FT  17 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Price surge spells danger for
timber industry - Canadian producers fear that users may turn to substitutes
EVEN AS Canada's timber industry celebrates surging prices for its products,
worries are growing that it will soon be caught in the same worldwide
squeeze on supplies that has driven lumber prices to record levels.
For the moment the jump in prices is a welcome ray of light in an otherwise
gloomy sector. The strong lumber business has helped integrated forestry
companies to offset their losses on pulp and newsprint and other types of
paper. Specialised lumber producers are basking in record profits.
According to Madison's Canadian Lumber Reporter, an industry newsletter,
standard spruce, pine and fir two-by-four planks are selling this week for
USDollars 460 per thousand board feet in the US, up from Dollars 305 in
mid-January and Dollars 235 a year ago. Prices are also sharply higher in
Japan, the biggest market for British Columbia's coastal saw mills.
Returns to Canadian producers have been further boosted by a 12 per cent
decline in the Canadian dollar since November 1991.
A recovery in housing starts and other construction has been the traditional
signal for a run-up in lumber prices. But the present price explosion owes
as much to nervousness about future supplies of timber as to rising
consumption. Indeed, some producers fear that prices are now so high that
homebuilders and other users may turn to substitutes such as steel, cement
and plastics.
Supply concerns in the US are centred on the large tracts of forest in
Oregon and Washington that the federal government has withdrawn from logging
to protect the northern spotted owl and other threatened species.
Across the Pacific, Japanese buyers have been forced to broaden their
horizons as a result of restricted supplies from south-east Asia and
disruption of exports from Russia.
The Canadians have rushed to fill the gaps. Canadian lumber exports to the
US will jump by 1.2bn board ft this year to a near-record 14.4bn, according
to a study published in Madison's by Mr Doug Smyth, research director of the
Canadian branch of the International Woodworkers of America union.
One reason for the recent surge in prices, however, is that US buyers can no
longer rely on Canada to meet the full shortfall in domestic supplies. Many
mills north of the border are more eager these days to widen the market for
value-added, finished lumber in Japan and Europe, rather than increase their
share of the market for lower-margin, commodity-grade products to the US.
The British Columbia coastal industry, which has the best quality trees but
also high transport and cutting costs, is already geared almost entirely for
offshore markets, mainly Japan and Europe, but increasingly Taiwan and
China. Some producers in the interior of the province, who in the past have
shipped almost exclusively to the US, are also becoming more active in the
Japanese market.
Mr Brian McCloy, vice-president of the BC Council of Forest Industries,
estimates that 10 to 15 per cent of interior lumber is now shipped overseas.
Canadian supplies are starting to be threatened however, by the same
environmental pressures that have slashed harvesting in the north-west US.
Mr John Burch, general manager for marketing at Primex Forest Products in
Delta, BC, predicts 'one or two major closures' among British Columbian saw
mills over the next few years as a result of tightening land-use curbs.
Weldwood of Canada last week announced the closure of a saw mill at Williams
Lake because of timber supply curbs. Timber shortages have already prevented
some interior mills from adding extra shifts to meet growing US demand.
The pressures come from various sources. There are no spotted owls in
Canada, but environmentalists are demanding wider protection for the marbled
murrelet, a small sea bird that they claim nests in old-growth forests. The
murrelet has already been listed as a threatened species in the US.
Forestry companies have also drawn fire for 'clear-cut' logging, which has
denuded some of the most scenic parts of the province.
The BC government has pledged to double - from 6 per cent to 12 per cent -
the land set aside for parks and wilderness areas. The Committee on
Resources and the Environment, headed by a former provincial ombudsman, was
set up last year to allocate land for commercial forests and other uses. It
has already appointed three land-use committees to draw lines on the map of
Vancouver Island, the Cariboo Mts in the east-central part of the province
and the West Kootenays in the south-east.
Meanwhile, the timber companies are nervously watching a myriad of
lower-profile initiatives, such as proposals to ban logging along river
banks and to increase the bio-diversity of existing forests. These proposals
threaten not just to put trees out of bounds for commercial logging, but
also to push up costs by impeding access of men and machinery to the forests
that can be cut.
An official at MacMillan Bloedel, the biggest coastal lumber producer, says
'these things are hurting us even more than the large-scale set-asides'.
Canada's lumber industry senses however, that it has one advantage over its
US counterpart in the fight against tightening environmental laws.
About 40 per cent of the trees in Washington and Oregon are owned by the US
federal government, but in Canada, forests are mostly under the control of
the provinces - 95 per cent, in the case of British Columbia. Industry
leaders hope that provincial governments will be more receptive than remote
federal bureaucrats to arguments that curbs on logging will lead to heavy
job losses and the devastation of some small communities. They note that
forestry is the biggest contributor to the British Columbia economy, while
it ranks only third in Washington state (after aerospace and farming).
MacMillan Bloedel contends that a 10 per cent reduction in the British
Columbian timber harvest would put 50,000 people out of work and add
CDollars 750m (USDollars 600m) a year to the provincial budget deficit.
