FT  14 JUL 93 / Survey of Birmingham and West Midlands (3): Regional effort
works - Business is picking up in the financial sector
SHORTLY before his departure from the government, Mr Norman Lamont, then the
chancellor of the exchequer, spoke at a banquet to senior West Midlands
executives. The response was publicly polite and privately indifferent. But
when a local speaker mentioned the management buyout of the Leyland Daf van
plant, a wave of enthusiasm and applause swept through the room.
Just as Leyland Daf has seemed a totem of West Midlands industry - its
future a matter of emotional significance - so the way in which the buyout
was arranged has become a rallying point for the financial community. No
London players here, but regional funding regionally organised, denoting an
ability to provide services across the board.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand organised the financial package for the buyout. The
regional office of 3i provided the main tranche of equity capital and the
senior debt came from the Bank of Scotland. The Birmingham office of Arthur
Andersen, the accountancy firm, whose London office had been the Leyland Daf
receivers, claims a role in facilitating the buyout, by creating the
environment in which 3i could invest money.
It shows increasing activity in a sector hit, as manufacturing was hit, by
both recession and technological change. The flow of deals is high and
'activity levels have moved significantly in the last three months,' says Mr
Bob Moore, chief executive of Birmingham City 2000, the financial and
professional lobby group.
'Generally business is picking up,' agrees Mr Roman McAlindon, managing
partner of Arthur Andersen in Birmingham. 'There is a string of
opportunities coming up, with investment into the Midlands from outside, and
management buyouts are beginning to emerge. But there's been a downturn in
formal receivership appointments; there are not as many of them around now,'
he says.
This could mean some revival of employment opportunities, but growth may
remain more constricted than in the 1980s, because of technological changes
(increased office automation through the use of computers and so on) which
are rushing through the financial services sector.
Between 1981 and 1991, according to analysis by Birmingham City Council's
economic development department, 'financial and professional services
expanded employment by more than a third, creating an additional 16,000
opportunities in the city. However, even this rate of job growth was
significantly lower than the more than 50 per cent growth experienced both
regionally and nationally.'
This increase - to 62,650 jobs, 13.5 per cent of jobs in the city - made the
financial and professional sector the single most important source of
private sector jobs in Birmingham - the region's dominant services centre.
Whether the recession has weakened the strength of this centre is not clear.
To be sure, expansion stopped and the number employed declined to 59,800
last year, but the number of lay-offs in the legal profession, for example,
was tiny compared with what has happened in London law firms.
Within the sector there have been changes. Although there is the full range
of clearing banks (together with their subsidiary companies in areas such as
lease finance, acting under separate names), more than 20 overseas banks,
building societies and insurance companies, the specialist activity of
merchant banking has declined.
Although groups independent of the clearing banks, such as Singer &amp;
Friedlander, remain, Kleinwort Benson and Barclays de Zoete Wedd have
withdrawn. This has left gaps in the market which the accountants have been
keen to fill - as in the Leyland Daf management buyout arrangements -
trading on their easy accessibility, extensive networks and, increasingly, a
willingness to negotiate smaller deals.
But if the choice of companies to negotiate deals and offer financial advice
has declined, there is no shortage of institutions willing to advance equity
funding in sums over Pounds 50,000. The regional office of the department of
trade and industry, seeking to compile a register of finance sources, found
more than 40 of them. More generally, it is agreed in the business community
that there is no shortage of money available.
The key question is the conditions under which it will be advanced - given
that the clearing banks have adopted very cautious lending policies. In
present economic circumstances this bears down critically on the smaller
businesses whose lack of physical assets causes the clearing banks to
exercise even greater caution.
As the debate about funding a way out of recession has continued, attention
has increasingly been paid to devising financial mechanisms for aiding small
companies with soft loans; for addressing financial problems where Pounds
5000, not Pounds 50,000, is the difference between survival and expiry. Thus
the Walsall Enterprise Agency, backed by a finance house, is setting up a
loan fund, modelled on the earlier experience of Sandwell, and Birmingham
Settlement, a voluntary group, is planning a community investment bank.
It is difficult, however, to measure the significance of Birmingham as a
financial centre. While the city is the hub of the region, it is not
automatic that businesses in Coventry or Stoke-on-Trent will look to
Birmingham for services - as opposed to, respectively, London or Manchester.
This uncertainty about its own position pushes the Birmingham financial
community, out of self-interest, to support the city council's attempts to
make Birmingham a cultural centre and to make the centre of the city more
welcoming.
There are local claims that Birmingham is the UK's second largest centre for
financial services - a claim that is repeated in half a dozen other cities.
It has its strengths as a regional centre (as Manchester Business School
established in a 1991 study): for example, in corporate stockbroking through
Albert E. Sharp, Smith Keen Cutler and Sharelink, and in the provision of
legal services through partnerships such as Eversheds, Edge &amp; Ellison,
Wragge and Pinsent.
Manchester Business School makes the point that the Big Six accountancy
practices employed more people in Birmingham than in any other regional
centre, but concluded that 'Manchester is the biggest regional centre in
terms of overall employment in banking, finance, insurance, business
services and leasing.'
