FT  18 OCT 93 / Survey of International Telecommunications (20): Pressure of
technological change / A look at the prospects for leading equipment
suppliers
Such is the buoyancy of the global telecoms industry that there is room for
the leading suppliers to continue to expand, and for new entrepreneurial
companies to break into their traditional businesses
EYEBROWS were raised when Northern Telecom announced a 26 per cent slump in
profits for the first quarter of 1993. The Canadian group has emerged as a
dynamic global player in the telecom equipment business in recent years, and
as the only company with a remote chance of unseating Alcatel and American
Telephone and Telegraph as the world's largest telecom equipment suppliers.
Northern Telecom, analysts believe, made the mistake of letting down those
customers on whose business its global aspirations were founded.
Its profits slumped, analysts believe, because US regional telephone
companies - the customers that Northern Telecom prised away from American
Telephone and Telegraph in the 1980s - were unhappy with the quality of the
the products and services it was delivering.
Northern Telecom is resilient and flexible enough to recover from the
setback. But its problems illustrate the pressures that technological change
and market liberalisation are putting on suppliers.
With the globalisation of the telecommunications industry, companies like
Northern Telecom have to balance the twin objectives of expanding into new
markets anri looking after existing customers.
Winning orders in markets which have traditionally been dominated by two, or
possibly three companies - many of which are supported by their governments
as national champions - has never been easy. To break into a foreign market,
a supplier has traditionally had to form a joint venture, or buy a stake in
one of the established suppliers.
Siemens became a leading supplier to British Telecom through the acquisition
of a 40 per cent stake in GPT in 1989, and to US regional operators as part
of the GPT deal which included a 50 per cent share in the former Plessey
subsidiary Stromberg Carlson.
Nortel bought a 100 per cent stake in STC, the UK's last remaining
independent supplier, in 1991, as a platform to expand into Europe, and has
since taken a 20 per cent stake in Matra Communications in France. Talks
with Bosch in Germany over a similar joint venture broke down in September.
Alcatel owes its strength in transmission systems to the purchase of
Rockwell Systems of the US in 1991, and in underseas cables, to the takeover
of Nortel's cables business agreed in August. The French manufacturer also
has a strong presence in the Italian market through Telettra, the former
telecom arm of the car giant Fiat.
AT&amp;T has a 40 per cent stake in Italian public network supplier Italtel,
while Ericsson of Sweden owns a majority stakes in Schrack of Austria and a
minority-stake in the Greek supplier Intracom.
In mobile communications, Ericsson has a 50 per cent stake in the UK company
Orbitel and an 80 per cent stake in the former General Electric subsidiary,
GE Mobile.
Mr John Dinsdale, a senior industry analyst at telecoms consultancy
Dataquest, believes that supplier rationsalisation is far from over.
In particular, companies which have relied almost exclusively on contracts
from state-controlled telephone operators, will be forced to team up with
larger suppliers, he believes. Even though most telephone operators are
still state-owned, many now operate independently from ministerial control
and gone are the days when they were expected to award contracts to domestic
suppliers.
But the conventional wisdom that there would be no more than six suppliers
of public telecommunications systems by the year 2000 now seems misguided.
Telecoms is expanding so quickly, and in so many different directions, that
it would inconceivable for a handful of suppliers to control the market.
To understand the forces that determine the structure of the telecoms supply
business, equipment can be divided into two overlapping categories.
One category is stable both in terms of technology and market share, while
in the second, technology is evolving so quickly that no supplier can feel
totally secure.
PUBLIC SWITCH AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS
The first - and by far the larger of the two - is public switch and
transmission systems for conventional telephone networks.
In Europe and North America, the market for public switches has largely been
played out. Operators have already digitalised their long-distance networks,
and have moved onto the more arduous, less rewarding task of digitalising
local networks. They have already selected their preferred suppliers - in
many cases, and there are few opportunities for newcomers.
The most attractive opportunities for suppliers of public switches are in
Asia, and in particular, China.
This year, China will buy nine million lines of which Alcatel will deliver
five million lines, and the balance will be divided between Ericsson,
Siemens, AT&amp;T, Nortel and NEC.
India, the continent's next largest growth market, will buy two million
lines of public switching equipemnt a year until the end of the decade, and
has already chosen Siemens, Ericsson, Fujitsu, Alcatel and AT&amp;T as preferred
suppliers.
Other growth regions include eastern Europe where Siemens has been active
with the setting up of nine joint ventures in seven countries.
CELLULAR SYSTEMS, VOICE AND DATA SERVICES
The second category groups together cellular telephone systems, data
communications networks, high capacity broadband networks and private
systems for both voice and data services.
Technology is changing so fast in these areas that opportunities are
available for new companies to compete with the established suppliers.
Ericsson and Motorola are firmly established as the leading suppliers of
cellular telephone networks, while Motorola and Nokia of Finland are the
largest suppliers of cellular telephones.
Mobile communications is the fastest growing sector of the equipment supply
business, and as consumer electronics companies diversify into mobile
telephones, they will increasingly compete with telecommunications
companies. Sony, for example, is supplying telephones to UK cellular
telephone operator Cellnet which, for the last year, has been targetting the
consumer market.
The UK company Amstrad which is better known for supplying budget PCs, is
set to become a mobile telephone supplier following its takeover last month
of Danish manufacturer, Dancall.
In the dynamic field of data communications, the arrival of US networking
companies is threatening to knock leading equipment suppliers off their
perch.
Systems are increasingly based on sophisticated computer software, and
networking companies like Novell, Cisco Systems and Synoptics, are bringing
products to the market quicker than the largest companies with a background
in telecommunications.
The leading equipment manufacturers are hoping that telephone operators will
commit heavily to broadband networks - high capacity systems that can
transmit huge volume of voice, data and image information. Operators are
testing broadband networks based around a switch technology called
Asynchronous Transer Mode, and transmission systems using Synchronous
Digital Kierarchy Technology (SDH). But the demand from users is hard to
predict and operators are conducting technical and commercial trials before
committing themselves to massive investment programmes in broadband.
Such is the buoyancy of the global telecommunications industry that there is
room for the leading suppliers to continue to expand, and for new
entrepreneurial companies to break into their traditional businesses.
For established suppliers such as Nortel, a balance must be struck between
cultivating new customer relationships and checking up on old friends.
The author is editor of the FT newsletter, Telecom Markets.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      FINANCING TELECOMS INFRASTRUCTURE: EBRD OPERATIONS APPROVED
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Listed here is a brief description of each project and its value, with
investment by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
shown in brackets:
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
ROMANIAN TELECOMS -   digital overlay network,
                      Dollars 660m (EBRD: Dollars 170m).
HUNGARIAN TELECOMS -  digital overlay network, village programme,
                      Dollars 240m, (EBRD Dollars 62m);
HUNGARY -             Westel Radiotelefon KFT: cellular project,
                      Dollars 82m. (EBRD, Dollars 10m).
POLAND -              Polskar Telefonia Komorkowa; cellular project:
                      Dollars 180m (EBRD, Dollars 40m).
BELARUS:              Belarus International Telecoms: international
                      access, local and regional; Dollars 44m;
                      (EBRD, Dollars 38m).
POLAND -              Warsaw Telecoms: network development,
                      Dollars 438m; (EBRD, Dollars 100m).
REGIONAL -            Eurovision network expansion; earth stations for
                      TV transmission: Dollars 14m; (EBRD, Dollars 14m).
BULGARIA TELECOMS:    digital overlay network:
                      Dollars 230m; (EBRD, Dollars 38m).
RUSSIA -              Sovintel: international gateway, Dollars 12m;
                      (EBRD, Dollars 7m).
CZECH REPUBLIC:       Eurotel-Czech, cellular projects;
                      Dollars 55m; (EBRD, Dollars 11m).
SLOVAK REPUBLIC:      cellular developments, Dollars 43m; (EBRD,
                      Dollars 8m).
RUSSIA -              Macomnet, fibre-optic cables,
                      Dollars 15m; (EBRD, Dollars 4m).
ALBANIA TELECOMS -    international access:
                      Dollars 33m; (EBRD, Dollars 9m).
SLOVAK TELECOMS -     digital overlay system, Dollars 326; (EBRD,
                      Dollars 53m).
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL:                Dollars 2,728m (EBRD Dollars 648m).
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
