FT  11 OCT 93 / Nato's growing pains: Europe
The crushing of the Moscow parliament raises troubling questions about the
future of Russia and the policies of the west towards Moscow. In the west
the short-sighted have brayed crude applause for the victory of the good
over the bad. Reality is less reassuring. It seems likely that from now on,
events in Russia will present the west with increasingly difficult policy
dilemmas.
The end of the parliamentary-presidential stalemate in Moscow may open the
door to the economic reforms needed to stabilise Russian society; the new
parliament due to be elected in December may help the building of a
precarious democracy.
But events may prove less utopian. If Russia becomes 'democratic', it may
not remain stable; if 'stable', it may not remain democratic. The new
parliament could be as incoherent as the old, and just as obstructive to
government policy. Worse, the bloody and incompetent use of military force
in putting down the parliament, may turn out to be an ominous precedent for
the role of the military in the turbulent years ahead.
As a result, western leaders face new and serious dilemmas. They have
supported President Boris Yeltsin, partly because he faced down the abortive
communist coup against President Mikhail Gorbachev in August 1991, partly
because he has the legitimacy of popular election. Since the parliamentary
shoot-out, western support has become almost unconditional.
Yet this crisis may mark a watershed in east-west relations. The west still
has every reason to hope for friendship with Russia; it still wants and
supports democratic and economic reforms. But the Moscow crisis and its
bloody conclusion, through some uncertain Faustian pact between army units
and the state, contain the risk that Russia may become more unstable
internally, more dangerous externally.
In other words, western security anxieties, which only four years ago seemed
to have evaporated in the heady euphoria following the collapse of the
Berlin Wall, are now likely to move up the agenda again.
These anxieties are already welling up in a new debate on the future of
Nato, which will come to a head at next January's Nato summit. And topping
that agenda will be the most contentious question: should Nato extend its
reach, or even its membership, to include countries in eastern Europe?
Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic have all pressed their hope of
joining Nato; and the idea of enlarging Nato membership has been encouraged
in Germany by Mr Volker Ruhe, German defence minister, and by Mr Manfred
Worner, Nato secretary-general. Even Chancellor Helmut Kohl has endorsed the
idea that Nato should give security guarantees to eastern Europe, perhaps
short of full membership.
The question of Nato enlargement will be settled essentially in Washington,
but it will also be crucially influenced by events in Russia. In August, in
a public statement in Warsaw, Mr Yeltsin gave the green light to Nato
membership for Poland and other east European countries. Since then,
however, he has reversed tack and privately warned western leaders against
any such enlargement; instead he has proposed that Russia and Nato should
jointly guarantee the security of eastern Europe.
This proposal has no chance of acceptance. The countries of eastern Europe
have only just thrown off the 'security' imposed by the former Soviet Union,
and they will not accept its return by the back door. But it is disturbing
confirmation of other claims advanced by Russia to a right to intervene in
the 'near abroad' - that is, its neighbours in the former Soviet empire.
Senator Richard Lugar, leading foreign policy spokesman for the US
Republicans, thinks enlargement is the best way to give Nato a new lease of
life. But most US policymakers will be even less enthusiastic about
enlarging Nato than the Russians. Their first hope is peace with their new
Russian friends; an extension of Nato to the Russian frontier would look
provocative, even hostile.
More important, the US will be reluctant to extend the real prize of Nato
membership - the ultimate security umbrella of an US nuclear guarantee.
While Russia's stability hangs in the balance, it is implausible that
Washington should extend such a guarantee to new Nato members in the east,
at the same time as it is slashing its troop forces in the west, now down to
100,000 men and falling.
The problem will not go away, however, because enlargement of the European
Community will automatically raise the question of Nato membership. The 12
are now negotiating membership with four countries belonging to the European
Free Trade Association, and they are close to conceding eventual membership
for eastern Europe. The Maastricht treaty commits the Community to the
development of a common security policy. But if Nato cannot be expanded, the
security policy of an enlarged EC would have to be conducted mainly outside
Nato.
This is the epitome of the EC's political dilemma. It can develop as an
independent partner in the trans-Atlantic community in which its security
policy can be the European pillar in intimate alliance with the US. Or it
can develop in the direction of a pan-European structure, in which case its
enlargement towards the east would progressively weaken the link with the
transatlantic alliance.
In some ways, western Europe will have to embrace the east. But it is
obviously not yet ready to take on, by itself, the risks and possible
threats posed by the disintegrating Russian empire.
