FT  13 JAN 93 / Leading Article: Reviewing the regulators
THE TIME is ripe for reviewing the British system for regulating privatised
utilities. This is partly because it is over eight years since Oftel, the
first of the new watchdogs, was set up to regulate a privatised British
Telecommunications. Since then, the gas, electricity and water industries
have been privatised and there has been a lively debate on whether the
regulators have been too weak to stop these companies earning excess profits
or have expropriated shareholders' wealth through over-zealous action.
Time has also revealed some of the structural defects of privatised
industries. Such defects are behind both the current Monopolies and Mergers
Commission's investigation of British Gas and the government's energy
review.
The regulatory system is working reasonably well. It is certainly much
better than the old approach which encouraged constant ministerial
interference in nationalised companies. But there is room for improvement.
Given the overall economic importance of the utilities, the prize of a
better system is well worth aiming at. But, unless the government initiates
a review soon, the future shape of regulation may be set by precedents
established on a piecemeal basis at the MMC, without any attempt to learn
wider lessons.
The experience so far is summarised in a report published this week by the
European Policy Forum, a UK think-tank. Although the report contains much
interesting detail, its overall tone - that investors are being treated
unfairly as a result of arbitrary actions by over-mighty regulators - is
questionable.
The pitched battles between utilities and their regulators are largely a
result of the government's decision to privatise industries as
quasi-monopolies. Lacking the discipline of effective competition, it is not
surprising that some of these companies have used their muscle to the
detriment of customers and fledgling rivals. The regulators would not be
doing their jobs if such abuses of monopoly power went unchallenged.
A review of utility regulation would need to examine at least the following
issues: the accountability and discretion of the regulators; whether the
current system needs streamlining; and how structural changes to utilities
should be brought about.
The clearest issue is accountability. Too often the process by which
regulators reach their decisions is opaque and they themselves
insufficiently accountable. Possible solutions could involve requiring
regulators to hold public hearings and/or to give detailed reasons for their
decisions. Parliament would also have a greater incentive to oversee their
actions if a select committee had the right to veto top appointments.
But the need for greater accountability does not necessarily mean that the
regulators' discretion should be curtailed, as some suggest. A case can be
made for a more legalistic framework on US lines. But the US system has
proved costly and too open to regulatory capture.
A case can also be made for streamlining the current patchwork, in which
each regulator has somewhat different powers, and even for merging the
various bodies into one or more 'super-regulators'. But, while greater
harmonisation has its attractions, so does the present diversity.
Even more important is how structural changes to the utilities, such as
breaking them up into smaller competing units, should be engineered. This is
not now the exclusive province of the regulators and nor should it be.
Regulators can refer companies to the MMC, which then makes recommendations.
Although this system of checks and balances has merit, it is a rough and
ready approach not clearly understood by investors.
Given the complexity of the issues, what is needed is not hasty reform, but
a thorough review. Since many of the current problems stem from
privatisation decisions taken by ministers and their civil servants behind
closed doors, such a review should be both open and independent.
