FT  22 MAY 93 / How To Spend It: Glittering art of patronage
GARRARD, the Crown Jewellers, has decided to celebrate 150 years of being
jewellers to the royals in some style.
The theme it has chosen for its anniversary exhibition is one dear to my
heart - the vital importance of new patrons if designers are to flourish -
and to illustrate it it looks back historically to the connection between
design and patronage throughout the 20th century.
Part of the exhibition looks back on what has happened in the past, showing
the work of eminent designers such as Reginald Gleadowe, (one of the first
designers to explore ideas for pass-producing fine silver); Harold Stabler
(who revived the use of enamel as decoration); George Kruger Gray (who
designed the coinage of more than a dozen countries); Leslie Durbin (who
worked on the sword which Churchill presented to Stalin in 1943) and Alex
Styles (who designed and made a stunning tea and coffee set which was
presented to The Prince of Wales by the people of Caernarvon on the occasion
of his investiture as Prince of Wales).
There are pieces, too, by Charles Sykes, the creator of 'The Spirit of
Ecstasy' which is found perched on the top of the radiator of every
Rolls-Royce.
Some of the work looks as fresh as if it had been designed yesterday. A E
Harvey's sculpturally simple vase has that timeless look that is the mark of
all fine design while Gleadowe's more flowing, curving lines and distinctive
fluting show that when it comes to pleasing the eye there are no rules.
Though the past work is fascinating to look at Garrard's wanted to make sure
that the exhibition was not just an exercise in nostalgia and self-
congratulation, but an inspiration to patrons. For this reason there is a
big selection of silverware from distinguished contemporary designers all of
which is for sale.
The pieces range from a pair of stunning fluted silver beakers by Ian
Calvert (Pounds 500 each) and the condiment set (photographed below) (Pounds
750) to pieces costing thousands. But besides the diversity of objects -
small pocks or photograph frames, wine coolers, goblets and jugs to a pair
of five foot high silver gilt ginger jars - what is most fascinating for the
potential patron is the wide range of talent on show.
The work ranges from the rich enamelling of Fred Rich to the more
streamlined elegance of Robert May.
As Garrard points out, new designers need new patrons - if they do not have
patrons they will not survive. Much the most important aim of the exhibition
is to encourage individuals to think of themselves as patrons. Many people
who easily spend Pounds 500 to Pounds 1,000 on designer suits or
mass-produced objects could rewardingly spend the same sort of money on a
hand- crafted object of great beauty.
Many of the pieces are priced between Pounds 1,000 and Pounds 2,000. Many of
us have occasions when we want to give presents that are beautiful, one-off
and personal - here is a chance to find the designer that could bring your
vision to life.
The exhibition is on until June 5 at Garrard, 112 Regent Street, London W1A
2JJ.
