FT  23 MAR 93 / International Company News: Montedison sells drug arm to
Procordia for Dollars 1.3bn
MONTEDISON, the Italian agro-industrial group, yesterday agreed to sell its
Erbamont pharmaceuticals subsidiary to Kabi-Pharmacia, the Swedish
pharmaceuticals company, in a deal worth up to L2,100bn (Dollars 1.3bn).
The transaction will create one of Europe's 10 biggest drugs producers and
push Kabi-Pharmacia, controlled by Sweden's partially state-owned Procordia
group, into the world's top 20.
The combined group will have annual sales of about Dollars 2.75bn, 18,000
employees and a research budget of more than Dollars 375bn. Its combined
products should give it a strong market position in five niche sectors:
cancer drugs, growth defects, eye surgery, patient feeding and laboratory
testing for allergies.
Apart from Sweden and Italy, it will be strongly represented in the US,
Japan and the main western European countries. Last year, Kabi-Pharmacia had
sales of L2,770bn and operating profits of L538bn, while Erbamont had
operating earnings of L140bn on sales of L1,600bn.
Kabi-Pharmacia will pay an initial L640bn in cash and take on debt worth
L642bn in return for a 51 per cent stake in Farmitalia Carlo Erba,
Montedison's listed Italian pharmaceuticals subsidiary, and its Erbamont
operation in the US. It will also have the right to buy, or Montedison to
sell, the remaining shares between next January and December 1995.
The overall sale should net the heavily-indebted Montedison, controlled by
the Ferruzzi Finanziaria holding company, about L2,100bn. Montedison will
also receive income from certain recent Erbamont drugs for a number of
years, providing a further sum of between L400bn and L500bn, according to
its estimates.
The two companies justified the deal in terms of reducing costs, improving
their combined marketing clout and reinforcing research capabilities. Mr
Hakan Astrom, Kabi-Pharmacia's president, said annual savings of SKr1bn
(Dollars 130m) were expected within four years through administration,
marketing and manufacturing synergies.
