FT  12 JAN 93 / Leading Article: New BBC broom
MR JOHN BIRT, the new director-general of the BBC, has moved swiftly to
assert his style. The announcement yesterday of senior managerial changes
and the accompanying statement of vision are intended to chart the
organisation's path in a rapidly changing broadcasting world.
Mr Birt's game plan has the merit of being clear. He wishes to persuade the
government to continue for another decade to fund the BBC with the proceeds
of a licence fee payable by those who own a TV set.
The argument, initiated at the end of last year in the BBC's response to the
government's green paper, is that an expanding commercial sector in
broadcasting still needs to be supplemented by a substantial public
corporation. To support the case for a new charter and licence fee, Mr Birt
has also recognised that the BBC must become more efficient and more
accountable. It has, after all, just mislaid over Pounds 50m.
There are two hallmarks of the Birt approach. The first is that he intends
the BBC to be a managed institution, rather than an agglomeration of
committees and warring baronies. This is sensible. It is barely credible
that, prior to these reforms, the BBC had no top-level management forum to
discuss programme priorities.
The second is that Mr Birt envisages the BBC withdrawing from areas crowded
with commercial competitors. Many wasted words have been spent on which soap
opera or game show might fall into this exclusion zone but, in principle, Mr
Birt is right. The public does not need the BBC to do everything and the BBC
cannot afford to do everything well.
However, it remains to be seen whether Mr Birt's 'producer choice', a
complex administered market which seeks to devolve managerial power, will
work. Mechanisms like this, which seek to create artificial markets without
permitting those involved to set prices or take true risks, have a history
of freezing into the same kind of bureaucratic inertia as the command
economies they seek to replace. But there is no doubt that Mr Birt's radical
recasting of the BBC's central bureaucracy is a step in the right direction.
Equally, the intention of the plans announced yesterday to improve
accountability cannot be faulted, although they ignore the fact that the BBC
is already burdened with a creaking apparatus of advisory and regulatory
bodies.
The approach, in short, is in tune with these Majorite times, applying an
earnest, schematic pragmatism to the modernisation of a large public
service. The BBC hopes that it thereby strikes less comfortable questions
from the agenda, such as: is it sensible to have such a big organisation
cornering all the public funding for broadcasting? Will the licence fee
still be defensible when, in 10 years' time, the BBC's share of the TV
audience is down from almost 50 to perhaps 30 per cent? Those who think
these questions pertinent will want to see a more vigorous debate than a
dull green paper has yet stimulated.
