FT  15 MAR 93 / Beijing accuses Britain of 'colonialism': Harsh criticism
follows Patten's move on democratic reform in Hong Kong
CHINA yesterday bitterly attacked Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's decision
to proceed with democratic reform, accusing Britain of returning to a
colonialist path.
The harsh criticism seems certain to be reflected in remarks made at the
National People's Congress by, among others, Premier Li Peng, who is due to
address the opening session of the parliament today.
Using language reminiscent of some of the worst moments in the sometimes
turbulent Sino-British relationship, People's Daily, the Communist party
newspaper, accused Mr Patten of undermining the Beijing-London accord on
Hong Kong's future.
'This is another serious step taken by Patten to break the Sino-British
joint declaration,' the paper charged. 'We feel shock and regret at such an
act. Through these disputes, more people will see the old-brand colonialists
in their true colours.'
British officials in Beijing say they cannot predict where the Hong Kong
issue may go from here, although they note that the media attacks
conspicuously have not ruled out a continuation of diplomatic contacts.
Hopes were raised earlier this month that the delicate 'talks about talks'
involving Britain's ambassador in Beijing and Chinese officials would lead
to a resumption of direct discussions on the democratic reform. But these
contacts foundered when China adamantly refused to accept the participation
of Hong Kong representatives as equal partners in any talks.
The latest Chinese blast seems certain further to rock Hong Kong capital
markets. The Hang Seng stock market index fell more than 3 per cent on
Friday after Mr Patten announced that he was proceeding with his
controversial legislation under which the people of Hong Kong would elect
more than half their legislators at a poll due in 1995.
China insists that Mr Patten's plan runs counter to understandings reached
with London on the transition to Chinese rule in 1997. Officials in Beijing
argue that broad-based elections favoured by Mr Patten would undermine an
agreed status quo.
In Hong Kong, the community appears split between reformers urging Mr Patten
to proceed with his legislation, gazetted on Friday in preparation for its
introduction to the Legislative Council, and an increasingly nervous
business community.
The People's Daily editorial mirrors a Chinese Foreign Ministry statement
which also expressed 'shock' at Mr Patten's announcement.
Mr Patten defended his decision on Friday to go ahead with the legislation,
saying that he was sticking to his principles. 'Nobody should think that
being accommodating, being conciliatory, is the same as abandoning your
principles,' he said.
However, he left open the possibility of further discussions with China.
