FT  16 JUN 93 / Survey of New Zealand (7): A surge in tourism - Big increase
in holidaymakers from Asian countries
INTERNATIONAL tourists are discovering New Zealand in ever-larger numbers,
helped in part by the increase in air services to the country and by strong
promotions in Germany, Japan, Britain and the US.
Tourism New Zealand, the body charged with promoting the country abroad, has
invested NZDollars 60m over the past 18 months and the industry is in a
highly confident mood.
In 1992, tourist numbers grew by 9.6 per cent to 1.05m, the first time they
had passed the one million mark. The growth has continued this year with
arrivals running 10.2 per cent, ahead of last year in the January - April
period. The tourism board aims for 3m arrivals by the year 2000.
New Zealand now earns more than NZDollars 3bn a year from tourism, making it
the country's single biggest export earner, and the Tourism Board says it
should be earning NZDollars 9bn by the year 2000.
The board chief executive, Ian Kean, says the growth in numbers will be
carefully handled, especially in terms of the environment.
'The fresh, uncrowded, unspoiled nature of New Zealand is one of our main
attractions - and we'll keep it that way.
'We offer a contemporary society with sophisticated cities, superb food and
wine, a unique Maori culture, and physical and natural attractions which
visitors say are unequalled anywhere in the world.'
The industry sees its greatest growth potential as being part of the Asian
Pacific region. Growing disposable income is seeing a sharp rise in visitor
numbers, although they are still well below those from more traditional
areas such as Australia, the US and Britain.
Recession in the US led to a 5 per cent drop in tourist numbers in the year
to March to 169,519, and Australian visitor numbers were also down 1 per
cent to 341,098. However, main promotions in Germany saw a 40 per cent lift
in holidaymakers to 43,356, and they stayed for an average 30 days, longer
than most other nationalities.
The number of British visitors rose by 22 per cent last year to 120,227, and
they stayed the longest of any nationality, an average 33 days. However,
this percentage is boosted by the number of UK residents making extended
visits to stay with family or friends.
Most European visitors prefer to rent a car and go where the mood takes
them, stopping at hotels or motels in the many small towns that take their
fancy. So do Chinese visitors from Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore. Large
numbers of Chinese settlers have lived in New Zealand from the goldmining
days of the 1860s.
Younger Japanese tourists are following the self-drive trend, although due
to language difficulties their older compatriots tend to travel in groups by
coach or airline. Rapidly developing airlinks, mainly pioneered by Air New
Zealand, with Korea, Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Taiwan and Singapore, have
led to a sharp rise in visitor numbers from all those countries.
In the year to March the number of visitors from Taiwan rose by 46 per cent
to a total of 91,387, There was also a 79 per cent increase in numbers from
Singapore, and a 96 per cent rise from Korea.
As Asian tourist numbers climb, so does their ownership of hotels.
Singaporean and Hong Kong companies have bought many of the country's top
hotels over the past three years.
