FT  21 APR 93 / The Queens's Awards for Export Achievement 1993: Welsh steel
hits Japan - Europressings
A PRIVATE Welsh company formed five years ago has won the export award for
sales which are almost exclusively to Japanese companies.
Europressings, based at a Cardiff industrial park, was formed by a group of
Welsh businessmen all involved in steel. They realised that there was a
potential market from Japanese electrical goods manufacturers which had set
up plants in Europe and needed casings for their products.
'The Japanese wanted to purchase more in Europe to comply with the EC
directive on local sourcing and because it was very expensive to ship from
Japan,' says David Horrocks, commercial director of Europressings and
formerly joint managing director of a steel stockholding company.
'But they found there was a shortage here of pressworkers for particular
parts - the metal casings. We thought we could supply the components
ourselves and the best thing we could do was to go to see for ourselves in
Japan. In October 1987 we went on a two-week study tour there around the
manufacturers. When we got there we blew our minds because the technology
was not available in Europe, and not even really known about in Europe.'
The businessmen agreed to take a gamble that, if they started making the
right product - which is described as 'cosmetically and dimensionally
critical metal pressings' - the Japanese would place orders with them. 'We
decided to start a new company with the Japanese as a target market. We
needed to set up a new operation and weld the Japanese technology to
European ways.' The chairman of the new company, Nick Williams, a Cardiff
entrepreneur, owns 80 per cent and the other directors the rest.
'We decided to build a factory on a greenfield site and to buy the equipment
from Japan. We made an outlay of Pounds 1.5m with no order. But we were very
bullish that the Japanese would come to see us and give us business.'
The 50,000 sq ft factory was completed in April 1988. 'We didn't produce a
part until June 1988, the first was a top cover for a video recorder for NEC
in Telford, Shropshire.' Other orders followed for such products as
microwave ovens, desk-top computers, video tape recorders and compact disc
players.
In 1989 Europressings won its first export order, to Sony in France. Today,
about half its output is exported. In the UK, it is now supplying Sharp in
Wrexham, north Wales, and Hitachi and Panasonic in south Wales, and on the
continent Japanese companies in France, Germany and Spain. In the last year,
ending April 1993, its sales were 4.6m and it is even more confident for
this year.
The factory already employs 52 people, mostly women, and expects to expand,
creating another 20 jobs, in the next three months. 'We've been held back by
the world recession - we've grown because we've increased our customer base
and the number of products we make,' says Horrocks.
'The Japanese,' he adds, 'are superb to deal with.'
