FT  19 AUG 93 / An ill wind of change: Wind power is uneconomic,
environmentally intrusive and unnecessary
Earlier this month Mr John Gummer, the UK environment secretary, overturned
the decision of a local council in Cornwall, south-west England, and
authorised the construction of a wind farm at Four Burrows near Truro.
Many people will support his action. Mr Gummer can override local opposition
to projects of national interest if he wants to, and wind power has clearly
won a place in this government's, if not the nation's, heart.
But this is rather disturbing. It is not the first time that a UK secretary
of state has pushed through a wind farm against the wishes of people who
have to live nearby. In fact, it is the fourth. In addition, two more
projects have been referred to Mr Gummer, and a further six are on appeal
after having been turned down by local councils.
Why is wind power being thrust upon the country in this way when it is
uneconomic, environmentally intrusive and, worse still, quite unnecessary?
I must disclose an interest. I spend a lot of time in the Duddon estuary in
south Cumbria where Mr Michael Heseltine, an earlier environment secretary,
bulldozed through another wind farm a couple of years ago. Two wind farms
now mar this beautiful stretch of countryside on the borders of the Lake
District, producing elect-ricity which the country does not need.
I have learnt in the course of many conversations about wind farms that this
is not a subject for rational discourse. People either feel good about them
because they are clean and green, or they object to the way they spoil the
landscape. The economic case seldom comes into it.
I don't want to waste time attacking the visual aspects of wind farms
because I accept that some people see beauty in clusters of 100-foot white
propellers twirling in the wind. Nor will I dwell on noise objections
because the evidence is clearly mixed. But I do want to question the
commercial case, on several grounds.
The first is cost. What few people realise is that wind power technology is
a very long way from commercial operation. It costs as much as 12p to
produce a kilowatt hour of wind power compared to the 2.5p-3p that
electricity fetches on the UK wholesale market, and the 8p that households
pay for it. The difference has to be made up through a special levy on
customers' bills. This is not itemised so most people do not even realise
that they are paying it. To date, wind power has received some Pounds 5m in
customer subsidies, and this is due to be increased as the next round of
subsidised projects is approved.
The second is that Britain has an abundance of power generation capacity,
and the last thing it needs is additional uneconomic plant. Capacity
currently exceeds demand by about 30 per cent, which is one reason why coal
miners are being thrown out of work.
The third is that wind does not supply predictable amounts of power when we
need it. It is subject to the vagaries of the weather; it cannot be switched
on at 5pm to cook the evening meal, yet if a gale blows at 4am, the power it
generates is wasted.
The fourth is that Britain is unusually well endowed with fuel sources
(coal, oil, gas, nuclear, hydro), so there is no case for arguing that wind
power is necessary for a diversity of supply.
The last is that even if it is wise on environmental or other grounds to
explore alternative energy sources, the fact is that wind can only make a
tiny contribution. According to the government's advisory group on
alternative energy, wind could supply a maximum 10 per cent of the country's
needs. But to achieve this we would have to build 38,000 windmills on 4,000
square kilometers of land, and transform all our exposed hillsides into
whirligigs.
We should be clear why the government is trying to push through such a
nonsensical plan. It is not out of any belief in its commercial value,
because there is none. It cannot be in furtherance of a utopian vision of a
land free of fuel-burning power stations, because that will never happen. It
is not even in support of British technology, since most of the equipment
used is imported.
The truth is that the government is exploiting widespread ignorance about
the true cost and potential of wind power to strengthen its own rather
doubtful green credentials. It is managing to get away with it because the
debate about wind power is so soggy.
All of which is very bizarre for a government so strongly committed to the
free market and the elimination of subsidy. If British Coal is being forced
to lop off an arm and a limb to stay alive, why are we handing wind power a
crutch?
