FT  02 DEC 93 / After the Budget: Whitehall faces accounting reform
The government has pledged to introduce plans for a radically different
system of financial reporting for Whitehall during the first half of next
year.
During his Budget speech on Tuesday, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
called the existing system of accounting in central government 'archaic' and
said far-reaching changes would be introduced.
The changes will move the public sector closer to the style and content of
information presentation used in the private sector and will echo reforms
being introduced by a number of other central and local governments around
the world.
Mr Geoff Foster, a principal in the government services and economics
division of accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand, said: 'This means government
accounts will begin to feel more like those of the rest of the world.'
He said it would permit the separate functions within each government
department to be held accountable, and distinguish the roles of agencies as
purchasers, providers and policymakers.
'At the moment they are all mixed up,' he said. 'The changes will allow
readers to see the real resources consumed in providing services and see how
they are allocated.'
At the heart of the changes is a shift from 'cash' to 'accruals' accounting.
This will show for the first time non-cash items such as depreciation,
superannuation and insurance.
There will also be wider changes with implications for the future management
of government departments.
They will focus on outputs and results and will require information on
assets, cashflows and service agreements.
The Treasury's proposals for accounting reform will consider how best to
present financial information in each department, and consider the
implications for public expenditure, planning and control.
Discussions are still at an early stage, but the intention is to implement
the changes over the next three to five years. They should trigger
substantial fees for accountancy firms in consulting service.
Yesterday's announcement of the reform of accounting presentation coincided
with the arrival of Mr Andrew Likierman, a professor at the London Business
School, to take up his appointment as head of the government's accountancy
service and adviser on accountancy in place of Sir Alan Hardcastle.
Mr Likierman has considerable experience of accounting issues within the
public sector and has written on accruals accounting.
Accruals accounting is already used by the New Zealand government. In
Australia, it has been introduced at federal level and for the state
governments of New South Wales and Victoria. The US and Canadian authorities
are both considering its introduction.
In the UK, versions are already in place in many of the executive agencies,
in local authorities and in former state companies.
