FT  15 APR 93 / Leading Article: Bosnia's agony
BARONESS Thatcher's impassion-ed attack on western strategy towards the
carnage in Bosnia has struck a resonant chord. Few who heard can have failed
to empathise with her frustration over the horrors beamed daily to western
television screens and the apparent helplessness of the international
community to do anything about them. Few will have disagreed with her thesis
that the west's current policy of 'feeding people but leaving them to be
massacred' has long ceased to be tenable. It is thus not good enough for
British ministers simply to dismiss Baroness Thatcher's words as 'emotional
nonsense'. The fact is, first, that western policy over the past 12 months
has been worse than ineffective. By making threats against the aggressors
without the will or means to back them up with force, it has encouraged
Serbian territorial expansionism. Second, if the international community
continues to stand aside, seeking to cover its dignity with the increasingly
tattered figleaf of the Vance-Owen peace plan, the land-grabbing will
continue until the vast majority of Bosnia's Moslems have been uprooted from
their homes.
Baroness Thatcher's suggestion is that the UN give the Serbs an ultimatum -
sign up to the Vance-Owen plan, which, though flawed, remains the only
framework for a settlement on the table, or we will selectively lift our
arms embargo on the former Yugoslavia in order to arm the Moslems, while
providing them with air cover.
The merit of this plan is that it would answer the growing moral pressure in
the west for 'something to be done', without entailing the sort of
commitment of ground forces that the US and its allies correctly argue their
domestic public opinion will not wear. Its drawbacks are equally easy to
identify. Apart from prolonging the conflict, it would hopelessly compromise
the existing UN humanitarian relief operation. Even if the Serbs bowed to
such pressure and agreed to Vance-Owen, it would encourage the Moslems to
prevaricate in the hope of western intervention. More importantly, it would
risk provoking a serious split in the UN Security Council as Russia lined up
with Serbia against the west. Far from containing the conflict, it could
help to turn it into a bone of contention on a much larger international
scale.
That danger is what makes this such a delicate moment - especially in
Washington, which is where the important decisions, if any, will be made.
Thus far, the Clinton administration has seemed as uncertain as any of its
allies as to how to handle Bosnia. It appears increasingly tempted to
contemplate lifting the arms embargo on the Moslems - and equally worried
about keeping the Russians and its allies on board. If the pressure for
direct intervention in the war becomes irresistible in Washington, the
challenge will be to square that circle. President Clinton will need all the
cool advice he can muster.
