FT  11 AUG 93 / Business and the Environment: A balancing act - A look at
the green performance reports just published by Britain's biggest
electricity generating companies
Britain's largest electricity generating companies, National Power and
PowerGen, are also its largest polluters. Between them they spewed more than
2m tonnes of sulphur into the atmosphere last year, as well as 500,000
tonnes of nitrous oxides and nearly 200m tonnes of carbon dioxide. They also
passed nearly one sixth of Britain's fresh water through their cooling
systems - all to keep the lights burning.
Many people will be shocked by the sheer size of these figures. But they are
derived from the environmental performance reports which both companies have
just published for the first time. The two documents are part of the
electricity generation industry's efforts to put across their side of the
story, though they will doubtless be excused of trying to raise excuses.
The timing is fortuitous - or well planned. The reports came out only days
after PowerGen received permission to burn orimulsion, the controversial
bitumen-based fuel from Venezuela. They also coincide with the start of
fresh negotiations in Geneva to tighten targets for reducing European
atmospheric emissions, where Britain is likely once again to be tagged the
dirty man of Europe.
At one level, the reports are intended to be a source of information. They
contain details of the companies' environmental policies, of their emissions
and of the efforts they are making to bring them down. They also describe
the chain of command within the companies and their record of compliance
with the regulations.
The general thrust of the reports is that both companies have inherited very
dirty power stations from pre-privatisation days and are making strenuous
efforts to clean them up. Both companies claim to be well within the
pollution limits set by the government and to be on a downward path that
will enable them to meet the long-term targets set by international
agreements.
National Power, for example, reports emissions of 1.3m tonnes of sulphur
dioxide last year against a limit of 1.6m, but it has to halve those to
660,000 tonnes by the year 2003.
PowerGen, which has fewer power stations, produced just under 1m tonnes of
sulphur dioxide, or 100,000 tonnes less than its limit. It has to get those
down to 669,000 tonnes by 1998.
There are also details of emissions of nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide and
other forms of waste such as dust and ash.
At another level, however, the reports are intended to show that bringing
these emissions down is not merely a question of sticking clean-up equipment
on the top of chimneys. Both companies list a number of other options:
switching to cleaner fuels such as natural gas, building new types of power
generation plant, raising fuel efficiency and even getting their customers
to use less energy.
National Power says: 'We cannot change our existing generating assets
overnight. Our company strategy is to investigate all possible ways of
achieving our environmental and commercial targets and then to pursue the
most cost-effective solution.' NP goes on to hint that it would rather shut
down some of its older power stations than invest in costly clean-up
equipment.
In other words, the reports try to identify the balance between the benefits
of environmental protection and the cost. Between them, the two companies
expect to spend more than Pounds 3bn on various environmental improvements
during the 1990s, including building cleaner power stations. But as
privatised companies, they have a duty to their shareholders; green
considerations have to take the appropriate place, and these reports make
clear that profit comes first.
Ed Wallis, PowerGen's chief executive, sums up the debating point that the
generators want to get across: 'Achieving the most effective investment, in
terms of environmental protection and economics, is a challenge which we,
our regulators and the government continue to face.'
PowerGen's is the more readable of the two reports. Apart from the colour
pictures, it has informative diagrams on how pollution is caused (though the
words acid rain are studiously avoided).
It also includes a map showing the areas of Britain which are most sensitive
to atmospheric pollution. This so-called 'critical loads' approach is the
basis of government policy. It breaks down the country into a set of
squares, showing the ability of each to tolerate more pollution.
But National Power's report seems to be the more thorough. It gives more
overall detail. It also goes into the sensitive area of compliance. It
reveals, for example, that the company breached environmental regulations 29
times last year, though none resulted in prosecution. Possibly most
important, John Baker, chief executive, states he has personal
responsibility for environmental policy and compliance. It is not clear from
the PowerGen document which main board director has this responsibility,
though Wallis signs a personal introduction.
National Power also asked Lloyds Register to verify its report. LR found the
report presents 'a correct, true and fair picture'. But it points out that
NP's aim of 'doing better than compliance where appropriate' has yet to
materialise because of the company's focus on complying with the
requirements of the Environmental Protection Act, which are still coming
into force.
This point is taken up by Fiona Weir, a clean air campaigner at Friends of
the Earth. She criticises the NP report for being entirely
'compliance-driven'. Her complaint is that the targets for pollution
reduction are based on what the law requires, not on what the environment
can stand.
She says: 'This is not an environmental policy. This is about avoiding
breaking the law and avoiding wasting money.'
She would like to see the generators adopting an approach which aimed to
clean up the air and reduce acid rain to acceptable levels, regardless of
what the law required.
'These reports show the importance of legislation,' she says. 'Companies are
not driving environmental policy. Environmental policy is driving the
companies.'
