FT  06 NOV 93 / Books: Lurid life of a literary witch
IN EXTREMIS: THE LIFE OF LAURA RIDING by Deborah Baker Hamish Hamilton
Pounds 25, 478 pages
FOR 15 years between the wars Robert Graves and Laura Riding were a literary
double-act. If you wanted one - and it tended to be Robert - you had
perforce to take on the other. They were never married but lived together in
exile in Deya, Mallorca, until the Spanish Civil War broke out. They held
court there, dominating a group of friends and followers, laying down the
law on poetical matters. Their circle included the poet Norman Cameron; TS
Matthews, later editor of Time Magazine and his wife Julie; Alan Hodge, a
poet in his youth, later an assistant to Brendan Bracken and editor of
History Today; and another poet, one whose art matured, James Reeves.
It was Laura who called the tune. Unlike Frieda Lawrence she competed
strongly with her man in the area of work, manipulating his judgment as well
as that of other colleagues. When Michael Roberts compiled his anthology The
Faber Book of Modern Verse (in which as much space is devoted to Laura as to
Auden), hers was a hidden hand shaping the introduction. When WB Yeats
compiled The Oxford Book of Modern Verse she tried to twist his arm to
include young Reeves as part of a package of Robert's poetry and her own.
Yeats politely resisted this demand and refused her invitation to stay at
Deya. He at least remained unscathed by Laura.
But those in the immediate circle who put up any sustained resistance
discovered that retribution followed. Her most notorious gesture was in 1929
when Graves, his then wife Nancy (Nicholson), an Irish writer Geoffrey
Phibbs and Laura, were all living in a flat in Chiswick in which free love
on Shelleyan lines was the order of the day. Laura was piqued at the
resistance of Phibbs and - to cut a very tangled story short - she jumped
out of an upper window, followed by Robert out of a lower one. Phibbs ran
from the house screaming. Nancy (who was soon to quit Robert and leave the
field clear for Laura) eventually composed herself and telephoned for an
ambulance.
The episode, tailor-made for Alan Ayckbourn, has been described several
times. Until two years ago, when Laura died aged 90, any reference to it in
print would trigger a violent reaction from her, in the form of long
incomprehensible screeds threatening legal action. Martin Seymour-Smith, who
wrote a biography of Robert Graves in 1982, was deluged with Lauragrams over
many months. He came to the sensible conclusion that the events leading up
to the jump were 'not really explicable'.
Deborah Baker in what is the first biography of Laura (another by Elizabeth
Friedmann, the 'authorised' version, is in preparation) has no satisfactory
explanation to offer either, but she does give a full account of all the
participants, even those on the sidelines like Norah, Phibbs's wife, who was
having a fling with David 'Bunny' Garnett. Whereas Seymour-Smith described
Laura as 'a witch', Baker extends every inch of biographer's empathy she can
to present her as a woman worthy of our admiration.
It is an uphill struggle, made more so by the opacity of much of Laura's
poetry. Some of the hitherto unpublished early work, recently discovered,
may change the picture, but the mature work totally lacks the sweetness and
charm of Robert's. It is grimly intellectual. Nor is her prose less dense,
smacking of Gertrude Stein without the wit. But Laura was an influential
critic. Her (and Graves's) analysis of Shakespeare's sonnet 129, 'Th'expense
of spirit in a waste of shame . . .' in A Survey of Modernist Poetry was a
significant moment in literary criticism and is reputed to have set the
young Empson off on his quest in search of poetic ambiguity.
Clearly Laura possessed remarkable powers of analysis. They were combined
with an iron will that she used to deconstruct and reconstruct her own
personality several times. She was born Laura Reichenthal in 1901 to
immigrant Polish New York Jews. Nathan, her father, was a Marxist who worked
for The Call, a Jewish English-language newspaper. Laura worked hard to get
to Cornell University in her teens, where she met her first husband, the
history professor Louis Gottschalk. It was as Mrs Gottschalk, the young
faculty wife recently arrived in Louisville, Tennessee, that she scored her
first literary success, a poem in the avant-garde magazine, The Fugitive.
That brought her into contact with the likes of Allen Tate, John Crowe
Ransom, Donald Davidson, the self-styled Fugitive poets. Love affairs with
them saw the break-up of her marriage. Laura now styled herself Laura
Riding.
Laura remained Laura Riding until 1939 when a second traumatic episode
occurred leading to the collapse of her relationship with Graves. They were
living in a farm belonging to Kit and Schuyler Brinckerhoff Jackson in New
Hope, Pennsylvania with their hosts' children and the Matthews. The model
for this episode is not so much Ayckbourn as Daphne du Maurier at her most
spine-chilling. Laura proceeded to take complete control of the household
forcing Kit into a nervous breakdown, and insisting after Kit had left for
hospital treatment that her presence be ritually exorcised. No master of
terror aming at a tale of purest feminine evil could do better than Baker's
cold recital of the facts.
Graves fades out of Laura's life at this point to be replaced by Schuyler
Jackson whom she married. Laura now becomes Laura (Riding) Jackson. She
renounces poetry and much time is spent on a Dictionary of Exact Meanings to
be compiled in collaboration with her husband, a mediocrity and dilettante.
It was never to be finished though they lived off the publishers' advances
for several years. Later still after Jackson's death, Laura entered her
final phase as a litigiously-minded literary widow living in retirement at
Wabasso on the east cost of Florida, fending off all potential biographers
and researchers, a Miss Havisham of modernism. The process of her
rehabilitation as a neglected modernist as well as a precursor of modern
feminism has got off to an earnest, illuminating start with this book.
