FT  22 MAY 93 / Ukrainian N-plant fire kills workman
FIRE at a nuclear power station in Ukraine yesterday killed one workman and
seriously injured another. The blaze was started when sparks from a welder's
torch ignited hydrogen leaking from a pipe in one of the six reactors at the
Zaporizhia plant, Ukraine's largest atomic station.
Officials said no radiation was released by the accident, which was in a
machine room, not the reactor core, Nevertheless, it is likely to raise
further questions over nuclear safety in the countries of the former Soviet
Union.
The plant is about 50km from the city of Zaporizhia, where nearly 1m people
live, and about 550km from Ukraine's capital, Kiev.
The power station has a VVR water-cooled reactor, considered by experts to
be safer than graphite-cooled RBMK reactors. Design flaws in RBMK-style
reactors have been blamed for the accident at the Chernobyl plant in Ukraine
in 1986, which claimed up to 8,000 lives, according to Ukrainian estimates.
Safety has been a serious concern at Ukraine's five nuclear power plants
since the Chernobyl accident. Public opinion in Ukraine is bitterly hostile
to nuclear power and morale in the industry is low.
The Chernobyl plant is to be closed by the end of the year by order of
parliament. But government ministers have asked parliament to consider
lifting a freeze on construction of at least three nearly completed
reactors. Some officials have suggested Chernobyl should remain open to meet
power needs.
Mr Oleksandr Kaliukaev, a duty officer at the Zaporizhia plant, said one
workman died immediately in the blaze and a second suffered serious
injuries. The fire, which lasted 3 1/2 hours, was preceded by an explosion
in the fifth block of the power station.
He said the reactor was under repair at the time of the accident and was not
connected to the electricity grid. News of the accident was broadcast on
local radio and television in the city.
The official said the plant director had given an assurance there was no
danger to people living in the immediate vicinity or in the city of
Zaporizhia.
