FT  27 MAR 93 / Insurers may be sued over refusal to settle Maxwell life
policy
LONDON INSURERS refusing to settle a Pounds 20m policy on the life of Robert
Maxwell are being threatened with legal action by administrators of
companies that were once part of his business empire.
It is understood that action could be initiated against some insurers which
are holding out against a compromise out-of-court settlement.
The compromise has been agreed in principle by most insurance companies that
have underwritten the policy, as well as by Mirror Group Newspapers and by
administrators Price Waterhouse and Arthur Andersen.
Under the settlement the insurers, which include Lloyd's syndicates and
London market companies, would pay only Pounds 6.5m, without accepting
liability.
Mr John Fisher, claims underwriter for the lead Lloyd's syndicate, said
yesterday more than 80 per cent of the Lloyd's syndicates involved in the
policy were now in favour of the proposed settlement. He expected a final
agreement to be signed 'within days'.
Broker Willis Corroon said that while the claim continued to be 'under
discussion', it was now of the view that a 'settlement should be
achievable'.
It is thought that writs against some insurance companies on behalf of the
Maxwell companies would follow the settlement.
Insurers which have agreed to the settlement are believed to be seeking a
watertight legal agreement protecting them from any further liability. MGN
and the administrators - on behalf of Maxwell Communication Corporation
(MCC); Robert Maxwell Group, a private Maxwell company; and Headington
Investments - are covered by the policy. But there might be some yet
unidentified associated companies of the Maxwell empire that might still
claim a share of any eventual pay-out
The proposed settlement was the subject of discussions lasting several
months after insurers and claimants failed to agree on the cause of
Maxwell's death.
Mr Roger Rich, of Rich Wheeler Company, loss adjusters acting for the
insurers, said this week that he remained convinced that the most likely
cause of Maxwell's death in November 1991 was suicide.
But a marine report commissioned on behalf of the insured by Price
Waterhouse concluded after a separate investigation that an accident might
have occurred prior to Maxwell's death by drowning off the Canary Islands.
He had fallen from his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine.
Under the policy, drawn up several years ago but last renewed in April 1991,
the full claim would be payable only if Maxwell died from accidental causes
or murder.
A report in the magazine Business Age that Maxwell might have been murdered
by Israeli agents is not being taken seriously by any parties involved with
the policy.
Sources close to the administrators of Maxwell's companies said last night
it was still not clear how any eventual insurance pay-out would be
distributed among creditors, including pensioners.
