FT  15 JAN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Ships and troops head for Bosnia
and if necessary evacuate - UK soldiers in Bosnia-Hercegovina were announced
by the government yesterday amid stiff warnings from Tory MPs that Britain
must not be drawn further into the conflict.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, said the aircraft carrier Ark Royal -
which left Portsmouth yesterday on its way to the Adriatic - would be
accompanied by two frigates and three support ships, carrying a total of
about 2,500 personnel.
They include Royal Artillery units with six 105mm guns and radars for
locating hostile artillery and mortars,
But Mr Rifkind emphasised that Britain's role of escorting humanitarian aid
supplies would not change. The troops would not be used to intervene in
fighting between rival factions in former Yugoslavia.
With many Tory MPs and ministers jittery about further UK casualties in
Bosnia, Mr Rifkind emphasised that the forces' task was to 'enhance the
safety of our troops'.
He added: 'They will also be available to cover a withdrawal of British
forces if that should become necessary. We are determined not to be in a
position where we are unable to respond immediately to a significant
deterioration in the situation.'
Of more than 400 extra army troops, most will initially remain at sea ready
to disembark. Only 89 extra personnel would join the 2,500 British UN
soldiers already in Bosnia.
Plans are also in hand for further possible reinforcements, including
heavier artillery, as well as the dispatch of Jaguar ground-attack aircraft
and Tornado F3 fighters to Italy. Mr Rifkind did not rule out sending
further aircraft in addition to the eight Sea Harriers and 17 Sea King
helicopters with the Ark Royal task force.
But he said no decision had been taken on UK participation in moves to
enforce the no-fly zone in Bosnia.
The reinforcements follow about 25 serious outbreaks of violence in the past
week in the area where British troops are operating. They include the death
on Wednesday of a lance corporal, the first fatality among UK forces there.
Earlier Mr John Major told MPs that Bosnia presented 'special difficulties'
and was 'quite different' from Iraq.
Mr Peter Viggers, Conservative MP for Gosport, warned that 'if the cabinet
commits further troops for use in Bosnia, it will not have the support of
many people on this side of the House'.
Mr David Clark, shadow defence secretary, said: 'There is a feeling that we
could be drifting inevitably to a war which could last for many years, and
there doesn't seem to be a clear political objective.'
