FT  10 JUL 93 / Arts: A very perky Pickwick
THE unrepentantly conservative audience at the Festival Theatre enjoys its
Chichester Knights. This season it awarded its standing ovation to Sir Harry
Secombe for walking through Pickwick, a role he created 30 years ago in Wolf
Mankowitz's musical based on Dickens' 'Immortal'.
Or perhaps it was a role created for him. Amiable, straight, unworldly,
Secombe seems to have spent most of his life auditioning for the part. Now
in his 70s he still has the face of a mischievous child, but the energy
count is inevitably diminished. He treats the show as a series of solos with
a little comic business on the side. It is hard to imagine him ruling the
Pickwick Club with a rod of iron, although the voice still commands respect
 -and the high notes.
But if Sir Harry takes it gently he is a generous ensemble player, looking
on sweetly while others pile up the points. This production could also
almost be promoted as Weller, so jauntily does David Cardy take his chances
as Pickwick's gentleman's gentleman. The stage definitely buzzes when he
dances, sings, and fools around a generously large cast. His energy rubs off
on Michael Howe as Jingle. It is a contest to see who can milk the most from
what is a fairly loose book, a canter through the familiar sketches from
Pickwick.
Jingle has the neatest cameo as he woos Alexandra Bastedo's Rachel Wardle
while removing her jewels, but Cardy gets to grin widest and longest. Even
the Pickwick Club members - Peter Land (Snodgrass); Kevin AJ Ranson (Tupman)
and Robert Meadmore (Winkle) - manage to look and sound like individuals
rather than supernumaries.
Patrick Garland's production needs to move swiftly to cover up the passing
years. You realise just how far the musical has progressed in a generation.
Lyricist Leslie Bricusse and composer Cyril Ornadel could still get away
with cheerful Cockney capers and rumpity-tumpity music which owed something
to music hall pastiche but even more to barrel organ blandness. Only the
ballads have worn well, and if 'If I ruled the world' now seems
unsupportably banal, 'Look into your heart' contains a tug on the emotions.
Pickwick also seems in danger of an appearance before the Equal
Opportunities Board. The women scarcely get a look in, although Ruth Madoc
as Mrs Bardell makes the melodramatic most of her fleeting chances. With
such a sentimental, soft-hearted, feel-good show it is perfect casting for
Roy Castle, who appeared as Sam Weller in the 1960s, to be given a cameo as
Sam's 'ancient', Tony Weller. In time Pickwick, the musical, may carry some
of the period charm of Dickens' novel. At the moment it is a glimpse into
the dark ages of the British musical. But the band played loudly; the cast
mugged it like professionals; and the audience thought that this is what the
theatre is all about.
