FT  29 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Airtours running out of steam - Owners
OWNERS ABROAD, which is fighting a Pounds 221m hostile part paper bid from
Airtours, yesterday said its rival's tour operating business was running out
of steam and that its offer grossly undervalued the group's prospects.
Mr Howard Klein, Owners Abroad chairman, said shareholders should reject the
Airtours offer which represented an exit multiple of 11.7 times earnings per
share in the year to October, a 40 per cent discount to the FTA All Share
Index.
Launching its formal defence, Owners Abroad executives predicted Airtours
would lose money on its current airline fleet. Airtours already had the
wrong aircraft for charter airlines and would end up, after a merger, with a
fleet consisting of three different types that would be difficult to manage,
said Mr Errol Cossey, airline director.
Integrating Owners Abroad's tour operations with Airtours' would also be
difficult for a management that by then would be running a business with
sales of Pounds 1.6bn, four times larger than they were at the end of last
year.
The company would inevitably become vulnerable to an attack from Thomson,
the market leader. 'They (Thomson) would hit hard and immediately knowing
the (Airtours) management were all over the place,' said Mr Dermot Blasland,
head of Owners Abroad's tour operations.
Mr David Crossland, Airtours chairman, said Owners Abroad's defence
'promises little more than jam tomorrow' and refuted the claims that his
business was running out of steam.
Mr Klein said the Airtours bid had all the hallmarks of an offer that had
been hastily pulled together after Owners Abroad announced in December a
tie-up with Thomas Cook and LTU, the German tour operator.
Airtours was paying a 'very large fee' to its advisers, Barclays de Zoete
Wedd, for a bid from a man (Mr Crossland) who owned a large stake in
Airtours. and 'clearly wants to be number one in the industry'.
If shareholders accepted the Airtours offer - only part of which is
available in cash - they would receive only diluted benefits from synergies
Airtours says will arise from a merger.
