FT  15 MAY 93 / How soccer's dream ticket fell foul
MR Alan Sugar, chairman of Amstrad and Tottenham Hotspur, is not known for
his cool temperament. He once admitted: 'I have got a terrible temper,
violent, wild; I bang the table and scream and shout.'
He is rarely lost for words and he does not take kindly to being told what
to do. So it must be rather difficult for him to comply with legal advice
that he say nothing about the boardroom bust-up with Mr Terry Venables, the
club's chief executive who was sacked as Tottenham's chief executive
yesterday and then re-instated last night on the orders of the High Court.
Whatever the immediate cause of the falling-out, it has been an open secret
that the relationship between the two Eastenders has slid downhill ever
since Mr Venables persuaded Mr Sugar to help him buy the club to thwart a
takeover bid by Robert Maxwell. That was two years ago  - the year Mr
Venables steered Spurs to FA Cup victory.
In the event it seems Mr Sugar wanted Mr Venables to stick to football and
leave the business side to him.
He was once quoted as saying that he would look after the Pounds 11m debt to
the bank while Mr Venables would look after the 11 men on the field.
This was bound to conflict with Mr Venables' ambitions of graduating from
football management to business management. And the strong coaching team,
headed by Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence, was designed to lighten the
training burden on him.
It should have come as no surprise that Mr Sugar would be the boss. He made
its clear during his abortive 30p-a-share buy-back bid for Amstrad  -
rejected by shareholders as being too cheap - that one of the key reasons he
wanted to take Amstrad back into the private sector was because he feels
instinctively more comfortable when he has day-to-day direct control.
When he took over Spurs with Mr Venables, it was regarded as a dream ticket
 -two East End boys working together, one looking after the finances and the
other looking after the football. The falling-out has been equally dramatic.
There appears to be no obvious reason for the split. The company turned a
Pounds 1.78m pre-tax loss into a Pounds 2.66m profit in 1991-92 and is
forecast to make Pounds 5m pre-tax in the year just ending, albeit boosted
by a Pounds 3m gain on player sales inflated by the Paul Gascoigne deal.
The share price, however, has typically traded well below the 125p rights
issue price.
It would seem the two men, from similar backgrounds, could just not get
along. For Mr Venables yesterday marked the lowest point in a colourful
football and business career. The former Tottenham manager, 'Son of Fred' -
to quote the title of his autobiography - came from a council estate in
Dagenham to enjoy success on and off the soccer field.
He played for England at every level including schoolboy, youth and under-23
teams. He followed this by managing Queens Park Rangers and Crystal Palace
before going to coach Barcelona - one of the biggest clubs in the world -
which led to the Spanish League title in his first year.
Off the field he has had a modest success as an author co-writing the Hazel
detective novels, and has run several pubs and clubs.
He risked personal ruin to buy into Spurs with Mr Sugar after the former
chairman Mr Irving Scholar had been ousted and a rival bid by Robert Maxwell
had been fended off.
Mr Sugar has often acknowledged that he is not really a 'team player'. He
also showed ruthlessness early on at Tottenham. He sacked Mr Ian Gray as
managing director and Brown Shipley &amp; Co as financial advisers. Both parties
launched litigation.
He also led the charge not just for Tottenham but for many of the Premier
League clubs in negotiating a lucrative deal with BSkyB, the satellite
broadcaster in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, has a stake. The
bagging of live Premier League matches for satellite TV has provided an
obvious fillip to dish sales - one of Amstrad's lines.
Mr Sugar does not forgive and forget, either. When his old friend Mr Gulu
Lalvani, head of the Binatone private electronics group and the man who gave
Mr Sugar his first break, interviewed and then hired Mr Bob Watkins,
Amstrad's technical director, Mr Sugar broke off the friendship.
Some who know the private and reportedly rather shy Mr Sugar say much of his
street-wise style reflects his upbringing in an east London council house.
Others including Lord Young, who first met him at a Downing Street seminar,
have suggested that his apparent unease in government and City circles
reflected insecurity.
But Mr Sugar is also a chameleon. Charming when he needs to be, he is the
reverse if angry. His wife Ann has said he enjoys the spotlight so much so
that he ought to be on the stage.
