FT  25 MAY 93 / Lopez denies he took General Motors papers to Volkswagen
VOLKSWAGEN'S top executives fought back publicly yesterday against a renewed
legal attack from arch-rival General Motors of the US.
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, whom, GM believes, took confidential
documents with him when he defected from Detroit to VW last month, said the
charge was 'untenable'.
'What did I bring with me? My personal knowledge and years of experience,'
Mr Lopez said. 'A strong inner motivation. The will to realise quantum leaps
at VW. No secret documents,' he added.
'I can only imagine that GM has been so affected by my change that it wants
to damage my credibility,' he told selected journalists at a
hastily-convened press conference.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen chairman, publicly defended Mr Lopez. It was
incredible that anyone should try to discredit not only his 'irreproachable
professionalism' but also the image of VW itself, he said.
VW was responsible for all its own technological progress and had not the
slightest need to take out 'loans' from competitors.
He could not discuss any other details of the legal confrontation because he
had not yet seen the text of the charges.
The press conference, in Braunschweig, near Hannover, was called after
General Motors announced on Friday that it had filed legal complaints in
Darmstadt, near Frankfurt, after Mr Lopez quit GM to be promptly followed by
seven group colleagues.
VW officials said yesterday that while the seven had filed counter suits
against their former employer, Mr Lopez had not yet taken legal action.
Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, had earlier won a court injunction
preventing VW from poaching its staff. According to Opel, Mr Lopez had
targeted about 40 key purchasing and production employees.
Mr Lopez, a renowned cost-cutter, joined VW after a bizarre on-off tussle,
as a key member of Mr Piech's new management team brought in to restore the
group's fortunes. VW lost DM1.25bn (Pounds 516m) in the first three months
of this year.
Mr Lopez, a Basque, claimed he had no contract at GM, and denied rumours of
multi-million dollar deals with VW. 'I could earn a lot more today in the US
than I get at VW,' he added.
