FT  22 DEC 93 / Arts: Romantic comedy dealt a heavy hand / Review of
Smetana's 'The Two Widows' at the Coliseum
For anyone who loves Smetana's fifth opera as much as I do, and who was
looking forward to its first professional mounting in London as much as I
was, the actuality may well be classified the number one operatic
disappointment of 1993. At the Coliseum on Monday The Two Widows - a
light-as-air romantic comedy with a treasure trove of melodies, a spring in
its heel and a loving heart - emerged horribly overblown. It seemed cruelly
weighed down by garish production, lumpen, out-of-balance conducting, and a
fatal determination to blow up a small-house confection into the ENO's
house-filling Seasonal Sizzler.
At the heart of the performance there struggles an interestingly cast
central trio - Marie McLaughlin as the land-owning widow Karolina,
Anne-Marie Owens as her cousin, the sad, self- repressing widow Anezka, and
David Rendall as Ladislav, secret object of Anezka's affections, whose ruse
to gain admittance to Karolina's estate is the hinge on which the
drawing-room comedy plot turns. Their grasp of roles and music seemed on
Monday already honourably tenacious, in spite of all the hazards thrown in
their way by Adam Fischer's woefully lax baton beat and the keep-it-moving
exertions of David Pountney's insensitively boisterous staging.
Later in the run they may well succeed in establishing even more firmly the
characters and the situations. For the rest - well, autopsy could be thought
more in order than conventional criticism. The sharpest blow seems to have
been directed to the heart of the score, for in the right, sympathetic
circumstances Smetana's flexibility of form, rhythm, instrumentation and
vocal writing can be heard and seen to mirror the plot shifts of atmosphere
and mood with delicious, heart-lifting ease.
Crudely blared out by the ENO orchestra, whose brass appeared on Monday to
be having a communal off-night, the quicksilver sonorities swiftly turned
leaden - and, in all-too-exact parallel, the gentle heartbeat of an opera
about bruised adults learning to love again simply got smothered.
The point needs to be underlined: The Two Widows is a small-house opera, and
its transfer to a Coliseum-sized theatre is fraught with risk. During the
interval more than one voice could be heard sadly recalling the precise
pleasures, festive merriments and tender emotions of the 1978 production in
the tiny theatre at Wexford. That was staged by - good heavens, can it
really have been the same David Pountney now responsible for this
poster-paint-coloured knees-up, in sets by Mark Thompson that effect an
unholy alliance between GMTV notions of design and a cut-price provincial
revival of Oklahoma?
We all know that Pountney's light touch deserted him during his long stint
as ENO director of productions; we have grim memories of Orpheus in the
Underworld (to name only a single instance) to draw on in support of that
sad assertion. Even so, how is it possible that a man capable of proclaiming
with such warmth the qualities of the work in this month's issue of Opera
(and capable of translating it into English with such a deft command of
rhyming patter), should then coarsen his affections so pitilessly in the
theatre?
Oh dear. On Monday neither Miss Owens (a sumptuous mezzo of wit and
disciplined stage style) nor Mr Rendall (a tenor with a bright ring to his
top notes) proved always able to strike the centre of their notes with
unfailing aim - the uneasy atmosphere of a difficult first night must no
doubt bear much of the responsibility. But already the sense of their
characters' complex relationship was being communicated with a true, sure
touch.
Miss McLaughlin has to struggle a good deal harder with a Merry Widow
characterisation of the free-spirited Karolina which is in danger of
rendering the singer's bounteous natural charms hard, forced and irritating.
She must also beware of the neo-Schwarzkopf mannerisms (in particular a
heavy reliance on 'white', whisked-away high phrases) that do duty for
spontaneous command of the music. More matter, less art, please: even in
these depressing circumstances a performer so fully equipped for a role must
be encouraged to work much less hard.
ENO at the London Coliseum, WC2. Co-production with Welsh National and
sponsored by Guinness plc. In repertory until January 20
