FT  06 MAR 93 / Dublin woos Unionists with new terms for peace talks
THE IRISH government yesterday made conciliatory overtures to the Protestant
majority in Northern Ireland, saying the republic's constitutional claim to
the province was not 'cast in bronze, incapable of change'.
Mr Dick Spring, foreign affairs minister, urged Unionist parties to return
to the negotiating table. 'I want to see an accommodation on the
constitutional issue which is reasonable and fair to all,' he said.
The reaction in Whitehall was cautiously upbeat. Sir Patrick Mayhew,
Northern Ireland secretary, hopes the new Irish government will help end the
political deadlock in the province. But Mr Spring's overtures were given a
chilly response by Unionist leaders, suggesting any breakthrough remains
elusive.
Nonetheless, it is the most affirmative statement yet by the Irish
government that it is willing to embark on some sort of compromise with
Northern Ireland's Unionist majority.
It was the first keynote speech by Mr Spring, the Labour party leader, on
the Northern Ireland issue since he took office in January as part of the
new coalition. Mr Spring would appear to be asserting the stamp of his
party, which has one third of the seats in the cabinet, on the country's
foreign policy.
All-party talks on Northern Ireland, embracing the UK and Irish governments
and the four main constitutional parties in Northern Ireland, broke down
last November. The Unionists insist the republic must drop its territorial
claim to the north if progress is to be made.
Mr Spring said yesterday that his government was committed to the principle,
laid out in the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement, that there would be no change in
the status of Northern Ireland without the consent of the majority there.
'We will be quite ready to confirm and elaborate that principle in various
ways as Unionists might wish, in any new agreement that transcends the
Anglo-Irish Agreement,' he said, adding that the constitution was never
intended to be an obstacle to mutual understanding.
Mr Spring said: 'We clearly see the need to get around the table to work out
how a generally acceptable package might fairly accommodate the deep
divisions, including the divisions on constitutional issues, which are the
source of the conflict.' He also proposed a new agreement or covenant.
Mr Spring hinted that he might be prepared to travel to Belfast to restart
bilateral negotiations with the Unionists, and added: 'We must at some time
reach the point where all of us around a table can say to each other: this
is a very difficult for us, but it is a just and fair compromise.'
Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist Party in
Northern Ireland, responded negatively, to the offer, saying: 'Between my
door and his door there is a road which has a very large obstacle placed on
it, which he alone and his country can remove - that must be the priority.
'He has to face up to the reality that you cannot have a new relationship
until the Irish Republic removes its claim to our territory.'
