FT  01 DEC 93 / International Bonds: World Bank arm in Dollars 500m Eurobond
offer
The International Finance Corporation (IFC), the private sector arm of the
World Bank, reaped the benefits of its recent Dollars 200m buy-back
programme when it launched its Dollars 500m offering of five-year Eurobonds
yesterday.
By buying back old, illiquid Eurobonds, the IFC enabled investors to swap
out of high-coupon, high-premium paper into a current-coupon and liquid bond
at virtually the same spread over US Treasuries, said joint lead manager
Deutsche Bank.
The new bonds were priced to yield 13 basis points over the 5 1/8 per cent
US Treasury due 1998. This compared with an average spread of 14 to 15 basis
points over US Treasuries at which the IFC bought back the old bonds.
The buy-back programme also allowed the IFC to establish a new benchmark
offering for itself which its relatively modest annual borrowing programme
would not otherwise permit.
Mr Robert Graffam, director of the IFC's treasury and financial policy
department, said that the IFC had now raised Dollars 1.2bn of its Dollars
1.6bn international borrowing programme for the current fiscal year which
runs until the end of next June.
Around three-quarters of the bonds had been sold by late afternoon, Mr
Graffam said. At the launch the bonds were priced at 99.665 but they eased
to 99.37 bid late in the day, in line with the  1/4 point fall in the US
Treasury market.
Elsewhere, the launch of the European Investment Bank's largest-ever Swiss
franc offering ran into difficulty yesterday when other Swiss banks failed
to join in the syndicate group.
The EIB raised SFr800m through an offering of five-year bonds. The offering,
which has a re-opening clause, carries a coupon of 3.75 per cent which
syndicate managers said was the lowest in the current interest rate cycle.
Lead manager UBS said that EIB's issue established a new benchmark for other
top quality borrowers wishing to tap this area of the yield curve.
However, syndicate managers at other Swiss banks said the bonds were priced
well in advance of a further drop in Swiss bond yields. The yield on EIB's
bonds of 3.7 per cent compared with yields around 4 per cent on outstanding
issues with similar maturities, they said.
Swiss banks expressed their disagreement with the pricing of the issue by
declining to join the syndicate group, which was made up of Japanese and
American banks.
