FT  04 FEB 93 / Angolan government sounds alarm: West loses patience with
enemies who refuse to compromise
ANGOLA'S embattled government made a desperate plea for help yesterday,
calling on the international community not to abandon the country.
The appeal is likely to fall on deaf ears. Both the government in Luanda and
the rebel Unita movement are to blame for the resumption of a brutal civil
war which has cost up to 10,000 lives since last November. Besides, with the
cold war over, Angola no longer has strategic value for major powers.
Both warring factions also seem unwilling to make the necessary concessions
to bring the conflict to an end. Peace talks in Addis Ababa last weekend
failed to agree a ceasefire in the conflict, which flared after Unita had
refused to accept the elections held in September and the government then
took the opportunity to launch a bloody purge of Unita in the cities.
The former Marxist government and Unita remain locked in the bitter
personal, tribal and ideological rivalries which fuelled the 1975-1990 civil
war. Diplomats say there is little hope of concrete results for a second
round of talks due to take place next week, and the United Nations is
scaling down its presence and preparing to withdraw from the country in
April if no progress has been made towards peace.
In the meantime, there is little respite for Angola's 10m people or for the
mineral-rich economy of a country which could become one of Africa's richest
and spur an economic revival throughout southern Africa. Up to 1m people are
facing starvation this year as the fighting disrupts aid operations.
The oil industry, which produced 550,000 barrels a day last year and is the
backbone of the war-crippled economy, has been severely hit by the renewed
civil war.
Unita has captured Soyo, which is Angola's second-biggest oil centre,
causing a loss of 90,000 barrels per day, worth more than Dollars 1.5m
(Pounds 990,000) a day.
Unita has also threatened to attack offshore oil platforms in the oil-rich
enclave of Cabinda, which produces two-thirds of national output.
The Cabinda Gulf Oil Company has been evacuating scores of expatriates. This
week, Unita kidnapped 15 Angolan oil workers in the Cabinda region.
