FT  17 NOV 93 / S Africa deal close on power sharing
THE South African government and the African National Congress last night
struck a deal to placate the white right wing, agreeing to guarantee the
white minority a substantial share of power in local government.
The deal takes the form of joint proposals from the two sides for
incorporation in the new constitution due to be agreed later today. It
represents an important victory for the ruling National party, which has
made considerable concessions in recent days over the issue of power sharing
in central government, and devolution of power to regions, but held out on
the sensitive issue of local government power-sharing.
If the proposals are finalised in the constitution, local government
elections will be held within two years and will guarantee whites at least a
30 per cent share of local councils, and in some cases one third or more of
the council. The deal is aimed at rural towns in the ultra-conservative
Orange Free State and Transvaal, where whites are heavily outnumbered by
blacks and fear that the merging of white and black local councils will
prove a serious drain on the budgets of white towns.
Local council budgets will require a two-thirds majority to pass, a figure
which will give whites an effective veto in this area, under most
circumstances.
Tension between black and white is most acute at local government level,
because residential areas remain almost totally segregated, and the gap in
the level of development between white and black areas remains huge. The
white right-wing has been effective at mobilising opposition to the new
constitution at local level, and negotiators from both sides were clearly
keen to defuse this threat.
Councils elected at the first local government polls, which are likely to
take place late next year or early in 1995, will remain in office for three
years. After that, a new electoral system will be agreed.
Last night Mr Nelson Mandela, ANC leader, and President F W de Klerk, were
due to meet to approve the whole package of deals on which the new
constitution will be based.
