FT  06 SEP 93 / EC's northern exposure
Wrangles between Brussels and the Nordic countries over their applications
to join the European Community are likely to be the subject of a growing
number of newspaper reports in the next few months.
As negotiations get down to the toughest issues - particularly the demand
for special treatment for the Arctic regions - doubts may be raised about
whether agreement can be reached. From the EC point of view, a serious
question remains: do the Nordic countries - Finland, Norway and Sweden -
really want to join the Community?
There is no easy answer. Consider the following example: few harbours in
Europe outside the English channel are as busy with passenger ships as
Helsinki, the capital of Finland. Every day, liners with unlikely names like
Cinderella manoeuvre in and out of the small port, dwarfing the rocky
islands that guard the approaches.
Some head south for Tallinn, plying a fast-growing trade with Estonia. The
biggest and sleekest glide westwards towards Stockholm. Some passengers on
board are genuine travellers, preferring the overnight journey by sea to the
high cost of flying around the Nordic region. But many are simply along for
the cruise.
Finns, Swedes and Norwegians enjoy these Baltic jaunts chiefly because they
can stock up on duty-free booze. Drink on board is a good deal cheaper than
in their state alcohol monopolies.
The EC wants to break these monopolies. If it succeeds, the price of drink
on dry land would fall. But people are not cheering on the EC negotiators.
Rather, the three Nordic governments are resisting such changes because of
the political influence still wielded by their respective temperance
movements.
Perhaps it is not such a paradox. In their different ways, the Finns,
Norwegians and Swedes are proud and jealous of their way of life and the
prosperous, welfare societies they have created against the climatic odds -
even if the recession has put them under severe strain.
For instance, in Norway, fishing ac-counts for only a tiny proportion of
gross domestic product and em-ploys only a small fraction of the workforce.
But fishing and the sea retain an unshakeable place in the national
identity. Fishing makes up, in the memorable metaphor of an adviser to Prime
Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland, 30 per cent of political GDP. The issue of
EC fishing quotas is, therefore, much more than just a question of fish
stock management and fishermen's income.
Likewise, the argument that food would become cheaper and choice wider if
protection and subsidy for Arctic and sub-Arctic farmers were dismantled,
cuts little ice with a Nordic public that has traditionally been willing to
pay a price for sustaining the population in remote areas. People do not
understand why, as all three countries would become net contributors to the
EC budget, Brussels should not fund some of these subsidies just as it did
for disadvantaged southern rural areas when they joined the Community.
Scepticism towards the EC in societies that are wary of outsiders has been
reinforced by the recent disarray within the Community. Confronted by
confusion over the Maastricht treaty, currency chaos, recession and, not
least, the woeful EC response to war in former Yugoslavia, public opinion
has hardened against the Community, just as it has within many of the member
countries.
Opinion polls show the No camp in a clear lead in Norway and Sweden and, at
best, only a fragile Yes vote in Finland. The three Nordic governments,
particularly those in Oslo and Helsinki, are thus adopting a muscular pose
in the negotiations. Each has promised to hold a referendum before making
the final decision on accession, and they are worried that they will lose
unless they are seen to have struck a hard bargain. Hence Mr Esko Aho, the
Finnish prime minister, whose own rurally based Centre party is divided over
the EC, talks of the Community having to adopt a 'northern approach'.
In spite of such utterances, it could be a mistake for the EC to conclude
that the Nordic countries do not really want membership. With the possible
exception of Norway, it is hard to find senior policymakers, officials,
businessmen and even trade unionists who do not think the three would be
better off inside than outside the EC. The prospect of breakdown in
negotiations tends to induce a collective shudder.
There is a clear undercurrent of anxiety over the possible consequences of
being left out - of the north becoming a dead-end street, as one Swede put
it. A recent Finnish study showed that 77 per cent of voters thought Finland
would soon join the EC, suggesting a belief that there is no practical
alternative. Many people throughout the region say that, if the Community
were in a more upbeat phase, as it was at the end of the 1980s, a Yes vote
would be easy to attain. There remains the faint suspicion that the
Community, exhausted by the events of the past 18 months, is ambivalent
about enlargement.
If the leaderships on both sides are sincere in their expressions of mutual
commitment to the goal of Nordic accession, they are doing a poor job of
getting the message across to the public. An impression of distrust will
grow if the autumn round of negotiations proves as difficult as predicted.
Instead of allowing attention to be focused on disputes over subsidies per
head of reindeer, political leaders should try to rejuvenate the vision of
the Nordic countries taking their place in the expanding family of European
nations. Perhaps an EC-Nordic summit on board a Baltic cruise liner would do
the trick.
