FT  18 MAY 93 / Business and the Law: Going global - The coming players in
the market for international services
When international accountancy firm Arthur Andersen let it be known recently
that it was behind Garrett &amp; Co, a new London law firm to be headed by the
former senior legal adviser to Investors in Industry (3i), Britain's largest
venture capital company, lawyers in the City of London blanched.
The link between Andersen and Garrett &amp; Co could pave the way towards the
creation of the first multi-disciplinary partnership between accountants and
lawyers. Although Garrett will be independent of Andersen in the short term,
it will be based in the accountants' London offices and will expect much of
its work to come through referrals from Andersen's network.
For the top City law firms, concern about the Big Six accountants moving
into legal services stems from the fear of competition not in domestic
markets but in those for international legal services. As much as 40 per
cent of their work now has an international element and any move into the
international legal markets by an organisation with an established presence
in every corner of the globe poses a considerable threat.
Some accountancy firms have already flagged their intentions. KPMG, for
example, has strong links with the French law firm Fidal, arguably the
largest in continental Europe. But Andersen is forcing the pace. It has
established a number of associations with law firms in other European
countries including SG Archibald of France and Friehalter, Kruger &amp; Co of
Germany.
It has some way to go before it is in a position to challenge the big
English and American law firms in the provision of high-value global legal
services but it can build on a network of 318 offices employing 62,000
professional staff in 72 countries around the world.
No law firm can match that spread - except perhaps Baker &amp; McKenzie, which
operates on a scaled-down level more appropriate to the size of the global
marketplace for legal services. B&amp;M has 53 offices in 32 countries. Its
1,640 lawyers represent 45 nationalities and speak 60 languages. No other
law firm comes close to that.
B&amp;M is used to being derided by its competitors for its unusual structure.
It knits local lawyers in different countries into its international
network, whereas the traditional method for providing legal services for
multinational clients involves a few overseas branch offices controlled from
the centre and staffed by lawyers on assignment from headquarters for two or
three years at a time.
As competition for international legal services hots up, the number of
detractors is dwindling. Some firms now appear to accept that the Baker &amp;
McKenzie approach may have been the right one after all.
Many of those who expanded rapidly overseas in the late 1980s now realise
that the cost of establishing, staffing and running more than a handful of
overseas branch offices to serve multinational clients may be prohibitive.
Some even appear to have changed tack. New York's Skadden Arps Slate Meagher
&amp; Flom, which quickly established seven offices in Europe in the late 1980s,
has recently entered into affiliations with local law firms in Frankfurt and
Vienna.
This is a development not lost on John McGuigan, the recently appointed
chairman of B&amp;M's executive committee. The 43-year-old Australian accountant
turned lawyer believes that when the regulatory barriers to
cross-jurisdictional legal practice come down only a very few firms will be
in a position to operate on a truly international basis.
One of the main limitations they will face is money, he says. B&amp;M has 53
offices around the world because that is the way the firm evolved. When
Russell Baker and John McKenzie set up the firm in Chicago in 1949 they hit
on the simple idea that as US multinationals sought to expand their market
and bases of production they were going to need sophisticated legal advice.
It seemed sensible for companies to have access to someone in those markets
who could provide that advice but who also had an understanding of the US
legal system.
'But,' says McGuigan, 'I wouldn't like to be seeking to establish 53 offices
now. The fact is we have them in the balance sheet, they're capitalised and
they're all profitable.'
The other main impediment will be cultural, he says. If firms are going to
operate on a truly international basis and offer as broad a range of
services as B&amp;M does, they need a flexible management style and a certain
degree of local independence and respect for local solutions. The
traditional head office/branch office structure is too rigid.
Critics of the B&amp;M approach point out, however, that the evolution of the
firm with its reliance on national lawyers in the various locations
inevitably means that the quality of its work is inconsistent.
Standards in Bangkok or Bogota may not be up to those of London or New York.
As competition in the international market place intensifies, critics argue,
and as clients bring an increasingly sophisticated approach to buying legal
services, companies which in the past have used B&amp;M around the world will
become more selective about where they use its lawyers in future.
Equally, a poor piece of work for a multinational client done in Manila
could damage relationships in more important markets such as Europe or north
America.
Eventually, these factors could begin to hurt the bottom line. Critics note
that while B&amp;M has the second highest gross revenues of America's
international law firms that is largely because it has so many lawyers.
Judged by profits per partner the firm is ranked 40th.
John McGuigan believes the quality problems are over-emphasised, but he is
far from complacent. 'We're only as strong as our weakest link,' he
concedes. Improving quality is a priority. The firm has doubled its training
budget over the last three years and its budget for professional development
has increased from Dollars 350,000 to Dollars 1.2m.
But many of the criticisms miss the point of B&amp;M's ethos, McGuigan says.
Imposing the way business is done in a location is wrong because it fails to
recognise that there are different degrees of sophistication in the various
legal systems of the world, that local lawyers' qualifications may not be up
to the standards of America and Europe and that different issues are
relevant in ensuring clients get the right service.
'Some US banking lawyers believe that what they need to do in Jakarta is
produce the same pile of closing documents as they would in New York.
They're wrong.' he says.
Given that B&amp;M's structure and approach most closely resembles that of the
Big Six, it might be thought more at risk than other international law firms
if accountants move into global legal services.
McGuigan disagrees. Accountants will undoubtedly move into the legal field
and will present a challenge in some of the more routine areas of legal
work. They could also increase pressures on pricing at the lower end of the
market.
But for the foreseeable future they are likely to have significant
difficulty in attracting the number of lawyers of real quality and
experience they will need to mount a serious challenge to the big law firms.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                      AMERICA'S TOP LAW FIRMS 1991
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Rank by gross revenue (Dollars m)                  Revenue     Profits
                                        Gross    per lawyer  per partner
                                       revenue    (Dollars    (Dollars
                                     (Dollars m)    '000)       '000)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom    490.0        490         930
Baker &amp; McKenzie                        477.0        300         380
Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue              406.0        380         320
Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher                 277.0        450         480
Shearman &amp; Sterling                     273.0        500         690
Sullivan &amp; Cromwell                     255.0        730       1,050
Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell                   252.0        620       1,000
Well, Gotshal &amp; Manges                  252.0        460         700
Letham &amp; Watkins                        238.5        420         520
Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton      235.0        550         770
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: American Lawyer Magazine
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
