FT  22 OCT 93 / Report dents Japan's image as highly efficient manufacturer
JAPAN'S efficiency in manufacturing, according to the international
management consultants McKinsey, is not all that it is cracked up to be. In
some sectors, such as cars and consumer electronics, the Japanese still rule
the world. But in protected areas like food and beer, Japanese productivity
is wretched: so much so, says McKinsey, that Japan's overall productivity is
17 per cent worse than America's, and only a shade better than Germany's.
McKinsey's results, based on a year-long study, measure value added per
hour. The study looked at nine industry sectors, arriving at a weighted
average of performance based on the number of workers employed in each. The
findings on each sector show enormous variations.
Car assembly: In 1990, value added per hour worked in Japan was 16 per cent
higher than in the US. German productivity was one third below US levels.
The key factors governing productivity in the car industry, says McKinsey,
are the organisation of labour and design for manufacturing, rather than
worker skills or high-tech factories.
The US has drawn close to Japanese productivity levels in response to the
challenge of Japanese transplants in the US. The study finds that US
carmakers are now on average as productive as Japanese makers, with the
exception of Toyota, the Japanese industry leader. Germany lags behind Japan
principally because it was protected from Japanese competition in the past.
Motor parts: Japanese productivity is 24 per cent higher than that of the
US, while Germany was 24 per cent lower. Japan's lead is attributed partly
to the strength of its car manufacturers, partly to differences in industry
structure. Whereas Japan has more parts producers in total, far fewer of
them supply directly to the carmakers. This tiered structure reduces the
level of operational complexity - and cost.
Metalworking: Japanese productivity is 19 per cent ahead of that in both the
US and Germany. During the 1980s, Japanese manufacture of machine tools and
robot systems moved from craft methods to a modern industrial process.
Japanese companies thus have longer production runs and economies of scale.
German and US companies have been slow to make this transition, though the
US is catching up.
Steel: The US and Germany are equal in value added per hour worked. Japan is
45 per cent ahead. Only 6 per cent of Germany's production comes from
new-style mini-mills, as against more labour-intensive integrated mills. The
US has the same percentage of mini-mills as Japan. However, it has been held
back by financial restructuring and the lenient US bankruptcy laws, which
have allowed old-style integrated mills to carry on producing despite being
uneconomic.
Computer hardware: Japan lags the US by 5 per cent, Germany by 11 per cent.
Production is global, with US companies accounting for 17 per cent of
Japanese production - the highest figure for any industry. The industry is
characterised by global competition and hence convergence in productivity.
Consumer electronics: Japan is 15 per cent more productive than the US,
Germany 28 per cent less so. Japan's good performance is chiefly due to
intense domestic competition, Germany's poor showing to trade barriers and
protectionism. The US picture is misleading, since the only important
product made in the US is televisions, of which only 8 per cent are made by
indigenous US manufacturers.
Food manufacturing: Japan's output per hour worked is one third of that in
the US and less than half that in Germany. The Japanese industry employs
roughly the same numbers as that in the US for one third of the output. Even
the bigger Japanese companies do not face overseas competition, which is
kept out by tariffs, quotas and the complexities of the distribution system.
Brewing: Japan produces 31 per cent less beer per worker than the US,
Germany 56 per cent less. In Germany, the industry is highly fragmented,
with more than 1,000 breweries producing 12.5bn litres a year, compared to
67 US breweries producing 23.1bn litres. Japanese breweries are large enough
to produce scale economies, but the government protects smaller brewers from
competition.
