FT  26 AUG 93 / International Company News: Watchdog bans Ferfin's auditor
PRICE WATERHOUSE, one of the world's leading accounting and consultancy
groups, has been banned by the Consob companies and stock market watchdog
from auditing the books of Ferruzzi Finanziaria (Ferfin), Italy's
second-biggest private company.
The ban, which may be extended to Ferfin's Montedison industrial subsidiary,
follows the opening of a formal investigation by Consob into Price
Waterhouse's conduct in auditing the group's accounts.
Consob based its move on the claim that Price Waterhouse had been shown to
be 'technically inadequate' in auditing Ferfin's books. Technical inadequacy
is one of only two grounds on which Consob is allowed to prevent an auditing
firm continuing its task; the other is conflict of interest.
Mr Dino Martinazzoli, a member of Price Waterhouse's Italian partnership,
said the group would probably launch a formal legal appeal against the move,
which is only the second of its kind in recent years. 'The job of auditing
Ferfin's accounts was carried out in a professionally correct way', he said.
Consob's move follows the discovery of severe financial irregularities in
Ferfin's and Montedison's accounts by the new management imposed earlier
this year by the group's leading bank creditors.
The irregularities, which centre on a L435bn additional loss in Montedison's
1992 accounts, are believed to result from attempts to cover up huge US
commodity futures trading losses incurred by Ferfin in 1989, when the group
was run by Mr Raul Gardini.
Ferfin, staggering under total borrowings of L28,838bn (Dollars 18.08bn) at
the end of May, and Montedison were obliged to revise their already high
1992 losses to reflect the new discoveries.
Meanwhile, the new management brought in by the group's leading creditor
banks, commissioned Deloitte &amp; Touche, another big international accounting
group, to carry out a detailed investigation into the groups' accounts.
Shortly afterwards, Price Waterhouse withdrew its certification from the
accounts it had certified only days before.
