FT  02 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Goldsmith announcement 'not
responsible for gold spike'
SIR JAMES Goldsmith's announcement that he was to swap gold shares for gold
bullion had nothing to do with a sharp rise in the gold price yesterday,
according to traders and analysts.
The price, which moved through the important Dollars 380 a troy ounce level,
was driven by activity on New York futures markets, they suggested.
Traders were deeply suspicious of Sir James's motives. They insisted no
professional speculator would reveal his hand so clearly before completing a
deal. 'He won't get the money from the share sale for a week or two. Does he
expect us to believe he would then buy gold in a rising market?' was a
typical comment. 'He has either already bought the gold or he doesn't intend
to buy any.'
Sir James and Lord Rothschild announced on Wednesday that they would offer
the public 9.65m shares in, or 14 per cent of, Newmont Mining, North
America's biggest gold producer. When the sale is completed, they will in
the space of less than a year have reduced their combined holdings in
Newmont from 49 per cent to 6.5 per cent.
In London yesterday gold started quietly and ended the formal morning fixing
at Dollars 377.85 an ounce, down about Dollars 1 from Wednesday's closing
price. Traders said business was quiet as gold producers were not selling
and demand was minimal.
Then New York investment funds re-discovered silver yesterday, pushing the
price up by 17 1/2 cents an ounce to Dollars 4.74 by the close in London.
Gold was dragged up because computer trading programmes frequently link the
two precious metals.
Gold closed in London at its highest level for the day, Dollars 384.50, up
Dollars 5.25 an ounce. Traders suggested that, as the price was being driven
by technical factors, it would probably move to Dollars 385 which was the
next important chart point.
One said that if Sir James used only half the Dollars 440m proceeds expected
from his share sale to buy gold call options, it would probably be enough to
drive the price above Dollars 400.
