FT  30 SEP 93 / Night flights plan ruled unlawful
THE High Court yesterday ruled as unlawful proposals by the government to
increase the number of night flights at London airports including Heathrow,
Gatwick and Stansted.
The decision is a blow to the government and to BAA, the privatised airports
operator, which wanted more flexibility for aircraft movements at Heathrow.
The government was planning to introduce a new quota system for night
flights based on the noise performance of aircraft to replace the current
system based on a specific number of aircraft movements.
The proposals faced fierce opposition from local authorities near the
airports worried that the new rules would increase the number of night
flights sharply.
Mr Justice Laws yesterday granted the councils a declaration that the
proposed new noise regulations were not authorised by the 1982 Civil
Aviation Act. He also ordered the government to pay 25 per cent of the legal
costs incurred by the councils. They include Richmond and Hillingdon in
London, Tandridge in Surrey, and Windsor and Maidenhead as well as Slough
councils in Berkshire and the London borough of Hillingdon.
The judge said: 'The truth is that the concept of a maximum number of
movements has in practical fact no part to play in the secretary of state's
proposal, yet it must - under the act - be the linchpin of any order made.'
Meanwhile, Birmingham International Airport, Britain's fifth-largest, is
seeking up to Pounds 400m of private-sector investment to fund expansion
over the next 10 years, its local-authority owners said yesterday.
Investors will be offered an equity stake in the airport. Local authority
leaders, however, said the move did not signal a move to privatisation.
Mr Fred Hunt, leader of Dudley Borough Council, said the seven local
authorities which own the airport envisaged a partnership between the public
and private sectors enabling Birmingham to keep pace with its main regional
rival at Manchester.
Detailed proposals on raising the finance, setting out options for investors
such as preference shares or long-term debt, will be published next year. If
approved, construction work could begin in 1997.
British Aerospace has applied for planning permission to develop its
airfield at Filton, north Bristol, as a commercial airport running scheduled
services. It said it needs to make better use of the airfield to protect the
future of the plant.
