FT  02 SEP 93 / Technology: Ship-shape cruising - Designing liners has
become more complex as demand for bigger vessels increases
It took six men three days to reassemble the 500-year-old fountain which
forms the centre-piece of the dining room on the Maasdam, one of the biggest
cruise liners under construction.
Its sister ship, the Statendam, already sailing the Caribbean for Holland
America Line, boasts a three-storey atrium. The Costa Classica has 350
tonnes of marble among its luxury fittings, on a liner which has 53,700
gross registered tonnes.
Building cruise ships has become big business as interest in cruises has
surged. Whereas the job was once largely a matter of converting former ocean
liners, purpose-built vessels are now one of the fastest-growing sectors of
the world shipbuilding industry.
The building of cruise ships has become more complex as operators have
demanded what are, in effect, vast floating hotels. As the size and content
have increased so has the cost. A 77,000 grt ship, such as P&amp;O's Sun
Princess, currently the biggest cruise vessel under construction, costs
around Dollars 300m (Pounds 202m). Within the next four years, it will be
dwarfed by a new 95,000 grt 'mega ship', carrying 4,400 passengers and crew,
being designed by Italy's state-owned Fincantieri yard.
The operators have sought larger vessels to achieve economies of scale and
maximise profits. However, the shift poses challenges for the handful of
naval architects and yards capable of building them.
'A normal merchant ship has about 100kg of outfitting for every tonne of
steel,' says Fincantieri's Gianfranco Bertaglia, one of the pioneer naval
architects of the new vessels. 'Today, we have to reckon with about one
tonne of outfitting - glass, marble, leather and electronics  - for every
tonne of steel.'
To keep the high cost of new vessel construction down has meant borrowing
heavily from military technology. Rather than the traditional 15mm-thick
steel plate used for merchant shipping, they have the 5mm plate found in
battleships.
Thin plate processing lowers hull weights, allowing owners to fit less
powerful, cheaper, engines and save fuel. However, it is considerably more
difficult than conventional shipbuilding. Making a hull in thin steel,
however, takes almost twice as long as building a traditional merchant
vessel. 'It's something between traditional shipbuilding and aircraft
industry precision,' says Bertaglia.
Electric engines, fed by big diesel generators, have become standard to
reduce noise and vibration; stabilisation systems are increasingly
sophisticated. Big ships operating from the US west coast to Alaska boast
silent propulsion systems, seldom used on vessels other than battle
submarines, to avoid scaring away the whales which many passengers want to
see.
Increased complexity means that only four yards specialise in the big cruise
ships of today - Kvaerner-Masa of Finland, Chantiers de l'Atlantique, owned
by France's Alsthom engineering group, Meyer Werft of Germany and Italy's
Fincantieri.
The number of clients has also shrunk. Carnival Cruises of the US (owner of
Holland America), the biggest, has ordered the 'mega ship'; Royal Caribbean
Cruise Lines, also US-based, operates the Sovereign of the Seas, the biggest
of the new generation cruise ships afloat; Scandinavia's Kloster group owns
the even bigger Norway. Britain's P&amp;O group and Italy's Costa Crociere
complete the handful.
It is the overall design, rather than individual details, of the new boats
which marks the biggest break with the past. Much of a naval architect's
time is now spent on space utilisation and layout.
'We have to provide the maximum comfort and amusement in a very limited
space,' says Maurizio Cergol, the Fincantieri architect designing the new
'mega ship'. 'We must offer what only the biggest hotels can give, with the
difference that ours have to be packaged into something shaped like a ship
and which can float.'
That means creating an environment capable of negotiating extreme weather,
lists of up to 6 per cent and the noise and vibrations of engines of up to
50,000hp, which is also appealing to passengers.
The yards are facing an ever-moving target. Cut-throat competition among
cruise operators means each new ship has to be 'more special' than anything
before. The exotic names, such as Sensation and Fantasy chosen by Carnival
for a new range of ships, indicate the sort of atmosphere operators are
trying to market to attract custom.
Each vessel also faces increasingly stringent safety standards. 'Just to
meet changing fire and smoke prevention rules on a ship of up to 12 decks is
a task in itself,' says Cergol. Waste disposal is another challenge. A ship
carrying 4,000 passengers and crew produces large amounts of waste, which
can no longer be dumped at sea.
And after the terrorist attack on the Achille Lauro cruise ship in the
Mediterranean, even anti-terrorist precautions have to be included to
protect the bridge and engine room from potential hijackers.
The new requirements have led to radical design changes. Moving lifeboats
from their traditional position on the top deck, where they were suspended
outwards, to an indented location lower down has made the new ships more
stable and reduced the distance between the lifeboats and the water line.
The pressure to maximise space means the profile of modern cruise ships is
also instantly distinguishable from those of even 15 years ago. The
superstructure now starts very soon after the bow and stretches up to the
stern. The emphasis on maximising internal space reflects the fact that most
amenities, such as shopping centres and casinos, are indoors.
The changes are also geared to the new clientele taking a cruise,
increasingly elderly. One liner plying the Caribbean expects to have about
40, elderly, wheelchair-bound people per cruise.
But the biggest design changes are hidden, say the architects. 'The
challenge is to make sure everything interconnects properly. It's all a
matter of flows,' explains Cergol.
Take the galley, which to meet stringent US hygiene standards now resembles
a cross between a normal kitchen and an operating theatre, with
easy-to-clean tiled surfaces and stainless steel appliances everywhere. 'The
galley has to be carefully positioned. It must be next to the main
restaurant. But it also needs easy access to refrigerated food stores, and
should be readily accessible when embarking fresh food in port,' he
explains.
Passengers paying thousands of dollars for a cruise do not want to have such
mundane functions intruding on their enjoyment. The same applies to the
essential, but often forgotten services such as the laundry or crew lifts.
'It's like a chess game. Say the cruise line wants to feature the restaurant
at the stern; that affects a string of other factors such as lifts and
stores,' says Cergol. 'Each ship is potentially very different.'
Computer-aided design helps, but the architects have little opportunity to
rectify mistakes. Most boats are built one-off; even with a rare contract
for three sister ships, production deadlines are so tight that it is usually
too late to alter the second on the basis of experience gained with the
first.
'We have learned there are now some basic relationships that must be
observed,' says Bertaglia. 'Putting a large pillar-free space, such as a
restaurant, in a central location on a lower deck obviously affects
calculations for distributing the weight of the thousands of tonnes of
superstructure above.'
While design and technology have changed so rapidly, Fincantieri's
architects think innovation may now be reaching its limits. Although the
'mega ship' will have about 1,300 cabins, they think a figure of around 800
cabins is likely to remain the norm. Few operators are big enough to want or
afford larger ships. 'It's not so much the physical limits as the business
risk,' explains Corrado Antonini, Fincantieri's managing director. 'Cruise
lines don't want to put too many of their eggs in one basket.' Demand for
cruising seems to be satisfied at about the current sizes. And just berthing
bigger vessels could cause difficulties at many ports of call.
Bertaglia forecasts cruise ships will likely turn into floating
entertainment complexes while cruising will decline. 'The future is to
develop an artificial life inside one huge bubble. That implies deck space
will be reduced even further.' For a keen sailor in the Adriatic off
Fincantieri's base in Trieste, it is an unappealing prospect. 'A ship must
be a ship, not an enormous, artificial, atoll, just floating around and
hardly moving,' he says.
