FT  11 DEC 93 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: A Christmas stuffing
Norway's Christmas tree, its annual present to Britain, was switched on this
week. In my view, however, the tree in Trafalgar Square does nothing to
lessen the infamy which that glum little country attained this year with its
decision to renew, unilaterally, the commercial slaughtering of whales in
defiance of the international ban on whaling adopted in 1986.
The Norwegians branded themselves as ecological hooligans by harpooning 226
minke whales - 157 commercially and 69 in the name of scientific research.
The meat finished up on local fishmongers' slabs where it retailed at about
Pounds 17 per kilo.
Norway was bombarded by protests. There was talk of US trade sanctions and
consumer boycotts of Norwegian exports; calls to travellers to stay away;
and reports that German and British companies had cancelled several million
dollars' worth of contracts for Norwegian food.
Were the Norwegians stupid? Why had a country of such insignificance and
poverty of achievement hurled itself into the furnace of international
condemnation for the sake of 226 dead whales? To find out, I visited the
Norwegian embassy in London, where I put these questions to Terje Lobach,
the embassy's counsellor for fisheries and agriculture.
Lobach is a nice man. He poured me coffee. I was determined not to get
bogged down in a sterile discussion of the Norwegians' technical arguments.
I wanted to get straight to the blood and guts - to ask Lobach why the
Norwegians seemed incapable of grasping the central tenet of the
anti-whaling case: that firing explosive harpoons into the planet's greatest
mammals is a crime against life.
First, though, it has to be acknowledged that there are many strands to the
Norwegians' case. They maintain that the north-eastern Atlantic minke is
plentiful in number (at least 87,000), and certainly not endangered; that
traditional Norwegian whaling provides employment and supplements income
among coastal communities; and that minke whaling, which yields meat
consumed by humans, is essentially different from the industrial,
capital-intensive whaling (primarily for whale oil) of former years which
drove some whale species piteously close to the brink.
Moreover, when it comes to killing methods, Norway claims that the majority
of whales die 'instantly.' According to the Norwegians: 'During research
whaling in 1992, about 50 per cent of the 95 whales shot died instantly . .
. less than 10 per cent lived for more than 10 minutes.'
Whales injured by a harpoon must be killed as swiftly as possible by rifle.
There are inspectors aboard whaling vessels to ensure compliance with
Norwegian law.
But why, I asked Terje Lobach, should Norway bother with all this
fiddle-faddle when the essential question was an emotional one. Why, I
wondered, had Norway's prime minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, impudently
claimed that decisions about the use of resources - in this case, the
leviathans - could not be based on 'sentiment.' Why were the Norwegians so
frigid?
'Norway has always objected to the ban on whaling,' Lobach said calmly,
'because there is no scientific evidence that minke whales cannot be managed
and harvested in a proper way. It has to do with resource management,
especially of fisheries, in which Norway's record is second to none. The 226
minke whales taken this summer represent less than 0.2 per cent of the
estimated minke stock in the north-east Atlantic.
'Norway is a very new independent country, and part of the reason for its
resumption of traditional whaling is that Norwegians don't want to be told
by outsiders what to do with their own natural resources. In polls, the
Norwegian government has the backing of 70 to 80 per cent of the (4.2m)
population.
'Norwegians can appreciate the sentimental objection to killing lambs, but
we still have to take their lives for food.'
'Not with explosive harpoons,' I countered.
'Even in Britain,' said Lobach, 'methods of slaughtering livestock for the
table leave much to be desired. In Norway, whalemeat is described as 'the
greenest of all meats,' because of the scientific way in which it is
harvested.'
I admit it: my opposition to whaling is 'emotional' and 'sentimental.' But I
would rather be thought emotional than mistaken for a Norwegian. They can
stuff their Christmas tree.
