FT  09 JUL 93 / International Company News: Cummins Engine and Telco link in
Indian venture
CUMMINS ENGINE of the US and India's Tata Engineering and Locomotive (Telco)
yesterday announced an important Dollars 50m joint venture to produce
engines for Telco vehicles at a proposed new plant at Jamshedpur.
The deal is one of the biggest joint ventures agreed in India in the past
two years, since it began to promote inward foreign investment as part of an
economic liberalisation programme.
The equally-owned venture will bring together the world's largest
independent producer of diesel engines and India's dominant manufacturer of
trucks and buses.
It is expected initially to produce about 60,000 Cummins B Series engines a
year when operations begin in mid-1995. They will power Telco vehicles for
the Indian market and for export.
For Cummins, the deal is another important plank in its Asian strategy, and
comes five months after it announced a co-operation deal in diesel engines
with Komatsu of Japan. The US company has been producing large diesel
engines in India for about 30 years through its Kirloskar-Cummins joint
venture.
However, Mr Henry Schacht, Cummins' chairman and chief executive, said
yesterday: 'We were missing from the volume part of the market in India  -
the eight, six and four-litre engines.'
The engines produced from the new plant, about 150 miles west of Calcutta,
will replace an important Telco range. This will allow the Indian company to
move to a new generation of efficient, low-emission engines in partnership
with an established producer which has already invested heavily in the
latest diesel and emissions technology.
Mr Schacht said the joint venture should be profitable in its second full
year of operation. The new plant would be able to handle growth beyond
Telco's current needs, and also supply engines for off-highway markets
through Kirloskar-Cummins.
Telco, the world's sixth largest manufacturer of medium and heavy commercial
vehicles, is the largest of the Tata group of companies. Last month it
reported a 75 per cent fall in net profit, to Rs300m (Dollars 9.6m) for the
year ended March.
The joint venture is an important part of Telco's modernisation and
expansion plans, and follows the opening in the past year of a new truck
assembly plant at Lucknow in north India.
The venture has yet to be approved by the Indian government.
The Indian government has approved the establishment of Seagram (India). The
new company will have a capital investment in excess of Rs250m. It will
produce distilled spirits, and develop fruit juice and fruit processing
capacity.
