FT  11 SEP 93 / A few wrinkles in a maturing business: Alan Pike on possible
reforms at UK residential homes
Are residential homes good places for your elderly mother? Are they good
places to invest your money?
The questions are closely linked. This week came evidence that the UK
government is considering relaxing regulations on care homes as part of its
drive against red-tape. The move comes soon after a series of market
flotations by leading private sector operators. While no operator wants
unnecessary regulation, there is awareness that scandals in badly-run,
poorly-inspected homes could damage the prospects of a developing sector.
Private homes underwent astonishing growth in the 1980s - places rose from
less than 50,000 in 1981 to more than 150,000 10 years later. On the basis
of statistics alone, residential care is a business that cannot fail in the
1990s. The proportion of elderly people is rising - one-fifth of the
population will be over 65 by 2021, twice as many as in 1951. There will be
a sharp increase in the over 80s, while changes in family structure mean
fewer dependent elderly people are living with their children.
But such trends alone cannot guarantee a successful business. The explosive
growth of private homes in the 1980s resulted from two exceptional factors.
Rising property values helped make owner-managed homes an easy and
apparently low-risk small business to launch. And the right of many elderly
 -who often would have been unable to pay their own fees - to social
security funding meant proprietors could rely on a regular income. State
funding of residents in private and charitable homes rose from Pounds 10m in
1979 to Pounds 2.5bn this year.
The property market is now less friendly, leaving some individual homeowners
with negative equity in rambling old houses with high maintenance costs.
Since the introduction of the government's community care reforms in April,
people entering homes for the first time no longer qualify for automatic
state-funding.
Local authorities now assess individual needs, and are encouraged by the
government to help the elderly remain in their own homes. A report by the
Commons' health committee in the summer predicted that, during the next few
years, the new arrangements would lead to a big shake-out of independent
residential and nursing home providers - 'painful for owners but even more
traumatic for residents if they find themselves uprooted from the places
they have come to consider their homes'.
The homeowners that appear best placed to survive any shake-out are the
bigger operators. There are about 20 quoted companies in the residential
care field. Of the two largest, Westminster Health Care saw pre-tax profits
rise to Pounds 4.3m in 1992-93 from Pounds 1.7m the year before. Takare last
month reported a 17 per cent rise in interim profits to Pounds 6.9m.
Big operators still only account for a small part of the market. Takare, one
of the biggest companies of its type in Europe, has little more than 2 per
cent of the UK market.
Like the hotel and catering industry, residential care will always retain a
place for owner-managed establishments. But the large companies have
considerable advantages.
Using modern purpose-built accommodation and benefiting from economies of
scale in areas such as staff training, corporate operators are agreeing
long-term contracts with public authorities to house substantial numbers of
clients - providing competitive rates for the authorities and a guaranteed
revenue stream for the companies. The next likely development is leasing
schemes, with property companies building cost-effective homes and
specialist care companies running them.
Though no operator will be exempt from competition caused by the shift of
emphasis in public funding to domiciliary care, the market will be
underpinned in the long term by demographic trends and the expected growth
of insurance policies taken out by working people to pay for residential
care in later life.
But there is no desire in the sector for a battle in which operators compete
by cutting standards. What the sector is demanding is more consistency in
regulations and contracts across the UK.
'Our homes have bedrooms with 35 per cent more space than required by law
and corridors that are 60 per cent wider than the prescribed minimum,' says
Mr Keith Bradshaw, chairman of Takare. 'I don't want people trading who are
not prepared to invest in acceptable standards. I am quite prepared to jump
through the hoops of regulation. But I need to know that the hoops in
Bradford are the same as those in Birmingham.'
His comments reflect widespread concern in the sector that April's reforms,
under which residents enter homes on the basis of contracts drawn up by
individual local authorities, are creating inconsistencies.
Methodist Homes for the Aged - one of the biggest charity home operators -
deals with 116 local authorities, for instance. 'Some operate only at the
minimum standards of the Residential Homes Act, which we regard as low,'
says Mr Phillip Barkett, operations director. 'Others take basic contracts
that it might be reasonable to apply to refuse collection and try to use
them in residential care. Some make specific demands - such as insisting in
contracts that residents must be served a hot drink within a stated number
of minutes of waking up in the morning.'
Standardisation of contracts between local authorities would, home operators
believe, reduce bureaucracy, assist inspection and help create a level
market around the country.
'At the moment many local authorities are driving hard bargains in contract
negotiations, while the same authorities are making lavish demands when
setting standards,' says Eunice Paxman, who chairs the National Care Homes
Association.
There will be few calls from the sector to abandon regulation but operators
feel the government's community care reforms, designed to increase
individual choice, are creating conflicting demands in which the maintenance
of standards, and the sector's prosperity, will become more difficult.
