FT  19 JAN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Slight uncertainty on dollar
THE DOLLAR slipped by exactly 2 pfennigs against the D-Mark in European
trading yesterday after Bundesbank officials dashed hopes of another
near-term cut in German interest rates, writes James Blitz.
At the end of last week, the US currency had enjoyed a rally up to DM1.6355,
as some dealers started to think that the Bundesbank could reduce short-term
rates at its council meeting on Thursday. There has been speculation that
the Bundesbank could cut its officially posted ceiling rate, the Lombard, by
up to 50 basis points this week.
However, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank's No. 2, helped to quash such
thoughts yesterday, by saying that inflation was well above what was
acceptable over the longer term.
His remarks followed comments from Mr Otmar Issing, the Bundesbank's chief
economist, who said that inflationary dangers had not been averted, in spite
of the weak-ening economy.
The dollar's fall through a key support level of DM1.6200 was probably due
to technical factors, too. The currency has risen 10 pfennigs since December
18, and a retraction was to be expected as dealers took profits. It finished
in London at DM1.6155. In New York the US currency slipped further to end at
DM1.6135.
Mr David Cocker, chief economist of Chemical Bank, believes that the dollar
will go higher, reaching DM1.85 this year. 'The dollar's rise will
accelerate,' he said, 'as interest rate levels come together on a world-wide
basis.' He thinks this convergence is certain to be led by cuts in German
interest rates.
However, Mr Jim O'Neill, head of research at Swiss Banking Corporation in
London, believes that the dollar rally could peter out from here. 'We are
into the third week of the year,' he said, 'and the dollar has not made as
much progress as had been expected. A lot of people will review their
scenarios.'
Mr O'Neill is of the view that the US economic upturn is not as strong as
anticipated, and that there is a lingering possibility of another cut in
short-dated US interest rates.
The huge trade budget and deficits in the US also set limits on how much the
US can raise rates. Mr O'Neill believes that, at best, the dollar will go no
higher than DM1.70 this year.
Tensions inside the European exchange rate mechanism continued to subside
and, for the first time this year, every ERM currency was within 50 per cent
of divergence from its central rate against the European Currency Unit
(Ecu).
The comments from the Bundesbank weakened the French franc yesterday, and it
closed at FFr3.385 to the D-Mark, more than  1/2 centime down on the day.
Pressures on the Irish punt eased. Irish interbank offered rates were quoted
at between 19 and 22 per cent, compared with Friday's levels of 32 to 40 per
cent.
