FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of South Africa - Open for investment (11): Playing
hard to get - International capital markets
NOW that the sanctions have been lifted and agreement has been reached on
its repayment of the Dollars 5bn of foreign debt caught in the 1985
standstill, only the elections in April stand in the way of South Africa's
return to the international capital markets.
However, since it has been shunned by the international investment community
for so long, South Africa is playing hard to get with the numerous banks
that have come courting.
Although the gold and foreign exchange reserves have fallen, there is no
urgent need for South Africa to raise funds internationally. An Dollars 850m
loan facility from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) should be
forthcoming by the end of the year and South Africa also has access to
short-term credit lines from several banks.
Nevertheless, bankers expect South Africa to launch its first international
bond issue since January 1992 after the elections.
South Africa is likely to test the waters with a Eurobond issue denominated
in D-Marks. If the D-Mark Eurobond issue is successful, South Africa will
then consider an offering in the higher-profile eurodollar sector. Offerings
from parastatal issuers are likely to follow.
The main bone of contention is the interest rate South Africa would have to
pay to raise funds in the Eurobond market. Borrowers who want to raise funds
in the Eurobond market have to pay a 'spread' or premium over the yield in
the domestic government bond market. The size of the yield spread is
determined by the market's perception of the borrower. The bigger the
spread, the riskier the borrower.
Bankers say that as long as South Africa is classified as an emerging market
it will have to pay a yield spread of between 225 and 275 basis points over
underlying government bonds. This is well above the yield spread of around
175 basis points which South Africa is prepared to pay.
As a result, South Africa could refrain from coming to the international
bond market until the pricing issue has been resolved.
