FT  23 OCT 93 / Independents come up in fast lane: A look at the British
carmakers that shone at the Motor Show
BRITAIN'S small independent carmakers, which have been the focus of this
week's London Motor Show, were too busy seeking or taking orders on their
stands to really enjoy the limelight.
Mr Xavier Karcher, head of the Peugeot group's Citroen division, whose
background is in engineering, summed it up: 'It is the creativity . . .
amazing.'
People such as Mr Peter Wheeler, the chain-smoking accountant who owns
Blackpool-based TVR, were well aware of the media attention.
These independents' combined production is insignificant in motor industry
terms - perhaps 2,000 in a good year. But between them at the show they have
unveiled almost as many genuinely new cars as the volume manufacturers. They
include:
The AC Ace, a Pounds 50,000, Ford V8-engined two-seater just going into
production on an industrial estate forming part of the pre-war Brooklands
racing circuit in Surrey.
The TVR Cerbera, a 340-horsepower coupe for which Mr Wheeler reported 10
orders on the opening day alone.
A 200mph four-seater, the Storm, from Lister Cars, which has long historic
associations with Jaguar.
The R42, a mid-engined 'supercar' from GTD Developments, a small company
from Poole in Dorset, which first established a market niche through the
production of replica Ford GT 40 sports/racing cars.
The Marcos Le Mans GT, unveiled by Marcos Cars of Westbury in Wiltshire,
which has been in erratic, small-scale production of sports cars for more
than 30 years. A pair of the 430-horsepower Rover V8-engined cars will run
in the Le Mans 24-hour race next year, with road-going ver-sions made
available for sale.
The producers say their survival - and even development of new cars - in the
recession shows there is scope for the smallest players to find profitable
niches.
In some cases they have brought cars into production for a few hundred
thousand pounds or less, allowing profitability on output levels of a few
hundred, or even a few dozen, cars a year.
TVR, with an output of 880 two-seater sports cars last year, is the largest
such producer in the UK. AC, whose chairman Mr Brian Angliss last year
bought back a stake acquired by Ford in the company in 1986, expects to
produce 200 of the new Ace next year, and is otherwise best-known for the
Cobra model sold by Ford throughout north America in the 1960s.
Mr Wheeler says TVR will produce 950 cars this year - continuing several
years of sales growth - and that there is now firm evidence of consumer
confidence returning in the luxury sports car market.
'What's most interesting about the pattern of demand for our cars is that
more and more deliveries are taking place into the south-east,' he said.
'And that's the region which, we all know, was hardest hit when the
recession came in.'
This weekend Mr Wheeler was preparing to forsake the show for a day at the
Midlands Donington Park motor-racing circuit - and a publicity coup for TVR
to match that of the new car's launch. World champion Nigel Mansell will
race a TVR Tuscan, one of 20 similar cars in a championship organised by
TVR.
Rumours that Mansell will be paid several thousand pounds per lap completed
in the TVR are hopelessly wide of the mark, said Mr Wheeler. 'Nigel's
getting a couple of cups of coffee and a bun like the rest of us.'
TVR could be seen as the ultimate enthusiasts' sports car concern. Mr
Wheeler, who races himself, admits to styling cars 'on the back of fag
packets' - and with the help of his dog, Ned, who helped design the new
Cerbera by biting a chunk out of the prototype model. The hole now houses
the sidelights.
Weekend FT, Page IX
