FT  18 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Everything in the garden's . . .
locked up - The whys and hows of protecting your external assets against
theft
PEOPLE who would not dream of leaving their house unlocked quite happily
leave items worth hundreds of pounds lying around unsecured every day.
Somehow, when the items in question are in the garden, their potential for
being stolen is overlooked.
Unfortunately, thieves are not so shortsighted. Garden statuary, fish, rare
plants, furniture, lawnmowers and even gnomes are all targets.
You might assume that most of these items would be covered by your household
insurance, but in most cases household insurers limit cover for objects kept
outside to a few hundred pounds. For example, the Prudential has a limit of
Pounds 300.
The contents of your shed or any outbuildings will normally be treated like
any other house contents, if the shed is kept securely locked and in good
repair. Greenhouses are impossible to keep secure - windows need to be open
for ventilation, and glass can be broken - so insurers apply the same limits
to greenhouse contents as to objects kept outside. Accordingly, it is better
to keep tools and machinery in a locked shed. Brokers Artscope say they have
seen an increasing number of claims for stolen mowers and chainsaws.
Plants are vulnerable to theft as well as storms and vandalism, but
household policies will not usually cover living things. There is one
specialist, stand-alone garden policy on the market: Garden Guard, from UNAT
Direct, insures growing, fixed and portable objects against theft,
accidental damage, most weather and vandalism. There are some exclusions,
such as damage by frost and vermin. Four levels of cover are available: the
maximum is Pounds 6,750, costing Pounds 12.95 a month, and the minimum
Pounds 2,250, costing Pounds 4.95.
Plants can also be insured in conjunction with buildings and contents at
Hiscox, the specialist high-value household insurers. Rare plants can be
covered for a premium of 2.5 per cent of value, while for Pounds 50 you can
get a tree extension which provides up to Pounds 7,500 to make safe or
remove trees damaged by storms or vandalism.
Fish theft is a growing problem, not surprising when some koi carp can fetch
thousands. Adrian Brodrick, of specialist livestock insurance consultants
Brodrick &amp; Sons, has arranged insurance for koi carp collectors at Lloyd's.
A group of fish worth Pounds 3,000 was insured for an annual premium of
Pounds 150, against all perils, including death from disease, provided that
the fish were properly kept. Policies of this sort have high excesses, of
about 10 per cent of the sum insured. Minimum premiums are also high, but
owners can earn no-claims bonuses.
The people with most to lose from their gardens are collectors of sculpture.
Demand for good examples of 17th to 19th century urns and statues is high
throughout Europe and the US. Organised gangs with lorries and lifting gear
make selective raids, and the haul may be transported abroad within a matter
of hours. Even good reproductions can be at risk.
Obtaining insurance for art objects kept outside is difficult. The risk is
so high that insurers are unwilling to cover such items alone. The only way
is to add them to ordinary household contents insurance or, if you also
collect indoor artworks and antiques, to a fine art policy offered by
specialists such as Hiscox, Nordstern, Masterpiece and Wellington. Hiscox
would charge 1 per cent of value to cover outside objects as an add-on to a
household contents policy.
If you can find an insurer willing to take on the risk, you will often be
asked to improve security. A report on the theft of garden statues and
ornaments, published this week by the UK branch of the International Council
on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and Haddonstone, manufacturer of
reproduction garden statuary, found that few owners had adequate security.
'Most owners fail to take even elementary precautions, although a range of
sophisticated methods is available,' says Edward Fawcett, chairman of ICOMOS
UK. 'The aim must be to deter thieves by early warning and giving them
insufficient time to complete the theft.'
He recommends measures such as securing the statue with a stainless steel
dowel attached to a concrete block below ground level. Gates should be
locked to prevent lorries or cranes getting close. Alarms and
movement-sensitive lights can also be used.
Rob Page, of Hiscox, recommends keeping statues surrounded by cultivated
ground rather than lawns. This makes them more difficult to remove, as
lifting equipment needs a stable base, and also means thieves will leave
marks which could help identify them.
However, thieves can break through almost any security system given time and
determination. If an object is stolen, chances of recovery are small, but
can be maximised by keeping good photographs of all the items, and marking
them.
If security measures are not possible, or the statue is very valuable, one
alternative is to have a replica made, or buy a similar but cheaper work,
and keep the real thing somewhere more secure.
