FT  05 JUN 93 / Arts: Credible rendering of cruelty - Alastair Macaulay
examines the updated Shylock
'THE VILLAINY you teach me I will execute.' David Calder, the RSC's
outstanding Shylock in David Thacker's new modern-dress Merchant of Venice,
makes this a key line. Yes, he is a Jew, but he only fully enacts
'Jewishness' - donning a skullcap, using florid gestures, enouncing words in
the mask of the face, forsaking his elegant city suit for a dour traditional
gaberdine - when the Christians have insulted him, beguiled him and,
finally, stolen his daughter Jessica. Yes, he becomes cruel, but only
because he has been made so by persistent and unthinking Christian cruelty.
He has been taught by masters.
Dignified, erect, urbane, his voice a heroic high baritone, Calder dominates
the play. For him, Thacker has even reinstated the post-Shakespearean scene
in which Shylock returns home to find Jessica gone: as Irving used to, and
as Verdi's Rigoletto does. Even in the courtroom scene, a sob escapes this
Shylock as he recalls his daughter - but then he recollects himself and, in
full view, his face becomes marble once more.
There are snags in so reasonable and updated a reading of Shylock - the only
obvious reason that Jessica might have for leaving such a father is that she
prefers partying to loud rock music to staying at home with his
piano-quartet CDs - but it is astonishing how potently most of the play
supports this noble reading.
Thacker's Venice, as designed by Shelagh Keegan, is a colourless high-tech
cityscape. Salerio, Solanio &amp; Co. are crass city slickers; Bassanio calls
Graziano on his mobile 'phone; Antonio is a white-haired older gent;
Launcelot Gobbo (with V-neck sweater and coffee mug) is Shylock's office
boy. These people's anti-Semitism is not gross. It is simply casual,
unthinking, shallow prejudice, and all the more credible. Most features of
the updating work with remarkable success, and Christopher Luscombe's mimsy,
prattling Launcelot is a comic triumph.
The Belmont scenes are more artificial. Penny Downie's Portia receives her
suitors in a 'period' full-length gown (and in mourning), and Nerissa's
dress is mock-18th century. Only later do these two fully enter the modern
world. Thacker catches the lovers' comedy of the final act neatly, and
Keegan's designs lend it colour. They do not, however, stop it from being
the usual charming anti-climax. Only Peter Hall's 1989 staging in my
experience has caught this scene's darker emotional pains, its moving belief
in the power of music, and its Renaissance return to rich musical harmony.
When Thacker's Lorenzo (Mark Lewis Jones) talks of 'The man that hath no
music in himself,' he unfortunately indicts Jessica, himself, most of their
chums and Gary Yershon's electronic muzak.
Downie, who five years ago fought a battle royal against Calder as Queen
Margaret to his York in The Plantagenets, is here outclassed. She has
Portia's breeding, her romance, and (interesting contrast) her stillness and
her impulsiveness. Yet these elements do not gel into an authoritative
portrayal. She etches no lines into memory, and her pianissimi are
inaudible. Owen Teale's Bassanio is virile, ardent, personable, and yet he
is too busy with a display of youthful excitability. I could not believe in
any sexual chemistry between them, or between the other two couples. But
these quibbles are petty against the revealing audacity of Thacker's
production, which makes us see Shylock and Venice with new eyes.
In repertory at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon.
