FT  27 MAR 93 / Violent week culminates in fury: The growing public outrage
over the violence on both sides of Northern Ireland's religious divide
THE DEEP revulsion felt over terrorism arising from the troubles in Northern
Ireland erupted into fury yesterday after a grisly week of killings -
leaving politicians floundering to address a fresh re-emergence of a
'something must be done' mentality.
The burial of Johnathan Ball, the three-year-old boy killed in Warrington
last weekend was a focus of anger - especially from Dublin.
A peace rally at the city's central post office tomorrow will protest that
the IRA is not acting in the name of Ireland. The site is intensely symbolic
 -the location of the 1916 uprising against British rule.
From the other side of Northern Ireland's religious and political divide six
Roman Catholics have been killed in the province this week by loyalist
terrorists.
The public outrage is palpable but, after almost 25 years of the 'troubles',
is far from unprecedented. Not for the first time either the words of
statesmen on both sides of the Irish sea have failed to cover the political
intransigence gripping the province.
Bogged down by dispute between Unionists and Dublin over whether Ireland's
constitutional claim on Ulster is up for negotiation, political talks are
not expected to resume until after the local elections in the province on
May 19.
In the vacuum, terrorism has surged. Loyalist attacks in particular are
seriously worrying security chiefs. The Ulster Freedom Fighters, the
military wing of the now-banned Ulster Defence Association, is being run by
a younger and more ruthless leadership.
Ironically, the intelligence forces are less able to track many ringleaders
following arrests made as a result of the 1990 Stevens inquiry into
collusion between loyalist terrorists and the security forces.
Sir Hugh Annesley, Royal Ulster Constabulary chief constable, says the
threat from loyalist terrorists has never been greater. The new hard-line
leadership has warned it will escalate its activities.
Politicians are united in their anger. Mr John Major said the 'belief that
these people are evil' was spreading. It was 'intolerable' that the wish of
the majority to live peaceful lives should be frustrated 'by a tiny
minority', said Mr Dick Spring, Irish foreign minister.
But the unanimity quickly degenerates when solutions are addressed. Mr Peter
Robinson, deputy leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist Party, insisted
that 'the men of violence are immune to public outrage - and they are also
immune to political settlement'. Many Unionists say tougher security -
including internment without trial - is the only answer.
Among nationalists, however, the priority is on addressing historical
divisions - and there is a sense that the failure of formal political talks
is a justification for individuals to talk to terrorists.
Irish Senator Mr Gordon Wilson, whose daughter was murdered by the IRA at
Enniskillen in 1987, is to meet IRA military chiefs and has received support
from Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the nationalist Social Democratic
and Labour Party. Mr Mallon has said the opening of such unofficial channels
of communication should be encouraged to stop violence spiraling.
The seemingly irreconcilable divisions only encourage support for the most
radical of solutions - treating Northern Ireland like any other part of the
UK or pushing for Irish unification. Neither Dublin nor London really
believe either can work.
Will anything result from this expression of popular mood? Mr Dick Spring is
trying to woo Unionists, to address their concerns in the hope of
re-starting talks. There might be a resumption in June or July.
Mr Major takes a close interest in the work of the Northern Ireland Office.
A year ago, after a still more ferocious episode of killing, he successfully
kick-started political talks, only for them to collapse later that year.
He is due soon to meet Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, under
an agreement that the two should meet every six months. Maastricht, the
domestic economy and coal pits have distracted his attention. Perhaps
Northern Ireland will be higher on his agenda this weekend.
The IRA said yesterday that one of the four Roman Catholic workmen shot dead
by the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters, in the past 48 hours was one of its
members. The terrorist group, which admitted the killings in of Castlerock,
had claimed the man was the IRA leader in the Maghera area.
