FT  05 FEB 93 / Groups win German mobile phone licence
A CONSORTIUM headed by Thyssen and Veba, the German industrial groups, and
including BellSouth of the US, and Vodafone of Britain, was yesterday
awarded the licence to develop and operate a new cellular telephone network
in Germany.
The new E1-network in Germany is described in the industry as the biggest
digital cellular network to be built anywhere .
Total direct investment in the network is estimated at DM4.8bn (Pounds 2bn),
and further indirect investments by suppliers may be worth a further DM3bn.
The network is expected to generate 8,000 jobs in Germany, of which 3,500
would be in the east, Mr Wolfgang Botsch, the newly-appointed German
minister of posts and telecommunications, said yesterday.
The network is intended to cater for 3m subscribers by the end of the
decade, and to begin operation initially in eastern Germany, based in Berlin
and Leipzig, by the end of the year.
Mr Botsch said the group had won by a clear margin from the only other
competitor, the E-Star consortium headed by BMW, the Bavarian motor
manufacturer, and MAN, the engineering group.
The new system will be the third cellular telephone network to be developed
in Germany, and will compete directly with the C and D1 network operated by
Deutsche Telekom, and the D2 system operated by Mannesmann, respectively.
The key difference is that the new network will operate at 1800 megaherz,
instead of the traditional but overcrowded 900 megaherz used by the existing
systems. Germany will be only the second country, after Britain, to use the
higher frequency.
The Thyssen-Veba consortium was an unsuccessful bidder to develop and
operate the D2 network, and there was a delighted reaction at the
consortium's Dusseldorf headquarters.
Thyssen and Veba have 28 per cent shares each, BellSouth, based in Atlanta,
Georgia, has 21 per cent, and Vodafone, the largest cellular telephone
operator in Britain, has 16 per cent. Other partners include several east
German enterprises, among them Minol, the petrol refining and distribution
chain taken over by Elf and Thyssen, and the French banking group Caisse des
Depots et Consignation. The latter is expected to help promote a European
network based on the DCS 1800 standard, according to a consortium statement.
Thyssen said the system would be built up initially in east Germany,
covering 88 per cent of that area by 1995, and 77 per cent on the west.
Vodafone said it hoped to be making an operating profit within four years.
One of the main requirements for the system was to put the initial emphasis
in east Germany where telephone density is only 20 per 100 inhabitants,
compared with 50 per 100 in the west.
The German cellular telephone market is seen as the European market with the
greatest untapped potential. Only 1 per cent of the population uses cellular
telephones whereas in Sweden, for example, market penetration is 8 per cent.
