FT  01 MAY 93 / Markets: An Pounds 8 ticket to fear and greed - London
IN ORDER to resolve pressing cash flow problems, this column is throwing
itself open to the public.
For a modest entry fee, priced comparably with other attractions such as the
London Dungeon and the Black Hole of Calcutta, visitors will be given a
guided tour of the historic Prejudice Engine, the Cliche Machine and the
Irony Maiden. In the wake of the IRA's Bishopgate bomb, we anticipate eager
business from tourists anxious for the City experience, without actually
having to experience the City.
Meanwhile, work continues as normal. This week, our highly skilled
operatives have spent most of the time wondering whether the stock market's
slow-motion slide is a sign of its extraordinary accuracy as a discounting
mechanism, or its inability to hit a barn door.
The accuracy school of thought argues that the stock market picked up
remarkably early on the shape and speed of the recovery, after sterling's
exit from the ERM. By the end of 1992, the FT-SE 100 index had risen to
levels that discounted exactly the sort of pickup in economic activity and
corporate profits that is now under way.
Thus, in the week that this judgment was confirmed by the announcement of a
0.2 per cent rise in UK gross domestic product in the first quarter, it was
not surprising that the stock market was drifting back to levels achieved in
the closing days of the year, when the recovery first came into focus.
The alternative view - that the equity market's poor performance in recent
weeks indicates a form of collective myopia - stems from the belief that
what is happening is more than just a long-awaited lurch off the
recessionary floor.
German interest rates are now moving steadily downwards, even though each
individual step in the process is likely to be small and grudging. This
week, for example has brought two signs of German easing - a fall in
money-market rates on Wednesday, and a further cut in the Bundesbank's
three-day Treasury Bill rate to 7 per cent on Friday, seen by some analysts
as a strong indication of more cuts to come.
Lower rates from the Bundesbank will in time pull continental Europe out of
recession, and they will open the way for still lower UK interest rates in
the months ahead. Though UK companies continue to report poor results for
the recessionary financial year just ended - this week, for example, Tiphook
said profits were 20 per cent below expectations and Tarmac reported a
pre-tax loss of Pounds 350m in 1992 - there are also signs of how strong the
bounce-back in profits can be as demand picks up.
ICI, reporting for the last time as a single entity on Thursday, said
pre-tax profits for the first quarter rose 10 per cent to Pounds 233m,
thanks to weaker sterling and the effects of cost-cutting. Those two forces
affect much of UK manufacturing industry. When a solid recovery of demand
starts to make itself felt also, profits may rise more sharply than analysts
currently expect.
Of course, the advantage to UK companies from sterling's devaluation has
been partly offset by the appreciation of the pound from its lows. That
should not be overstated, however. This week, sterling closed at just over
DM 2.49, down a quarter of a pfennig on the week, and up 18 pfennigs since
February. On a trade-weighted basis sterling is now nearly 7 per cent higher
than it was in February. But it is still 11 per cent lower than in September
last year.
Worries about the impact of a rising pound on overseas earners are one of
the factors dragging down the stock market this week. A second factor
hurting the market - and supporting the case that it fairly values the
future stream of profits from UK companies - has been the weak performance
of gilts.
Ten-year gilts closed the week yielding 8.1 per cent, back above the 8 per
cent level for the first time since early February. A week ago, they were
yielding 7.9 per cent; a month ago, the figure was 7.7 per cent.
This move in long term interest rates not only affects the value of the
stock market directly - by making the dividend yield on equities less
attractive in relative terms - but also hints at economic worries to come.
It suggests that bond market investors, at least, are worried that the
economic recovery may be so brisk that it contains the seeds of its own
destruction, in the form of rising inflation. Short-term UK interest rates,
far from moving downwards in line with further German cuts, would at best
stay constant and might in time have to rise, to avoid the economy
overheating. That would put upwards pressure on sterling, reducing the
competitive advantages obtained by devaluation.
The gilt market is thus reinforcing the case for caution which is already
reflected in equities. One category of share is, however, very far from
displaying caution. The medium-sized, predominantly domestically oriented
companies in the FT-SE Mid 250 index continue to outperform their larger
brethren in the FT-SE 100.
This week they have achieved that outperformance largely by avoiding the
worst of the FT-SE 100's falls. Large investors move into and out of FT-SE
100 futures as a proxy for the market as a whole, a process which throws the
burden of sudden switches of mood disproportionately on to that index's
constituents.
Still, such technical factors apart, the Mid 250's move has been a striking
one. Its best performing stock - Barratt, the housebuilder - has risen 218
per cent since sterling left the ERM and the second-tier stocks took off.
Other construction groups have also risen sharply, as have companies such as
Burton (up 141 per cent) and Owners Abroad (up 116 per cent). Only 14
members of the FT-SE 100 have risen by more than 50 per cent since
mid-September; in the Mid 250, 90 companies have achieved that feat.
