FT  07 DEC 93 / Piech sees 'fat duck' carmaker ready to take off again in a
year: Volkswagen chairman presents medium-term strategy
The fat duck of the German motor industry will be fit for take-off in around
12 months. With a following wind it will then soar, landing once a year to
lay golden eggs in the laps of patient shareholders.
That is the plan, presented late last month to members of the Volkswagen
group's supervisory board, by chairman Mr Ferdinand Piech. Under his
medium-term strategy, VW will return a pre-tax profit of over DM4bn (Pounds
1.5bn) in 1998.
The board, which at the same meeting swallowed the bitter pill of a looming
DM2bn deficit this year, nodded and rubber-stamped Mr Piech's project for
off-loading more ballast. Out will go 50,000 more of the group's 245,000
worldwide workforce. Out also are earlier commitments to DM10bn of capital
spending.
In are schemes to put some 100,000 German workers on a cost-saving four-day
week, and to increase group vehicle output by a third, to almost 4m.
Together with current programmes to push down component suppliers' prices by
up to 30 per cent, and build all group models on three basic platforms with
mostly common parts beneath the skins, the 1994/1998 medium-term strategy
completes Mr Piech's fitness diet.
Mr Piech, who personally described VW as a duck grown too fat to fly, has in
the past 12 months piloted the group through the worst slump in the European
motor industry since the war. The flak thrown up by General Motors and its
German subsidiary, Adam Opel, over the alleged theft of their strategic,
model and pricing secrets by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, has
threatened VW's stability.
Now the chairman is striving to convince markets that his company is heading
upwards, out of reach of gunfire and away from the danger of crashing under
its own weight. VW's recent statements suggest that it could be close to
breaking even within a year.
But group negotiators have yet to find a way out of a minefield in Spain,
where some 9,000 Seat workers are scheduled to lose their jobs as a result
of the closure of a redundant factory in Barcelona. The company also has to
restore its fortunes in the US market - where sales are down 37 per cent in
the first 11 months of this year - and Japan.
Nor are VW's domestic problems clearly under control. While independent
observers support company claims that cost-saving team working and
continuous improvement programmes have been eagerly and effectively
implemented by the workforce, the unprecedented four-day-week scheme has yet
to be approved and put into practice. Hopes of saving DM1.8bn in 1994
through the scheme depend at least in part on the government's agreeing to
contribute funds from its unemployment pay budget for workers laid off
temporarily.
Furthermore, Mr Piech is already suggesting that the scheme - and the
associated income sacrifices - may have to run for longer than the two years
originally planned. No more than 28.8 hours a week would be worked at VW for
the 'foreseeable future', he said in an interview published yesterday.
Meanwhile, his medium-term plan foresees a further reduction in the German
workforce. From the present payroll of 103,000 employees building 1.4m
vehicles a year, some 88,000 will be left in 1998, building 1.9m cars and
vans.
Even more uncertain is the future of the chairman's right-hand man, Mr
Lopez, instigator of the production and components purchasing revolution
within the group.
A recent internal audit apparently cleared Volkswagen of involvement in
suspicions of industrial espionage against Mr Lopez and colleagues who
followed him from General Motors in March. But criminal investigations are
still continuing in both Germany and the US into the alleged disappearance
of data from GM and Adam Opel. The German investigators' findings are not
due until spring, when, in the event of more unsavoury disclosures or even
charges, the VW supervisory board could face a decision far more difficult
than that of approving Mr Piech's medium-term strategy.
In the past few months, Mr Piech made plain his absolute trust in Mr Lopez,
implying that if his Spanish 'soulmate' had to go, the supervisory board
would have to reckon with his departure, too.
