FT  06 JUL 93 / 1976 and all that: The chancellor's dilemma - an inside view
In his recent FT interview the new chancellor threatened to put up taxes if
the economy did not recover. That was extraordinary because, before he came
to the Treasury, Mr Clarke's instincts were Keynesian and Keynesians believe
that, when demand is weak, it should be boosted by tax cuts, not held back
by tax increases.
It looks as though Mr Clarke, after talking to his officials and junior
ministers, has come round to the Treasury view that the most important task
confronting him is to get the public finances in order. A strong recovery
would help in that respect, because tax revenues would rise and
recession-linked spending would fall. But, if a faltering economy fails to
deliver this improvement automatically, Mr Clarke's first Budget will make
good the shortfall.
This is the economics of the hard centre: tough on borrowing, tough on
inflation. It will be deeply unpopular on the right, which will say it is
anything but tough on public spending. Battered by recession, Mr Major's
government has seen the reduction in public spending achieved under Lady
Thatcher completely reversed. At 45 per cent, it now takes a greater share
of GDP than in 1979.
The best way of reducing borrowing is to cut public spending, but that
option has been ruled out this year. So Mr Clarke now faces the classic
dilemma: borrow or tax? If he opts for higher taxes, the right, already
upset by spending levels it sees as creeping socialism, might rebel. Labour
will gloat over broken promises. So, more borrowing seems the easier option.
Though it might give Mr Clarke an easier time in the House of Commons it
would, however, play badly on the financial markets.
The government's Pounds 50bn budget deficit has been funded relatively
easily so far, but the price has been high. Despite core inflation down to 3
per cent, and headed lower, long interest rates remain around 8 per cent.
The markets are far from convinced that we have permanently kicked the
inflation habit. They are worried by the worst deterioration in the public
finances since 1976. That was the year of recurrent sterling crises,
remembered for chancellor Healey's about-turn at the airport followed by a
cap-in-hand application for an lMF loan.
In 1976, public borrowing as a share of GDP was nearly 11 percentage points
higher than six years earlier. Today, a greater rise has occurred in five
years. On both occasions the increase had its origins in a tax-cutting boom,
followed by a deep recession, with an election in between.
In 1976, the public borrowing problem was compounded by a balance of
payments problem. The present balance of payments deficit, at 3 per cent of
GDP, is three times as bad as in 1976, without the excuse of an oil price
hike.
Many countries had current account deficits as big as the UK's in 1976. Few
do today.
This year, Britain will borrow some Pounds 20bn from abroad to fund its
current account deficit. The government could help in principle by selling
some of its Pounds 50bn of debt to foreigners. But persuading them to buy
may prove difficult - as it did in 1976, and for similar reasons.
No lender likes putting money into a country (or firm, or household) in
which the burden of debt is steadily rising as interest charges are rolled
up into the outstanding debt. Yet the present position of the UK government
is even worse than that. Total debt is officially forecast to rise by much
more than the interest bill over the next four years.
The debt burden will rise from less than a third of national income to over
a half.
That will not be easy to change. The large international buyers of
government bonds will, as in 1976, note the UK government has a small
majority. That is why spending cuts have been ruled out. Backbench pressure
may also preclude tax increases, hated on the right for ideological reasons,
and resisted across the board (as in 1976) by those worried about their
effect on a fragile recovery at risk from a world economic downturn.
It is because of the political risk of persistent budget deficits that
yields remain so high in real terms. Selling gilts at an 8 per cent coupon
with underlying in-flation at 3 cent is expensive, but preferable to the
alternative, seen in 1976, of a buyers' strike. For, once the Bank gets
behind with its funding, another risk looms: the money supply starts to grow
very rapidly, reinforcing inflationary fears.
Such fears would tend to be self-fulfilling, since they would weaken the
pound, thus adding to inflationary pressures. The events of Black Wednesday
have left the authorities with depleted foreign exchange reserves (another
parallel with 1976) so intervention would not be an option. A falling pound
would make it almost impossible to sell gilts to foreigners, so the
monetisation of the debt would accelerate unless interest rates were jacked
up sharply. All the ingredients for a full-scale financial crisis would be
in place.
This vicious circle actually occurred in 1976. But then the markets saw
Britain as a strike-torn country run by a Labour government in the thrall of
unruly trade unions paying a coupon on its debt which barely matched the
endemic double-digit wage-led rate of inflation. The financial markets like
peaceful labour markets, Conservative governments, low inflation and high
real interest rates. They will draw comfort from yields well above a low
inflation rate underpinned by a remarkable fall in wage inflation and the
lowest number of strikes on record.
A repeat of 1976 is not likely. But that distant horror story reminds us
that the new chancellor's first Budget has, above all, to reassure the
financial markets. Another financial crisis, so soon after Black Wednesday,
could bring down the government.
As he ponders his options, the new chancellor may reflect on another, more
comforting precedent: the 1981 Budget, which raised taxes in the depths of a
recession. That ran counter to the conventional Keynesian wisdom of the time
and was deeply unpopular. But it is now generally agreed to have laid the
foundations for the subsequent long period of sustained growth with low
inflation.
It seems to be a fact of life that the deterioration in the public finances
generally happens in the boom years, but becomes apparent only in the
subsequent recession.
Why that is so is a question to which I shall return next week. But because
it is so I believe Mr Clarke should put up taxes in his first Budget and I
believe he will.
The author is former director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies and
special adviser to former chancellor Norman Lamont
