FT  16 NOV 93 / A fall-out among friends: Chernobyl's legacy
Chernobyl's reactor number four, which caused the world's worst nuclear
disaster, is tamed for the moment. The temperature in the core has cooled
from some 3,000 degrees centigrade on the night of the explosion, April 26
1986, to about 100 degrees.
But the concrete sarcophagus erected hurriedly over the ruined shell is now
cracking, and the red-and-white-striped chimney is propped up with metal
girders. This summer the Ukranian government called for suggestions from
international companies on how to repair the crumbling structure, but
believes none of the suggestions so far would contain the radiation. 'The
government is now inviting institutions and scientists to brainstorm a
solution,' says Mr Vladimir Holosha, deputy minister in the town of
Chernobyl.
But patching up the sarcophagus may be the least troublesome consequence of
the Chernobyl disaster. The explosion heavily contaminated much of Belarus,
Ukraine and Russia with radiation; and the consequences for the local
populations' health are still unknown.
Last week, a delegation from the European Commission and European Parliament
spent three days in Kiev and the contaminated zone, accompanied by western
cancer and radiological scientists, some of whom have been studying the
effects of Chernobyl since the accident. For two years, the the European
Union, which has contributed Ecu 14.2m (Pounds 11m) to 16 research projects
in the region, has been attempting to help the republics prevent
contamination spreading, to advise on medical treatment, and to help
estimate the long term effects on health. Now many members of the team
believe a critical point is near if the environmental problems are not to
worsen and if the impact on health is ever to be properly assessed.
The environmental problems were brought home to the Ukrainian government
earlier this year when 6,000 hectares of the highly contaminated pine forest
surrounding the plant caught fire in the summer heat, sending a new cloud of
radioactive dust over the region.
The immediate danger to Kiev's water supply has been alleviated by a 12km
dyke built to trap and divert water from the abandoned fields north of the
plant. Radioactivity in those areas from the strontium and caesium in the
soil, which seeps into the water, deliver the same dose in four hours that
people in the UK receive from background radiation in a year.
But the worst problem may lie in the 600 pits of waste from Chernobyl and
the surrounding area buried hurriedly near the plant in the months after the
explosion. Scooped out of the sandy soil, some of the pits are not lined
with clay. The danger is radiation will wash down into the water table. Mr
Rolf Linkohr, one of the leaders of the delegation, says: 'Today,
contamination of the acquifers is not a problem, but it may be in 10 years.'
Even harder to predict is the effect of the disaster on the population's
health. The effect of radiation on the human body, particularly in damaging
the cells' genetic material, may not be visible for years.
According to the western scientists with the delegation, only 42 deaths so
far can definitely be attributed to the Chernobyl accident. This is in sharp
contrast to the Ukrainain government's claim that 8,000 people have already
died because of the disaster. 'We are not saying there will be no effect -
just that much of the cancer we expect will not show up for years,' says one
member of the European group.
Scientists are agreed on one count: there has been a sharp increase in
thyroid cancer in children from exposure to radioactive iodine, a disease
that is normally extremely rare. A panel of experts working for the European
Commission has confirmed 186 cases in Belarus between 1986 and mid-1993.
Ukraine and Belarus report that three children have died. Mr Jaak Sinnaeve,
head of the Commission's radiation protection research unit, says
'scientific consensus is that there is a link with the accident'.
However, other claims by the republics are not backed by such firm data.
Part of the problem is the republics lack good historical health data on
which to base comparisions. For instance, Belarus says it has detected an
increase in hepatitis, and in breast and stomach cancers, while Ukrainian
officials report 'high psychological stress' among their people.
According to some of the scientists accompanying the European team, these
illnesses cannot be linked to the radiation, or, in the case of increased
stress, cannot be measured scientifically.
Mr Hans Storm, an epidemiologist with the Danish Cancer Society, who
accompanied the visiting team, says: 'Hepatitis is not linked to radiation
exposure, and cancers caused by Chernobyl are not expected to show up for
years.' He adds that the increases in breast cancer may be real, but may be
attributable to other causes.
The European delegation wants the joint research programmes to improve the
quality of health and environmental data quickly so that the effects of the
radiation can eventually be measured. Several scientists with the group
emphasised that, if the health of the population was not accurately assessed
now and the most-exposed people identified and monitored, even that modest
aim may be frustrated.
'A third of people get tumours anyway. Our best guess is that there may be a
1 per cent increase in that number, or some may get cancer earlier than they
would have done. We will miss that if we don't put monitoring systems in
place now,' one scientist said.
But some of the group have also asked whether the republics are tempted to
claim more than is scientifically justifiable to attract more western money.
One member of the group said privately: 'There is a gap between what we are
offering and what they want. To them, this is a problem which touches every
part of their society. But we are equipped only to study the effects of
irradiation.'
At the heart of the three republics' problem is that they have only recently
begun to shake off a culture where scientific research was employed to meet
political ends and where official statistics were mistrusted both by the
population and by outside observers. Lack of comprehensive data on the
population has left the region ill-equipped to estimate the environmental
and health impact of the disaster; it may, also make it harder to get
outside financial support.
Mr Storm says: 'There is no question Chernobyl was a disaster. The land is
closed and poisoned, maybe forever. But for the people living there, we just
do not yet know how big a disaster it may be.' The three republics do not
need to persuade the outside world that Chernobyl was a catastrophe; they
may need urgently to repair the shortcomings of their research if they are
to get the help that they need.
