FT  24 AUG 93 / World Trade News: Miti probes Toshiba chip export claim -
Plan to transfer technology to East Germany denied
JAPAN'S Ministry of International Trade and Industry is investigating a
claim that Toshiba, a leading electronics maker, had agreed to transfer
technology to former East Germany that would have breached an
internationally agreed export ban to communist countries.
Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary, confirmed Miti was examining
the allegations, contained in a Japanese daily newspaper.
The Sankei Shimbun newspaper claimed Toshiba had agreed in 1986 to transfer
semiconductor chip technology to East Germany that would have breached rules
set up by the Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls
(Cocom). The group was set up in 1951 by Nato to monitor and control the
export of products and technical data of potential strategic value to Warsaw
Pact countries and their allies.
The newspaper said it had secret documents from East Germany indicating that
Toshiba and Mitsui, the trading house, had agreed to help build a factory to
manufacture 256-kilobit dynamic random access memory chips.
Toshiba, however, scrapped the deal after it was revealed in 1987 that a
subsidiary of the company had exported machine tools to the former Soviet
Union. This resulted in the company being excluded from US government
procurement for three years.
Toshiba yesterday denied the latest allegations, saying it had made no
agreement with East Germany on the transfer of semiconductor technology. The
company said it followed strict export guidelines.
Toshiba said that between 1986 and 1987 the East German government had asked
it to transfer technology for the manufacture of printed circuit boards and
transistors for colour televisions, neither of which would have been in
breach of Cocom rules. Mitsui was involved in the talks.
When the sales of machine tools to the Soviet Union came to light in March
1987, Toshiba cancelled the TV transistor technology contract it had signed
with the East Germans and called off talks on the transfer of circuit board
technology.
Miti said it had investigated the chip issue in 1988 - finding no evidence
that Toshiba had agreed to transfer semiconductor technology to East Germany
 -but was reinvestigating since fresh allegations had surfaced.
Cocom still prohibits the transfer of technology for the manufacture of
certain advanced semiconductor chips and the export of some semiconductor
manufacturing equipment.
