FT  13 DEC 93 / Survey of Oil and Gas Industry (1): Gas becomes the jewel in
the crown - Oil prices, which fell 20 per cent this year, may suffer even
steeper falls once Iraq comes back on stream. But gas, once the oil
industry's poor relation, is now the star performer
Mood swings are nothing new to the world's oil and gas industry. Its history
is writ large with extreme movements in prices and a supply situation that
can fluctuate rapidly between shortfalls and surplus.
To some observers the 20 per cent slump in oil prices this year may be seen
as merely a temporary blip. Advocates of this argument say demand and supply
is nearly in balance, and that oil prices are likely to edge back up to
average Dollars 17-Dollars 18 next year. The most recent price falls, they
believe, reflect over-nervous financial markets, which have reacted badly to
persistently low demand in the main consuming countries at a time of
particularly plentiful oil supplies.
But others warn that today's depressed prices may be just the first phase of
a deeper collapse.
They note that crude oil prices have fallen by an average of 9 per cent a
year since 1991, with few positive factors on the horizon.
Traders are beset with reasons why oil prices could fall further. There is
the prospect of even greater amounts of oil becoming available next year
from a resurgent North Sea and other producers outside the Organisation of
Petroleum Exporting Countries.
There is also considerable scope for market volatility in the run-up to the
re-emergence of Iraqi oil exports, possibly as early as the second half of
1994 if Baghdad meets United Nations demands over the long-term monitoring
of industry with military potential.
Pessimistic observers say such conditions could even prompt the benchmark
Brent Blend to fall below Dollars 10 a barrel - a level last seen in the
price collapse of 1986 - although in real terms prices are already at those
levels.
The major oil companies had been scurrying off in search of new supplies of
relatively cheap oil. That search has been fuelled by the opening up in
recent years of large parts of the world previously out-of-bounds to the
industry, including the former Soviet Union and China.
But much of the industry's current capital spending is still concentrated in
well-known areas.
This is due in part to the application of new seismic and drilling
technology. This is occurring both in new areas, just being opened to
exploration, as well as in mature regions such as the North Sea and the Gulf
of Mexico, whose original development can be traced to earlier periods of
high oil prices.
Such techniques are being used by both the major companies and a growing
band of independents to add substantially to the life of many existing
fields and producing regions.
Such strategies have the added benefit of maximising the investment made
over the years in costly infrastructure such as platforms, pipelines and
terminals. For the big integrated oil companies, however, the recent decline
in oil prices and the knock-on effect on their share prices has taken much
of the gloss off such achievements.
Suddenly the themes put forward by both the US and European majors and which
so impressed the markets earlier this year - successful reductions in
overheads and a renewed focus on core businesses - no longer seem so
convincing. Sceptical investors wonder what will happen to the majors' cash
flow if average prices next year are closer to the current level of Dollars
14 a barrel, rather than the Dollars 18-Dollars 20 a barrel to which a
number of companies have successfully adjusted.
Weak oil and share prices would also affect the search for ever-cheaper and
bigger reserves in the world's frontier areas.
Exploration efforts in remote areas of China and the countries of the former
Soviet Union are in their early stages. The majors have committed large
amounts of skilled manpower, but their capital costs are so far relatively
small. That could soon change, however, as projects in those areas become
serious competitors for scarce development funds, say analysts.
The scale of such undertakings is illustrated by a recent estimate by Chase
Manhattan Bank that western companies could be spending more than Dollars
5bn a year on exploration and development projects in the former Soviet
Union within a 'couple of years, and much more in five to 10 years'.
The integrated majors have downstream profits to fall back on when prices
weaken, a factor much in evidence in third quarter results. But chronic
refining over-capacity in Europe threatens to undercut margins, while the
recession in Europe and Japan continues to dampen final demand.
The independent exploration companies have no downstream buffer to fall back
on. A prolonged period of price weakness could not only cut into new
exploration and development spending. It could also trigger off an
acquisition hunt by bigger cash-rich companies keen to secure sound assets
at bargain prices.
The financial pressures imposed on the corporate sector by low oil prices
are nothing, however, to those being felt by the 12 members of Opec. The
extent of the potential damage is highlighted by the fact that for every
annualised dollar fall in the oil price, member states lose a combined
Dollars 5bn in annual revenues.
Opec's overall oil revenues have fallen steadily in the first three quarters
of this year. The most recent price falls mean they could reach a level not
seen since before the Kuwaiti crisis of 1990, according to a recent study by
the London-based Centre for Global Energy Studies. Even Saudi Arabia, the
dominant producer, is experiencing a budgetary crisis.
The failure or inability of many Opec members to diversify their economies
and reduce their dependence on oil revenues has compounded the pain induced
by the price falls.
It also raises the spectre of possible social unrest in the most vulnerable
Opec countries, such as Iran and Nigeria, whose non-oil domestic economies
are performing poorly.
The oil industry is looking to Opec to stabilise the market with production
cuts. But the organisation faces a dilemma, according Gulf Arab officials. A
modest cut from its current output ceiling of 24.52m barrels a day might
send a positive signal that Opec can fine-tune production to suit very
short-term demand. But it would also cause some members to cheat on their
individual production quotas, say the Gulf officials, thereby triggering
further price falls.
Opec's decision in November to maintain the present production ceiling into
the new year was also based on a belief that the demand will increase,
either through bad weather in the industrialised world or as a result of
cheap prices encouraging the greater use of oil in those economies which are
growing.
But the decision also reflected Opec anger that independent producers are
nibbling away at the organisation's market share.
Opec no longer wants to play the role of swing producer, say officials, and
a production cut would simply hasten the gains being made by non-Opec
producers.
The decision not to budge was also a reflection of the reluctance on the
part of Saudi Arabia and other large Opec states to cut quotas in advance of
Iraqi exports being readmitted into the production ceiling, probably by the
second half of next year.
An emergency meeting will be called as soon as the UN gives the go-ahead for
renewed Iraqi exports. It could prove to be one of the most contentious in
Opec history given the antagonism between Iraq and its Gulf neighbours.
Iraq, which has the world's second largest reserves, is adamant that it
should be allowed to return to the export markets with a large quota. But
that would require deep cuts in the quotas of other members, most notably
Saudi Arabia, at a time when their need for oil revenues is rising.
The pessimistic mood which has gripped the oil industry has shown no signs
of infecting the gas sector. Gas is increasingly being viewed as the most
environmentally benign fuel, a label which is ensuring a high degree of
interest in developed markets such as Europe.
In October the first gas was delivered to continental Europe from fields off
Norway under the Troll agreement, the largest commercial contract in the
history of the petroleum industry.
A number of pipeline proposals are under consideration to link continental
Europe with new reserves. These include the possible construction of an
inter-connector between the UK and Belgium, as well as additional lines from
Russia and Norway.
In the US, newly-deregulated markets have resulted in higher prices, which
in turn have persuaded a number of companies to explore for new reserves.
Elsewhere, and especially in Asia, gas-fired power generation schemes are
seen as one of the fastest and cheapest ways to make up from shortages of
electricity.
