FT  11 SEP 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Grand old men of wine - Jancis Robinson meets
two mature but undervalued experts on wine
THE TWO grandest, oldest men of wine prove that drinking fine wine may make
you live longer, but is unlikely to make you rich.
Harry Waugh, born 1904, was one of the mould-breaking British wine merchants
of the 1950s and 1960s. He helped introduce a little- known wine called
Petrus to Britain, encouraged the entirely new phenomenon of domaine
bottling in Burgundy, and was singing the praises of California wine about a
decade before anyone else outside the state.
He left Harveys of Bristol in 1966, when it was bought by Showerings, of
Babycham fame, but retained his directorship of the Bordeaux first growth
Chateau Latour and a pension which did not take account of either inflation
or the fact that he was to become a father, of twins, seven years later.
At Harveys he trained many of the most famously successful men in today's
wine trade, including, ironically enough, the chairman of Allied-Lyons which
has just sold Latour back into French, determinedly French, hands, thereby
leaving the wine trade's most respected figure, a hale, straight-backed 89
year-old, in urgent need of a financial manager. Step up, Mark McCormack
Born in Moscow, three years earlier than Harry Waugh in 1901, Andre
Tchelistcheff is an even more remarkable fellow. After surviving severe
illness in childhood, and a particularly bloody campaign in the White
Russian army in his teens, he trained in agriculture in Czechoslovakia and
Paris and specialised in wine only at the age of 36, when he was recruited
to impart 'Frenchness', including the technical probity of Pasteur, to
Beaulieu Vineyards in California. He could have gone to China instead, like
his best friend who became Minister of Agriculture there after Mao.
Instead, this intelligent scientist-philosopher has come to be regarded as
the father of modern California wine. He pioneered cool fermentation,
controlling malolactic fermentation, developed the anti-frost damage wind
machines that are such a visible feature of the Napa Valley to this day, and
has been consultant at scores of wineries both in America and Europe.
At 92 he has just completed a six-week tour of European winemaking friends
and vineyards, which he describes as 'education'. This was supposed to be
his last trip to Europe, but his wife, Dorothy, overheard him volunteering
at Burgundy's Domaine de la Romanee-Conti to take up an apprenticeship next
year.
Only someone with near divine knowledge would claim such ignorance. With the
look (including hairstyle) and stature of an impish prep school boy, Andre
Tchelistcheff 's understanding of the wine world is still acute,
well-informed, and often unexpected. In a soft, still heavily accented
voice, he presents perhaps the only analysis of the wine world that has ever
been based on such a long history and such a wide geographical purview.
Acknowledging the demands of the technically curious but impatient modern
wine consumer, he observes, for example, that: 'Wines are naked at the
moment. And this is a good thing because it is good to show one's
deficencies. Little by little winemakers will learn what the consumer wants
of his wines and will begin to reclothe them. Pumping over the grape must is
the key.' Andre Tchelistcheff believes that wines will never again be
designed expressly for long ageing in bottle.
He is also blunt about the phylloxera vine pest currently destroying a good
part of the northern California vineyard: 'It's the grape growers' fault.
They chose to plant a rootstock they knew did not have good phylloxera
resistance.'
His palate is as keen as ever, although he drinks sparingly, sparing his
frail knees in particular. He must have been one of the few visitors to have
done a three-day stint at this year's Vinexpo, Bordeaux's notoriously
exhausting international wine exhibition, and certainly the only
nonogenarian to walk the full length of the exhibition hall. Dorothy, whose
arm enabled the feat, heard many a hissed 'that's Andre Tchelistcheff' as
they made their progress, presumably from one grandson of an old associate
to the next.
One of the consultancies which has thrilled him most has been with Chateau
Ste Michelle, of Washington state, where he believes there may be greater
potential than California. He is still quoted, admired, and decorated amid
much ballyhoo when it suits the decorators (although as far as he is
concerned, it is presumably difficult to better the Chevalier du Merite
Agricole awarded by the French as early as 1954 for his part in Frenchifying
the American wine industry).
Considering his input to the world's ritziest wine industry, Andre
Tchelistcheff lives modestly, has never had a wine cellar of his own, and
seems to have encountered more difficulties during his six-week tour of
Europe than one would think fit for an eminent 92-year-old.
One blow was a letter from Lodovico Antinori, of Ornellaia in Tuscany,
maintaining that he could no longer afford the services of the consultant
whose name appears in so much of his promotional literature.
Then there was the fact that they spent their first night in Britain last
month in the newly-opened Ibis hotel at Heathrow. We should have organised a
troika with outriders and given them, and Harry Waugh and his wife, the run
of the grand new Vintners' Place development overlooking the Thames.
