FT  12 MAR 93 / Sales rise fuels hope of recovery
HOPES for an end to the recession were encouraged yesterday when the
Confederation of British Industry said retailers last month saw strong sales
growth for the second month running.
Confidence in the sector in February about economic prospects reached its
highest point since May, while more retailers are planning to increase
investment than at any time for four years.
The CBI said its monthly survey of business conditions across the
distributive trades, which also takes in car dealers and wholesalers,
provided grounds for 'cautious optimism'.
The sharp year-on-year increase in sales volumes in both January and
February reflected heavy discounting among retailers, and also extremely
weak demand at the beginning of 1992.
Last month, the year-on-year increase in sales volumes in retailing, which
accounts for about a quarter of the economy, was the highest recorded by the
CBI since April. It fits in with evidence that consumer spending may be
picking up.
Motor traders saw sales strengthen last month compared with February last
year, with the increase on an annual basis the highest since August 1988.
But wholesalers - which sell mainly to small shops - registered a
year-on-year sales decline.
Mr Nigel Whittaker, a director of the Kingfisher stores group who is
chairman of the CBI's distributive trades panel, said: 'I am pleased with
progress in the retailing sector since Christmas but it is too early to say
whether we are on a firm upward trend.'
Employment across the distributive trades continued to fall last month as
companies tried to cut costs against a background of generally fragile
demand.
Price increases among retailers were at their lowest since the survey
started 10 years ago. That reflected big price-cutting campaigns in many
stores.
Mr Whittaker said the 15 per cent fall in sterling since September had not
so far shown up in higher prices at the retail level. Many shops and
distributors had absorbed higher import costs.
Details, Page 8
