FT  03 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Malaysian tin industry wilts as
market slumps
DIRE PREDICTIONS are being made about the future of Malaysia's tin industry
following this weeks price plunge to fresh lows this week on the Kuala
Lumpur Tin Market. Tin was trading at around MDollars 11.60 (Dollars 4.50) a
kilogram mark on the KLTM - the first time prices had dropped below the
MDollars 12 level.
'Over the last two years a record number of Malaysia's tin mines have closed
down,' said a tin trader. 'With these kind of prices it can't be long before
the whole industry collapses.'
Malaysia was once the world's biggest tin producer. But production of tin in
concentrates fell to 14,339 tonnes last year compared with 20,710 in 1991.
Traders are predicting that Malaysia's output will fall below 10,000 tonnes
this year.
The Association of Tin Producing Countries is due to meet in Kuala Lumpur at
the end of October to discuss ways to reduce global tin stockpiles and
improve prices. 'The market is really going crazy and this spells trouble
for the industry,' said Mr Redzwan Sumun, the ATPC's executive secretary.
The association groups Malaysia, Australia, Bolivia, Indonesia, Thailand,
Nigeria and Zaire, which together account for about 60 per cent of world tin
production. Malaysia's tin producers want the ATPC to abandon its export
quota system, saying it has done nothing to improve prices.
Non-ATPC countries such as China and Brazil are blamed for increasing their
tin exports, frustrating attempts by the association to reduce a global tin
stockpile now estimated at 40,000 tonnes. Traders say recent large sales of
tin by the US Defence Logistics Agency have also led to a market glut and
low prices.
Malaysia, a relatively high cost producer, has been particularly badly hit
by the prevailing low market prices. Foreign buyers are also reported to be
staying away from the Kuala Lumpur market because of the continued strength
of the Malaysian dollar against the US currency.
