FT  01 SEP 93 / Survey of Africa - A continent at stake (14): An issue the
west ignores at its peril - Environment / The problems of over-population,
over-cultivation and over-grazing
NO ISSUE divides Africa from the first world more strongly than the
environment. While the west worries about the endangered black rhino and
loss of bio-diversity, most Africans are too exhausted from the daily
struggle to find fuel and water to care about the destruction of their
environment.
The priorities of each seem irreconcilable, and yet, they need not be. What
is needed is a greater awareness in the industrialised world of how its
policies exacerbate Africa's environmental crisis. And African governments
need to place greater emphasis on combatting the extreme poverty which is a
cause, as well as a result, of environmental degradation. There is little
time to reverse the damage. At current growth rates, Sub-Saharan Africa's
population of 600m will double in 22 years. The World Bank estimates the
growth rate will decline from the present 3.1 per cent to 2.5 per cent at
the end of the decade, as Aids takes its toll and family planning becomes
more widespread. However, even this decline will not be enough to prevent
the population doubling early in the next century.
Already, women in the Sahel and many parts of east Africa walk 15km each day
to gather a bundle of firewood. In a few years, there will be more mouths to
feed and less wood to burn.
Over-cultivation and over-grazing are transforming much of the continent
into a vast wasteland: an area twice the size of India, according to the
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), is under direct threat of
desertification. In addition, Africa is losing 2.7m hectares of woodlands
every year. In most countries, forests are disappearing because people need
land for farming, not wood to burn.
When famine sweeps across Africa, the west calls it a natural disaster and
spends billions of dollars in emergency food relief. But Africa's hunger is
not simply a question of crop failure. In 1985, five out of six nations on a
United Nations list of famine-afflicted countries were also racked by civil
war. In Ethiopia, Chad, Sudan, Mozambique and Angola, it was difficult to
distinguish between drought-related famine and war-induced starvation.
'For the past 20 years, civil strife has indirectly wreaked as much
devastation on the environment as any other cause in Africa,' argues Dr
Roger Batty, an Oxford historian and consultant at UNEP. He believes western
powers have been culpable of fuelling conflict by arming their client states
on the continent. With the end of the cold war, however, superpower interest
in conducting wars-by-proxy on the continent has evaporated, and it is hoped
that the level of military aid to African governments will also fall.
Environmental degradation can also add to the pressures from which conflict
emerges. 'The next war in our region will be over the waters of the Nile,
not politics,' Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, now the UN secretary-general,
warned in 1985. The Nile basin touches on nine other countries, reaching as
far south as Tanzania and Zaire. All upstream nations are keen to extend
land under irrigation by tapping Egypt's only source of water.
'Without political imagination,' Mr Boutros Ghali continued, 'Egypt will
become a new Bangladesh fraught with drought and famine - but with one
difference. This Bangladesh will be on the shores of the Mediterranean,
half-an-hour by jet from the rich people in the north.'
Already, according to the UN High Commission for Refugees, there are 5m
displaced people on the continent. To call them refugees would be a
misnomer, for most will never be able to return to their homes. Many are
fleeing land too degraded to support them. Others seek refuge from civil
war, government repression, ethnic conflict, or simply the desperate poverty
of rural areas. But up to now, the west has preferred to focus on endangered
animals, rather than endangered humans.
The expulsion of Maasai pastoralists from 4,800 square miles of traditional
grazing land which became the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania was one of
the first important battles fought by western conservationists in Africa.
All over the continent, 'experts' imposed the theory that wildlife and
people should be separated. This principle is now being challenged. 'It is
hard to imagine that 150,000 tourists are not causing greater environmental
damage and disturbing wildlife far more than 2,000 Maasai ever did,' says Mr
Raymond Bonner, a US journalist and author of At the Hand of Man: Peril and
Hope for Africa's Wildlife.
New solutions are required which marry the needs of local people to those of
the environment. In Luwangwa, Zambia, hunting rights are auctioned among
safari companies and the revenues are channelled to the local tribes. As a
result, villagers have started supporting the national parks service and set
up security committees to prevent poachers entering into their areas. The
number of poached carcasses of elephants and black rhinos in Luwangwa fell
by 90 per cent between 1985 and 1987.
The lesson to be learned is that Africa needs an economic incentive to
protect its wildlife. But western institutions - be they tourist or
pharmaceutical companies - are often reluctant to pay the price.
Far more worrying than the endangered black rhino are Africa's disappearing
insects and plants - species that could hold the cure for Aids. Already,
Africa has destroyed 65 per cent of its original wildlife habitats.
Concerns about the staggering loss of bio-diversity are not exaggerated. A
substance discovered in the rosy periwinkle, a species unique to Madagascar,
has quadrupled the survival rate for children suffering from leukemia.
Worldwide sales of the rosy periwinkle drug now earn more than Dollars 100m
a year, but not a cent has accrued to Madagascar in compensation for
preserving the plant's habitat.
A growing number of ecologists now argue that the best way of persuading
African nations to protect their bio-diversity is by paying them to leave
their natural resources intact. What is found in Africa may be needed in
Europe and the rest of the developed world.
Paper mills in the US and Japan, for example, are experimenting with an
African plant, Kenaf, a relative of jute, which produces five times more
pulp than the average tree. After 30 years of investigations, the US
Department of Agriculture has singled out Kenaf as the most promising
substitute to produce tree-free paper. It is an annual crop, whereas
man-made forests require up to 60 years in the northern hemisphere to reach
maturity. US newspapers which have tested Kenaf newsprint report that it is
brighter, reproduces better pictures, and uses less ink, which does not
stain hands.
Africa's environmental problems are often portrayed in doomsday tones. In
reality, they are neither insoluble nor insurmountable. What is needed is a
radical reassessment of the value the industrialised world places on
Africa's environmental health. It is an issue the west ignores at its peril.
