FT  01 NOV 93 / Risk and Reward: CFTC stalls over regulation until
reinforcements arrive
ANOTHER authoritative study on off-exchange derivatives was released last
week. Its primary finding, that no new regulation is needed for the
multi-faceted financial instruments, echoed the conclusions of a similar
study by derivatives dealers and issued last summer by the Group of 30, the
Washington-based think tank.
Issued barely a week after a Bundesbank warning that expanding use of
derivatives and their global linkages threaten the stability of world
financial markets, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission study was noted
for its endorsement of the status quo.
The CFTC regulates exchange-traded futures and options in the US. The
agency's responsibilities evolved with the rapid growth of financial
derivatives. Its budget, and its stature in Washington and on Wall Street
failed to follow apace.
The CFTC's summary of OTC derivatives regulation was not expected to be
controversial, given that any recommendations for regulatory restructuring
could have again pushed the agency into a fight for its regulatory life. It
undertook the study only at the behest of Congress. But the CFTC has made a
solid contribution to the derivatives debate.
It said current regulatory structures were adequate. But the agency reported
that its study was hampered by the lack of information on OTC markets - a
remarkable statement by a body backed by the US government. 'Data generally
are available only for broad categories of derivatives products and market
participants. The most extensive data pertain to interest rate and currency
swaps and to dealers and broad categories of end users,' the report said.
'Very little information exists on the extent of activity in OTC equity
options and swaps and commodity swaps or by non-depository financial
institutions such as pension funds and investment companies.'
Later, the agency revealed that the data it used for the most
broadly-reported vehicles swaps comes directly from the International Swaps
and Derivatives Association, whose membership reports swaps turnover
voluntarily and whose data lack independent confirmation.
The study bemoaned the difficulties posed by variations of regulatory
treatments across borders and across participants.
Finally, the CFTC said the recent rash of separately capitalised
subsidiaries created as swaps trading vehicles by non-bank securities
dealers lacked any regulatory oversight. In short, the study's findings fail
to back its conclusion.
The CFTC's fumbling attempts to get its arms around the OTC market
demonstrate that derivatives regulation is in sad need of realignment. For a
start, comprehensive and reliable data reporting is needed. Meanwhile, the
CFTC has deferred decision on one the US's most significant derivatives
issues in five decades until it receives political reinforcements.
The CFTC has jurisdiction over exchange-traded markets of the same
trillion-dollar size and steep growth curve as OTC derivatives. The on- and
off-exchange derivatives markets share many of the same participants and are
used largely for the same purpose-risk transfer.
Exchanges contend that because they have more onerous reporting requirements
and are more closely regulated, they lose competitive edge to their
off-exchange cousins.
Having watched the CFTC grant regulatory exemptions to a swathe of OTC
energy and financial derivatives this year, the world's two biggest futures
exchange are asking for similar treatment. If their petitions for regulatory
exemptions for their biggest players, professional traders, in the Chicago
Board of Trade's lexicon, are accepted it is hard to calculate the effect.
Recognising that the issue could attract the wrath of Congress and that its
is undermanned, the CFTC is stalling.
After declaring an unusually long comment period on the petitions in August,
the agency recently extended the comment deadline to December 15.
Reinforcements, in the form of long-awaited appointments of a CFTC chairman
and two of four commissioners, are expected within days.
