FT  13 AUG 93 / Nigerian protest limited to south-west
A STAY-AWAY called to demand the end of military rule in Nigeria brought
Lagos to a halt yesterday, but failed to win backing outside the south-west
of the country.
For the second time since President Ibrahim Babangida annulled the June 12
presidential poll, the country's commercial capital was forced to shut down.
But the organisers of a three-day campaign of protest won little or no
backing outside the Yoruba-speaking south-west, stronghold of Mr Moshood
Abiola, the successful candidate in the June election.
Life continued as normal in the important northern cities of Kaduna, Kano
and the capital, Abuja, according to residents.
Earlier protests in July crippled Lagos for three days, and around 100
people were killed when gangs took advantage of demonstrations to loot and
troops were ordered in. Yesterday the streets of Lagos and Ibadan, the
country's second largest city, were deserted and no violent incidents were
reported.
The objective of the campaign is to bring economic pressure on the
government, which, say opposition officials, will find it difficult to
control Nigeria if 23m Yorubas who dominate the economic heart of the
country oppose it.
The Campaign for Democracy has denounced the proposed interim government and
believes that the next government should be headed by Mr Abiola. Mr Olisa
Agbakoba, spokesman for the Campaign for Democracy, said he was disappointed
that the protest had received little backing in the north and east but said
he hoped that links with the labour movement and with local leaders of the
SDP who oppose the interim government would make future action more
effective.
The Nigerian Labour Congress has said that it would consider concerted
action if the military are still in power on August 27, although the
50,000-strong oil workers' union is threatening to strike unilaterally.
Should they take such action, the government would then be under severe
pressure, with oil exports accounting for over 90 per cent of export
earnings. The US government has suspended direct air links with Nigeria,
about five flights a week, because of long-standing security issues at Lagos
airport.
