FT  12 AUG 93 / Yeltsin in drive to speed up sell-offs
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday sought to override parliament's efforts to
block mass privatisation, issuing a decree under which Moscow could punish
officials for failing to implement the legislation.
In addition, Mr Anatoly Chubais, deputy prime minister responsible for
privatisation, also said funds would be cut off to regions that failed to
fulfil the programme.
Mr Chubais said the decree and a similar government resolution were issued
in response to an attack on the programme by the parliament. He said
parliament was embarked on a 'crazy' political gamble since the process of
privatisation was too popular to be stopped.
The government resolution included a requirement that 30 per cent of
individual state enterprises be offered to the public three months after
they are turned into joint stock companies and that 70 per cent of stock on
offer be sold for privatisation vouchers distributed to every Russian
citizen.
The presidential decree said the privatisation programme, which includes a
list of enterprises earmarked for sale, could be submitted to parliament
only after it was approved by all of Russia's 89 regions.
This is seen as a delaying tactic since the process could last indefinitely
and would keep the legislation clear of parliamentary scrutiny.
Mr Chubais said the government resolution could not be reversed as
parliament does not have the right to do so. However, it has already twice
overturned Mr Yeltsin's presidential decrees on privatisation and could do
the same again.
Mr Yeltsin faces new attacks when parliament meets today. On its agenda are
proposals to convene a Congress of People's Deputies to strip Mr Yeltsin of
his role as commander-in-chief, and to set up a medical commission to
examine his health.
In an attempt to project new decisiveness on the part of the president, who
has promised his political opponents a 'combative September', a presidential
spokesman described Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker, as a
'maniac'.
Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, press spokesman, accused Mr Khasbulatov of trying to
draw the armed forces into politics by attacking the President at a meeting
with military officials on Tuesday.
'His accusations show not only the level of his political extremism but also
the maniacal imbalance of this figure, whose actions pose an increasing
danger to society,' Mr Kostikov said.
Mr Boris Fyodorov, the finance minister, said it was unlikely a handful of
former Soviet republics would be able soon to recreate either a rouble zone
or an economic union.
He denied Russia was seeking to write off debts to the west, saying that a
statement to this effect had been the personal opinion of Mr Konstantin
Kagalovsky, Russia's representative at the International Monetary Fund.
Negotiations were under way with republics that wanted to keep the rouble as
their currency, Mr Fyodorov said, but 'what will happen to the rouble zone
remains to be seen'.
The central bank's botched monetary reform, which proclaims to endow Russia
with a proper currency of its own and to cut off other republics, showed
'these issues cannot be resolved so easily', he added.
He was also sceptical of separate plans for economic union with Ukraine and
Belarus.
Halting the charade, Page 13
