FT  13 FEB 93 / Brittan tells US of trade war dangers
SIR Leon Brittan, the EC external trade commissioner, yesterday ended two
high-profile days of talks urging Clinton administration officials and US
businessmen to renew efforts to complete the long-stalled Uruguay Round of
world trade negotiations.
After two meetings with Mr Mickey Kantor, the US Trade Representative, Sir
Leon said 'the chemistry' had been 'excellent' and the two 'intend to bring
fresh vision to the Round'.
He said he had successfully alerted key figures in the administration and
Congress to the dangers of a trade war. Serious conflict on trade issues
could 'seriously impair' US-EC co-operation on issues of foreign security.
But after the meetings, Mr Kantor's tough positioning on trade disputes with
the EC seemed little changed.
Mr Kantor expressed surprise that the Bush administration had thought the US
and EC were close to agreement on tariff reductions in the Uruguay Round.
'As far as we're concerned, we're not close at all,' he said.
On one issue the two sides were in total harmony: it was the turn of Japan
to be brought to the table for concessions.
But at the US State Department, meanwhile, there were public assurances from
the Clinton administration to Japanese Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe. The
US was committed to an open trading system, said Mr Warren Christopher, the
secretary of state.
Sir Leon's hope of injecting momentum into the Uruguay Round became an
exercise in damage control as the number of US and EC differences became
apparent. The EC commissioner had not been in the country three hours before
President Bill Clinton attacked Airbus subsidies, as he did frequently in
last year's election campaign.
Responding to a question from Seattle, where Boeing is the leading employer,
about layoffs in the US aerospace industry, Mr Clinton said he would not
'roll over and play dead' if the EC continued to subsidise aircraft
development.
Mr Kantor, who is thought to be sceptical about threats of trade war, said
he 'had problems' with sections in the Uruguay Round negotiating draft about
market access, intellectual property, services and anti-dumping, as well as
with the farm reform deal worked out with the EC.
If he had concerns about trade hawkishness in the new administration, Sir
Leon sought to obscure them by making much of Mr Clinton's long-expected
support for an extension of his 'fast-track' negotiating authority. This
must be agreed by Congress if the administration is to submit an unamendable
trade agreement for approval.
But it is not clear that Congress will agree to an extension without
conditions, or if, indeed, the administration even wants an unconditional
'fast-track'.
There is talk of adding a new 'Super 301' on to the 'fast-track' extension.
This is a much criticised provision - supported by Mr Clinton - that orders
the US Trade Representative to negotiate away foreign trade barriers or
impose sanctions on those governments that resist.
Sir Leon said Mr Kantor would go to Brussels 'at his earliest convenience',
while Sir Leon would return to Washington in April. 'The momentum is there,'
he insisted.
