FT  31 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Tibbett &amp; Britten rises to Pounds 14.7m
TIBBETT &amp; BRITTEN, the warehousing, transportation and distribution services
group, increased annual pre-tax profits by 9 per cent to Pounds 14.7m in
spite of what it described as 'difficult trading conditions everywhere.'
Sales rose 28 per cent to Pounds 231.8m in the year to December 31. The
group said 69 per cent of its growth was generated organically while 80 per
cent of revenue was contractually based.
Development was particularly strong in its consumer and personal products
divisions, with additional business from existing clients being reinforced
by the impact of new contracts won over the past two years.
Lowfield's grocery operations added new contracts and Tibbett &amp; Britten
Canada also grew. More modest development by the clothing and textiles
division reflected continuing difficulties in the sector.
In June, Tibbett paid Unilever Pounds 2m for SA Warehousing Services, which
distributes nationwide in South Africa for Unilever and other local and
international companies. The group said it had already provided a platform
for further development there. In November, Tibbett paid an initial Pounds
31.2m for Silcock Express, a private car distribution company.
Mr John Harvey, chairman, said profit margins continued to be held back by
investment in overseas developments and the difficulties of the
non-contracted Fashion Logistics operations in an extremely depressed
clothing sector. Margins were further impacted by the inclusion of Silcock's
December trading which added no profit, being a seasonally poor month.
Tibbett said it was financially robust and had generated strong operational
cashflow. After the 1-for-5 rights which raised Pounds 30.8m at the time of
the Silcock purchase, Tibbett had year-end net borrowings of Pounds 1m,
giving gearing of 1.4 per cent.
Mr Harvey said: 'In the medium term the group should benefit from recovery
in the clothing and motor sectors. More immediately, the recent acquisitions
should perform in line with expectations. All divisions are actively
tendering, reflecting opportunities arising from supply chain changes within
their established markets.'
Earnings per share rose 10.5 per cent to 27.3p (24.7p). A recommended final
dividend of 8.1p gives a total for the year of 11.9p (10.8p).
