FT  13 OCT 93 / FT Exporter (29): Industry facing radical change / A look at
an industry in crisis as margins are reduced and carriers and forwarders
compete for a declining amount of business - Freight movement
WITH margins being squeezed ever more tightly as competition increases for
less business, the freight industry is having to deal with a number of new
pressures that are forcing carriers and forwarders to rethink their
operations.
For the trader, the future promises great benefits with faster and more
efficient clearances of exports and imports. The frustration for the freight
industry is that it can do little to influence its destiny. 'We are entirely
dependent on world trade and can only respond to what the markets require to
be moved,' says Jim White, director general of the British International
Freight Association (Bifa).
'And if the over-tonnage in the deep sea, air markets and within European
transport, both road and rail, continues then the pressure on margins is
going to make it difficult for any freight intermediary to achieve the
amounts needed to be spent on training and new information technology.'
Across Europe the transport picture is similar. Companies are being hard
hit, says a spokeswoman for the Union International des Transports Routiers
in Geneva.
Increased competition for less business is causing a round of price cutting,
she says, while fuel taxes are adding further pressure. 'Although we're
hoping things will get better, in general we're still in crisis.'
Winifred Rockman, head of the Brussels-based European Liaison Commitees for
Road Transport, describes the situation as critical, with hauliers being
forced to cut their prices by between 10 and 20 per cent. Among the hardest
hit countries are Spain and Italy, he says.
But the fact that the number of haulage companies operating in Europe has
increased - in spite of the downturn in business - shows that smaller
specialist companies will always have a role to play, Mr Rockman says.
On British roads, while loads carried have been increasing, the number of
vehicles has been falling. Simon Chapman, economist at the Freight Transport
Association, says the sector has been badly hit by recession. 'The industry
has been affected since 1990 and this is reflected by the number of
registered lorries.
According to Mr Chapman, 478,000 vehicles of more than 3.5 tonnes were on
the roads in 1989. This number fell to 460,000 by 1990, to 430,000 by 1991
and to 415,000 at the end of 1992.
While the industry was cheered by predictions that the Single Market would
increase intra-European trade by 7 per cent, there were two prices to pay -
one of lost jobs and the other of extra work.
At the start of this year, Bifa estimated that up to 100,000 customs brokers
throughout the European Community would be made redundant but, at the same
time, EC governments made it clear that they still expected freight movement
statistics to be collected.
Forwarders found themselves having to take on the role of the fiscal and
information brokers, providing data such as VAT details on behalf of clients
as well as duty and tax information.
Forwarders are also expected to supply trade statistics and other
information needed at consignment level to help Customs units prevent
smuggling.
In Britain, it was quickly seen that the key to beating European rivals in
this area would be the introduction of electronic trading systems between
trader, forwarder and Customs units.
Last November Bifa launched Bifanet, an electronic trading service developed
jointly with General Electric Information Services, a division of General
Electric of the US. The system gives even the smallest companies access to
state-of-the-art technology.
No equivalent has yet been established on the continent, but Portugal, Spain
and Denmark are looking at the system to see if they can adapt it to their
needs.
Although the forwarder may be prepared to take on these extra tasks,
Britain's Institute of Export points out that the onus is on the exporter
himself to provide trade statistic returns. 'I'm sure exporters could do it
themselves and Customs might prefer this, rather than getting the
information secondhand, but most companies have always been used to leaving
this side of things to their forwarders or consolidators,' Tony Symes, the
institute's freight spokesman, said.
The implications of the Channel tunnel for the freight industry present
uncertainty.
The Institute of Export says little detail is available so far on how it
will operate. But it concedes that, while the French are planning how to use
it, in Britain it is likely that people will 'shut their eyes until the
tunnel opens and then see how it's going to work'.
Developments in the area of security within the British freight industry are
soon to be enshrined in the Aviation and Maritime Security Act. According to
the Department of Transport, the code will be a voluntary one.
The act applies only to the UK but the Civil Aviation Authority is promoting
its principles to its continental counterparts.
Air cargo agents will be able to apply for security listing, thereby
becoming legally responsible for subjecting cargo in their possession to
security screening and searching before delivering it to airlines.
Those who apply will be required to:
provide satisfactory statements of their current security procedures;
show that premises where cargo is handled are physically secure and that
they have appropriate control on access and;
demonstrate that they can comply with 'directions' when issued. It is
expected that the first directions concerning audits, tests and inspections
will be issued early next year.
While the department specifies a 'voluntary framework', air cargo agents
will inevitably feel they have to meet the department's requirements in
order to attract or keep customers.
This month sees the introduction in Britain of Chief (Customs Handling of
Import or Export Freight), an enhanced version of Deps (the Departmental
Entry Processing System) which allows traders to put their information
directly into the Customs' system. Traders can pre-enter imports and exports
without waiting for the paperwork to catch up.
Installing the new system will be relatively cheap as it entails simply
updating what traders have already been using. Customs estimates that the
required software will cost the small operator between Pounds 500 and Pounds
600 and perhaps double that for bigger concerns.
Customs feels it is a price worth paying. 'Manual clearances will still be
possible,' the Customs spokesman said. 'But, if they do join, they will be
hooked into what we consider to be the most efficient freight handling
system there is.'
