FT  12 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Perfume cartel
THE MONOPOLIES and Mergers Commission investigation into the UK perfume
industry has a rather bad smell about it. The MMC's overall conclusion that
the industry's restrictive practices are not against the public interest
does not flow naturally from its own detailed arguments. The case also
raises concerns that UK competition policy is being hampered by decisions in
Brussels.
The investigation centred on complaints that perfume houses were refusing to
supply Superdrug and Tesco, 'grey market' retailers that sell scent at a
discount to recommended retail prices. The Office of Fair Trading was
worried that such restrictive distribution practices were keeping prices
artificially high.
The MMC went along with much of the OFT's analysis. It argued that the
industry's practice of recommending prices was uncompetitive. It noted that
authorised perfume retailers had discussed in their trade association how to
choke off supplies to the grey market retailers. Its own research showed
that Superdrug's outlets were of a above average quality, undermining a key
industry argument that restrictive distribution was designed to ensure
high-quality sales outlets. The MMC even concluded that the practice was
designed to maintain and exploit a complex monopoly.
But the MMC decided none of this was against the public interest for three
reasons. First, the UK market had become more competitive in recent years.
Second, the industry's restrictive distribution systems had recently been
cleared by the European Commission. Third, there was no clear evidence that
the practice was designed to maintain resale prices.
While it is true that the market has become more competitive, that is in
large part due to the activities of Superdrug whose ability to sustain
vigorous competition will depend on securing ready supplies in future. As
for the lack of clear evidence, that is debatable given much of the detail
in the MMC's own report.
But the wider concern surrounds the MMC's apparent willingness to accept
European Commission rulings in an investigation that related to the UK
market alone. This undermines the principle of subsidiarity, enshrined in
the Maastricht treaty, under which decisions are supposed to be taken at a
national rather than European level wherever practicable. Similarly, it
throws into doubt the European Union competition authorities' stated
intention of transfering responsibilities to national authorities.
It may be that a desire to avoid a conflict with the European Commission was
not decisive in this case and that the MMC would have taken the same view
anyway. But open conflicts between national and European competition
authorities may be harder to side-step in future. A clear division of
responsibilities must therefore be agreed that puts flesh on the
subsidiarity principle.
