FT  09 MAR 93 / Banks attack audit proposals as disruptive
BRITISH BANKS yesterday attacked as costly and disruptive a government plan
to require auditors of financial institutions to report to regulators
anything of 'material significance'.
The Treasury's proposed legislation follows recommendations made by the
Bingham report last year on the supervision of the collapsed Bank of Credit
and Commerce International.
But yesterday bankers said the rules were too wide-ranging and would
jeopardise the existing relationship between them, their auditors and
regulators.
Mr Paul Tillett, a director of the British Bankers' Association, said: 'We
think auditors may feel the need to deluge regulators with information which
they don't need.' The effect would be to increase costs and tempt auditors
to deal directly with regulators rather than in three-way discussions with
their clients.
The draft rules refer in general terms to the requirement for auditors of
banks, building societies, insurers and any other companies regulated under
the Financial Services Act to report if they identify anything which would
have a 'material significance to the exercise of regulatory functions'.
At present, auditors have a professional duty to report material fraud to
regulators and are protected from any breach of duty to their clients when
they do so. The Bingham report recommended that this duty be reinforced by
law.
The consultative document published by the Treasury yesterday warns that
auditors failing to comply with new statutory duties could be exposed to
civil liabilities and to disciplinary action by their professional bodies.
It also says regulators would have the power to request a second audit or
disqualify auditors from auditing regulated companies if they failed to
report when under a duty to do so.
The document rejects suggestions that auditors should be required actively
to seek out and report fraud. It said this was not recommended by the
Bingham report and would 'undesirably' change the relationship between
auditors and their clients.
The Treasury said the proposals had been agreed with the key professional
bodies before being issued, and that it would take any additional comments
into account during the consultation period, which finishes on June 1.
The intention would be to bring them into law by October after guidelines on
their application have been circulated by the Auditing Practices Board.
Mr Bill Morrison, chairman of the Auditing Practices Board, said: 'I think
(the proposals) will make a difference. The authority will give auditors
additional resolve.' But he added: 'The whole thing doesn't hinge on what
you write down but on what you do. It's all judgmental.'
Audit easing backed, Page 9
