FT  13 MAY 93 / Survey of Southern France (6): Film fun goes on - The annual
Cannes festival
IT was back in 1939, on the eve of World War II, that the French government
decided to launch an international film festival in the sunny Mediterranean
town of Cannes.
The outbreak of war forced the government to put its plans on ice. It was
not until 1946 that the newly formed Centre National de la Cinematographie
staged its very first Festival International du Film in the old casino in
the heart of Cannes.
The festival was more like a movie club than an international competition,
given that only 300 people attended and every film went away with a prize of
some sort or other. The organisers were also chronically short of cash. The
festival, intended from the beginning to be an annual event, was scrapped in
1948 and 1950 because of financial problems.
But the organisers determined to continue. In 1949 they launched the Palme
d'Or to be given to the film deemed to be the very best in the festival by a
specially selected jury of film makers and actors. The first winner was
Carol Reed's The Third Man starring Orson Welles.
Cannes has since gone from strength to strength. The festival has been
clouded by controversies from 1968 when it was cut short by les evenements,
the student riots, in Paris, to 1990 when screeching teenagers invaded the
town to mob Madonna, the pop star, when she arrived, clad only in a cream
satin Jean-Paul Gaultier corset, for the premiere of In Bed With Madonna.
But the business aspect of Cannes has become bigger and bigger. The number
of delegates has grown year after year from the paltry 300 at the first
festival in 1946 to a daunting 19,905 last year.
Star spotters are often doomed to disappointment. The big stars jet in for
their premieres, as Madonna did in 1990 and Sharon Stone last year for the
opening of Basic Instinct. But the producers prowling around the bars of the
Carlton or the Martinez, or power-lunching on the cafe terraces along the
boulevard Croisette, are more interested in counting digits on their
contracts than in signing up 'wannabe' starlets on the beach.
Cannes may have lost its lustre over the years, but it is still the annual
film event for the media. The number of journalists and photographers has
risen steadily from a respectable 700 in 1966 to 3,545 (from 1,945 different
publications or television programmes in 54 countries) last year.
The swanky suites in the Carlton Inter-Continental and the Martinez are
booked solid for festival week years in advance. Even lesser hotels are so
packed that most of the big producers and studio executives billet their
lackeys in their villas in Cannes itself or in the hills around the town.
Some delegates 'commute' daily to the festival from nearby Antibes, or even
Nice.
The 1993 festival is now in full swing. The hotels are as busy as ever. The
jury is in session, chaired by Louis Malle, the French film maker, aided and
abetted by Gary Oldman, the British actor who starred in Francis Ford
Coppola's Dracula and Emir Kusturica, the Bosnian director, whose Stories of
the Beehive won the Palme d'Or a few years ago.
As for the Palme d'Or, more than 20 films have entered this year's
competition. The shortest odds are on Kenneth Branagh's Much Ado About
Nothing, Jane Campion's The Piano, and the Taviani brothers' Fiorile to win.
