FT  30 JUL 93 / GM rebuts Piech allegations with date, time and place:
Christopher Parkes hears Opel's detailed version of row with VW over missing
documents and former employees
ADAM OPEL, the German subsidiary of General Motors, yesterday reopened its
barrage on Volkswagen's defences. But there was no return fire.
VW's big gun, chairman Mr Ferdinand Piech, rolled out on Wednesday for a
brief bombardment to counter industrial espionage charges against his
employees, had been pulled back from the fray.
'In Volkswagen's view everything relevant to this subject has been said
several times. We. . . have nothing more to add,' the company said.
Meanwhile, Mr Hans Wilhelm Gab, vice president of GM Europe, yesterday
rebutted Mr Piech's suggestions that evidence designed to incriminate VW's
production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and three colleagues
might have been planted. Mr Piech referred yesterday to 'other hands' being
involved.
The four, all former GM employees, are under criminal investigation in
Germany on suspicion of industrial espionage. Mr Lopez is also the focus of
an FBI probe in the US.
Opel officials claimed that Mr Lopez - who signed a contract with VW, by
VW's own account, at 9.57pm on the evening of March 9 this year, and called
Mr Piech immediately afterwards - attended a meeting in Opel headquarters on
March 10 at which he asked for 'internal' documents to be sent to an address
in Spain.
Later the same day, he was back in Detroit, where he told Mr Jack Smith, GM
president, that he was leaving for VW, the Opel officials said. After a
tug-of-war between the two companies, in which he was offered promotion to
keep him on board, Mr Lopez left for Germany on March 15.
He left undelivered the final draft of an emotional speech, which he had
personally approved that morning, and the clouds of doubt which prompted
Opel shortly afterwards to ask German prosecutors to probe their suspicions
of industrial espionage.
According to Mr Gab, on December 2 Mr Lopez, then head of global purchasing
at GM, asked for the so-called Epos list, containing details of all GM's
European parts prices last year - equivalent to 70,000 to 90,000 print-out
sheets - to be transmitted to him in the US. These data, Mr Gab claimed,
which were sent to him on December 22, were of no use to him in his work in
the US. They had since disappeared, he added. 'And they could be in the
hands of people to whom they do not belong.'
There was more, including evidence suggesting that Mr Lopez and others had
taken part in a large-scale information gathering exercise while, as has
since been shown, he was in negotiations with VW.
Mr Lopez has repeatedly claimed that he finally decided to switch to VW on
March 9. He lost all enthusiasm, he claims, when he discovered that his pet
project, a secret super-lean car production plant, was not to be built in
his Basque homeland.
Opel said yesterday that no final decision had been made at that point. The
plan had in fact been 'frozen' much earlier because of poor business
conditions.
Indeed, on January 14, Mr Lopez had personally drafted a letter telling a
Spanish financing and construction consortium just that. The letter was
signed and sent off by Mr Louis Hughes, president of GM Europe. The next
day, Mr Lopez, who had already been talking to Mr Piech, met Mr Jens
Neumann, the VW personnel director for the first time, Opel officials said.
Three weeks ago, Mr Lopez was disappointed again. After claiming his dream
was soon to be realised, Mr Piech publicly announced that the project was
'out of the question at this time. . . I have told Mr Lopez this.'
See Editorial Comment, Lex Column
