FT  25 MAR 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Out of step on the
catwalk - The fashion show may have had its day
This time last week more than 2,000 journalists, photographers, store buyers
and socialites squeezed into a marquee in a courtyard of the Louvre museum
for the traditional highlight of the Paris fashion collections - the Chanel
catwalk show.
For years other fashion houses have tried, and failed, to trump the
theatricality of the Chanel show. But times are changing. The pressures of
recession, combined with the neo-hippy ethos of the early 1990s, has
prompted some fashion designers to reassess their attitude to fashion shows.
Yohji Yamamoto and Comme des Garcons, the Japanese designers, scaled down
their shows last week. Others, including Martin Margiela, did not stage
shows at all.
The fashion show, which lasts for around 45 minutes and costs anything up to
Dollars 500,000 (Pounds 347,000), is a critical part of a designer's
marketing strategy. It is not only their largest area of promotional
expenditure but replaces conventional advertising as their chief vehicle for
communication with the media and their retail customers.
The cost of shows escalated in the buoyant fashion market of the 1980s. The
designers were trapped in a vicious cycle of staging increasingly
spectacular shows to generate media coverage so they could reach the
ordinary consumers who bought their licensed products, such as Chanel No5
perfume and Christian Dior tights. The chief beneficiaries were the
super-models, Linda Evangelista or Claudia Schiffer, who by the late 1980s
charged up to Dollars 20,000 a show.
The industry can no longer afford such extravagance. The Paris designers'
sales fell from FFr5bn (Pounds 603m) at their 1990 peak to FFr4.3bn last
year, according to the Chambre Syndicale, which organises the Louvre shows.
Many fashion houses have serious financial problems. The latest issue of
Harper's Bazaar, the US fashion magazine, questions whether expensive shows
are justifiable in an article entitled 'Must The Show Go On?'
Ostentatious shows are also out of tune with the times. The informal
fashions of the early 1990s look lost in the huge Louvre marquees, as do the
new breed of 'wraith' models, Kate Moss and Lucie de la Falaise, who have
ousted the super-models.
Yohji Yamamoto and Comme des Garcons left the Louvre this season. 'Money
isn't the issue,' said Comme, which presented its collection in a deserted
vegetable market. 'It's a question of mood.'
Younger designers refuse to show in the Louvre as part of their rebellion
against the fashion establishment. The most fashionable events in Paris last
week were staged in night clubs, art galleries or, in the case of Xuly-Bet's
show, the toy department of the Samaritaine store.
Martin Margiela, a leading avant garde designer, went further by abandoning
his show. He presented his clothes personally in his studio and filmed his
collection in a 'home movie' video to create a 'more empathetic environment'
for his work.
Other designers may follow by cancelling or scaling down their shows. This
raises the risk that fewer journalists and buyers will come to the Paris
collections, thereby jeopardising the city's status as the international
fashion centre and imperilling the Chambre Syndicale's plan to move the
catwalk shows this autumn to a permanent complex under the Louvre.
In the long term the decline of the conventional collections may make it
more difficult for young designers to make their names on the international
scene. It could also force the established houses to spend more on
conventional marketing which could be even more expensive than fashion
shows.
