FT  12 FEB 93 / A disarming achievement: The next big challenge for arms
control is to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons
For the first time in 20 years, diplomats in Geneva and Vienna have no new
arms control treaty on their agenda.
Delegates stay on, working to tidy up existing pacts and put them into
practice, carrying on discussions on a set of disarmament topics - but no
longer with any mandate to negotiate treaties.
That phase is over. There has never been a period for arms control such as
the one accompanying the end of the cold war. The old east-west adversaries
are now concentrating on the challenge of carrying it all out and trying to
mend the holes in the arms control web which could lead to new threats,
including the threat of nuclear missiles, from developing countries.
Last month's convention outlawing chemical weapons - an ambition of the
international community since the end of the last century - was the last of
an extraordinary series. In just over five years, three treaties between the
nuclear superpowers and four wide-ranging international agreements have been
concluded. Five of these pacts involve actually destroying weapons and
monitoring their destruction.
The first to break this new ground, the US-Soviet Intermediate Nuclear
Forces treaty, obliged both countries to destroy all their medium-range
ground-to-ground missiles. Within a month of finishing the job in 1991, they
signed the first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (Start), the culmination of
a long, interrupted negotiating process. In January this year, with that
treaty not yet in force, they overtook it with the more radical Start 2,
aiming at a two-thirds reduction in their long-range nuclear arsenals.
Wrecking of more mundane weapons, such as tanks, began last year under the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty, which Nato and the Warsaw
Pact completed in 1990. Verification clauses allow these countries and
successor states to pry into one another's military affairs on a scale
beyond the dreams of any cold-war spy. The Open Skies treaty signed last
year means they can also carry out surveillance flights over each other's
territory. These accords were followed by agreement on the missing element
in the CFE deal, manpower ceilings, a subject that arms control negotiators
had often despaired of resolving.
All these negotiations began when the main concern was lowering east-west
tensions. Political upheavals in eastern Europe assisted the process, but
also robbed the agreements of much of their impact. The ceilings set in CFE
are now largely artificial. For their own budgetary reasons most
participants on both sides are making deeper cuts.
No new categories of weapons have been identified for extending the process.
The idea of bringing general-purpose naval forces into the arms control net
has always been resisted by Nato - on the grounds that the western alliance
relies ultimately on Atlantic sea-lanes - and Moscow appears to have stopped
pressing its case.
Since it is no longer possible to talk of an east-west balance, the
framework which served for drawing up the CFE treaty is no longer available.
There was much talk of a CFE 2, but the process stopped at the manpower
agreement known in the jargon as CFE 1a. The CFE treaty was the first
between the members of Nato and the Warsaw Pact; CFE 1a was the last.
Reluctance to move further along the path of negotiated disarmament is also
partly a reflection of the amount of work needed to implement existing
agreements and the serious question of how countries such as Russia and
Ukraine can cope. Surplus armoured vehicles, artillery weapons and aircraft
covered by the terms of CFE have to be destroyed in the next three years.
Nuclear cuts are spread over 10 years. The US is anxious to speed them up
but Russia cannot do it without help.
Many arms control experts favour further nuclear cuts. But US officials have
indicated that any follow-on would be some years off.
At the height of the Start talks, chief negotiators were meeting every day,
alternately at the US and Soviet missions in Geneva. Later they flew in on
intermittent visits. Now the US delegation discussing nuclear and space
issues no longer has an ambassador.
Under the umbrella of the 39-nation UN Conference on Disarmament in Geneva,
which produced the hard-won chemical pact, committees continue to discuss
subjects such as radiological weapons, of which none are known to exist, and
a permanent ban on nuclear tests, for which the US, Britain and France are
not yet ready. One panel is charged with a 'comprehensive programme of
disarmament', but that committee is dormant.
In Vienna, consultative groups work on implementation of the CFE and Open
Skies accords. In the same room in the Hofburg palace where negotiators
spent 15 years up to 1989 failing to agree on mutual force reductions in
central Europe, the 53 countries now belonging to the Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe attend a Forum on Security Co-operation, devoted
to confidence-building measures.
But the priority for western governments has shifted. The main focus now is
on stemming the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons - a worry that
has risen with the disintegration of the Soviet Union which, it is feared,
could either spawn new nuclear powers or enable other countries to obtain
weapons, materials or the know-how to produce them.
The Chemical Weapons Convention, due to come into force in 1995, will
complete a series of treaties which already cover nuclear and biological
weapons programmes. But some countries fall outside these agreements; most
Arab governments said they would not sign the chemical convention as long as
Israel got away with holding nuclear weapons. There is also concern about
the scope for cheating within treaties, as Iraq, a signatory of the nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, did on a grandiose scale before the Gulf war.
The crucial event looming is the NPT review in 1995, when the treaty's
25-year span runs out. The review conference has to decide whether to renew
it, for how long, and whether to amend it. A preparatory committee starting
work in Geneva will focus on ways of tightening inspections to prevent
illegal programmes such as Iraq's.
Efforts are also under way to find acceptable ways of monitoring the 1972
Biological Weapons Convention. British arms control officials hope that
'managed access' procedures worked out for the chemical convention can serve
as a model for the other two treaties.
Measures to curb proliferation of missiles were recently extended to cover
weapons capable of carrying chemical as well as nuclear warheads. Since an
informal Missile Technology Control Regime was set up in 1987, the number of
industrial nations participating has grown from seven to 22, and several
others, including Russia, have promised to follow its guidelines.
However, none of these regimes is watertight. The best that is hoped for is
to slow down programmes by would-be proliferators and make them more
expensive and more embarrassing.
Plans for sharing information about arms sales are seen as helping this
process. 'Transparency in armaments' has become a new buzzword. The first
returns are due to be made this spring for a UN sales register, initially
proposed by Mr John Major, the UK prime minister. But British officials make
clear that curbing sales is not part of the aim.
After the 1991 Gulf war, talks were begun between the US, Britain, France,
Russia and China on controlling supplies to the Middle East, or at least
keeping a watch on them. But China pulled out after the US announced plans
last September to sell F-16 fighters to Taiwan. It is unclear where, if
anywhere, the talks will lead. Meanwhile the contracts flow in - ranging
from the delivery of a Russian submarine to Iran to the recent Pounds
4bn-Pounds 5bn UK-Saudi deal including Tornado bombers.
Defence cuts at home mean that suppliers - and for that matter government
armament programmes - rely increasingly on exports, and there is no sign
that either western or former Warsaw Pact countries are prepared to deprive
their arms manufacturers of this part of their livelihood.
