FT  20 SEP 93 / Management: Aged enfants terribles - The McCain brothers
seemed to have the ideal succession plan but they have paralysed the company
by falling out
Harrison and Wallace McCain seemed to be following all the best management
principles when they drew up a succession plan for their family-owned
potato-chip and frozen-food empire, based in New Brunswick, Canada.
The plan embodied the give-and-take spirit that has marked the brothers'
partnership as McCain Foods' joint chief executives since they built their
first potato-processing plant on a cow pasture 37 years ago.
It appeared to cover just about every eventuality. Both brothers would
retire no later than age 75, unless the board asked them to stay on. If one
died earlier, the other would take sole control. The chairman of the company
would not be from the same branch of the family as the remaining brother.
Wallace and Harrison even picked the head of McCain's UK operation to
succeed them in the unlikely event they both died at the same time.
To help identify successors and smooth the transition, the brothers also
agreed two years ago to bring four prominent outsiders on to the board of
their main operating company. These outside directors were to form a
'management resources committee' to recommend who should fill the brothers'
shoes.
But carefully worded agreements and a fruitful business relationship
spanning more than three decades have not been enough to prevent the sparks
flying in the McCain family. A row has blown up between Harrison and
Wallace, after Wallace unilaterally appointed his son Michael to head the US
subsidiary in October 1990, casting a shadow over the future of a highly
regarded business.
With annual sales of more than CDollars 3bn (Pounds 1.4bn), McCain Foods
almost doubled its profits last year. The group employs 12,500 people in
North America, Europe and Australia, and sells its potato chips, frozen
juices, cheeses and processed meats in 60 countries.
The succession dispute has paralysed McCain Foods to the point where the
directors of the holding company - all but one of whom are McCain family
members - recently voted to oust Wallace as joint CEO and president by the
end of this month. Wallace will ask a New Brunswick court later this week to
overturn the board resolution. He has also proposed splitting the company
into two roughly equal parts. One, to be owned by his side of the family,
would comprise the North and South American and Asia/Pacific operations; the
other, consisting of the UK and European interests, would be in Harrison's
hands.
Each of the McCain brothers appears to have underestimated the other's
determination to protect his own interests. An adviser to Wallace says that,
in drawing up their succession plan, each brother may have hoped 'that the
other guy would be the first to go. But then it looks likely that you're the
first to go, and you say: 'Good grief, what have I agreed to?''
A total of 33 McCains are shareholders in McCain Foods. Six younger family
members are also active in the business. Wallace's son Michael heads the US
operations. Michael's brother Scott is vice-president of production. One of
Harrison's sons is vice-president for export sales, another is a business
analyst. Allison McCain, son of one of Wallace and Harrison's two dead
brothers, is managing director of the UK subsidiary. Until 1991, the boards
of the family holding company and the operating company were identical. But
as part of the effort to ensure a smooth handover, the family decided to
reserve six of seven holding company directorships for members of the
younger generation. The chairman, Andrew McCain, runs a small investment
company in rural New Brunswick, but has no management or executive
experience.
Harrison and Wallace thought they were moving the succession process along
by giving their sons and nephews an increasingly active role. But it is hard
to escape the conclusion that the participation of so many McCain family
members in the business hampered rather than helped the process. Harrison
says the close relationship with his brother changed after Wallace promoted
Michael. Since then, Harrison says in an affidavit, 'an atmosphere of
distrust, intrigue and manoeuvring has existed'.
Wallace, for his part, alleges that his nephews have made little
contribution to the business. One of them, he says, does little more than
send him newspaper clippings.
The sour mood created by Michael's appointment and the subsequent flurry of
offers and counter-offers among the family shareholders have stalled efforts
to identify a new CEO. Although the succession plan was adopted in mid-1991,
the committee of outside directors set up to identify up-and-coming talent
only began meeting towards the end of last year. The committee's chairman,
Arden Haynes, who is the retired head of Canada's biggest oil company, told
the brothers last May that the outside directors would not proceed with the
search 'until the family dispute has been settled'.
Wallace's first choice is still to stick with the original plan, which
allows him to stay on till the age of 75, and perhaps even beyond. 'I am 63
years of age, in excellent health, work long hours and enjoy my involvement
in the McCain Group,' he says in a recent court affidavit.
Wallace maintains that the four outsiders on the management resources
committee will need at least two years to familiarise themselves with the
company before attempting to identify successors.
Harrison, who is two years older, underwent heart surgery in early 1992,
which kept him away from the office for three months. 'Harrison is in poor
health,' Wallace says in his affidavit. '(He) is jealous that my son Michael
may be the heir to the position that he would vacate.' Harrison counters
that relations between himself and Wallace have deteriorated to the point
where the future of the entire company is in jeopardy unless a new CEO is
installed soon. 'I have reconciled myself to changing my role in the
company,' Harrison said last month. 'I think it's time Wallace did too.'
The future of McCain Foods is set to be decided in the courts, causing what
Harrison describes as 'embarrassment and humiliation to all members of the
McCain families'. It is ironic that the family might have been spared some
of its present anguish if Wallace and Harrison had put tighter limits on
their sons' and nephews' role in the business.
