FT  07 OCT 93 / International Company News: Mercurial times for HK telecoms
 -Simon Holberton assesses the aims of a poacher turned gamekeeper
Peter Howell-Davies describes himself as a 'catalyst'. In management-speak
he would be called a 'change agent'. He is both of these but he is also a
poacher turned gamekeeper.
Mr Howell-Davies, the former deputy chief executive of Mercury
Communications, the telecoms company owned by Cable &amp; Wireless that is
challenging British Telecom's UK monopoly, is now in Hong Kong charged with
protecting Hongkong Telecom's monopoly from competition.
By mid-1995 a second, and possibly a third, telecoms company will have been
licensed to compete with Hongkong Telecom - which is controlled by Cable &amp;
Wireless - in the Hong Kong domestic market.
Mr Howell-Davies, deputy chief executive of Hongkong Telecom since February,
does not dispute the poacher turned gamekeeper tag: 'I've been through - and
have scars to prove it - starting up, growing a business, and competing with
a large and well-established business. I should therefore have some idea
what the second network may try and do or want to do.'
This week he has been explaining to senior management his plan to meet the
challenge posed by the onset of this competition. Mr Howell-Davies plans to
do in two years what took established telecoms companies elsewhere five or
10 years: that is, radically altering how Hongkong Telecom deals with its
customers.
The company's structure, which was split along functional and product lines,
is being changed so that all aspects of the business which 'touch' customers
will be centralised in an enlarged sales and marketing division. That
reformed division will itself be segmented into three business units
reflecting different customer needs.
When Mr Howell-Davies came to Hong Kong, he found an organisation used to
the ways of a monopoly.
'Hongkong Telecom has operated in an exclusive franchise environment. It has
been relatively inward looking and it was not very nimble. It has been a
technology-driven company, like many of the large PTTs, and has been very
successful at that.
'But it was recognised that the company needed to go through a change, like
any monopoly needs to, if it's going to be able to operate in a competitive
environment. It does need to become much more market-driven and much more
customer-focused and have the ability to bring on new services much quicker
than it has been done in the past. You need a catalyst in order to make
changes.'
The problem with Hongkong Telecom's previous structure, Mr Howell-Davies
says, was that no one was accountable for what he calls the 'end-to-end'
provision of a service. No one, that is, until the problem got shunted to
his office. 'That was manifestly wrong in an organisation of this size and
complexity,' he says.
To deal with this, the reorganisation seeks to 'recast the process of
responsibility'. This, he hopes, will mean that problems are looked at from
the customer's perspective and not from a particular product or functional
point of view.
When the reorganisation is complete, Mr Howell-Davies believes the company
will be able to provide a one-stop service. 'Sitting behind the account
manager will be the people who are developing products for the customer and
the people who will support the selling, installation and maintenance of the
service.'
The sales and marketing division - now 1,200 strong - will grow by 2,000.
The enlarged workforce will service three 'marketing business units' (MBUs):
MBU1 will deal with the 1,000 largest customers; MBU2 with the 200,000 to
250,000 small and medium-sized company sector; and MBU3 with residential
customers.
'Not all customers want the same service from Hongkong Telecom,' he says.
'Mrs Wong in the New Territories wants one type of telephony service from us
and the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank want a very different portfolio of
services. So we need to position, to structure ourselves to meet both their
differing and legitimate requirements.'
It is clear that Mr Howell-Davies expects competition from new entrants to
be in niche areas, not an attempt to provide a ubiquitous service.
The segment of Hongkong Telecom's business most under threat will be the big
business customers, those who Mercury set its sights on in the UK when it
started up.
Competitors are circling. Although its monopoly in international telephony
is secure until 2006, American Telephone and Telegraph has tied up with
Hutchison Whampoa to provide value-added international services, such as
E-mail; British Telecom is setting up a 'node' for its Syncordia network;
and it faces competition from Singapore Telecom for the hubbing of
multi-national companies' international communications.
It faces competition in mobile communications, paging and value-added
services. Since the summer, mobile operators have been able to interconnect
with Hongkong Telecom's international service, sharing a percentage of the
revenue accruing to outgoing calls and receiving a flat rate for incoming
calls.
The change in corporate structure which Mr Howell-Davies told staff about
this week is seen as the most important management reorganisation the
company will conduct in advance of competition.
