FT  08 JUL 93 / Survey of Greece (4): Institutions focus on bad debts / A
look at the effects of deregulation in banking
COMPETITION is intensifying in Greek banking as private banks continue to
chip away at the market share of the state-controlled institutions.
While the private banks were taking advantage of deregulation to offer a
sizeable range of new products, the attention of state-controlled banks has
been focused on sorting out bad debts.
Not before time, the Greek government stepped in to address a serious
anomaly in the banking system whereby state banks gave a gloss of
respectability to their balance sheets by accruing interest on
non-performing loans.
In addition to setting capital adequacy requirements for Greek banks
according to Bank for International Settlements (BIS) rules, a new banking
law laid down that interest could no longer be charged on loans left
unserviced for more than 12 months.
The result has been a dramatic fall in profits for National Bank, the
largest state-controlled bank, from Dr43bn (Dollars 215m) in 1991 to
Dr22.5bn last year. National Bank wrote off Dr30bn in bad debts in 1992,
while interest losses on doubtful loans amounted to Dr27bn.
Of the state-controlled banks, National Bank is burdened with much the
largest portfolio of bad debts, the result of decades of being forced to
make loans on political criteria to businessmen favoured by successive
governments.
Ionian Bank, also state-controlled, posted profits of Dr8.1bn for 1992, a 48
per cent decline from the previous year, after increasing provisions for
doubtful debts to Dr11.5bn.
Ionian's loan book now contains about Dr55bn in non-performing debt,
equivalent to 20 per cent of total lending, according to bank officials. The
bank hopes eventually to recover about Dr30bn of this amount.
According to analysts, the market share of the state-controlled banks has
dropped from more than 80 to around 70 per cent in the past four years.
Deregulation has permitted the private banks to exploit their comparative
advantage of greater flexibility and better technology.
However, the half dozen new private banks that have joined the market since
1990 cannot yet be called fully established. Their combined market share is
less than 5 per cent, according to most estimates.
This is forecast to grow slowly but steadily as their activities expand,
again at the expense of the large state banks. Mr George Gonticas, chairman
of Euromerchant Bank, which belongs to a group of private banks controlled
by the Latsis shipping family, says: 'To be successful you must develop a
range of activities. There's not really enough scope in Greece to
specialise.'
Euromerchant, with a capital base more than double the Greek licencing
requirement of Dr4bn, has focused on corporate lending and private banking.
However, it has not neglected the business of growing a deposit base. Its
branches are more imaginatively located than many: there is one in a leading
Athens supermarket and another in a private medical clinic.
Private banks, together with the 20-odd foreign banks with branches in
Greece, are also expected to gain most from the central bank's latest moves
to liberalise regulations.
Full liberalisation of interest rates came with the central bank's abolition
earlier this year of the basic 18 per cent savings rate, the last
administered rate. It brought a marked increase in the variety of
interest-bearing accounts available to depositors.
Still, so long as the government is obliged to raise more than Dr150bn each
month, mostly in high-yielding treasury bills, to finance the public sector
deficit, real interest rates can be expected to remain high.
The effects of the biggest changes have yet to be felt. In May, the central
bank lifted controls on all foreign exchange transactions except for
short-term borrowing in drachmas from abroad and transfers of paper, such as
cheques. The remaining curbs are to be lifted in July 1994 under an
extension agreed with the European Community.
However, it will be several months before the banks are ready to take
advantage of the new freedom in forward transactions.
The government has decided to go ahead with the privatisation of four small
state-controlled banks, including several subsidiaries of larger credit
institutions. All are profitable, with nationwide branch networks, but have
suffered from being used as receptacles for patronage appointments.
Following some confusion last year over the sale of Bank of Piraeus, a
subsidiary of the state-controlled Commercial Bank, which was criticised for
a lack of transparency in the deal, the preferred method of privatisation
will be through tender offers on the Athens Stock Exchange.
Earlier this year, Hanwha First Investment, a subsidiary of South Korea's
Hanwha group, acquired control of Bank of Athens, a subsidiary of National
Bank, through such an offer. Bidding in association with Rabobank of the
Netherlands, Hanwha paid Dr6.83bn for a two-thirds stake in Bank of Athens.
