FT  28 SEP 93 / International Company News: Philip Morris in Kazakhstan deal
PHILIP MORRIS, the US tobacco and food products group, is to become the
first foreign company to acquire a significant stake in a privatised
enterprise in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan, under the terms of
an agreement announced yesterday.
The company, which already has a strong presence in eastern Europe and
Russia, said it had agreed to a deal in which it would gain control of
Almaty Tobacco Kombinat, a Kazakhstan cigarette manufacturing operation
which employs 1,700.
Initially, Philip Morris will take a 49 per cent interest in ATK, with its
stake building to more than 90 per cent within a year. ATK's management and
staff would hold the rest.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed, but the group said it was
committed to spending at least Dollars 200m over the next five years to
modernise ATK's manufacturing facilities.
Mr Andreas Gembler, president of Philip Morris Europe's eastern Europe,
Middle East and Africa operating region, said: 'Kazakhstan is certain to
play a key strategic role in the economic development of central Asia.'
The group said it envisioned the country becoming a net exporter of tobacco
products within a few years.
The immediate goal is to boost annual capacity from 12bn to 20bn cigarettes,
the approximate number smoked in Kazakhstan a year.
Local brands as well as Philip Morris's main international brands -
including Marlboro, L&amp;M and Bond Street - are to be produced at the plant.
In conjunction with efforts to boost output, the group has earmarked at
least Dollars 25m for a programme aimed at improving the quality and
quantity of Kazakhstan's tobacco crop.
It is hoped that the country will become self-sufficient in tobacco growing
by 1998.
The acquisition highlights Philip Morris's strategy of broadening the base
of its international tobacco operations, which have experienced healthy
earnings gains recently, in contrast to its US tobacco business, where
operating income has fallen sharply.
