FT  11 AUG 93 / Questions remain on Opel data
THE shredding at Volkswagen of documents brought to Germany by Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the group's new production director, has left
unanswered questions about the fate of other data missing from Adam Opel,
the German subsidiary of General Motors.
Mr Dino Martinez, the man who compiled the material, destroyed during the
last week in March, dispatched several other shipments at the request of Mr
Lopez, former global procurement chief at GM.
Mr Martinez, described yesterday as Mr Lopez's former 'handyman' at Opel,
has since moved and is working for the US group in Spain.
He was the GM employee referred to anonymously in a VW statement on Monday
as being responsible for collating and posting 'magazines, clippings and
correspondence with suppliers'. The statement did not say he was acting on
Mr Lopez's instructions.
These items, described by VW officials as usual, personal office contents,
were shredded in the group's guest house in Wolfsburg, at Mr Lopez's
suggestion, to prevent any chance of 'possibly sensitive' material being
distributed inside VW, the German group has said.
Mr Martinez sent similar material in early February to Mr Lopez in Detroit.
VW officials said they knew nothing more, and could not comment on the fate
of a further three shipments sent later by Mr Martinez, on Mr Lopez's
instructions, to an address in northern Spain, Mr Lopez's birthplace.
One of these, dispatched on February 22, while Mr Lopez was negotiating a
contract with VW, comprised nine boxes and weighed 150kg.
A further batch of 'internal' Opel papers, again at the request of Mr Lopez,
was sent to the same Spanish address on March 10, the day after he signed
his contract with VW.
Mr Lopez and former GM colleagues, under investigation for suspected
industrial espionage, theft and perjury, are alleged to have systematically
plundered GM secrets in the period before they left for Volkswagen in March.
Mr Lopez last Friday won full support from VW's non-executive supervisory
board, which said a thorough investigation had shown no grounds for
accusations of industrial espionage.
