FT  16 SEP 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): In a league of their
own
Campaign, the British advertising industry's weekly publication, celebrates
its 25th anniversary this week. It has been digging into its archives and
tomorrow publishes a league table of the top creative agencies. Ranking is
based on how many awards agencies have collected over the years.
Saatchi and Saatchi heads the list (current work includes British Airways
and Silk Cut). Next are: Collett Dickenson Pearce (Benson and Hedges, Parker
pens); Boase Massimi Pollitt (VW, Heinz); and Abbott Mead Vickers (Volvo and
Sainsbury's). The full list of 25 includes some agencies which are no longer
on the scene.
But how meaningful is it to rank agencies according to the prizes the
industry awards itself? The answer, as far as the agencies are concerned, is
that who wins which award is of consuming interest. The rest of the world
would probably be unwise to use awards as a basis for measuring anything.
Dominic Mills, Campaign editor, says an award-winning campaign has:
originality; relevance to the product and target market; impact; and wit.
Some clients do enjoy working with prizewinners, but the main rewards seem
to be enhanced internal morale and increased opportunity to draw in creative
talent from outside.
The competitions that Campaign has tracked include the Cannes awards,
advertising's equivalent of the film festival, the Designers' and Art
Directors' competition and Campaign's press and poster awards. All the
competitions measure creativity, rather than effectiveness. Mills says there
are 'a hundred and one reasons why it's very difficult to measure
effectiveness. For example, brilliant advertising can be ruined by poor
distribution or uncompetitive pricing.'
Nevertheless, an attempt is made every two years by the Institute of
Practitioners in Advertising to measure and reward effectiveness, with
'agencies producing lengthy papers to prove their point,' says Mills.
The IPA competition was not included by Campaign when it came to compiling
its league table, but there is some overlap, he says. Strong performers on
both counts, according to Mills are Boase Massimi Pollitt, Abbott Mead
Vickers and Bartle Bogle Hegarty.
There may have been no shocks at the top of the league table, but Mills says
it was a 'little surprising' to see D'Arcy Masius Benton and Bowles, and
Still Price Lintas featuring further down at numbers 22 and 24 respectively.
Surprising, says Mills, because they are 'large multinational client-based'
agencies. Such agencies 'largely don't produce award-winning work, but
they've turned out to be more creative than people think,' he says.
The multinational client is more likely to produce advertising by committee
and to be conservative, says Mills. If your advertisement is aimed at the
dull old 'housewife buyer' of, for example, washing powders or fish fingers,
you are less likely to be able to collect a creative award. More promising
territory is 'the bright youth market or the thirty-somethings who are ad
literate and sophisticated,' says Mills.
