FT  23 JUL 93 / Iraq backs down on arms monitoring
IRAQ has agreed to United Nations monitoring of its nuclear, chemical,
biological and heavy weapons capability in a bid to have sanctions lifted,
the Security Council was told last night.
After five days of negotiations in Baghdad, Mr Rolf Ekeus, head of the UN
weapons inspection commission, said agreement had been reached and
high-level technical talks on its implementation would begin in New York at
the end of August.
Meanwhile, a UN technical team was due to go to Baghdad today to mount
surveillance cameras at two missile sites at the centre of a confrontation
between the UN and Iraq, which had refused until this week to permit such
installation.
The cameras will not be activated immediately. Their operation will be among
matters to be discussed in the negotiations.
Mr Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi deputy prime minister, provided what Mr Ekeus
termed explicit assurances of adequate notice before any test firings and to
facilitate inspections whenever and as often as the commission felt
necessary.
At a press conference, the UN official said he was confident his inspectors
would soon learn of any Iraqi attempts to fire rockets, even those up to a
range of 150km permitted under the ceasefire resolution, let alone rockets
above that limit.
In response to Iraq's request for the lifting of sanctions in return for its
co-operation, he had undertaken to report to the Security Council if and
when Baghdad was in full compliance with all of the provisions relating to
weapons.
He noted that the imposition of the oil embargo was linked directly to those
provisions.
The US and Britain are said to want to insist that Iraq first observe the
resolutions concerning human rights, including those of the Kurds and Shias.
Referring to talks now in suspense on the proposed sale of Dollars 1.6bn of
Iraqi oil under a limited waver of sanctions, Mr Ekeus said that while there
was no formal link, he had addressed some aspects of this at the request of
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general.
