FT  25 NOV 93 / French express optimism on deficit target
The French government said yesterday it would be able to keep this year's
budget deficit to the original target of FFr317.6bn (Pounds 36.3bn), chiefly
thanks to the influx of privatisation receipts and some juggling with social
security accounts.
Presenting a year-end 'rectifying' mini-budget, Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, the
budget minister, said it had been a long time since a French government had
'hit its deficit target to the very last centime'.
Since this year's budget was voted in June, the government has been able to
make economies of FFr22.3bn. Half of this has come from smaller debt service
charges (FFr3.7bn) as a result of lower interest rates and from this
summer's big 'Balladur bond' issue. The bond saved the government FFr7.8bn
it would otherwise have had to pay in short-term borrowing costs.
The FFr22.3bn savings balanced out the recession-induced FFr3.2bn drop in
tax receipts - which would have been far greater had not Paris paid FFr5.5bn
less to the European Union budget than it originally calculated - and an
extra FFr19.1bn which the Balladur government has forked out this year to
help the housing sector and to placate its farmers.
But Mr Sarkozy's self-satisfaction yesterday was made possible by charging
some FFr4.5bn in school aid to the family allowance fund - one of the few in
the welfare system to be in surplus - and by using some of the privatisation
receipts, which constitute backing for the Balladur bond issue, for current
budget expenditure.
Such ruses may become increasingly necessary if France is to stick to its
commitment, contained in the Maastricht convergence plan it presented to EU
partners this week, to reduce total French public deficits to 2 per cent of
national output by 1997.
The credibility of this goal depends on the economy returning to growth in
1994. Mr Edmond Alphandery, the economy minister, yesterday dismissed
October's 1.2 per cent drop in consumer goods sales as a blip in the uneven
path to recovery. Citing encouraging trends in housing starts and investment
intentions, he held to his forecast of 1.4 per cent real growth next year.
