FT  06 APR 93 / Kenya's tourist industry suffers big fall in revenue
TOURISM in Kenya dropped sharply last year, reducing hard currency revenues
from the industry to Dollars 295m from Dollars 400m (Pounds 195m from Pounds
266m) in 1991, a government official said yesterday, Reuter reports from
Nairobi.
Mr Philemon Mwaisaka, permanent secretary at the ministry of tourism, blamed
the sharp downturn in visits to safari parks or Indian Ocean beaches on
reports in western countries, where most visitors come from, about attacks
on tourists, tribal violence and political unrest.
'Imagined insecurity in Kenya had convinced European-based tourists that the
country was not safe,' he said.
The run-up to December's first multi-party polls in 26 years was marred by
tribal violence.
This, coupled with bandit attacks on tourists, led to a fall in hotel
bookings of up to 60,000 bed-nights in the last five months of 1992, tourism
officials say.
Last year, some 700,000 tourists visited Kenya after a record 814,000 in
1991. But many, enticed by cheap bucket-shop deals, kept their wallets
closed while in the country.
Mr Mwaisaka said the government was fighting back with a vigorous campaign
to revitalise the industry and woo visitors.
He said security in national parks would be stepped up, more roads would be
built and accommodation would be improved.
'Protection of endangered species like elephants and rhinos has received
priority,' he added.
'Poaching has been reduced to almost zero and an elaborate security network
put in place to ensure tourists' safety and increased comfort,' he added.
The government has also begun aerial surveillance of game parks and issued
advice about which areas of Nairobi are considered dangerous. Fears for the
safety of tourists have been fuelled by attacks in game parks, particularly
the Masai Mara reserve.
Germany and the US have warned their nationals not to go to parks while
Britain and Australia have cautioned against travel in parks when
unaccompanied by rangers.
Kenya, which rejected International Monetary Fund and World Bank-backed
reforms last month, badly needs tourists to help purchase essential imports
and service a Dollars 7.1bn foreign debt.
President Daniel arap Moi, angered over an IMF refusal to reinstate critical
balance of payments support of around Dollars 40m a month, two weeks ago
called a halt to liberalisation policies and said Kenya would go its own
way.
