FT  07 SEP 93 / Egypt takes Mideast mediator role
MR Yassir Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, is to
meet Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak today amid signs of concerted
diplomatic efforts to speed the signing of framework peace agreements
between Israel and all its Arab neighbours.
Egypt, the only Arab state to have made peace with Israel, appears to be
playing a key mediating role in background diplomacy aimed at fulfilling a
stated US desire for Syria, Lebanon and Jordan to conclude outline
agreements with Israel as part of a comprehensive deal under the terms of
the present Middle East peace talks.
The US has nominated September 13 for a possible signing ceremony and
indicated it could be held at the White House if Syria, Jordan and Lebanon
were also placed to join the Palestinians in concluding accords with the
Israelis.
But Syria and Lebanon both indicated yesterday that this date appeared
optimistic. Mr Farouk al-Sharaa, Syrian foreign minister, told reporters in
Beirut there had been 'nothing new on the Syrian path' of the negotiations
in Washington during the present round. Mr Faris Bouez, his Lebanese
counterpart, also said that 'we cannot say there is any progress compared
with the previous rounds'.
One indication of the intensified diplomatic manoeuvring was the decision of
King Hussein of Jordan to postpone a visit to China early next week. A
palace spokesman cited a flurry of activity on the Middle East peace front
as a reason for the postponement.
Mr Arafat held talks in Cairo yesterday with Mr Amr Moussa, the Egyptian
foreign minister, after his arrival from Damascus. The two sides are
believed to have focused on ways of shoring up Arab support for the PLO
agreement with Israel.
Arab officials said a statement of support for the Israel-Palestinian deal
by the Gulf Co-operation Council, representing six Gulf states, was
significant since it ensured a majority within the Arab League for the peace
deal.
Gulf foreign ministers meeting in Riyadh said the GCC continued to 'support
peace efforts. . . in the hope that (Arab-Israeli) negotiations would make
substantive progress along all tracks to push the peace process forward.'
This was a reference to parallel talks between Israel and Syria, Lebanon and
Jordan.
On his arrival in Cairo yesterday, Mr Arafat denied that Syrian endorsement
for the plan had been lukewarm. He described his talks on Sunday with Syrian
President Hafez al-Assad as 'brotherly, warm and dignified'. He told
reporters: 'I have thanked President Assad for the meeting, for his
understanding and for all the advice he has given, especially in this
atmosphere and the developments that the Palestinian and Arab cause is
passing through.'
