FT  13 JUL 93 / International Company News: QVC in share-swap deal with Home
Shopping
QVC, one of the leading US television shopping networks, yesterday proposed
a share-swap merger with its chief rival, scandal-battered Home Shopping
Network.
The deal would create a formidable power in the emerging market for
electronic retailing with annual sales of around Dollars 2bn.
QVC has been headed since January by Mr Barry Diller, who helped Mr Rupert
Murdoch build Fox into America's fourth national television network.
Shares in QVC have more than doubled since his arrival, with investors
hoping he will inject programming flair into television shopping, a
retailing form which many analysts believe could enjoy explosive growth in
an age of inter-active television.
Home Shopping, a pioneer of electronic retailing, has been under a cloud in
recent months as a federal grand jury has investigated allegations that Mr
Roy Speer, chairman, and former executives of the group engaged in improper
financial dealings.
QVC, which reaches some 47m US homes, concentrates on the more up-market end
of TV retailing, and has a relatively polished style of presentation.
Home Shopping, which reaches some 60m homes, sells to the lower end of the
market and has a more aggressive retailing style. It is known for its
advanced telecommunications technology. Both companies generate around
Dollars 1bn in sales.
A merger would represent one of the last big consolidations in an industry
which attracted many participants in the 1980s, most of which failed to
generate the sales necessary for strong profits. Despite its supposed
potential, electronic shopping only generates sales around Dollars 2.3bn a
year
The QVC bid seems likely to go through since it has the backing of Liberty
Media, the controlling shareholder of Home Shopping, with 41 per cent of its
equity and 71 per cent of investors' voting power.
Liberty, which also holds a large stake in QVC, is a company spun off from
America's largest cable TV service company, Tele-Communications Inc, and is
chaired by Mr John Malone, who heads TCI.
QVC is proposing a reverse takeover under which Home Shopping would issue
five of its shares to the holder of each QVC share. QVC investors would also
be entitled to additional shares in Home Shopping, up to a maximum of 10 per
cent of its capital stock, dependent on unknown liabilities facing the
company - an apparent reference to the alleged scandal.
Home Shopping would retain its listing on the New York Stock Exchange, but
would change its name to QVC Network Inc, and the current QVC board would
replace Home Shopping's board.
QVC, quoted on the Nasdaq over the counter market saw its shares rise
Dollars 2 1/2 yesterday to stand at Dollars 67 3/4, giving it a market
capitalisation of around Dollars 2.6bn, while Home Shopping rose Dollars 1
to Dollars 13 5/8, for a capitalisation of around Dollars 1.1bn.
