FT  27 SEP 93 / State role in growth of east Asian economies questioned
INDUSTRIAL POLICIES to promote particular sectors or companies have been a
failure in east Asia and do not explain the region's rapid growth in recent
decades, according to a World Bank study.
The bank's findings counter the argument made by many economists that the
region's success reflects government intervention in the economy rather than
orthodox market-oriented policies.
'While there are some differences between countries, broadly speaking,
attempts to change industrial structure simply are not associated with rapid
growth,' said Mr John Page, the leader of the bank team. However, some
interventions in financial markets and to promote exports had been
successful.
The 380-page report on the 'east Asia miracle' concludes that aggressive
industrial policies failed to raise productivity growth in favoured sectors.
It says market forces would have brought about the changes in industrial
structure sought by governments without the need for public sector
intervention.
The bank study, the most exhaustive analysis of the east Asian miracle yet
published, says the region's success mainly reflects sound economic
fundamentals - conservative macroeconomic policies and much higher levels of
saving and investment than in other developing countries. The rapid growth
reflected a strong emphasis on primary and secondary education.
Per capita real growth in the eight most dynamic economies in east Asia  -
Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand
 -has averaged 5.5 per cent a year since 1960, three times as fast as Latin
America and five times as fast as sub-Saharan Africa.
The bank study says some government interventions may have helped. Policies
to reduce the cost of capital and direct credit towards favoured industries
worked in some countries but not in others. Policies to promote exports,
which sometimes involved protection of the home market, were generally
successful in accelerating growth.
Mr Richard Richardson of the Overseas Development Council, a Washington
think tank, challenged the bank's findings. Industrial policy had worked in
Japan, he said. The bank was wrong to conclude that selective interventions
would not work elsewhere.
The East Asia Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy. World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington DC 20433.
Theorising on an eastern promise, Page 3
Asian miracle that wasn't, Page 34
