FT  23 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Anger over Shephard letter
TEACHERS' unions last night reacted angrily to proposals for tightening
Britain's union laws set out in a letter from Mrs Gillian Shephard,
employment secretary, to Mr John Patten, education secretary.
Mr Patten has announced a review of the National Curriculum and associated
tests but has stubbornly refused to offer further concessions to the
teachers. He has been buoyed by support for his hardline stance from
Conservative MPs but adopting Mrs Shephard's proposals would be a radical
step.
Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, which
leaked the letter, said: 'Educational change brought about by force and
without the professional support of teachers is unlikely to be effective in
our schools.'
Mr Norman Willis, TUC general secretary, said the proposed move would be
'offensive' and 'heavy-handed'. Mr David Hart, general secretary of the
National Association of Head Teachers, which is not affiliated to the TUC,
said any attempt to change the law was 'disgraceful'.
Mr Fraser Younson, an employment law partner at Baker &amp; McKenzie, the City
firm, said: 'This is the first time since the 1906 Trade Disputes Act that
such a substantive change has been made to the subject matter of a trade
dispute. It broadens the impact well beyond teachers - it seems to invite
litigation in many other areas, including health and safety.'
The letter is as follows:
Dear John,
Industrial action to prevent the performance of statutory duties
As you know I have been considering a possible amendment to the law to make
it clear beyond doubt that industrial action is unlawful if, as in the case
of the threatened teachers' boycott of English tests, it is clearly designed
to frustrate the carrying out of a specific statutory duty. A change to the
law could be made while the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill is
still before Parliament.
The advice I have received indicates that it would be possible to introduce
a provision to remove immunity where the principal or sole demand is that
workers should not be required to do work which is necessary in order to
carry out a specific statutory duty on the employer. The aim would be to
make industrial action such as that presently contemplated by the teachers'
union unlawful, even where it could be argued that the dispute came within
the current definition of the trade dispute.
It is important to be clear about what my proposal would and would not do.
It would not make it unlawful, for example, for trade unions to demand a
substantial pay rise as the 'price' of agreeing to do work required by a
statutory duty. That would remain a lawful trade dispute. It follows that
some disputes would become unlawful whilst others would remain lawful, even
though they had the same impact on services. For example, in the teachers'
case, a boycott which derived from opposition to the principle of the tests
would not have immunity, but a boycott over whether teachers should be paid
more for supervising the tests would have immunity.
It would, of course, be possible to withdraw immunity from any industrial
action which interfered with the performance of statutory duties. This would
be a much more wide-ranging change. It would, in practice, remove immunity
from any industrial action in large areas where the public sector and highly
significant parts of the private sector as well. It would be highly
controversial, and would be attacked by our opponents as tantamount to the
removal of the 'right to strike' from public sector employees. I do not
think we should contemplate going that far. My proposal is designed to deal
only with industrial action whose specific purpose is to prevent an employer
from carrying out a statutory duty.
A change in the law of this kind would be fully in accord with the other
changes to the statutory immunity for organising industrial action which we
have made in our trade union legislation since 1979. In combination with the
'Citizen's Charter' proposal in what is now clause 21 of the Bill, it would
mean that the parents of the child who was denied a test as a result of an
unlawful boycott would be able to seek an injunction to get the boycott
removed, If the unions did not call off the boycott they would be in
contempt of court and at risk of fines and ultimately sequestration of their
funds.
In making the case for the amendment it would of course be necessary to
refer specifically to the threatened boycott of English tests as evidence of
the need for a change in the law but we would make it clear that our
intention was to deal with any industrial action whose purpose was to
frustrate the will of Parliament.
I would be glad to know whether you and other colleagues agree that we
should introduce an amendment of this kind while the current Bill is still
before Parliament. If you agree that we should proceed in this way,
introductions to Parliamentary Counsel - on which my officials will, of
course, consult yours and those of other interested departments - will need
to be prepared urgently. The Bill has now been introduced into the Lords and
Committee stage there is due to be completed before Easter.
I am copying this letter to the PM, other members of the Cabinet, the
Attorney General and Sir Robin Butler.
