FT  10 SEP 93 / Health fund planned for silicone implant cases: Dow Corning
proposes Dollars 4.75bn in benefits
WOMEN with silicone breast implants may be eligible to a share of up to
Dollars 4.75bn in health benefits over a 30-year period under a proposal
being discussed by both sides in litigation over implants.
Manufacturers of implants are facing thousands of lawsuits by women claiming
they cause diseases of the immune system.
Dow Corning, once the world's biggest maker of silicone breast implants
before it withdrew from the business last year, said discussions had
progressed to a point where a proposal had been developed and was under
review.
The Michigan-based company, a 50-50 joint venture between Dow Chemical and
Corning, said the Dollars 4.75bn benefits would be funded by industry
participants, including manufacturers, raw material suppliers, insurance
carriers, physicians and other healthcare providers. Details of how much
each participant would contribute have yet to be determined.
Mr Gary Anderson, Dow Corning executive vice-president, stressed the
preliminary nature of the proposal. 'There are still many steps to go
through and conditions to be met before a settlement can be implemented.' He
described the proposal as 'essentially a 30-year insurance policy for women
with implants so that they won't have to worry about being protected in the
future.'
After the defendants and trial lawyers agree on a formula for sharing the
settlement, there will be public fairness hearings across the US to ensure
that it is fair to women with implants.
Dow Corning and other manufacturers deny implants are unsafe, although they
have been banned from widespread sale in the US. Bristol-Myers Squibb, a
former manufacturer, said it 'denies all liability and has entered the
discussions to avoid protracted litigation. It should be noted scientific
research has not established a link between implants and disease.'
Dow Corning had already committed Dollars 10m to research the safety of
implants 'and we will probably end up spending Dollars 20m which will not be
part of the proposed fund', said Mr Anderson.
The company said the proposal 'could possibly have a material adverse effect
on the company's consolidated financial position'.
Lawyers representing British women taking legal action against Dow Corning
welcomed the principle of a global settlement, but were unhappy with the
prospect that plaintiffs living outside the US would receive much less
compensation.
