FT  23 MAR 93 / Kenya turns away from liberalisation
THE KENYAN government yesterday threw its economic liberalisation programme
into reverse in the face of a deepening economic crisis and a row with
western donors.
In a circular released by the central bank yesterday evening the government
abolished newly introduced 'retention accounts' which allowed exporters to
retain and sell foreign exchange earnings through the interbank market
instead of remitting them to the central bank at a much lower exchange rate.
The circular re-established foreign exchange controls over the three
mainstays of the economy - tea, tourism and coffee - and said foreign funds
currently held in retention accounts should be sold to the central bank
within 48 hours.
The move dealt a crushing blow to the country's exporters, scrapped a
market-determined second tier window of exchange and derailed recent efforts
by the government to win back critically needed quick-disbursing foreign
aid.
President Daniel arap Moi, who last week accused the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank of forcing 'dictatorial and suicidal' reforms on the
economy, was quoted on state-run radio saying the government had no choice
but to re-establish controls.
'As a sovereign state, Kenya will no longer accept any form of economic
arm-twisting from any quarter,' he was reported as saying.
Exasperated donors said the measures marked the desperation of the Kenyan
government and the victory of a group of hardliners in the regime with
massive corrupt interests in a controlled economy.
'It's a complete reversal of trade liberalisation and a return to a managed
import and foreign exchange allocation regime,' said one of Kenya's biggest
western donors. 'Maybe it's time for us to wash our hands of this place.'
In the middle of February the government embarked on bold measures to win
back support from the IMF and World Bank including a partial exchange rate
liberalisation and lifting some price controls.
But the IMF and donors who met in London last week said the government would
have to take further measures before aid worth Dollars 40m (Pounds 27.5m) a
month could be unblocked. They called for policies to squeeze excessive
monetary expansion, end endemic corruption, curb the bloated civil service,
speed privatisation and further liberalise prices and the agricultural
sector.
Donors say the government made a major macro-economic mistake in
liberalising the foreign exchange regime at a time of excessive monetary
expansion. Money supply grew by at least 35 per cent last year, largely as a
result of the central bank pumping at least Ksh10bn-15bn (Pounds 126m-Pounds
188m) into the system through politically connected banks and companies.
The bulk of the money was injected through the pre-shipment financing
facility or by the central bank allowing a handful of politically connected
banks to run up massive overdrafts.
The disclosure last week that the central bank had rolled-over Ksh5.4bn of
loans made through the pre-shipment financing facility to two politically
connected banks after the finance minister had declared the scheme defunct
caused further donor discontent. In the last six weeks the shilling has
plummeted on the interbank market by 60 per cent against convertible
currencies, largely as a result of capital flight and speculation.
With inflation rising to 40-60 per cent and the currency spiralling out of
control the government was faced with having to raise interest rates
massively or scrap its liberalisation programme.
'The scrapping of trade liberalisation shows that the government's reform
effort was merely window dressing to try to win back suspended foreign aid,'
said one western economist. 'They don't have the backbone to confront the
politically powerful interests which have run this economy into the ground.'
