FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (14): New hope for old smokey -
Coal combustion
Anyone in the UK could be forgiven for regarding coal as a dirty, dying
relic of the industrial revolution, as the electrical generating companies
dash to build gas-fired power stations and the country's collieries close at
an unprecedented rate.
Such a parochial view would, however, give an entirely misleading picture of
the international scene. Coal is maintaining its share of the global market
for power station fuels - and more than Dollars 1bn a year is being spent
worldwide on research and development to make coal burning a cleaner and
more efficient way of generating electricity.
Although soot and dust may be a local nuisance, the main pollutants on a
global scale from burning coal are carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and
nitrogen oxides. CO - the main contributor to man-made global warming - is
inevitably the primary product of the heat-releasing reaction of the carbon
in coal with the oxygen in air; its emission can be reduced by increasing
thermal efficiency, but not eliminated.
On the other hand, SO and NOx - the main causes of acid rain - are
by-products of the combustion process. They arise from oxidation of sulphur
and nitrogen impurities in the coal and nitrogen in the air. Clean coal
technology offers far more scope for reducing SO and NOx than CO emissions.
Today's dominant technology for coal-fired power stations - 'pulverised
fuel' combustion - dates back 60 years. The coal is crushed finely and blown
into a large boiler. Its burning releases heat to produce steam to drive a
turbine generator.
In practice, most pulverised fuel plants achieve thermal efficiencies in the
33-35 per cent range, although the very best (in Denmark and Japan) manage
to exceed 45 per cent efficiency. Further increases in efficiency,
accompanied by reduced NOx and SO emissions, can be expected in future
through a range of improvements in combustion conditions, the steam/water
circuit and turbine design.
But the main emphasis in clean coal research is not on improving traditional
pulverised fuel technology but on two newer approaches: fluidised bed
combustion (FBC) and gasification. Walt Patterson, energy analyst, describes
the the 'impressive progress' on both fronts in a new FT Management Report
on coal technology*.
'Many of the world's largest engineering firms are pursuing technologies
based on these concepts, dedicating major commitments of finance, skills and
time,' he says. 'Their efforts are bearing fruit. New units continue to come
on stream around the world month by month; many are achieving impressive
records for reliability, efficiency, fuel flexibility and emission control.'
FBC is the further developed of the two approaches. It involves burning
powdered coal in a bed of pulverised limestone which acts as a chemical trap
for any sulphur emitted from the fuel. The bed is kept in constant motion,
like a boiling liquid, by a strong upward flow of air. Steam produced by
boiler tubes in the fluidised bed drives the main generating turbine; the
hot exhaust gases may drive a second turbine.
The main variants for power generation are circulating FBC (CFBC) in which
the air flows so fast that the bed loses its upper surface and fills the
combustion chamber with a turbulent cloud of fine particles, and pressurised
FBC (PFBC) in which the whole chamber operates at between five and 20
atmospheres pressure.
CFBC is already fully commercial, with more than 100 units operating
worldwide. The technology makes it possible to burn dirty and low-grade
coals. Many CFBC plants have been built within cities for cogeneration -
producing both electricity and heat (for district heating or industry). The
largest so far is a 165MW unit at Point Aconi in Nova Scotia, Canada.
PFBC has only just crossed the commercial threshold, led by ABB Carbon, the
Swedish power engineering company. Three successful PFBC demonstration
plants in Stockholm, Escatron (Spain) and Tidd (Ohio, USA) will be followed
by a fully commercial 350MW plant at Karita, Japan.
The principle of turning coal into a fuel gas - reaction with steam and
oxygen to produce a combustible mixture of hydrogen, methane and carbon
monoxide - has been known and applied since the last century, when coal gas
lit Victorian cities. But it is only now being developed for power
generation, in the form of integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC)
plants. In IGCC, the hot coal gas passes through a chemical cleaner to
remove pollutants and generates electricity in a gas turbine. Meanwhile
waste heat from the turbine and gasifier raises steam to drive a second
turbine.
An important milestone for IGCC will be the start-up scheduled for this
winter of a 250MW demonstration plant, designed by Shell, at Buggenum in the
Netherlands. Several other IGCC plants are under construction in Europe and
the US (where the federal Clean Coal Technology Programme is funding five).
Both PFBC and IGCC promise thermal efficiencies at least as high as the best
pulverised coal plants, with much better control of SO and NOx. But it may
be possible to go further by combining the best features of each approach.
Hybrid designs such as British Coal's experimental 'topping cycle' would run
a gas turbine at very high temperature and a steam turbine at lower
temperature; given further progress in turbine technology, this could raise
overall efficiency above 50 per cent.
A more futuristic prospect is to combine gasification with a fuel cell,
which would generate electricity directly from the chemical reaction between
fuel gas and oxygen, like an extremely hot battery, without the need for a
gas turbine. Experimental 2MW coal gas fuel cells are due to be operating in
the US by 1997. The 'integrated gasification fuel cell' could ultimately
achieve an efficiency of 60 per cent - offering a reduction of one quarter
in CO emissions compared with today's best coal-fired power stations.
*Coal-Use Technology, Financial Times Management Reports, Pounds 248/Dollars
413.
