FT  03 JUN 93 / Anti-German sentiment of Turks hardens: FT writers assess
the immigration crisis in W Europe as EC ministers in Copenhagen agree
tougher guidelines
UNTIL a few days ago, Onder Daloglu, a 19-year-old Turk born in Germany, had
one dream. He wanted to be a German policeman. Last month, he passed the
exam required to enter the police training course and the same day he
applied for German citizenship.
He never imagined that within weeks he would find himself shoulder to
shoulder with fellow Turks charging shielded German police. Yet for four
consecutive nights in Solingen, that's just what he has been doing.
'Tomorrow, I will cancel my citizenship application,' he says, taking a
break from the riots which have shaken his local town since five Turks died
last Saturday in an arson attack blamed on teenage neo-Nazis.
Onder Daloglu, like the hundreds of other young Turks on the streets of
Solingen, has never felt as Turkish as in the last few violent days.
The continuing wave of attacks against foreigners is hardening the
anti-German sentiment of the country's 1.8m Turks and posing serious
questions over how Germany's largest foreign community can be integrated.
Reacting to the Solingen deaths, Turkish organisations all over Germany have
demanded greater political rights for their compatriots, most of whom
arrived in the 1960s and 1970s following a 1961 labour agreement between
Turkey and Germany.
At the moment, foreigners applying for German citizenship face some of the
toughest requirements in Europe. A minimum of 10 years' residence is needed,
while foreigners born in Germany must have lived there for at least eight
years.
Along with the opposition Social Democrats, Turkish organisations say these
conditions should be eased. But Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian
Democratic Union, together with the Christian Social Union, its Bavarian
sister party, have so far refused to dilute the access to German
citizenship, based on a 1913 law.
'Foreigners, foreigners, that's all our children, born in Germany, have
heard since nursery school,' says Mr Ahrmet Aktas, leader of the Turkish
community in Essen, as he walks down the streets of Solingen, shaking hands
with young Turks wearing flags and nationalistic emblems. 'We must give them
the chance to feel German and to vote,' he adds, echoing the feelings of
other Turkish leaders. The recent spate of violence has prompted the German
government to devise a tougher immigration policy, but integration may prove
harder.
Many Turkish organisations are calling for dual citizenship. Turks in
Germany have been unwilling to renounce their Turkish nationality and opt
for a German passport.
'Our people here are not ready to give up their Turkish identity. Germany
has never shown them that they belonged here. How can they trust they will
be at home here, especially now?' explains Mr Hakki Keskin from the Alliance
of Turkish Immigrants in Hamburg.
Smoking a cigarette in front of the Turkish restaurant his parents run,
Onder is watching the streets eagerly. He wants to make sure he doesn't miss
the neo-Nazis expected in Solingen tonight. 'Defend the Germans? No, not
really. That's no longer what I will do with my life,' he says, looking back
at his father who is busy feeding the demonstrators.
