FT  15 MAY 93 / Culture clash creates an endangered species: The viewpoints
at this week's international whaling conference in Kyoto
When Japanese officials relate the history of the International Whaling
Commission, they tend to start the story in the early 1970s, when US troops
were entangled in the Vietnam war and Washington was looking for a fresh
issue on which to focus public opinion. That issue, the story goes, was the
plight of the whale.
The Japanese interpretation, coloured by a fondness for seeing the country
as a victim, is that a political conspiracy unfairly targeted the country's
'whaling culture', setting in motion an influential environmental movement,
represented in all its varied forms at the IWC's annual conference this week
at Kyoto.
Popular as this theory is in Japan, it tends to ignore the rapid depletion
of the world's whale population, mostly at the hands of large, aggressive
companies and not, as popularly portrayed, by feisty fishermen in rickety
boats. But the explanation does highlight that whales, slaughtered for oil,
bone and flesh, have provided a rich political harvest.
Political hustling, more than international co-operation was on display in
Kyoto. The IWC gathering was a forum spiced with conspiracy theories,
insults, rumours and vested interests, including those of Japan's far
right-wing groups which appeared in military-style uniforms to emphasise
their role as cultural defenders.
The 34 countries, which had gathered to draft a scientific framework for
whale management, were swayed as much by the latest opinion polls back home
as by the hard statistics on whale stocks. The UK representatives were aware
that the whaling issue produces 'mail bags of letters', and the Norwegian
delegation came armed with the threat that the country's fishing boats were
in the water, ready to resume the hunt.
Small countries with a marginal interest in the whaling issue raised their
hands in tandem with Tokyo, prompting allegations, denied by Japan, that
votes were bought with aid money. And countries with clout, such as China
and Russia, were reluctant to disagree openly with the US, which has taken
the strongest anti-whaling stance and departed from the principle of
'sustainable development', the controlled harvesting of natural resources.
Back in December 1946, before 'sustainable development' became a fashionable
phrase, an International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling was signed
in Washington, establishing the IWC's guiding principles. It stated that
'the history of whaling has seen over-fishing of one area after another and
of one species after another to such a degree that it is essential to
protect all species of whales from further over-fishing'.
But the IWC consistently failed to turn the early recognition of threat into
a coherent protection plan, balancing the survival of the species with
commercial harvesting. The Kyoto conference continued the decades-old debate
on a workable plan, drafting a 'revised management scheme' (RMS) to
supersede a 'revised management programme', which replaced a 'new management
procedure' in 1982.
In the past, whaling nations liberally interpreted these guidelines to
protect their influential fishing industries. For example, in 1963, Japanese
companies opened four land-based fishing stations in Antarctica, exploiting
a loophole in regulations limiting the number of boats which could be
dispatched from Japan. In 1993, the anti-whaling nations, in the majority,
are purposefully slowing debate on the RMS to block a return to commercial
whaling, effectively banned in 1987.
For these nations, the debate can continue indecisively for a few more
years, satisfying the anti-whaling voters at home, and avoiding a clear
decision denying the right to whale. The IWC scientific report did not give
a clear estimate of whale numbers and made no clear recommendations,
allowing both sides to cite its findings in support of the pro or anti case.
The anti-whaling nations succeeded in adding a proposal for a whale
sanctuary in the southern oceans to next year's agenda. The UK, which best
reflected the views of the anti-whaling group, explained that the government
'cannot even contemplate' an end to the ban until 'we are fully satisfied'
about whale numbers, a management structure, and the humaneness of killing
methods.
Responding to that argument, the Japanese delegation called for advice on
how to run a 'fox-hunt humanely' and how to 'kill kangaroos humanely' in
Australia.
But the Japanese and Norwegian representatives were most annoyed by the US,
which dropped the pretence of stalling on scientific grounds and opposed
commercial whaling under any circumstances, reflecting the tougher line on
environmental issues taken by the Clinton administration.
The US stance surprised some anti-whaling nations, as it is a departure from
the old debate over designing the right scientific model to chart whale
numbers and set appropriate catch quotas. It also departs from the concept
of sustainable development, and gives primacy to politics on the grounds
that, as the US delegation put it, 'we found no support among the US public
or Congress for the resumption of commercial whaling'.
By crossing the line of sustainable development, the US, which has done much
of the most useful research work on whaling, raises the possibility that
other environmental debates will be redirected to the political playing
field, with science a mere spectator. It also leaves the US open to
criticism that in protecting bio-diversity, it is ignoring cultural
diversity.
A Chinese delegate said the US statement was 'unfortunate' and would be
interpreted back in Beijing as a 'kind of imperialism' as the IWC's
scientific committee has found no reason to continue a ban on limited
harvesting around the Antarctic and in the north Atlantic. And Japanese
delegates were quick to interpret the decision as evidence of the cultural
prejudice of beef eaters.
When the conference closed last night, the Norwegian and Japanese
governments were hinting that they would withdraw from the IWC, and the
fishermen outside complained that the commission was 'humane to whales,
inhumane to people'. For the IWC, the most pressing issue may no longer be
sustainable development, but sustainable relations.
