FT  24 JUN 93 / Court upholds Somali role of Bundeswehr
GERMANY'S constitutional court last night upheld the right of the government
to keep German troops in Somalia, provided parliament agrees to it.
The court's decision, which represents a victory for Chancellor Helmut Kohl
and his governing Christian Democratic Union (CDU), could pave the way for
Germany gradually playing a greater role in activities outside the Nato
area.
It could also strengthen Germany's position in its attempts to gain a seat
in an expanded United Nations Security Council.
A statement issued by the court said the current German mission in Somalia
would stay there provided parliament gave its assent.
Opposition to the court's ruling is unlikely since the three-party coalition
government had last month agreed to send the troops.
The opposition Social Democrats last week asked the court for an injunction
against Germany's involvement in Somalia on the grounds that the fighting
there had changed the operation from a humanitarian to a combat mission. The
SPD argued that this change of role violated the constitution, which limits
any military activities by the German army, navy and air force, to Nato
territory.
The government insisted that the mission remained humanitarian.
Germany has deployed 300 troops in Belet Huen, north of the Somalia capital
of Mogadishu. An additional 1,400 troops are due to be sent in mid-August.
The court's decision follows a similar injunction aimed at preventing German
pilots from flying air surveillance missions in Nato Awacs aircraft over the
former Yugoslavia, which eight judges overruled.
Earlier in the day, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, said
the UN would be undermined as a body if Germany decided to withdraw its
troops from Somalia.
Speaking during a visit to Bonn, Mr Boutros Ghali said: 'I hope that the
German soldiers will stay in Somalia so that they will be able to continue
their humanitarian action there in favour of peace and security.
'Our success in Somalia is not a success for peace as such, but a success
for the actions of the UN as a whole,' he added.
