FT  30 JUL 93 / Survey of Japan (12): A weakness for discipline -
Traditionalism still rules in most schools
TOKYO'S most prestigious fee-paying boys school owes nothing to the
tradition of Eton or Harrow. Housed in undistinguished concrete in the urban
Hiroo district of the city, Azabu Gakuen looks like a product of the 1960s
heyday of comprehensive education in the UK.
That resemblance runs more than skin deep: the relaxed attitude of the
teachers, casual dress and unruly classrooms are evidence of a liberal
attitude never embraced by the bastions of the British public school
tradition.
But Azabu is far from representative of Japanese schools. It can afford to
go against the grain because it gets results. It sends a higher proportion
of pupils to prestigious universities, notably Tokyo University, than almost
any other school. In the eyes of status-conscious Japanese parents, that is
the sole barometer of success.
Although fee-paying, entrance to Azabu is by competitive examination only.
In that respect it is very much a product of the Japanese system. It
prospers by its ability to get pupils through the university entrance
examinations, and sets its own entrance examinations to cream off the best
pupils.
To stand a fighting chance of getting to Azabu, and thence to Tokyo
University, most pupils will have already passed entrance examinations to
win a place at a good preparatory school. For many the process of testing
will have started at the age of three.
'We can afford to be liberal because our pupils are all keen to learn and
want to succeed,' said Mr Takao Negishi, Azabu's headmaster.
Faced with intense competition at every stage - and pupils generally less
blessed with diligence or intellect than Azabu - mainstream Japanese schools
favour a disciplinarian approach. At Takamatsu Junior High, a model state
school in suburban Tokyo, a strict code of uniform, punctuality and good
behaviour prevails.
That might be enough to make traditionalists in many European countries weep
with nostalgia.
The role of testing, the existence of a national curriculum and a thriving
private sector would equally win plaudits among conservative educationalists
in the UK.
Conversely, though, the approach is now being questioned in Japan. For
example, while in principle the national curriculum has almost universal
support among Japanese teachers, the design of the current curriculum is
seen to place too much emphasis on the accumulation of facts while
neglecting creative thought.
There is some sympathy with this view within the Ministry of Education. Its
interest does not stem from liberal sentiment: the over-riding question for
government is whether Japanese schools are producing the workforce required
by the service and high-technology industries of the future.
Even though Japan spends less on education as a percentage of gross domestic
product than its industrial rivals - classes of 40 pupils per teacher are
the norm - it achieves higher rates of literacy and numeracy. The worry is
that such basic skills no longer suffice. Yet while the main function of
schooling is - in the eyes of many parents - to propel children up the
educational pyramid with Tokyo University at its apex, piecemeal reform of
the curriculum is unlikely to transform the system. Schools like Azabu are
free to tailor tuition to fit the requirements of university entrance
examinations. For example, ninth grade pupils at Azabu spend six hours per
week on mathematics.
AT TAKAMATSU pupils of the same grade receive only four hours tuition - as
demanded by the national curriculum. If the state sector strays too far from
the three-R's, the gulf between public and private schools will only widen.
The emphasis on examinations has also created an industry of 'juku' or
cramming schools, which children are expected to attend outside normal hours
for extra tuition in core academic subjects. Like Azabu, the better juku do
not come cheap. That raises the question whether a traditionally egalitarian
education system - what could be more egalitarian than a system based
squarely on entrance examinations? - is now failing the poor.
The growth of private schools is also adding to the problem of falling rolls
as Japan passes through demographic changes more pronounced than in the UK.
Takamatsu's newly refurbished buildings now house 469 pupils, against more
than 1,500 in the mid-1980s. The encroachment of private schools means still
fewer pupils, and can cause problems in the classroom.
'The best pupils in this area are more likely to attend private schools. The
natural leaders are taken out of our classes. 'There is no problem with
discipline, but motivating the remaining pupils to learn has become more
difficult,' said Mr Makoto Kawashima, headmaster at Takamatsu.
The Ministry of Education sees two options to close the gap between public
and private education: either deregulate the state sector, allowing public
schools to imitate fee-paying schools, or regulate the private sector by
imposing the national curriculum strictly across the board.
Neither option is particularly attractive. The first would only reinforce
the reputation of Japanese schools as rigorous crammers and increase
examination pressures. The second would require heavy-handed intervention in
a private school system which has widespread support among parents.
Ultimately, though, change may have to filter down through the system from
the top before the style of Japanese education changes. 'Higher education in
Japan has historically emphasised imitation rather than innovation.
Since the end of the last century that has been seen as the way for Japan to
compete successfully with the West,' commented Mr Michio Nagai, an
educationalist and former Minister of Education. 'For these historical
reasons, Japan has not developed a tradition of basic academic research.'
Admission to even the best universities is regarded by students as a
comfortable interlude between the pressure of school and the horrors of life
as a 'salary-man'. University entrance exams are thus tests of accumulated
knowledge rather than measures of academic potential.
Only if universities value creativity and spontaneity are parents likely to
put pressure on schools to do the same. If an education system is a mirror
of the society it serves, there can be no more eloquent commentary on the
growing pains of Japan itself.
