FT  21 AUG 93 / Benefits of strengthened yen yet to reach consumers: Why
people must play the watchdog on stores despite the falling costs of
imported goods
JAPAN'S consumers are being urged by their new government to play watchdog
on the stores at which they shop.
They should be enjoying the benefits of a yen which has strengthened against
all leading currencies since the beginning of the year - it has made
importing US goods 16 per cent cheaper, even after Thursday night's US move
to stop the yen breaking Y100 to the dollar.
But in the shops, for the most part they are not. Some of the windfall gains
get snagged in the multiple layers of the country's distribution system,
while the portion which reaches retailers is greeted as manna by store
chains struggling to stay in the black.
However, consumers are now being offered the glimmerings of a better deal.
'We know there are merits as well as demerits in the yen's rise,' says Mr
Masayoshi Takemura, chief spokesman for the seven-party coalition sworn in
last week. 'It's a question of how to provide the merits to the public in
the framework of a market economy.'
The government is putting on a more consumer-friendly face than its Liberal
Democratic party predecessor, which was the ally of the Japanese producer
during its 38 years in office.
Mr Takemura is urging importers to cut prices and adds: 'It is also
necessary for the general public to watch closely whether companies involved
will show readiness to pass on such gains.'
A survey of 4,000 housewives by the Economic Planning Agency this month
found that fewer than half thought imports had got any cheaper.
Electric utilities, the first to yield to the government's moral persuasion,
said they could manage cuts in charges which would save the average
household a princely Y50 (31p) a month.
Beyond these efforts, the coalition, headed by LDP defectors but also
comprising socialists and Buddhists, has seized on deregulation as a key
which it hopes will unlock trapped domestic demand.
Ministries and state agencies have been told to scour their statutes by
mid-September for rules and restrictions which can be abolished, thereby
freeing up economic activity.
Civil servants in Japan issue more than 10,900 different types of licence or
approval, a number which has been growing in spite of previous attempts to
streamline administrative procedures.
However, bureaucrats seeking to maintain the existing order are likely to
defend many of these on grounds such as safety - such as the 71 standards
which an imported car has to meet - or argue that established industries
will suffer.
An indication that government officials in many cases remain hostile to open
markets came this month when the Agriculture Ministry instructed importers
to go easy on shipments of foreign beef because domestic farmers were
suffering.
The move drew protests from the US and Australia, main beneficiaries of the
phased opening of the Japanese beef market from 1991. Tariffs were last cut
as recently as April.
Daiei, the country's largest supermarket chain, said this week it would
ignore the directive. Imports grew by a fifth last year to account for 60
per cent of all its beef sales. It says it has been reducing prices, citing
the example of a Kansas shoulder-cut which it brought down by 13 per cent in
May.
Daiei is big enough to do its importing directly, circumventing the big
trading houses, which are nervous of incurring official displeasure and at
which the order was mainly directed.
The chain - which will import some Y120bn (Pounds 760m) worth of foreign
goods this year, more than 5 per cent of all sales - insists that it passes
on currency benefits through its checkouts. But it says rises in overseas
labour and shipping costs have also to be taken into account.
The Japanese appetite for foreign branded goods, almost insatiable during
the late-1980s 'bubble' years of inflated asset values, has been dulled by
the current austere climate.
Department stores, also increasingly undercut by parallel importers which
sell goods more cheaply in less ritzy surroundings, are trying selective
promotions on less expensive lines. For a clothing sale being held next week
by Matsuzakaya the garments come from Quelle, a German mail order company.
Consumer demand has been weakest for big-ticket items such as cars. But in
spite of a 7.8 per cent fall in new car sales in Japan for the six months to
June, and the 71 impediments, some foreign automotive groups have fared
well.
Rover of the UK, minority-owned by Honda, lifted first-half shipments 44 per
cent after it began reducing prices in February. For Rover, the hope must be
that the yen does not now go too far into reverse and drive away it market.
