FT  28 JUL 93 / Israel's restless gunners euphoric at a chance to 'hit
back': Julian Ozanne talks to the soldiers who say they have been 'sitting
here taking it like cowards'
PERCHED on the top of a stony mountain ridge overlooking the rolling valleys
of southern Lebanon, five huge artillery cannons blasted away yesterday,
lobbing shell after shell into Lebanese villages behind the distant hills.
In less than 30 minutes, the young Israeli gunners of Battery B had fired a
deafening 230 shells across the olive groves and tobacco fields towards the
villages of Barasheet and Jibsheet, which the Israelis insist are
strongholds of the pro-Iranian Hizbollah guerrillas.
Israeli warplanes streamed overhead, occasionally breaking the sound
barrier, on their way to strafing and bombing raids.
'My men have been working round the clock. They haven't slept at all since
Sunday,' said an Israeli officer who identified himself as Lieutenant
Colonel 'W', commander of the artillery battalion.
The colonel said his big guns were accurate to within 50 metres. 'The
villagers got a warning we would shell and they have to run away. If they
didn't hear, then that is a problem.'
The army public relations effort has been working hard to sell their
offensive as a limited strike against 'terrorists'. 'We've been sitting here
taking it like cowards,' said one gunner. 'All those villagers who (are
called) civilians are Hizbollah and they are getting what they deserve.'
Several senior army officers were called in at Battery B yesterday, beaming
at colleagues and slapping each other on the back. Many had their
photographs taken in front of the blazing guns and their increasingly
euphoric young gunners.
In a fortified infantry observation post deep in the area of southern
Lebanon which Israel occupies in defiance of UN resolutions, restless ground
troops of the elite Givati brigade urged their generals to let them in on
the action.
'The air force and artillery can't get the job done alone,' said one private
as plumes of smoke rose in the distance above Lebanese villages. 'We are not
trained to sit back and take it and let everyone else have the fun.'
Many of the younger generation of soldiers are hoping the government will
kick Israel's equivalent of the Vietnam syndrome - the fear of committing
ground troops in Lebanon resulting from the disastrous Israeli invasion of
1982 which left at least 650 Israeli soldiers dead.
In the picturesque Israeli resort village of Metulla on the Israel-Lebanon
border, the incessant shelling from batteries all around the town shook
windows and set off car alarms. Israeli politicians, anxious to be
photographed close to their 'boys in action', and army officers and
journalists have replaced tourists in the hotels.
Down the road in Kiryat Shmona, the Israeli town that has been the focus of
Katyusha rocket attacks that killed one Israeli civilian on Sunday, shops
and businesses remained closed and residents stayed close to communal
reinforced bomb shelters for a third day.
Streets were deserted and in the main shopping centre of what has turned
into a ghost town a large speaker blared out up-to-the minute radio reports.
At least 5,000 of the town's 22,000 residents have fled to the larger
Israeli cities of Haifa and Tel Aviv.
Those who have remained play games outside their concrete shelters or sleep
off the afternoon heat on iron bunk beds inside the shelters.
'It is worse than it was in 1982 and everybody is afraid,' said Mr Morechai
Barchechath. 'But everybody here wants the army to clean out the south of
Lebanon.'
