FT  13 JUL 93 / Arts: Neil Young - Pop
The Gods seem to favour ageing hippies. Amazement that they have survived,
touched with awe at the amount of death defying drugs they have absorbed,
gives them an almost priestly authority. They also seem to have control over
the elements. As Neil Young stepped on stage at Finsbury Park on Sunday
night the rain stopped. It stayed cold, dank and dismal, but marginally the
spirits perked up.
They stayed perked for the next two hours as Young went through his
considerable bag of tricks. He has over 20 years of recorded products to
choose from, covering every highway and byway of pop, from Woodstock
dottiness to poke-in -the-eye grunge. You somehow forget that he was
responsible for such classics as 'Heart of Gold', 'Only Love Can Break Your
Heart' and 'Alabama', and on and on. He could fill a week's play list on
Classic Gold, yet he still retains a musical integrity and the respect of
the myth makers .
It was all on offer in the park. For a man who set up the original super
group with Crosby, Stills, and Nash it is natural that he should now call on
the revered Memphis blues band, Booker T and the MGs to back him. Not that
he needs them. Young is a big musician, tall and sturdy, the mop of hair
surprisingly dark, the bald spot well disguised, the presence commanding. He
is also big in sound, contrasting his wailing, jagged, feed-back driven
guitar with some plaintive harp blowing. If this is returning to the past it
is exhilarating enough to make conservatives of us all.
The band was very much a supporting group, despite the lustre of legendary
guitarist Steve Cropper and Booker himself towering over the keyboards. This
was Young's party. It began slowly, inhibited perhaps by the cold, and the
rather forlorn-feeling crowd. The opening songs were equally melancholic,
with Young, digging deep into his roots for 'Southern Man' and the stricken
'Helpless'. Gradually the atmosphere warmed up with 'Motorcycle Man', which
brought in backing vocals, and a buzz in the audience.
From being a static voice in a gathering gloom - and Young's voice has
deepened for the better over the decades - Young started to stomp the stage,
and the whole performance picked up steam. It is useless to pretend that a
sombre evening in a scrappy London park is an ideal setting for such a manic
performer. He flowers best in the claustrophobia of a small club, where he
can pepper his wit and cynicism over his music. But as he concentrated on
the classics, and brought in the band from the shadows for party pieces, you
at least knew you were experiencing one of the true giants of pop, a man for
all seasons. You can hardly grudge him his late flowering as a big venue
money grabber.
