FT  08 MAY 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: How NI offers scope to save
INCOME tax-payers spend a lot of time and effort on ways to reduce their
bills. National Insurance contributions are also a compulsory levy on
earnings but, unlike the tax system, only rarely are they considered an area
where financial planning reaps any reward. Yet changing the method of
payment can bring significant gains for casual workers such as those in
temporary or part-time employment; those in agriculture and similar seasonal
employment; and students doing vacation work.
NICs are paid on a rising percentage scale between two earning levels. The
lower one equates roughly with the basic state pension and is now Pounds 56
a week, or Pounds 243 monthly, or Pounds 2,912 yearly. The upper is around
7.5 times the basic pension and is now Pounds 420 weekly, or Pounds 1,820
monthly, or Pounds 21,840 yearly.
Unlike income tax, which is based on a yearly cumulative total, with high
earnings balancing out lower ones to give the overall liability, NICs are
payable on an amount fixed in advance on the 'earnings periods' - whatever
they may be.
Not having to pay income tax does not absolve you from NICs on relevant
earnings. Thus, students working in vacation periods may get income tax
exemption through P38(S), but will still have to pay NICs in any periods
when their income exceeds the lower earnings level.
Earning periods normally are determined by the dates on which wages are paid
(or are due to be paid), and not for the periods during which the work
actually was done. So, if you contract to do four weeks' work at Pounds 56 a
week, you have exceeded the lower earnings level and will have to pay Pounds
1.12 NICs each week. Work a month for Pounds 240 and you pay no NICs because
that monthly figure is below the lower earnings level of Pounds 243 a month.
This principle applies all the way up the scale, and means that careful
timing can drop NICs into lower rate bands or below the lower earnings level
altogether.
A salary of Pounds 600 a week for four weeks' work results. for example, in
four NICs of either Pounds 27.33 or Pounds 33.88 weekly for that period
(depending on whether the firm which employs you is contracted in or out).
If you were paid monthly, though, you would be liable for only one NIC.
Similarly, six months' work at rates above the lower earnings level, paid at
weekly intervals, would mean 25-26 NICs. But care must be taken not to
breach the anti-avoidance regulations which ensure that NICs are not evaded
or reduced by abnormal practices such as uneven or irregular payments.
However, these are not likely to be applied for casual work.
Where a person has different jobs with different but associated employers,
the department of social security contributions agency aggregates these sums
so that employees do not pay NICs at lower rates. Teachers doing part-time
work for a local authority for a couple of evenings a week can be caught out
by this 'aggregation' principle; but those working odd sessions for a
private establishment might be viewed more favourably.
Paying less in NICs, or none, could reduce your entitlement to state
benefits including those for maternity, unemployment and sickness, and the
state pension. Most have high entry requirements in any case and a short
term reduction in NIC payments may not make too much difference to your long
term entitlements. But this is a factor to check.
