FT  18 NOV 93 / City groups raise Pounds 1m fund to counter IRA bombers
LARGE City institutions have assisted in raising a Pounds 1m fund to help
police reward those with information about IRA attacks on economic targets.
The unprecedented move was announced yesterday by Scotland Yard with minimum
details so as to protect the main sponsors from further terrorist attacks.
In a rare example of an institution prepared to comment, the National
Westminster Bank, whose City of London tower office was badly damaged in the
last attack by the IRA on the City in April, said it strongly backed the
initiative.
The bank said: 'This is an important additional mechanism that will help
pursue those responsible for terrorist attacks.'
According to Scotland Yard, the initiative had been jointly developed over
the past year by senior officers of its anti-terrorist branch S013 and top
managers of UK-based companies. S013 has national UK mainland responsibility
for conducting anti-terrorist operations together with MI5, the security
service.
Money already committed comes from dozens of unnamed companies throughout
the country and will be administered by joint agreement between the police
and the main sponsors.
It is not clear yet if the full sum will be held in an escrow account or
remain the responsibility of the companies until needed. The amount to be
paid out at any one time will depend on the quality of the information.
A spokesman for Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch said last night: 'Our
experience is that we do not have to provide financial inducement to get
useful information on terrorist activities. But if there is the slightest
chance that an individual might be tipped over by a reward, then we should
take it.'
The initiative was prompted by business concern at the commercial costs of
IRA attacks over the past two years in the City and elsewhere. Neither the
Corporation of London nor the headquarters of the Confederation of British
Industry in London would comment on the initiative.
In Northern Ireland, the local business community will today back a trade
union initiated 'community day of action' in support of peace.
Mr Nigel Smyth, the CBI's Northern Ireland director, said there was a
widespread feeling now that every effort should be made to bring violence to
an end. 'People have to accept that we have to look to the future and we
need compromise and understanding,' he said.
Business leaders in the province are holding back from detailed political
pronouncements for fear they might be targeted by terrorists. But
significantly the CBI has not rejected any option for getting peace talks
under way.
Mates denies he talked to Sinn Fein, Page 8
