FT  08 APR 93 / Patten to review school testing: Boycott is still likely
after teaching unions give proposals a lukewarm reception
AN URGENT review of school testing and the national curriculum was announced
yesterday by Mr John Patten, the education secretary, in a last-ditch
attempt to avert the threatened boycott by teachers of compulsory tests.
Speaking at a conference in Cardiff of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers (ATL), he said that although 'testing is here to stay', the
national curriculum, together with its tests for seven, 11- and
14-year-olds, could be greatly simplified.
But with Mr Patten facing growing criticism from inside and outside the
Conservative party and with his proposals drawing a lukewarm response from
teachers' unions, the move seems to have done little to defuse the growing
political crisis now facing him over the issue.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, yesterday condemned Mr Patten's
proposals, insisting that he was making 'guinea pigs of our children'.
Mr Hugh Dykes, Conservative MP for Harrow East and an outspoken critic of
the school tests, yesterday described Mr Patten's announcement as
inadequate.
Two out of three of the largest teaching unions seem set to boycott the
compulsory English tests for 14-year-olds planned in England and Wales this
summer. The NASUWT, the second largest teachers' union, which has already
announced a boycott, said it would continue its action as planned.
The biggest union, the National Union of Teachers, which is due to vote on
Saturday on a ballot for a similar boycott, reiterated its opposition to the
tests.
'Mr Patten's statement takes us no further forward. The tests should be
abandoned,' the union said.
The ATL, one of the more moderate of the teaching unions, will decide today
whether to hold its own ballot. Although Mr Patten received a relatively
muted reception at the ATL conference, Mr Peter Smith, the union's general
secretary, yesterday noted that the outcome of today's ballot was now 'on a
knife-edge'.
If the ATL unites with the more radical unions over the issue, the
Department of Education will face a serious logistical challenge in staging
the tests.
The headmasters' union, the National Association of Head Teachers, has
already indicated that it would be unlikely to carry out the tests in the
face of widespread opposition from teachers.
Mr David Hart, general secretary of the NAHT, said although Mr Patten's
statement was 'a modest step in the right direction' without wholesale
reform 'this year's industrial action will be repeated next year'.
The review announced by Mr Patten will consider:
Slimming down the national curriculum, which currently consists of 10
compulsory subjects for secondary school pupils.
Simplifying the unwieldy 10 point system used to assess attainment in these
subjects.
Streamlining the tests, and shifting the timing, to make them easier for
teachers to administer.
Improving the national curriculum's central administration.
Including more teacher representation on the new School Curriculum and
Assessment Authority, which is to be established to carry out the review.
