FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (8):
Selection process is critical - How winners and losers are decided
DEVELOPMENT is a crucial component in the future fortunes of pharmaceuticals
groups. Most have access, either internally or externally, to exciting
research. But the way companies select new chemical entities and the way
they develop them decides the sector's winners and losers.
'The development process is very important. Differentiation comes from the
way you select research and how you use it in a creative and flexible way,'
explains Dr Rolf Krebs, chairman of Boehringer Ingelheim.
Selecting compounds is far from easy yet, according to Dr Richard Sykes,
Glaxo's chief executive and director of R&amp;D, this is where the critical
decisions are made.
'It is critical to decide which projects to take forward. You have to know
the medical need; you have to know that it is technologically feasible; and
you have to be innovative. The drug must have the potential to be an
important medicine - significant advantages in terms of safety and efficacy
or both,' says Dr Sykes.
Most R&amp;D directors agree that any compounds must be innovative if they are
to be successful. 'If the industry does not generate enough innovative
products, it will end up fighting cheap generics with me-too products,' says
Dr Krebs.
Defining, let alone generating, innovative products is not easy, however.
'The problem is you don't know what's going on elsewhere,' says Dr George
Poste, R&amp;D chairman at SmithKline Beecham. 'Take Tagamet, our anti-ulcer
product with sales of more than Dollars 1bn a year. Work began on that
compound 30 years ago.'
New chemical entities are like black boxes, says Dr Poste. It is far from
clear if they will work and if they will be safe. You might be behind three
other companies, but the opposition's second and third compounds could fall
by the wayside, he explains. 'Only generic compounds set out to be me-too
drugs,' says Dr Poste.
'Me-too has wrongly become a pejorative term,' says Dr Leon Rosenberg,
president, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute. 'Science
only moves in small increments. Giant steps are only made once in a decade
or even every 20 years. The world's two top-selling drugs - Zantac and
Vasotec - were me-too compounds, but with dosing or safety improvements.'
Dr Poste agrees, pointing out that 25 of the 32 compounds given a me-too
classification by the US Food and Drug Administration in the 1980s actually
offered improved safety, tolerability or quality of life, or had better
dosing than earlier medicines.
Developing innovative drugs is risky. Such molecules take longer to develop
than me-toos and there is a heightened danger of them being cut for reasons
of safety and efficacy. Dr Max Wilhelm at Ciba says a development portfolio
must be balanced, with follow-up products in case some fail. There must also
be a good mixture of safe bets and high risk-high reward products. He will
only develop products that will reach annual sales of more than SFr500m.
Sometimes not being innovative can be justified, says Dr Wilhelm. He
explains his recent decision to launch Lotensin, an ace-inhibitor for
hypertension, even though the market is saturated and there is even price
competition in the US. He argues that by developing the drug it gave the
company access to experts and opinion formers.
Without Lotensin, Ciba's credibility in the cardiovascular market would have
been undermined. 'It kept us in the market place and in the scientific
community - and it'll make some money,' says Dr Wilhelm.
Other groups are far more Draconian in their approach. Dr Frank-Joachim
Morich, director of pharmaceuticals R&amp;D at Bayer, says he is pleased his
company fails to figure among the top 50 groups listed in order of the
number of compounds in development. He says there is no relationship between
the number of compounds in development and innovation.
Dr Jurgen Drews, president of international R&amp;D at Roche, has also become
increasingly tough. 'We have become very vigorous in refusing to develop
agents that do not have an innovative profile. We have cut the number of
compounds in development by 15 to 20 per cent over the past 12 to 16 months.
We are learning to be strict.'
Dr Drews says an increasingly large proportion of molecules proposed by
research are now rejected. He reckons 10 years ago only 10 per cent of
compounds entering clinical development made it to the market. Now that
barriers are higher, the proportion reaching the market is at about 30 per
cent. 'There are fewer of them, they are of higher quality, and there is
less attrition,' he says.
An added complication to the development process is the need to conduct it
internationally. In spite of efforts to harmonise regulations, authorities
in the US, Japan and Europe, still often require different clinical trials.
Given the costs of bringing a drug to market, pharmaceuticals groups must
develop their medicines in all three regions, covering more than 80 per cent
of the world market.
Not all companies have the expertise to do that. While some are beginning to
license out products for co-development, others are turning to contract
research organisations such as Bessalaar and Pharmaco of the US and
Munich-based Harrison Clinical Research to conduct clinical trials.
Given the increasing demands of regulatory groups, most groups are looking
to cut down on the numbers of studies and the complexity of studies they
conduct.
'It's seductive when conducting trials to add in supplementary questions
that aren't really necessary and that create enormous quantities of data
that can't be analysed,' says Dr Stephen Hill, medical director of Roche
Products, Roche's UK subsidiary.
R&amp;D directors must also be brutal in cutting projects, says Dr Sykes at
Glaxo. 'If a company is ahead of you and your drug is not as good, then you
need to act. There's nothing wrong with cutting projects, the decisions have
to be made.'
Finally, the end product should be a good read, says Dr Drews. 'The new drug
application must be attractive and the dossier must have entertainment
value. It must be something that is almost fun to deal with. It will then be
read faster because the investigator becomes involved in a positive way,' he
claims.
