FT  30 APR 93 / Survey of Executive Cars (6): Appearances will be deceptive
 -The Future
What radical changes have the manufacturers of executive cars in store for
buyers as the decade draws to a close? On the face of it, not many. The real
developments will occur beneath the cars' more slippery surfaces. The
vehicles will look similar to today's.
Key components such as engines, transmissions and suspensions are unlikely
to change radically, despite experiments now taking place to change that.
The cars will also be made in a similar way.
The main differences will be hidden inside, driven by the frequently
conflicting requirements of environment concerns and safety legislation. The
designer's dilemma is to balance expectations of better fuel consumption and
lower exhaust emissions with those of higher equipment levels and greater
crash protection. The problem is that demands on one side mean taking weight
out, and on the other mean adding it.
Increasing attention to environment and safety will redefine future
executive cars every bit as much as they will city run-abouts. But as the
years unfold, the cost of putting the latest technologies and new materials
into showroom cars will ensure that executive cars are the earliest
pioneers.
It is far easier, for example, to incorporate the cost of an on-board
navigation system or rear-seat air bag on a Pounds 40,000 saloon than on a
Pounds 1O,000 hatch-back. Only later, as volumes increase and costs come
down, will similar devices spread to cheaper cars.
There are scores of precedents, ranging from fuel injection and anti-lock
brakes to multi-valve engines and air conditioning. Kit like this, regarded
as exotic only a few years ago, was once fitted only on expensive,
high-performance cars. Now it is commonplace on much more modest family
saloons.
For an indication of how little the executive car's appearance will change
over the coming years, it is necessary to look no further than the concept
coupe which Mercedes-Benz displayed at the recent Geneva motor show. While
sleek and rounded by Mercedes standards, its lineage is self-evident. But
that car, or one rather like it, will go into production as a coupe based on
the next 200-300 Series. That means it will still be on sale in the next
millenium.
Where future generations of cars will differ is in packaging. They will
contain similar amounts of passenger and luggage accommodation in smaller
bodies. It is part of an industry-wide downsizing. Just as mass-producers
such as Volkswagen and Fiat are pressing ahead to bring cars smaller than
the Polo and Uno to market, so up-market makers are planning models smaller
than those they have traditionally sold.
The best-known example is the surprise announcement by Mercedes in January
that it will build a town car. BMW's experimental Z13 city car is a clear
indication of its thinking. Audi, too, has decided to produce a Golf-sized
model later this decade. Saab is considering a small car rather than the
limousine it once planned.
None of this means abandoning the luxury market. Those cars will still be
made. But they will be more compact, without forfeiting the traditional
creature comforts and performance which buyers at this price bracket expect.
One significant departure may be the use of aluminium for a car's chassis.
The metal has long fascinated car engineers, who admire its weight-saving -
and therefore its potential to improve mileage or performance - while having
reservations about its cost and ease of production and repair.
According to Mr Bernd Pischetsrieder, chairman-designate of BMW, 'A BMW 318
made of aluminium would have the performance of a 325.' Ford's experimental
Synthesis 2010, an aluminium saloon in the Taurus category, is 8cwt, or 28
per cent lighter than the car around which it is based.
Honda's low-volume NSX sports car is so far the only production model to use
an aluminium chassis. Now the industry is awaiting Audi's replacement for
the V8 saloon this autumn. Known as D2, the top version will utilise an
aluminium chassis.
Equally important, electronics will feature even more prominently. They
already manage many automatic transmissions and engines for maximum
efficiency. Now they are at the heart of research into areas such as noise
control, active suspension, electronic steering, navigation systems, head-up
information displays, multiplex wiring and cruise controls which maintain
distances between moving vehicles.
'What we have now is a mechanical device with electronics attached to it,'
explains Mr Bruce Blythe, until recently Ford of Europe's vice-president in
charge of strategy. 'In the future, we will have electronic devices
complemented by mechanical parts.'
The other area claiming large proportions of research budgets is power
units, as companies endeavour to cut emissions and improve economy. They
were given added impetus when California - an important and wealthy market -
laid out a timetable requiring ultra-low and zero-emission vehicles (Ulevs
and Zevs) at the end of this century and into the next.
The development prompted America's Big Three manufacturers - General Motors,
Ford and Chrysler - to join forces for the first time in an electric power
consortium. Battery-powered cars are unlikely to have the same impact in
Europe, at least in the foreseeable future, although any company which
wishes to sell cars in California needs an electric car programme.
In the main, though, car companies are relying on further refinement of
internal combustion engines to give them the improvements they need in the
late 1990s. At Jaguar, that means testing two-stroke V6 engines. BMW and
Mazda think there is potential for hydrogen power. Direct injection of
diesels will become much more commonplace.
Many other companies are turning to methanol (neat or mixed with petrol)
fuel, or to hybrids. These usually combine battery power (for use in towns)
with petrol or diesel engines (for use over long distances and for
recharging the batteries).
Volvo's attention, on the other hand, is focused way into the future with
the Environmental Concept Car it revealed last September. The aluminium ECC,
which combines nickel-cadmium batteries with a diesel-fuelled turbine, is
Volvo's idea of a four-seater for the year 2000. Ambitious, certainly, but
few of Volvo's competitors believe anything like ECC will be on sale by
then. Their faith is in incremental improvements rather than the great leap
forward.
