FT  04 AUG 93 / Leading Article: After franc fort a franc float
THE FRENCH government has reason to feel aggrieved at Europe's weekend
reversion to dirty floating exchange rates. Some combination of Belgian,
Danish, Dutch and German opposition to the temporary departure of the D-Mark
from the exchange rate mechanism, and the clearly second-best adoption of
very wide ERM bands, has forced France to sanction what appears to be an
implicit and politically embarrassing franc devaluation. But the new soft
ERM does now give the French government the freedom to deliver what its
economy desperately needs: a substantial cut in interest rates. If the
benefits of the last 10 franc fort years are not to be squandered, it should
take the opportunity.
To do so, France must first recognise that the useful life of the franc fort
policy - designed to secure low inflation by tying the currency tightly to
the D-Mark - has passed for now. This is not to suggest either that the
franc fort policy has failed or was misconceived - quite the reverse. France
currently has an inflation rate half that of Germany and, more
significantly, a marginally lower interest rate on its long-term government
bonds. France is now paying to Germany the highest compliment a tutor can
hope for: imitation which surpasses the teacher's own abilities, a fact that
may discomfort the Bundesbank president, Helmut Schlesinger.
Moreover, France has used the franc fort years to amass sizeable gains in
competitiveness. The franc has appreciated by more than 5 per cent against a
basket of European currencies since the beginning of 1987, when the last
wholesale ERM realignment occurred. But consistently low rates of wage
inflation relative to its competitors have more than offset any loss in
competitiveness from this nominal appreciation. French industry thus finds
itself, despite the appreciation of the past nine months, in a much stronger
competitive position than when the policy began.
D-Mark appreciation
But the franc fort's success, combined with the wayward behaviour of Germany
since unification, has made the policy increasingly inimical to French
interests. Germany's need to shift resources from west to east, the
government's fiscal profligacy, and the resulting shift to a current account
deficit, have required the D-Mark to appreciate and German interest rates to
rise. But the combination of the hard ERM, and France's stubborn resistance
to a D-Mark appreciation, have transmitted excessively high interest rates
and an unnecessary recession across Europe. The success of the franc fort
policy in reducing French inflation meant that short-term real interest
rates became ever more painful, and ultimately unsustainable.
Mercifully, for French companies, banks and consumers, the French government
now has the flexibility to re-orientate its distorted economic policy. The
priority for the French government must be to ensure that it can return, as
soon as possible, to economic growth with low inflation.
Cut rates
First, the government must cut short-term interest rates by at least 2
percentage points. Every domestic inflationary indicator suggests that
French monetary policy remains far too severe. Broad money growth, at 3.1
per cent over the past year, is too slow to sustain a recovery, while
three-month money market interest rates of 7 per cent mean that the yield
curve remains inverted. Consumer price inflation is less than 2 per cent a
year and wage inflation fell to an annual rate of 2.6 per cent in the second
quarter, its lowest level in more than a decade.
Second, the French government must consolidate its reputation for low
inflation. By accelerating changes at the Bank of France which can entrench
the bank's nominal independence, and explaining how domestic monetary
indicators will be monitored, it can demonstrate its commitment to keeping
inflation low.
Third, France should accept that it cannot rejoin Germany in a system of
narrow bands (even in a reformed ERM) until the latter's inflationary and
fiscal problems are under control. Rejoining before German interest rates
have fallen substantially would not be consistent with price stability in
France.
What the government must not do is attempt to keep the franc fort policy
alive by trying to shadow the D-Mark in its old ERM bands. That would mean
resisting the interest rates French industry desperately needs, and
perversely, may well increase the chances of the French franc falling much
further and make the politics of an eventual return to a hard ERM more
difficult. Economy minister Edmond Alphandery was right to say early on
Monday morning that franc stability, both domestically and on the foreign
exchanges, would be the priority for French monetary policy. Both objectives
imply that the franc fort policy should be mourned and then, for a period,
forgotten.
