FT  03 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Brent Walker approaches vital Hill deadline
amid acrimony
Brent Walker is rapidly approaching a vital deadline in its efforts to sell
or refinance William Hill, its betting shop business. A decision is required
on Monday.
Discussions are understood to have become fraught, with accusations flying
and banks complaining of strong-arm tactics.
Advisers believe that if the flotation course is to be pursued, a decision
must be made early next week. This is so that a marketing campaign can begin
in time to manage a successful float by the March 1 deadline for the
repayment of William Hill's debt.
Lenders to William Hill are only concerned with getting their loans repaid
on time. This can be achieved either through a flotation, a sale to a group
of venture capitalists which has put in an offer, or by the Brent Walker
banks taking on the William Hill debt.
Standard Chartered and Lloyds Bank, lead banks to Brent Walker, appear
determined to adopt the latter course, refinancing Hill's Pounds 330m of
secured and Pounds 40m of unsecured debt, which is ring-fenced from Brent
Walker.
They prefer that route since they believe that William Hill's true value
could be higher than the expected Pounds 500m flotation proceeds.
Furthermore, the Brent Walker refinancing completed last year was predicated
on the retention of two cash generating businesses - the pubs chain and
William Hill. Without William Hill, the prospects for Brent Walker's banks
being repaid eventually would seem dimmer.
Standard Chartered and Lloyds could block a flotation, since the consent of
the Brent Walker banks is needed for a sale of William Hill.
But refinancing attempts have so far failed, with deadlines being missed and
extended. Standard Chartered and Lloyds are said to have found takers for
only Pounds 270m of the William Hill debt. Even large lenders to Brent
Walker, such as Credit Suisse, are understood to be unwilling to participate
in the refinancing.
That leaves the venture capital offer, which exceeds Pounds 450m. This could
provide a way out for Brent Walker, as the offer could repay the William
Hill debt and allow the company to retain an equity stake in the betting
business.
However, bankers fear that if the flotation option fades and the refinancing
fails, the value of the venture capital offer could recede, leaving little
for Brent Walker after repaying the William Hill banks.
