FT  04 MAY 93 / International Capital Markets: Asia may offer opportunities
INTERNATIONAL investors are well-acquainted with the Asian stock markets,
but tend to be far less familiar with the region's bond markets, most of
which are small and undeveloped. However, as investors scour the globe for a
wider range of investments, some are asking whether the Asian bond markets
can provide interesting investment opportunities.
The outlook for fixed income securities markets in the Asian-Pacific rim is
brightening, according to a recent report from the OECD* which looks at the
debt securities markets in the 'Dynamic Asian Economies' (DAEs) of Hong
Kong, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.
The OECD report points out that 'the promotion of these (debt) markets has
become an almost common goal of government policy among the DAEs' for
several reasons.
These include a perceived increase in government borrowing needs (for
example, for large infrastructure projects), the desire to have a broader
range of monetary instruments and the need for a wider variety of means by
which private enterprises can raise money.
The Asian Development Bank has taken some steps towards promoting the Asian
capital markets. In 1991, it launched its so-called Dragon Bond - a bond
issued in the main Asian bond markets. The aim was to widen its investor
base in the region, diversifying its own funding sources away from the
Euromarket, Yankee bond and Japanese markets, and to encourage other bond
issuers to use the Asian capital markets.
Mr Andrew Ferguson, deputy managing director of Wardley in Hong Kong, the
local lead manager for the ADB's Dragon bond issue in 1991, says in the OECD
report that the ADB's issue has alerted other multilateral development
agencies and triple-A issuers to the possibility of tapping the Asian market
now that a useful benchmark issue has been established.
'Regulatory controls that have impeded the development of the capital
markets have been brought into sharper focus, questioned and, in some cases,
relaxed,' Mr Ferguson says.
Even so, problems remain. Mr Robert Pozen, a managing director of Fidelity
Investments in Boston, points out in the OECD report that big US investors
prize the following attributes when considering whether to buy a country's
sovereign debt: political stability; the ability to service debt; a fully
convertible currency; unrestricted capital movement; market liquidity; and
reliable pricing.
One global securities house which has made a preliminary study of the
investment opportunities available in Asia highlights poor secondary market
liquidity as the key obstacle when it comes to investing in the region's
debt markets.
On the demand side, the report notes that many investors prefer to hold debt
until maturity for tax reasons, which does little to encourage secondary
market activity.
The OECD sees the existence of controlled interest rates - particularly in
countries such as Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand - as a severe obstacle in
the creation of more liquid markets.
It points out that the effective yields of the bonds are below free-market
levels 'with the result that the securities are only held by captive
holders, that is, financial institutions which are required to do so to
fulfil reserve and liquidity requirements.'
*Emerging Bond Markets in the Dynamic Asian Economies. Published by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
