FT  26 OCT 93 / Major rules out deal with IRA on ceasefire: Adams banned
from entering Britain - Mayhew condemns 'sickening hypocrisy'
THE British government angrily rejected last night a proposal from Mr Gerry
Adams for a conditional IRA ceasefire and announced the Sinn Fein leader had
been banned from entering Great Britain.
It accused Mr Adams of 'sickening hypocrisy' and set an unconditional and
permanent end to violence as a precondition for the IRA and its supporters
to be brought into any negotiations on the future of Ulster.
The message was reinforced by the announcement that Mr Michael Howard, home
secretary, had signed an indefinite exclusion order under the Prevention of
Terrorism Act. The order - signed before the latest IRA bombing in Belfast -
prevents the Sinn Fein leader from travelling from Ulster to any other part
of the UK.
As the weekend killing of Protestant civilians in Belfast's Shankill Road
was followed by a bomb attack on a mainland railway line, Mr John Major came
close to dismissing the initiative drawn up with Mr Adams by Mr John Hume,
leader of the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party. But the
government was careful not to extend its denunciation to Mr Hume's role in
preparing the proposals.
Last night Protestant terrorists claimed responsibility for the murder of a
Catholic in North Belfast. Earlier a Catholic taxi-driver died in hospital
after a revenge shooting in response to the Shankill Road bombing.
Mr Adams told the BBC a positive response from the London government to the
Hume-Adams proposals could bring an IRA ceasefire. But at the Commonwealth
summit in Cyprus, Mr Major retorted: 'I am not going to do deals with people
who plant bombs and kill innocent people.'
That view was echoed in the House of Commons by Sir Patrick Mayhew, the
Northern Ireland Secretary, as the latest IRA attacks brought universal
condemnation from government and opposition MPs.
In a sombre denunciation of the Belfast bombing - which killed nine
Protestant civilians as well as one of the terrorists - Sir Patrick said:
'Next to the sickening quality of what was done to people in the Shankill on
Saturday has been the sickening quality of the hypocrisy of Mr Adams.' The
condition for dialogue with Sinn Fein and the IRA was an end to violence
'without condition and forever'.
The Northern Ireland secretary, however, 'saluted' Mr Hume for his courage
in seeking a settlement.
Senior ministers said they saw no real prospect of the Hume-Adams proposals'
leading to a lasting settlement, but could not afford to reject them out of
hand before they had been formally presented by Dublin.
Mr Hume said the British government could not afford to reject a set of
proposals which had as their objective a 'lasting peace and total cessation
of violence'. But Mr Major underlined the gulf between the two sides by
accusing Mr Adams of blackmail: 'If Mr Adams can end the violence then he
should end the violence now without preconditions, without any delay . . .
and without any proposals which sound to me tantamount to blackmail.'
Sir Patrick's Commons statement was quickly followed by the announcement of
the exclusion order against Mr Adams.
The announcement from Mr Howard - who signed the order last Tuesday - said
that Mr Adams was or is concerned in the commission, preparation or
instigation of acts of terrorism connected with Northern Ireland. The
decision came after reports that the Sinn Fein leader was planning to visit
Great Britain at the invitation of Mr Tony Benn, the Labour MP.
The rail network in southern England was in chaos after the IRA detonated a
bomb on the main line from London to the west of England. Two bombs were
placed in Reading, one of which exploded several hours after the first had
been successfully defused.
Police said the second blast had been calculated to kill workers from the
emergency services responding to a coded warning of the first attack.
Explosions cause rail chaos in south, Page 8
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
