FT  04 MAY 93 / Labour stresses its European credentials
LABOUR is reasserting its European credentials with a policy paper designed
to emphasise its commitment to the social dimension of the European
Community and to contrast its position with that of the Conservatives.
Its release, in the week that the party will share a common cause with Tory
Euro-sceptics over the controversial amendment to the Maastricht bill on the
social chapter, emphasises Labour's determination that harrying the
government over the bill at Westminster should not damage its wider European
reputation.
Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker of the Commons, will announce today
whether she will allow MPs to vote on the amendment which excludes from the
bill the social protocol containing both the social chapter and the UK's
'opt-out' from it. A fierce row erupted when MPs were denied a vote on the
amendment in earlier discussion.
The amendment is supported by opposition parties and Tory rebels, leaving
the government facing a serious risk of a defeat that would be deeply
humiliating, even though ministers say that it would not wreck the treaty.
Labour believes, however, that if the amendment were approved the government
would be forced to sign up to the social chapter.
Acceptance of the social chapter provisions is one of the central themes in
the policy paper. It argues that the UK government's 'opt-out' will become
untenable because there will be strong pressure to consolidate the chapter
in the treaty in 1996, at the next inter-governmental conference.
It expresses doubt that ministers will want to remain isolated from deciding
such a central policy, given that 'at some future date it will apply with
equal force in the UK'.
The document will be discussed by the first meeting of the party's national
policy forum this weekend, and will go to the ruling national executive
committee next month, to form the basis of the committee's statement for the
annual autumn conference.
On the economy, the paper says that Labour remains fully committed to
working with other EC countries to encourage increasing economic
integration.
While expressing support for the principle of a managed system of fixed but
adjustable exchange rates, it is cautious on the prospect of sterling's
return to the European exchange rate mechanism.
'Any move to re-enter the exchange rate mechanism will clearly require the
adoption of policies designed to strengthen our weakened industrial capacity
and revive our depressed economy,' it says.
