FT  11 FEB 93 / World Trade News: Potholes in the private road to public
utilities - Turkey's BOT system
SIR ROY Watts, chairman of Thames Water, the privatised UK water authority,
must have thought the deal was in the bag when he flew to Ankara last Friday
to sign up for a Dollars 700m (Pounds 460m) dam project using the Build
Operate and Transfer BOT form of financing, a concept pioneered by Turkey.
As it turned out, there appeared still to be some details to attend to.
Thames now hopes to initial an implementation agreement in the next couple
of weeks, but that, as a number of contractors have discovered, is just the
first hurdle.
The attempt to revive BOT, a method of franchise financing which uses
private sector debt to fund public infrastructure, reflects the desperate
state of public finances in Turkey. The move also underscores a personal
rivalry between Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and the man who more or less
invented the BOT concept, President Turgut Ozal.
Under BOT, a contractor owns a plant for a set period - in Thames' case 15
years - before transfering it to the public utility. The contractor arranges
finance, repaying the debt with revenues generated from the project.
Turkey is currently looking at three big schemes. The Thames Water project
at Izmit, south-east of Istanbul, involves dam construction, pumping
stations and more than 60 miles of water mains.
At Birecik on the Euphrates, a consortium led by Philipp Holzmann of Germany
is looking at a DM2bn (Pounds 800m) hydro-electric scheme.
Discussions are under way with Enron, the US engineering giant, on three
combined cycle gas and oil power stations at a total project cost of Dollars
2bn.
The beauty of BOT is that it enables the government to finance public
infrastructure 'off balance sheet' as it shifts the risk from the government
to the private sector. This is a key factor at a time when outstanding
public and private external debt is Dollars 56bn.
In addition, bankers argue that because the private sector is taking the
risk, BOT will ensure more rigorous project disciplines. The onus is on the
private sector developer to see the project is viable and can be completed
on time - otherwise he cannot recover his costs.
Another attraction is that the consortium's financing will typically
incorporate an equity element, in effect bringing in foreign capital
investment which would not be available under a turnkey government project.
However, where BOT has come unstuck is where discussion turns to the levels
of guarantee available in the securities package. The traditional concerns
are currency risk, resource risk and, most critical of all, protection
against force majeure, where natural or other disasters prevent the
contractor from completing, leaving the question as to who has to repay the
banks.
As a first stage, Thames has to sign an implementation agreement which gives
the consortium the licence to sell water, hitherto the state's legal
monopoly. Perhaps inevitably, there is already some opposition within Public
Works, the agency handling state sector water projects, which is naturally
reluctant to see its powers curtailed by a private sector developer in an
area traditionally handled by government.
Accounting for resource risk will be just as challenging. According to Chase
Manhattan, which is advising Thames, the Izmit authority will undertake to
buy 140m cubic metres of water a year. The terms of the offtake agreement in
effect means the purchaser pays for the water whether or not he takes
delivery - the only way these BOT schemes can hope to work.
Thames has also to secure an offtake arrangement with the Istanbul water
authority, under which the Izmit authority will sell water on to its
Istanbul counterpart.
On the Birecik scheme, for example, where Chase is also the adviser, the
consortium has to secure a sales agreement with TEK, the state-owned power
utility to buy the project's electricity. In addition, an accord has to be
struck with DSI, the state hydraulics corporation, to guarantee that the
Ataturk dam upstream discharges a certain volume of water to enable
Birecik's turbines to operate.
The price has then to be agreed, denominated in a hard currency. On the
Ankara metro scheme, one of the reasons BOT failed to attract bank support
was the difficulty matching the project's external debt servicing needs with
the Turkish lira revenue flows from the metro's tolls.
If these problems seem surmountable, the parties are expected to have more
difficulty agreeing a formula in the case of force majeure interrupting the
revenue flows, and in turn affecting the ability of the developer to repay
the banks.
Chase is using a subordinated loan mechanism, in effect a standby facility
which will repay the banks in the event of force majeure. Again, the Ankara
metro, which the Treasury eventually decided to finance with a full
sovereign guarantee, envisaged an unlimited subordinated loan, another
reason that the BOT scheme collapsed.
During construction, Chase has set the level of the loan at Dollars 270m,
which falls away to Dollars 50m during the less risky operational period.
However, it is still unclear who will be the subordinated lender. Some
observers fear this could still prove the project's Achilles heel.
