FT  24 AUG 93 / Arts: Mark Morris, three of the best - Anthony Macaulay
wonders how the same man can make three pieces so unalike / The Edinburgh
Festival
The audience cheers Mark Morris's second Edinburgh programme even more than
the first - as do I. It includes three pieces all new to Britain: the JS
Bach Jesu, meine Freude (good), the Michelle Shocked-Rob Wasserman Home
(better), and the Lou Harrison (best). As in Programme One, the live music
is so excellent you could shut your eyes all evening and have a great time.
But I imagine that most people, while leaving the Meadowbank Stadium at the
evening's close, must feel mighty bewildered - as do I. Who is Mark Morris?
How in the world can the same man make three pieces so unalike?
As everyone must know by now, Morris makes homosexual dance look as natural
as hetero-; and in this respect he is a breakthrough choreographer. But
Jesu, meine Freude shows another breakthrough side of him, lesser-known:
that he means dance to express religious as well as secular conditions. It
is very odd to see a dance set without irony to a Bach devotional cantata.
Odd, because for over 16 centuries Christianity has been the religion most
determined to divide flesh from spirit, and to make dance an irreligious and
profane art. But here are 10 of Morris's dancers - dancers of various races,
dancers with more flesh than you see in ballet, dancers linked in various
AC/DC couplings  - rapt in religious devotion.
As a dance, Jesu meine Freude is bright with internal variety. Passages of
severe upper-body gestures (reflecting the rigours of religious
contemplation) are opposed to sequences of fluent, travelling dance
(suggesting the lyric transports of religious rapture). The former keep
leading to, are the premise of, the latter; and both grow naturally out of
the music. I do, however, detect a certain absence of spontaneity, a slight
nearer-my-God-to-thee self-conscious holiness, in the movement style that
keeps me from surrendering to this dance's spirit.
Home, by contrast, is a powerful and poetic piece of secular Americana. Set
to music composed and performed by Michelle Shocked and Rob Wasserman, it
consists of six sections. Numbers 2, 4 and 6 are country music, communal
dances, bright-spirited affairs, in which men and women 'clog' in leather
shoes. Numbers 1, 3 and 5, however, are scenes for women without men, dark
and bleak scenes of women in the agricultural mid-West, while Shocked sings
with thrilling force of (no. 1, 'I Need a Friend') loneliness, (no. 3,
'Still-born') depression, and (no. 5, 'Winter Wheat') impatience. As Home
alternate between these two tones, it grows ever more moving: harsh and
compassionate at the same time.
The evening ends with an extraordinary work, an utter knockout work, Grand
Duo, a four-part dance for full company. (Its final section, Polka, was seen
here last year; the rest is new.) The music is by Lou Harrison (b1917), an
American composer whose music Morris has used before; what music of his I
have heard strikes me as so superb that I am amazed how seldom it is played
here. This Grand Duo for Violin and Piano, though composed only five years
ago, is vintage modernism: driving, fragmented, with elements of folk music
thrown into its furious engines.
The tribal dance that Morris has made to this music is like the Rite of
Spring you always wanted to see and never have. It is, at one and the same
time, (a) a brilliant piece of primitivism, a pulsing vision of an archaic
community, (b) a shocking portrait of neurological disturbance, an assembly
of people seldom touching but united in violent and helpless gestures that
need to be exorcised, their alarmingly frenetic energies emerging from deep
within, (c) a work that shows people like cogs in a vast impersonal device,
driven by machine rhythms.
Grand Duo is the most thrilling new dance I have seen for many a long month.
It is, I believe, the greatest thing that Morris has made since the 1989
Dido and Aeneas; and, like that and other works of his, a masterpiece. Every
praise to the dancers, who are the committed embodiment of Morris's grand
design. Because of them, liking his dances is the easiest thing in the
world. They make you fall in love again with dancing, dancing to music,
dancing as instinct and life force.
