FT  13 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Copper market responds to
'rogue' element
THE HUGE WEIGHT of money available to market operators is having an
increasing impact on the London Metal Exchange's flagship copper market,
according to Mr Martin Thompson, commercial adviser at the RTZ Corporation,
the world's biggest mining company.
'Like any free market, that for copper has always been open to a wide
variety of 'technical' influences that do not necessarily reflect its
fundamentals,' Mr Thompson says. 'But in recent years the price's behaviour
has tended to become increasingly divorced from the perceived levels of
physical supply and demand.'
Mr Thompson suggests the main cause is that the growth of the copper market,
which is restricted to the growth in copper consumption, 'has fallen far
behind the growth in the finance available to some market operators, whose
capacity to influence the behaviour of the price has grown accordingly'.
'Restriction on the supply of metal - attributed to a Japanese company  -
did much to support copper's price in 1991. Heavy buying by Chinese
companies, well beyond their physical purchases, performed the same service
in 1992 and early this year. Operations by American commodity funds have
also been influential from time to time,' he explains. 'In addition, the
volume of options now sold is such that covering by their sellers, by both
buying and selling, has become a major 'rogue' element (in the market).'
Mr Thompson's analysis appears in the latest annual reviews from Mining
Journal and was written before the latest technical squeeze - and
accompanying allegations of manipulation - took hold of the copper market.
Mr Chris Green, a former chairman of the LME and a director of Barclays
Metals, also suggests in the annual reviews that option activity on the
exchange is playing a significant role in keeping copper prices up.
He says that as much as 15-20 per cent of all 1993 copper mine production
has been covered by options in one form or another. A number of producers
have already bought similar protection against 1994 output.
The difficulty for the granters of the options, 'on whose shoulders the
burden of risk management now lies', is that there has been in copper little
opportunity to offset the risk of options granted to producers against
business with consumers, Mr Green says.
'This latter group, which comprises major motor vehicle manufacturers, the
larger domestic appliance manufacturers and the big electrical combines,
have been singularly, but understandably, reticent to enter into similar
deals the other way round.
'There is no history in copper, unlike the aluminium industry, of producers
being willing to guarantee their customers fixed prices for years ahead.
'Such is the gap between the expectations of (copper) consumers and those of
producers that the development of 'two-way' option business has been
relatively small.'
Mr Green explains that official LME options, while giving transparency and
liquidity to the market, in normal circumstances are all restricted to the
third Wednesday of each month and must be declared two weeks prior. So,
while the market is highly active, it can also at times be 'seriously
illiquid'.
He says additional warehouse locations for copper in other key industrial
areas would help ease the position by making physical metal more easily
obtainable. (This is a hint that Mr Green would support any LME move to
appoint warehouses to store copper in the US, which so far it has been
reluctant to do.)
Meanwhile, 'the rigidity of the system remains a target for manipulation,
which can in turn generate a stampede in the marketplace'. And this was what
happened in earlier this year when such a 'stampede' caused the copper price
to fall by one-quarter in five weeks to reach Dollars 1,710 a tonne in May,
its lowest level for 5 1/2 years.
Mining Journal's two annual reviews provide detailed overviews of the
industry, covering 155 countries alphabetically from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe
and 64 metals and minerals from aluminium to zirconium.
Mining Annual Review and Metals &amp; Minerals Annual Review: Pounds 60 for
addresses in the UK, Pounds 75 or USDollars 140 outside the UK, from Mining
Journal Books, 60 Worship Street, London EC2A 2HD, UK.
