FT  01 FEB 93 / The tide turns against another corporate Titan: Alan
Friedman analyses the hasty Amex boardroom departure
THE board of directors of American Express, the troubled US travel and
financial services group, will meet today to discuss the election of a new
chairman, following the surprise resignation of Mr James Robinson at the
weekend.
It is understood that Mr Richard Furlaud, a board member and former
president of Bristol-Myers Squibb, the drugs company, may be named as
interim non-executive chairman.
Mr Robinson, who has run American Express for 15 years, said on Saturday he
would sever all ties with the company by February 22. He will resign as
group chairman and will also give up his new positions as chairman and chief
executive of Shearson Lehman Brothers, the loss-making brokerage and
investment banking subsidiary.
'In this environment, with all the attention focused on management problems
at IBM, Westinghouse and other major corporations, my staying at American
Express would leave Harvey (Golub) and the company encumbered by issues that
have nothing to do with reality - and for what purpose?' Mr Robinson's
statement said. The choice of a successor at Shearson is expected to take
several weeks.
But Mr Robinson, 57, began last week by turning the tables on those in Wall
Street who had demanded his resignation in the wake of heavy card losses and
a share price slump. By the weekend Mr Robinson, faced by angry
shareholders, recognised he had to go.
In September a group of American Express directors, including Mr Rawleigh
Warner, the former Mobil chairman, insisted that Mr Robinson prepare to
resign as chairman and chief executive.
The prime reason for the push was the obvious failure of Mr Robinson's 1980s
strategy of trying to construct a financial services supermarket by way of
an expansion that at various stages included plastic cards, travel services,
the Shearson Lehman brokerage and investment banking business, private
banking, cable television and insurance.
Mr Robinson's foremost adviser in his boardroom troubles has been Mrs Linda
Robinson, his wife, an ambitious public relations executive.
His strategy was to put a brave face on his coming resignation as chief
executive, denying he was being forced out. By last Monday he had persuaded
the board to install Mr Harvey Golub, his chief deputy, as chief executive.
But what really surprised American Express shareholders, however, was that
Mr Robinson last Monday not only salvaged his job as chairman, but also
pushed aside close friends and had himself named chairman and chief
executive of Shearson, the loss-making subsidiary. Among those pushed aside
was Mr Howard Clark, Jr, the Shearson chairman whose father - Mr Howard
Clark Sr. - was Mr Robinson's predecessor at American Express and who had
himself turned against Mr Robinson in recent weeks.
Although Mr Robinson said he was not available to be interviewed, close
associates say both he and his wife perceived Shearson as his comeback
vehicle, or may have hoped to restore it to profitability and eventually buy
it from American Express. Mrs Robinson, in turn, has been dubbed the 'Lady
Macbeth' of American Express by the US media.
The opposition to Mr Robinson's tenure at American Express intensified
immediately after it was announced last Monday that he would stay on. At the
same time the company disclosed nearly halved 1992 earnings and figures for
its core Travel Related Services (TRS) division that showed a 75 per cent
crash in profits between 1990 and 1992.
By last Tuesday investors had dumped American Express stock in trading that
topped three times the normal volume. Within 24 hours the selling had wiped
more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m), or 8 per cent, off the company's market
capitalisation.
Analysts doubted Mr Golub's claim that he was in charge, viewing him as
beholden to Mr Robinson. By Wednesday three board directors, including Mr
Warner, had quit American Express, following Mr Robinson's apparent victory.
It did not help Mr Robinson's image that as directors were resigning on
Wednesday night he was celebrating his wife's birthday at a lavish and
socially notable party in New York's East Village.
On Thursday Mr Golub faced an open rebellion from some institutional
shareholders who told him Mr Robinson was now proving an albatross to the
company, dragging down morale, image and the share price.
By Friday it was rumoured that Mr Richard Furlaud, a director and the former
president of Bristol-Myers Squibb who has been a key player in the boardroom
drama, had become concerned about possible shareholder lawsuits. .
Mr Robinson remained defiant even on Saturday afternoon, when he finally
announced he would sever all ties with American Express.
He dismissed as 'a big misperception' the idea that his carrying on as
chairman of the group would impinge on Mr Golub's ability to act as an
independent chief executive. He replied to Wall Street's overwhelming vote
against him by railing against 'unnecessary confusion in the minds of some
investors and the press'. And he claimed that 'the good of the company has
always been and continues to be my primary and overriding concern'.
Now American Express faces more disarray and insiders say it will be up to
Mr Golub and what remains of the board to restore a semblance of stability,
make new appointments and then get on with turning the group around.
Shearson - alone among big US securities firms - suffered heavy losses in
1992. American Express must meanwhile face credit losses and its steady loss
of market share and customers.
The future management direction of American Express is likely to see more
tough measures by Mr Golub to reduce losses at the troubled Optima credit
card division and to re-launch other card products and seek cost savings in
the TRS division and at Shearson. It is not inconceivable that Shearson will
eventually be sold.
In broader terms Mr Robinson's downfall, coming just five days after he had
pulled off the most dramatic counter-coup seen in years in corporate
America, is notable among the recent string of top-level management
upheavals at blue-chip companies such as IBM, General Motors and
Westinghouse.
The reasons are twofold. Firstly, Mr Robinson was among the last of the
quintessentially 1980s corporate Titans.
His departure - more than others - is another sign that the mind-set of the
past decade is over.
Secondly, his departure reinforces the growing trend toward greater
shareholder democracy in America. It suggests no chairman and chief
executive should believe himself to be invincible or unaccountable.
The revolution at American Express is thus both a cautionary tale and a
potentially salutory lesson for corporate America. The next few months will
show whether or not the company can profit from the pain.
