FT  14 MAY 93 / World Trade News: China lays on an Olympian reception - Tony
Walker loses count of the accolades heaped on visiting IOC president
'SAMA-WHIRLWIND sweeps Shanghai' said the headline in the Chinese newspaper.
This was not a reference to a freak storm but to the presence of a man who
has been elevated by China's official press to the status of a demigod.
Juan Antonio Samaranch, President of International Olympic Committee for the
past 12 years, has been buried under gifts and honours as Chinese leaders
fell over each other to pay their respects.
To the Chinese, desperate to secure the nomination for the 2000 Olympics as
an affirmation of their growing world importance, Mr Samaranch's presence
has afforded an opportunity to influence the man whom they believe holds the
key to hearts and minds of the 90 IOC delegates who will vote on the
nomination.
China's Samaranch-fever, in all its astonishing manifestations, is the most
visible aspect of an intensifying diplomatic and public relations blitz as
Beijing and Sydney ' clear frontrunners to stage the 2000 Olympics ' settle
down for a contest that will come to an end on September 23 when the winner
is announced in Monte Carlo.
While both Australian and Chinese officials insist in public that they are
intent pursuing the contest in true Olympic spirit, there is no doubt that
at another level they are engaged in 'no holds barred' competition.
On hand in China this week to witness the deification of Mr Samaranch were
Australians Mr Kevan Gosper, an IOC vice-president, Mr John Coates President
of the Australian Olympic Committee, and Mr Phil Coles, an IOC delegate.
Among their tasks was to sign a 'truce' to smooth any bumps in relations
beteween the two Olympic Committees as the bidding war intensifies.
But scarcely was ink dry on the agreement that provides for enhanced
co-operation and sporting exchanges than representatives of both sides were
seeking to undermine each other's claims. Australian officials mumbled about
Beijing's pollution, China's indifferent human rights record, traffic snarls
in the capital, and the poor maintenance of some of China's sporting
facilities.
The Chinese, for their part, stepped up their diplomatic blitz with their
fawning reception of Mr Samaranch and their heavy emphasis on China's size
and weight. The implication here is that the IOC can hardly deny the wishes
of one-fifth of mankind to host the world's premier sporting event.
On the record, representatives of the two sides are being determinedly
sporting. Mr Coates said the Australian Olympic Committee hoped that the
competition could be conducted in a 'friendly' atmosphere.
The opening of the inaugural East Asian games in Shanghai involved thousands
of performers in a mass synchronised display that went off like clockwork, a
spectacular fireworks show designed by a French specialist and a crowd of
30,000 who accorded Mr Samaranch a standing ovation when he appeared in the
stadium.
Mr Samaranch could be forgiven for experiencing something of an anti-climax
when he travels to Australia later this week after being feted in Shanghai
and latterly in Beijing.
Sydney's press is unlikely to clear its front pages to detail Mr Samaranch's
every move in contrast to his treatment one day this week by the Beijing
Daily which carried almost nothing but 'Sama-stories' on its front and back
pages.
China's official 'Outlook magazine' almost certainly outdid its competitors
in its praise for Mr Samaranch. 'His achievements,' the magazine told its
readers, 'are simply too many to count.'
