FT  28 APR 93 / Survey of Hertfordshire (3): Increased emphasis on R&amp;D -
Pharmaceuticals / The sector has deep roots in the county
EUROPE'S leading centre for pharmaceuticals research and development is not
Basle, home of the Swiss giants, Ciba, Roche and Sandoz. It is
Hertfordshire.
Four of the world's biggest drugs groups, Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham of
the UK, Roche of Switzerland and Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme of the US, employ
between them about 5,500 workers in the region.
Hertfordshire's importance as a centre for drugs manufacturing has declined
in recent years as land prices have increased, but its importance as a
centre for research and development has increased.
By 1995, there will be about 3,500 R&amp;D pharmaceuticals scientists in the
county, according to a recent report* by the South East Economic Development
Strategy. In 1990, the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry
estimated there were 16,300 R&amp;D drugs employees in the UK.
Increasing government pressures on the industry's prices and profits are
likely to lead to rationalisation first and foremost in manufacturing and
then marketing. But only the weakest companies - among which Glaxo, Merck,
SmithKline Beecham and Roche do not figure - will be forced to cut R&amp;D.
Glaxo has been the European leader in rationalising manufacturing
facilities, but decided to concentrate some of its secondary manufacturing
at Ware, suggesting this site is safe as a production location.
Glaxo, Europe's largest pharmaceuticals group and the largest drugs employer
in the region, has made the most important R&amp;D investment in Hertfordshire
in recent years. The group, the world's biggest R&amp;D spender, is building a
Pounds 500m research campus, designed to house 1,500 staff. By 1995, the
company expects to employ 1,000 people in manufacturing at Ware, and a
further 1,200 for drug development at the same site, on top of the 1,500 at
Stevenage.
The 75-acre Stevenage site, comprising 10 main buildings, will be the
Glaxo's largest research centre in the world. The campus will be used to
seek treatments for cancer, heart attacks, arthritis, Aids, and diseases
associated with ageing.
Meanwhile, SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group, remains the second
largest pharmaceuticals employer in the region with about 1,700 employees.
Its UK pharmaceuticals headquarters is at Mundells, in Welwyn Garden City, a
legacy of SmithKline &amp; French's move to the area in 1959.
The company no longer manufactures in the area, having closed its facilities
last year following the merger of the US group SmithKline Beckman with
Beecham of the UK in 1989. SmithKline Beecham says it wanted to concentrate
its manufacturing operations at two sites, Crawley and Worthing. However, it
still distributes products from warehouses in the Hertfordshire region.
SmithKline Beecham's remaining facilities include the R&amp;D centre at the
Frythe site, in the village of Old, where about 500 people are employed.
Merck Sharpe &amp; Dohme, the world's largest pharmaceuticals group, has its UK
headquarters at Hoddesdon, where about 950 people are employed.
Du Pont Merck, Merck's joint venture with Du Pont of the US, has its
European headquarters in Watford. A number of smaller groups also have
branches in the region. They include Astra Pharmaceutical, a subsidiary of
the Swedish group, which has its UK sales and marketing base at Kings
Langley, and Serono Laboratories, part of the Geneva-based Ares-Serono,
which has its marketing wing at Welwyn. Schering-Plough, the US group, plans
to move its UK headquarters from Mildenhall, in Suffolk, to Welwyn Garden
City later this year.
Not all of the traffic has been one way, however. In 1981, Smith &amp; Nephew
decided to move some of its operations to Romford in Essex, where it was
already manufacturing. It is also moving operations from Gilston,
Hertfordshire, to York.
The reason for the concentration of pharmaceuticals activity in
Hertfordshire is a combination of historical accident and the county's
natural advantages. Many are located there because they acquired businesses
in the region. SmithKline Beecham's presence can be attributed to its
takeover of AJ White in 1956, for example.
Roche has had operations in Welwyn Garden City since 1937. One of its four
international research centres is based there. Dr Jurgen Drews, head of
Roche's international R&amp;D, says the Welwyn site is in charge of Roche's
research into herpes and HIV, the virus that causes Aids, as well as some
inflammatory work.
The site also contains the UK head office, general administration, and sales
and marketing. Some 300 people are involved in manufacturing. Roche
Nicholas, the over-the-counter non-prescription drugs business, is also
based there, as well as the recently acquired businesses from Fisons.
The company was attracted by the availability of land, easy communications
with London, and plentiful and skilled labour, according to Mr John Bennie,
head of personnel and administration for pharmaceuticals at Roche Products,
the Swiss group's UK subsidiary.
'Those reasons still hold true today, apart from the availability of land,'
says Mr Bennie. Communications are still good, with travelling times of 45
minutes to Heathrow airport if the M25 motorway is clear. Stansted, although
geographically closer, takes about the same time to reach.
Labour shortages, acute five years ago, have become much less of a problem
because of the recession. Attracting skilled scientists has become less
tricky since house prices have fallen.
Nevertheless, the recent South East Economic Development Strategy study
suggested that there were still difficulties in recruiting people with
appropriate skills, training and experience, although it added companies
were insisting there was no crisis.
Glaxo said the shortages were caused by a declining number of young people,
as well as fewer being interested in science. Many local schools had also
tended to teach engineering-orientated subjects for the aerospace sector,
the dominant local industry.
One final attraction for many former north London employees, says Mr Bennie,
is the proximity of Tottenham Hotspur and Arsenal football clubs, although
he admits this was not a reason why Roche concentrated its activities in the
area.
The South East Economic Development Strategy report also cites the proximity
of the county to the UK department of health and leading teaching hospitals
in the south east, as well as easy access to the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge.
Given the strength of the pharmaceutials industry and its roots in
Hertfordshire, the sector should prove an important counter-weight to the
decline of the aerospace sector in the future.
*Health and Wealth? The development of the pharmaceutical industry in the
south east, focusing on the Hertfordshire sub-region, by Michael Breheny et
alia. South East Economic Strategy. Tel 0279 44 6448/9.
