FT  05 AUG 93 / Midland shows sixfold profit increase
MIDLAND Bank, the UK subsidiary of HSBC Holdings, yesterday disclosed a
sharp improvement in profits, helped by buoyant trading income in treasury
and capital markets operations.
Midland achieved pre-tax profits of Pounds 385m in the first six months,
against Pounds 60m in the same period last year. This was in spite of a 12
per cent rise in bad debt provisions in the bank's continuing operations to
Pounds 321m, against Pounds 287m.
The bank did not disclose separate figures for its Midland Global Markets
operation, but the bank's dealing profits were Pounds 296m, against Pounds
50m. This led to non-interest income of Pounds 854m, including trading
profits, exceeding net interest income of Pounds 840m.
Midland's holdings of debt securities, including UK gilts, rose to Pounds
9.5bn from Pounds 5.02bn. This contributed to a Pounds 6.1bn rise in total
assets to Pounds 67.5bn, against Pounds 61.4bn, in spite of a fall in loans
to personal and corporate customers.
Midland treasury and capital markets activities were merged with Hongkong
Bank's last year following the acquisition. The bank said profits had been
helped by the synergies combined with exceptional trading conditions in the
first half.
The bank paid a Pounds 50m dividend to HSBC out of attributable profits of
Pounds 282m, compared with Pounds 5m. Retained profits and Pounds 130m
additional capital included under EC accounting rules led to a rise in its
tier 1 capital ratio from 5.5 to 6.5 per cent.
Sir Peter Walters, chairman, said the bank was now able to take advantage of
any rise in domestic lending. The banks was 'actively pursuing'
opportunities to lend. But he said the bad debt charge showed 'lingering
doubts' about recovery.
The bank's ratio of costs to income fell from 73.3 to 61.4 per cent, in
spite of a 9 per cent rise in costs for continuing business - excluding the
Thomas Cook travel agency sold last year and its former merchant bank - to
Pounds 1.04bn.
Mr Brian Pearse, chief executive, said there remained 'a lot to do to
develop income' in the branch bank. But Mr Pearse said there was not much
scope for cost reductions, a matter on which he was 'trying to educate the
parent'.
He said the bank was starting to re-establish its position in small
corporate business. It believed it had raised its market share to 12 per
cent from 9 per cent, although it was still below its peak of 15 per cent.
The domestic bad debt charge fell to Pounds 272m, against Pounds 277m, but
two large corporate bad debts accounted for Pounds 65m of this. Bank
analysts said yesterday that they believed the two debts referred to were
against Queen's Moat and Isosceles.
Firstdirect, the telephone banking operation, raised the number of accounts
to 400,000 at the mid-year. The Forward Trust leasing business made a Pounds
28m profit, up from Pounds 25m.
HSBC shares closed 19p up at 690p yesterday. It will report its interim
results on August 31.
Lex, Page 16
