FT  11 NOV 93 / Technology: Trials and tribulations of drug harmony - The
need for a standard approach to pharmaceutical testing
Discussion flared in Florida last month over how much sun could get through
the window of a Tokyo pharmacy in high summer.
This conundrum was just one item on the agenda of 1,600 scientists from the
pharmaceutical industry and health ministries around the world who attended
the Second International Conference on Harmonisation of the Technical
Requirements for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use.
Against the improbable background of Disney World, the cream of the world's
drug developers and regulators spent three days debating how an alignment of
divergent national testing requirements could bring new medicines onto the
market more quickly.
At present, there is no standardised approach to checking how medicines
stand up to light - which is why the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare
was presenting detailed data on how it measured the exposure of a drug
stored near a south-facing window during a 14-day period in June.
Drug manufacturers face a daunting technical challenge in bringing their new
products on to international markets. Differing regulatory demands from
country to country oblige a company to perform new tests or present its data
in different formats to satisfy each health authority.
With the average cost of developing a new drug estimated at nearly Dollars
360m (Pounds 238m), companies have a powerful incentive to eliminate
unnecessary expenditure and delay - and one obvious route is the
rationalisation of testing requirements.
According to David Kessler, commissioner of the US Food and Drug
Administration: 'Science-driven harmonisation can curtail duplication and
thereby reduce significantly the cost of new drug development - not just in
dollars spent by the industry, but in risk-taking by patients, in
experimentation with laboratory animals and in the regulatory effort of our
governments.'
After more than three years of intensive collaboration, the health
authorities and the pharmaceutical industry in the world's big three drug
development regions - the EC, US and Japan - are now starting to see the
first results of their labours towards rationalised drug registration
requirements.
Cuts of 33 per cent in the cost of stability testing have been claimed as
the result of one of the harmonisation measures announced in Orlando.
A joint guideline nearing agreement on long-term toxicity studies holds out
the promise of halving the length of some tests without any significant loss
of data.
Similar agreements are in prospect on a standard format for presenting
clinical trials data, how to screen out potential cancer-causing agents,
whether it is legitimate to transfer results between ethnic groups and the
hundreds of other detailed testing standards that have pushed drug costs
upwards and held back new product introductions.
These could be only the first steps. Drug regulators are now admitting, for
the first time, that the prospect of a single standard application format
worldwide is not entirely unrealistic, and that the road could even extend
to joint review of new drug applications.
Given that the EFTA countries, Canada and the World Health Organisation are
also involved in this harmonisation process and that many other countries
wish to join in, the long-term benefit for companies introducing new drugs
already appeals to business managers as much as to research heads.
However, the touchstone of success will be how quickly the new agreements
can be put into practice in the three regions which are the motors for
change. Kessler has warned that cost constraints could prevent the FDA
moving ahead 'with the sense of urgency that harmonisation projects may
deserve'.
Keith Jones, director of the UK Medicines Control Agency, has responded that
delay by any of the three regulatory parties 'would deliver little to
industry or to patients'. And Fernand Sauer, the EC Commission's head of
pharmaceuticals, has drawn a connection between the success of the
harmonisation programme 'and its correct and swift implementation in the
three regions'.
There is also a perceived need to speed up the harmonisation process itself
and make the negotiations more efficient. As Nobataka Tsunakawa of the
Japanese Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association remarked on the
development of the stability testing guideline: 'At the beginning of the
process, we expected to obtain early results with this issue. But it took
three-and-a-half years to reach our goal.'
Some European industry representatives at Orlando, resentful that they had
been bounced into a deal which tightened up testing requirements for them,
ruffled the feathers of diplomacy by circulating a letter complaining of
decisions being made 'in a political climate'.
Nevertheless, the process appears set to continue. The obvious motivations
include long-term economic benefit, faster drug development, fewer animal
tests and better science.
But for many of the hundreds of experts involved in this network of meetings
and discussions over the last three years, the satisfaction - and the
principal recompense for a heavy increase in personal workload - is that of
the pioneer.
