FT  22 JAN 93 / Arts: Boulez conducts in Birmingham - Concerts
There can no better confirmation of the arrival of the City of Birmingham
Symphony in the top international flight than Pierre Boulez's acceptance of
an invitation to conduct the orchestra. For Simon Rattle, who has been
largely responsible for the CBSO's present eminence and for whom playing
under Boulez in the National Youth Orchestra 20 years ago was an important
formative experience, it must be an immensely satisfying occasion.
Boulez is spending the best part of two weeks in Birmingham, conducting two
CBSO programmes as well as working with students from the Birmingham
Conservatoire and appearing with the Birmingham Contemporary Music Group.
The programmes of Debussy, Stravinsky, Bartok and the Second Viennese
School, as well as his own Notations, come from the core of Boulez's musical
world. It is all repertory close to Rattle's heart also; at present there
can be few European orchestras better equipped to respond to Boulez than the
CBSO.
Certainly the verve with which he launched the first of Schoenberg's Five
Orchestral Pieces in Symphony Hall on Thursday of last week could only have
been achieved through complete familiarity and technical confidence. The
later, more expressive Boulez emphasises the sinewy lyricism of these pieces
and in the process demonstrates just how important a model they were for
Alban Berg; but that still does not preclude him from balancing the colour
chords of the 'Farben' movement with absolute precision, or marshalling the
counterpoints of 'The endless recitative' with uncompromising directness.
There was Webern in both concerts. In Thursday's the two Cantatas Opp. 31
and 29 framed the orchestral Variations Op. 30 and slightly misfired: an
unannounced change of programme order did not help the audience's
concentration, but there was still something didactic about Boulez's Webern,
however much he gave dramatic life to the choral textures (from the BBC
Singers) in the cantatas or underpinned the soloists (Sarah Leonard and
Robert Hayward, both faultless) with vivid detail. In the Variations there
was still the feeling of emphasising compositional intricacy over expressive
force. The freedom with which Boulez conducts Schoenberg and Berg nowadays
seemed not yet percolated through to their compatriot, yet the second
concert this Wednesday opened with as effective and direct an account of the
Op 1 Passacaglia as could be imagined, built up from the slowest of
beginnings to a fierce, challenging climax.
Petrushka ended the first concert, given as always by Boulez in the original
1911 version with quadruple wind. The CBSO was on top of every bar,
wonderfully pungent in its solos (eloquent flute, piano, clarinets and
trumpets) and exact in its ensemble. Boulez combined rhythmic accuracy with
exquisite refinement - ravishing in the delicate folk counterpoints of the
first tableau and in the lapping impressionist washes of the last, which
seem like the Stravinskyan equivalent of a vamp-till-ready. In the closing
pages every element was made to tell, with no question of anything but the
most acute and searching dramatic sense informing every note.
The second programme was rounded off with a flourish by Notations, a
brilliant orchestral showpiece which has surely become the most performed of
all Boulez's works. There was a sample of his unsentimentally eloquent
Debussy too in the shape of the Nocturnes and a staggeringly accurate
account of Bartok's First Piano Concerto with Krystian Zimerman as the
perfectly cast soloist. Zimerman is a wonderful foil to Boulez's keenly
perceptive accompaniment, just as vigilant and scrupulous in his own
balancing of textures, just as exact in his rhythmic sense and technical
address. The CBSO responded with equal alertness; even in a brace of
concerts pitched at the very highest level of accomplishment, the concerto
was very special indeed.
Symphony Hall, Birmingham; further concerts January 26 (Birmingham), 27
(London)
