FT  18 NOV 93 / Men still on top: Women's jobs are increasingly being
poached by the opposite sex
Mr Alan Hubner, aged 27, of Wigton, Cumbria and Liverpudlian Mr Charles
Shiells, 50, have yet to make an impact as the male equivalents of the
suffragette Pankhurst family.
But history books might reserve them a footnote each. After decades in which
women have battled to take jobs traditionally held by men, the roles are
being reversed.
Last month, Mr Hubner was awarded Pounds 2,000 by an industrial tribunal
after he failed to get a Pounds 90 a week job at a Carlisle factory. The
tribunal accepted his complaint that he was rejected because he wanted to
take advantage of the company's subsidised child-minding scheme, available
for women workers.
In an earlier case, Mr Shiells won Pounds 600 compensation after being
rejected for a job as a nurse at Tuebrook Tots nursery in Liverpool.
The driving force behind men's encroachment into previously female territory
is primarily economic. The official male unemployment rate - almost 14 per
cent of the workforce in September - is more than twice the equivalent
female rate.
Mrs Lilian Bennett, chairman of Manpower UK, the employment agency, says
there are no figures showing the number of male to female job applicants but
reports 'a noticeable increase in the numbers of men entering the temping
market for jobs that women have expected to do'.
Mr Hubner and Mr Shiells represent only the tip of a small, but growing,
iceberg. The Equal Opportunities Commission says that of the 1,253
complaints it received last year about sex discrimination in companies'
hiring and recruitment policies, 40 per cent had come from men - a 10
percentage point increase on the previous year.
The EOC also says males are 'more stroppy' about complaining. 'Men are
quicker to take advantage of equal opportunities legislation - so much so
that, because of lack of funds, we are having to prioritise in women's
favour,' says the EOC's Ms Fiona Fox.
At the same time, the recession is forcing changes in corporate behaviour. A
Confederation of British Industry paper earlier this year noted that high
unemployment had reduced the pressure to bring members of under-represented
groups into the labour force and to improve their skills.
Though joblessness largely explains the behaviour of companies and
individual males, there are also some in the equal opportunities field who
detect a backlash against positive discrimination for women. According to a
Department of Employment official, 'positive action is being targeted as
unacceptable at a time of the highest male unemployment since the 1930s'.
No company would admit publicly to dropping commitments to promoting women.
But the Labour party recently provided evidence of a possible groundswell of
male opinion against affirmative action; Labour MPs reacted to what some
described as an 'assisted places scheme' for females in shadow Cabinet
elections last month by throwing two women, Ms Harriet Harman and Ms Ann
Clwyd, off the front bench team. However, Mr John Smith, the Labour leader,
reinstated Ms Harman as shadow Treasury chief secretary.
Meanwhile, the EOC has received complaints from several would-be male Labour
MPs about the party's proposed ban on men standing in half the parliamentary
seats where the local constituency organisation is looking for a new
candidate.
All this is bad news for those trying to improve the position of women in
work, as the hurdles they face seem as high as ever. A survey of 179
countries by the Geneva-based International Labour Organisation said that,
on current trends, women will take 475 years to achieve equality with men in
'managerial' or 'decision-making' positions in all sizes of companies.
While men have risen rapidly to the top of almost every female-dominated
profession they have entered, women have no comparable success in
traditional male dominated fields - such as the civil service.
For instance, males make up just 7 per cent of all qualified nurses in
Britain. But above the level of senior nurse, men outnumber women, according
to the Royal College of Nursing. 'Men are more assertive because they are
not worried about getting pregnant and interrupting their careers,' says Mr
Jamie Fleming, of the RCN.
Similarly, of 35,000 practising midwives in the UK, only 53 are male. But
one, Mr Paul Lewis, who qualified in 1979, already has one of the country's
top midwifery jobs - director of women's services at West London Hospital.
Though women may envy male success, there is a case for arguing that they
should not gripe about the readiness of men to resort to the law to increase
their job chances: the EOC argues that any act that increases awareness of
sex discrimination by companies can only be beneficial to all in the long
run.
