FT  13 AUG 93 / Scientists split over killing off viruses
THE FAILURE of virologists to reach a decision on what to do with the last
known stocks of smallpox has highlighted the sharply conflicting views of
scientists over whether to destroy such deadly viruses.
An emotional debate at the International Congress on Virology in Glasgow
this week produced no consensus on whether the smallpox stocks, kept deep
frozen in two laboratories in the US and Russia, should be preserved.
A clear-cut verdict by the 1,000 virologists would have given a strong lead
to the World Health Assembly, which is expected to decide the fate of the
virus at the United Nations next year. But no vote was taken at the end of
the evenly balanced debate in Glasgow.
A worldwide vaccination campaign eradicated smallpox in the wild. The last
naturally transmitted case was in Somalia in 1977, though the final smallpox
victim was Mrs Janet Parker, a medical photographer who died in 1978 after
some virus escaped from a Birmingham University laboratory.
Microbiologists agreed after that accident to store all remaining virus
samples in secure laboratories in Atlanta and Moscow.
Dr Brian Mahy, head of virology at the US Centres for Disease Control in
Atlanta, wants to destroy the stocks in his laboratory. This would tell the
world that scientists 'are not afraid to create a safer environment for
future generations', he said in Glasgow. 'Retaining the virus has always
represented the threat of germ and biological warfare.'
His Russian colleague, Dr Dmitri Lvov of the Institute of Virology in
Moscow, agreed. Destruction 'would be a great Christmas gift to all the
world'.
Dr Ken Berns of Yale University, who chaired the debate, said the
destructionists relied mainly on political arguments while their opponents
emphasised the scientific benefits of keeping the virus alive.
The preservationists argue that:
Further research, using new genetic techniques, might shed light on why
smallpox was so dangerous and on why some viruses are more virulent than
others.
The Atlanta and Moscow stocks might not be the only remaining smallpox in
existence. The virus could conceivably survive in bodies buried decades ago
in the Siberian permafrost. There could still be samples in other
laboratories, concealed or just forgotten. Even if smallpox is extinct, a
similar disease might occur if a related animal virus such as monkey pox
mutated into a form that infected humans. The original virus would be a
useful reference for fighting such a new disease.
Humanity has no right to exterminate any living species, whether it is a
panda or a pox.
The fate of smallpox could set a precedent for other organisms that cause
human disease. The World Health Organisation is campaigning to eradicate
polio by the year 2000.
The WHO predicts that the second disease after smallpox to be wiped out  -
perhaps even as soon as 1995 - will be dracunculiasis. It is caused by the
guinea worm, a parasite that would be far more difficult to store
indefinitely in a deep freeze than smallpox or polio virus. Even if smallpox
is reprieved, scientists might be forced to exterminate the guinea worm in
the name of human health.
