FT  06 MAY 93 / Boutros Ghali urges UN war crime tribunal
AN INTERNATIONAL tribunal to judge war crimes committed since 1991 in former
Yugoslavia should be set up under the mandatory enforcement procedures of
the UN Security Council, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary general,
proposed yesterday.
In a written report to the Council, which agreed in February to establish
the court, he said a resolution under Chapter VII of the UN Charter would
become 'immediately effective' and all states then would be obliged to take
necessary action.
The court would comprise 11 judges and sit at The Hague in the Netherlands,
where the International Court of Justice is located.
The US has already prepared a list of suspected Yugoslav war criminals. This
includes Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader who last Sunday
initialled the Vance-Owen peace plan. The release of Mr Boutros Ghali's
recommendations on the day that the Bosnian Serb 'parliament' was
considering whether to ratify acceptance apparently was only a coincidence.
Responding to reservations voiced by some UN members about the propriety of
creating a tribunal, the secretary general said the court was 'legally
justified.' The Security Council had already determined that widespread
violations of humanitarian law in former Yugoslavia threatened international
peace and security.
Mr Boutros Ghali, himself an international legal authority, offered the
draft of a 34-article statute for the court, one article of which would
presume the innocence of the accused, promised speedy trial and no
compulsion to self-incrimination.
The court should not be empowered to impose the death penalty and terms of
imprisonment should be based on the general practice of sentencing by
Yugoslav courts.
Among the offences that should be tried are genocide and complicity in
genocide - a clear reference to the ethnic cleansing campaign in Bosnia
which has shocked the world and helped to fuel demands for UN military
measures. Charges of murder, enslavement, deportation, imprisonment,
torture, rape, political, racial and religious persecution as well as 'other
inhumane acts' should be dealt with by the court, the Secretary General
proposed.
