FT  28 JUL 93 / Survey of Resource Management - Buying-in Services (5):
Private sector suppliers gain ground in local government - Research shows
wide disparity over levels of savings of public money
PRIVATE sector companies appear to be gaining ground from their early
footholds in local government on two fronts.
First, the compulsory competitive tendering programme, once restricted to
blue-collar services such as refuse collection, is being expanded to
white-collar work. Legal services must go out to tender in June next year,
with construction-related services (architecture and quantity surveying), to
follow in July.
Information technology must follow in December, followed by finance,
personnel and corporate administration in 1995. Some councils, such as
Berkshire and Westminster, have put some of these services out to tender
voluntarily.
Contracting out white-collar services allows easier adaptation to the more
fragmented services which councils must now provide to allow for more
devolved services, such as education. In some cases, it can allow for a
better job to be done than the council could do itself.
Some authorities have even voluntarily contracted out white collar services.
For example, Oxfordshire has entrusted a third of its finance department,
dealing with pensions and pay-roll administration, to the CSL group. The
council said that with the fragmentation of its other services, this offered
the best route to allowing central services to be run cost-effectively. It
was also able to negotiate a contract which ensured that all its existing
staff maintained their jobs - which was not always possible for councils who
compulsorily put blue-collar work out to tender.
The private sector is also making progress on the second front of blue
collar contracts, and appears to be winning a greater share of the market
with each new round of contracts.
According to a report by the Institute of Public Finance, a research arm of
the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, private companies
have won more than two-thirds of the refuse collection contracts put out to
tender by councils since January last year.
Private contractors now operate contracts worth almost Pounds 150m a year in
total - 24 per cent of the market. That shift should continue, according to
the IPF.
However, the pattern is uneven across sectors. Private sector bidders have
enjoyed most success in building cleaning, ground maintenance and refuse
collection, according to the Local Government Management Board.
The LGMB's latests survey of ground maintenance contracts, covering England,
Scotland and Wales, finds that direct labour organisations have held on to
67.5 per cent by number (853 of 1263 contracts), and 82.5 per cent by value.
For building cleaning, direct labour organisations had held on to only 436
of the 904 contracts surveyed by the LGMB (81.5 per cent by value).
But penetration of more complex and tightly defined contracts, such as
school catering, has been minimal.
In catering (education and welfare) contracts, the public sector has held on
to 97.6 per cent, by value, of the contracts to be tendered.
In these areas, with few opportunities for staff cuts, and a rigidly defined
job specification, there is little or no profit to be made. According to Mr
John Sutcliffe, of the LGMB, 'the sectors which have attracted the most
interest and labour-intensive. If you can cut your labour costs, have other
people doing the job with a reasonably flexible specification, the private
sector can do that quite effectively.'
This suggests that white-collar CCT may not be as effective in providing
attractive opportunities for contractors.
But there is still controversy between researchers on whether the exercise
has succeeded in its prime aim of saving public money.
The most optimistic assessment of the CCT programme so far comes from Dr
Stefan Szymanski of the London Business School, who has analysed the
difference between prices paid now for refuse management contracts and the
costs attributed to these services recorded by local authorities before
contracting out in returns to the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
Accountancy.
According to Dr Szymanski, direct unit costs for refuse collection have
fallen by an average of 27 per cent since competitive tendering started.
This does not take into account the cost of monitoring the contract (which,
he suggests, is around three or four per cent), and so Dr Szymanski believes
the true level of saving has been between 20 and 25 per cent.
This research showed wide disparities between authorities, with 10 per cent
some enduring real terms increases, while 20 per cent of authorities cut
costs by more than 40 per cent.
It also found a marked economy of scale, with high cost authorities tending
to be about 20 per cent smaller than the average, and low cost authorities
around 5 per cent smaller.
But both the Audit Commission, which acts as a watchdog for local
government, and Birmingham University's Institute of Local Government
Studies, have produced much lower estimates for savings, at between 6.5 and
seven per cent. Their surveys differ by including a smaller number of local
authorities, but cover the full range of contracted-out services.
These estimates include the cost of managing the contracts, and compare
directly between the years immediately before and immediately after
contracting out. Therefore they aim to avoid the problems of accounting for
cost saving via technological improvements, which may lie behind some of the
savings identified by the London Business School.
Whatever savings have been achieved seem to have been maintained, judging by
the first refuse management contracts to be renegotiated. Out of the first
nine councils to do so, all bar one achieved real terms reductions in price
compared to 1988 of at least 18.4 per cent.
This contradicted prevailing wisdom that private sector bidders had treated
the first year as a 'loss leader' and would extract greater profits later.
Mr Cliff Davis-Coleman, managing director of CDC Research, which published
the information, said the increase could be attributed to private firms
deciding to bid aggressively for volume. He also pointed out that the power
to re-tender had greatly strengthened councils' hand.
In return for a long contract and an agreement not to re-tender, councils
were able to extract significant cost-cuts from contractors, he said. This
is underlined by Dr Szymanski's research, which shows that longer contracts
tend to be for lower prices.
What is unmistakeable is the growing strength of the private sector.
According to the Institute of Public Finance, the research arm of the
Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, 'with each new
tranche of contracts that passes, private contractors appear to be winning a
greater share of the contracts.'
The challenge of the next year is to repeat these gains on the subtler, less
labour-intensive white-collar services which will soon be up for tender.
