FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (8):
How to cover yourself
YOU MIGHT think it's expensive, you probably think it's boring, but getting
proper insurance for your ski holiday is still essential.
Getting it wrong can be costly and irritating. Worse, given the accidents
that can happen on the piste, poor or non-existent cover could even wreck
your life should you have a serious fall requiring expensive medical
treatment. Does your policy cover you for skiing off-piste? Is the accident
cover good enough, especially if you are skiing in the US? What about third
party indemnity? Does it cover skis stolen while left outside a mountain
restaurant, or skis from the rental shop?
Winter sports insurers over the past decade have suffered similar problems
to the general insurance world. When coupled with inconsistent snow
conditions, many companies have made losses which they are now trying to
convert into profit.
I have changed my cover twice in three years after discovering that things
were not quite as they seemed. I am notorious for not reading the small
print - but what if the small print is changed and no one tells you?
Initially I was insured with American Express, which illustrated its ski
insurance leaflets with a picture of a skier in powder snow. He was
obviously skiing off-piste, which seemed to suggest that skiers using the
policy would be covered. To my concern I discovered that the policy did not
cover me for skiing off-piste.
Although Amex did eventually change its policy on off-piste skiing, by that
time I had switched to one of the most reputable specialists, Douglas Cox
Tyrie, which did offer off-piste cover. What it did not cover - unbeknown to
me - was rental skis. Or rather, it did when I first took out my policy, but
last winter, after I had wrecked a ski, the company refused to pay up. The
small print, it was explained, had been changed that year.
The loss or damage of ski equipment - owned or rented - has become a serious
problem, partly because more and more skiers are using higher quality skis.
Apart from suffering losses caused by organised gangs which tour the Alps
stealing skis, Alan Lumsden, director of Douglas Cox Tyrie, says that his
company became fed up with effectively being used by rental shops to
subsidise their stocking-up with new skis each year.
He believes that some rental shop owners have decided that insurance
companies are an easy touch. As the season draws to a close, he says rental
shop staff start to complain more and more about damaged and worn-out skis
when they are returned, hoping that insurance companies will foot the bill
to replace them.
One piece of good news is that Douglas Cox Tyrie has scrapped its decision
not to cover the theft of skis left outside mountain restaurants because
other insurance companies refused to follow suit.
According to Fogg Travel, another ski insurance specialist, one feature
which has caused an 'enormous problem' in recent years has been a huge rise
in claims for holiday cancellations, which has coincided with the recession.
'With cancellation claims, insurers are to a great extent in the hands of
the medical profession,' says Colin Allum, Fogg Travel's director. 'The
problem with a skiing holiday is that whereas in the summer someone with a
twisted ankle may be able to lie in the sun and recuperate, an injury of
this kind to a skier will mean the holiday has to be cancelled. There is no
purpose in travelling on a winter sports holiday if you cannot engage in
winter sports.'
Other factors pushing up premiums include the setting-up of expensive
private health clinics in Bulgaria and other parts of Eastern Europe, and
the reduction in charter flights available to repatriate injured skiers to
the UK. More and more people will need to be brought back on expensive
scheduled services.
Some tour operators try to insist on skiers taking out the company's own
insurance. This can be the most profitable element in the holiday for the
operator and some big multiple travel agency chains, as they frequently
inflate the price originally charged by the insurance company in order to
offer cut-price holiday deals. The reductions are only available if the
client buys the insurance.
Skiers should make sure that if they are forced to buy a tour operator's or
travel agency's insurance policy that it will cover their needs. If it fails
to do so, they should make their own arrangements if possible, or top up the
policy they have been coerced to buy.
