FT  13 MAR 93 / UK Company News: SmithKline Beecham suffers double blow
SMITHKLINE Beecham, the Anglo-American drugs group, received a double blow
yesterday.
First, a US food and drug administration committee refused to recommend
Kytril, one of its most promising drugs. And secondly, a study was published
suggesting that Seroxat, its anti-depressant which analysts believe could
reach sales of more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 700m), was no more effective
than earlier and far less expensive medicines. SB's shares fell 21 1/2 p to
469 1/2 p.
The study, published in yesterday's British Medical Journal, analysed 58
trials to compare old anti-depressants called tricyclics with a new
generation of anti-depressants called selected serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs).
These include SB's Seroxat, Eli Lilly's Prozac, and Pfizer's Zoloft.
The analysis suggested that SSRIs were no more efficacious than older and
cheaper tricyclics. SSRI manufacturers have never claimed this, but have
argued their drugs were more effective because they generate fewer side
effects. This allows more patients to continue taking their medicines.
However, the study claimed that 32.3 per cent of patients on SSRIs dropped
out of the clinical trials compared with 33.2 per cent on tricyclics.
SSRI manufacturers had previously claimed there was a 10 per cent difference
in drop-out rates, said Mr Nick Freemantle, research fellow at the Nuffield
Institute for Health at Leeds University and co-author of the study.
If that had been true, then the extra cost of SSRIs would have been money
well spent. A tricyclic can cost only Pounds 1.43 for 30 days treatment,
compared with up to Pounds 33.90 for an SSRI.
The only sales point left to the SSRIs was that they were less toxic than
tricyclics, said Mr Freemantle.
About 400 suicides a year are related to anti-depressants, he added.
The study concluded that first line treatment of depression using SSRIs may
greatly increase cost with only questionable benefits and that the drugs
should not be routinely used as a first-line treatment for major depression.
In the US, the FDA's gastrointestinal advisory committee were unable to
recommend approval of Kytril, because of potential carcinogenic and
cardiovascular side-effects.
Mr Bob Bauman, SB chief executive, said the committee had not felt competent
to comment on these issues. The drug is used to prevent nausea in cancer
patients receiving chemotherapy.
'We are confident we can resolve these issues with the FDA,' he said. 'We
have already satisfied 20 countries about the safety of this drug. There is
no evidence in humans of carcinogenic side-effects.'
Kytril had worldwide sales last year of Dollars 55m. Glaxo's equivalent drug
Zofran has been licenced in 63 countries and generated worldwide sales of
Pounds 163m during the last six of 1992.
