FT  08 JAN 93 / Citic in HKDollars 10bn asset reshuffle
THE Chinese government's main domestic and international investment agency
last night unveiled a HKDollars 10bn (Pounds 837m) asset reshuffle which
will see its listed Hong Kong entity take a 12 per cent interest in Hongkong
Telecom and controlling stakes in power stations on the Chinese mainland.
Citic Pacific, the Hong Kong quoted subsidiary of China International Trust
and Investment Corporation of Beijing, will make a HKDollars 7.17bn
placement and borrow HKDollars 3.3bn to finance the deals, which include
buying a chemical waste management business in Hong Kong.
The timing of Citic's asset sales was the subject of much speculation in
Hong Kong. Some analysts saw it as a vote of confidence by China in the
colony's economy. Others interpreted it as preparation by Citic for stock
market volatility relating to governor Mr Chris Patten's plans for greater
democracy in Hong Kong.
Citic Pacific, which a year ago acquired Hang Chong, a trading company, has
been keen to throw off its image as an investment company and present itself
as a manager of businesses. Analysts said last night's transactions would
reinforce the company's old image. Its share of Hongkong Telecom's dividends
was estimated by Smith New Court to account for 35 per cent of its earnings.
The assets which Citic Beijing is selling to Citic Pacific are held by its
wholly-owned Hong Kong subsidiary, Citic (HK). The latter company acquired a
20 per cent interest in Hongkong Telecom in April 1990 from Cable and
Wireless of the UK.
Last night's statement said that Citic (HK) will sell 12 per cent of
Hongkong Telecom to Citic Pacific at HKDollars 7.8 a share - representing a
19.6 per cent discount to Hongkong Telecom's current share price. At that
price Citic (HK) stands to make a profit of HKDollars 4.2bn.
Citic (HK) will also sell control of two power stations and an interest in a
chemical waste treatment company.
Before the transaction Citic (HK) owned 43 per cent of Citic Pacific. It
will subscribe to 420.4m new shares at HKDollars 13 each in Citic Pacific
(of a total of 551.8m to be issued) which will leave it owning 45.9 per cent
of the company. It will also make the HKDollars 3bn loan to Citic Pacific.
