FT  27 OCT 93 / Major to discuss Ulster peace move
THE Hume-Adams proposals for peace in Northern Ireland will be discussed on
Friday by Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr Albert Reynolds, the
Irish premier, it emerged yesterday.
The meeting was confirmed against a background of rising violence in Belfast
in the wake of Saturday's IRA bombing in the Protestant Shankill Road, which
killed 10 people.
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said he expected both prime
ministers to give the Hume-Adams initiative 'very serious attention on
Friday to see where the process can go from here'.
But Mr Major's determination not to alienate the Ulster Unionist party was
last night reflected by signs at Westminster that the government was now
ready to back unionist demands for the establishment of a Northern Ireland
select committee. The prime minister has denied that he did a deal with the
Ulster Unionists to avoid a Commons defeat in a confidence debate on the
Maastricht treaty earlier this year.
But with the tacit backing of Downing Street, the Commons procedure
committee is expected today to give a positive response to demands for a
select committee. Such a move would represent a clear signal of the
government's commitment to ensure that any settlement in the province would
have to secure the whole-hearted backing of the protestant community.
Extra troops and police were moved to Belfast from elsewhere in Northern
Ireland yesterday after two Roman Catholics were killed and six wounded in
two separate incidents.
Mr Major told the Commons the perpetrators of this week's terrorist attacks
would be 'hunted down and subjected to the full severity of the law'.
However, the government ruled out the reintroduction of internment. Sir John
Wheeler, the Northern Ireland security minister, said there were 'no simple,
easy solutions'.
Downing Street continued to distance itself from the peace proposals put
forward by Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social
Democratic and Labour party, and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the
political arm of the IRA.
Officials said Mr Major was willing to talk to Mr Reynolds, but was more
interested in reviving the stalled 'three-strand' talks under the auspices
of Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary.
In an indication of the sensitivity with which the issue is regarded in
London, Downing Street said neither Mr Major nor Mr Reynolds had asked for a
bilateral meeting in Brussels. British officials said the Brussels summit
offered a 'useful opportunity' for a meeting, but stressed that there was no
formal agenda.
Downing Street also continued to maintain that Mr Major had not seen the
Hume-Adams proposals, and was unaware of the details of the initiative.
Irish officials said the Shankill Road bombing had 'seriously damaged' the
Hume-Adams initiative, but Dublin appeared keen to keep the proposals alive.
Mr Spring said the two governments had an 'obligation' to look at 'any
opportunities' to bring about peace in Northern Ireland 'despite the (IRA)
atrocity of last weekend'.
