FT  10 SEP 93 / International Company News: Dow Corning plans implant fund -
Proposals to create a landmark settlement
DOW Corning's unexpected announcement yesterday of a proposal to settle all
litigation involving silicone-gel breast implants may become a landmark in
mass tort litigation, in addition to lifting the cloud that has been cast
over the company since early last year when the Food and Drug Association
imposed a moratorium on the devices amid mounting concerns about safety.
The details of the plan are far from firm, but according to Mr Gary
Anderson, Dow Corning vice-president: 'From what I've been told, this is a
unique and different settlement.' The company, once the biggest manufacturer
of the devices, plans to join with other manufacturers, as well as raw
material suppliers, insurance carriers, physicians and other health care
providers to establish a Dollars 4.75bn fund over a 30-year period.
'It would be a large pool with different types of buckets,' says Mr
Anderson, 'covering everything from health check-ups and implant removal
where necessary to treatment and compensation for someone with a documented
disease related to the implants.'
For Dow Corning, a joint venture owned equally by Dow Chemical and Corning,
the proposal may help restore its reputation at a considerable cost. The
company said the settlement would 'likely have a material adverse effect on
Dow Corning's results of operations in the period in which it is recorded
and could possibly have a material adverse effect on the company's
consolidated financial position'. The company did not elaborate.
The proposed settlement is expected to be less of a financial burden for Dow
and Corning at parent level. Corning said yesterday that its share of such a
charge would have a adverse impact on earnings only in the quarter in which
such a charge is recognised.
Dow Corning has been trying to clear its name since 1991, when a San
Francisco court decided that the company had concealed evidence linking
ruptured implants to immune disorders and issued a Dollars 7.3m verdict
against the company. After initially adopting a combative stance with the
FDA, by early 1992 Dow Corning had changed its top management and taken a
more conciliatory approach.
As recently as January this year, however, the company balked at turning
over an outside counsel's report on its breast implants to the FDA.
Although Dow Corning and other manufacturers have steadfastly maintained
that their products pose no danger, a growing number of researchers in the
US are finding links between leaking silicone and diseases of the human
immune system. Dow Corning is investing at least Dollars 10m to research the
safety of silicone gel. The company is sponsoring a study to see whether
silicon causes scleroderma, a potentially fatal immune-system illness.
From a legal standpoint, the proposal has been compared to the Dollars 2.4bn
fund established in 1989 after 10 years of litigation over the Dalkon Shield
contraceptive, which was manufactured by A. H. Robins. The case contributed
to the company's bankruptcy filing.
Mr Guerry Thornton, a partner at Atlanta-based Thornton &amp; Leff who handles
claims against the Dalkon Shield trust and represents 15 implant plaintiffs,
said: 'From what we've been told, this would be similar to the Dalkon Shield
plan. Presuming there is a hearing to investigate the fund and see that
everyone is fairly and equally treated, I think everyone will benefit. It
will end up saving hundreds of millions of dollars in litigation costs -
money that would normally go to legal and medical experts would go directly
to the victims.
'Dalkon Shield has been by far the most successful mass tort resolution in
history. Hopefully this plan will incorporate the most favourable provisions
from that plan and implement some others to become the landmark settlement
used in the future to resolve other mass tort cases.'
