FT  10 AUG 93 / International Company News: US loan guarantees to back Pemex
bond issue
PETROLEOS Mexicanos (Pemex), Mexico's state oil company, will use its first
loan guarantees granted by the US Eximbank in 15 years to securitise a
Dollars 348m public bond offering.
Pemex has been given loan guarantees of Dollars 379.2m to finance US
drilling services and heavy marine construction in two fields in Campeche
Sound, west of the Yucatan peninsula. While holding on to exploration
rights, Pemex is inviting foreign and domestic oil firms to develop fields
on a turn-key basis.
Under the transaction, Pemex will borrow money from a facility set up by the
Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) and guaranteed by the Eximbank. UBS will
then use the facility to securitise up to Dollars 348m of bonds. The bonds
would have a triple A rating and a seven-year maturity.
Pemex described the deal as 'a milestone of great importance'. The
transaction concludes lengthy negotiations with the Eximbank and would mark
the first time a Mexican company has used loan guarantees to securitise
public bonds, a way of lowering financial costs.
Pemex had hoped to borrow about Dollars 750m but the fields in the Campeche
Sound proved less extensive than once thought. However, the US Eximbank is
considering granting Pemex two further loan guarantees of Dollars 500m and
Dollars 200m respectively. Pemex also intends to use these loans to
securitise public bonds, says Rene Schmed of UBS.
Pemex was instrumental in persuading the Eximbank and US Securities and
Exchange Commission to allow loan guarantees to secure bond offerings. In
the handful of such deals the Eximbank has recently completed, secured bonds
trade about 40 - 50 basis points over Treasuries, according to UBS.
Banco Union, said net profit for the first half of 1993 was 115m new pesos,
a 314 per cent rise over the corresponding year-earlier period, Reuter
reports from Mexico City.
The bank reported a 93.5 per cent increase in assets to 14.2bn new pesos and
said loans had increased by 32.8 per cent since the end of 1992 to 11bn new
pesos.
