FT  04 AUG 93 / Business and the Environment: Mines make a clean sweep -
Peru's biggest copper producer is taking the lead in reducing industrial
pollution
Measured in terms of biodiversity, Peru is one of the world's richest
countries. But economically it is one of the world's poorest, having
suffered a GDP collapse of around 25 per cent in the past six years. For
most Peruvian companies, concern for environmental issues is a luxury they
cannot afford.
But the environmental theme looks certain to gain prominence in the near
future. Privatisation of state-owned mining companies is under way and the
government is pursuing an aggressive policy of encouraging foreign
investment in natural resources.
Multinational concerns embarking on mining or petroleum ventures in Peru
will be bound by a self-imposed code of ethics to apply the same
environmental standards in Peru as they do in, for example, Canada, Finland
or Australia.
The environmental lead in Peru is being taken by Southern Peru Copper
Corporation, the country's largest privately owned company and responsible
for two-thirds of all national copper output. SPCC is majority-owned by
Asarco of the US, while Phelps Dodge and Newmont Mining have minority
holdings.
SPCC's environmental initiative is not entirely voluntary. In 1987, a
commission was appointed by the government to investigate repeated
complaints of air and water pollution caused by the company's smelter
complex at Ilo, the port town 600 miles south of Lima, from which SPCC
refines and ships blister (almost pure) copper.
Eighteen months ago settlement was reached between SPCC and the
administration of President Alberto Fujimori over a long-standing
contractual dispute inherited from the previous government. Under the
agreement, SPCC committed itself to investing Dollars 300m (Pounds 200m)
over five years - a third for environmental improvement work and the
remainder for general expansion and investment in two new plants.
North of the Ilo smelter site - on a coastline that is home to sea birds and
seals - is a long, pitch-black beach. Years of slag dumped from the smelter
first into the ocean, then on the shore, has been swept along by currents
and deposited a couple of kilometres away.
Another problem is the tailings from SPCC's two mines, 70 miles away in the
mountains to the east. At a rate of 86,000 metric tonnes a day, they are
channelled down to the coast where they spill into the bay, forming a large
artificial beach over a mile long. Fortunately, SPCC's ore is largely free
from toxic impurities but substantial percentages of mineral solids remain.
'Worldwide, dumping tailings is just not acceptable anymore,' says Eric
Ivey, general production manager. 'We have to accept our responsibility.'
Exhaustive studies are under way to determine whether tailings can safely be
dealt with by submarine disposal.
The process, already operating off the west coast of Canada, is to pipe the
tailings out and deposit them on the seabed 30ft down. Deprived of oxygen
and light, there is no chance the tailings can affect marine life, says
Rescan Environmental, SPCC's Canadian consultants. If studies, scheduled for
completion late this year, confirm this, the flumes for marine disposal will
be installed.
Most controversial are the emissions from the Ilo smelter chimneys. SPCC
officials have for years claimed that what the locals call smoke is water
vapour plus gas, with infinitesimal percentages of sulphur dioxide which,
the company claims, is an irritant rather than a toxin.
However, the Ilo smelter's smoke has been a local issue for years - and a
steady source of income for many local inhabitants. 'They plant alfalfa,
which is particularly susceptible, and there's certainly been some damage,'
says Ivey. 'We've been paying out several hundreds of thousands of dollars a
year in compensation and the sum was escalating all the time.'
If all goes to plan, however, that source of income will soon dry up. SPCC
is working on the installation of a capture acid plant, using technology
developed by Chile's copper corporation, Codelco. The idea is to close one
of the three smelter furnaces and eliminate one chimney-stack in an attempt
to push up sulphur dioxide content to a capturable 5 per cent.
SPCC estimates the capture acid plant will cost around Dollars 80m; the
project is currently at the basic engineering stage. 'It's high school
chemistry to understand it, but to control it is another, expensive,
matter,' says Ivey.
The slag problem is being resolved by building a sturdy sea wall to prevent
any further erosion of the original dumping place. The slag is unsightly but
inert, 'very similar to what comes out of a volcano', says Ivey. Locals
claim the fishing around the black slag beach is excellent. The sea wall is
costing the company more than Dollars 1m.
SPCC has spent an additional Dollars 1m on a sewage treatment plant for
their Ilo company housing complex where 8,500 workers and their families
live. As in most Peruvian coastal towns, much of Ilo's sewage goes straight
into the sea with little or no prior treatment. SPCC will recycle the water
recovered and put it to industrial use.
The Peruvian mining sector seems destined to take the lead in attacking
environmental problems caused by industry. Already, a new mining law
requires environmental impact studies for all new operations, and Daniel
Hokama, mines and energy minister, has publicly recognised the environmental
'debt' acquired by many state-owned companies now scheduled for
privatisation.
One important point that remains unresolved, according to Manuel Pulgar, a
Peruvian environmental lawyer, is the absence of legal standards for
pollution. 'If you haven't established permissible levels,' he says, 'then
you cannot talk about enforcement.' He would like Peru to follow Chile's
example and set maximum emission levels.
'If you're changing the environment - even if you're not harming it - you
have to address the problem,' says Ivey. It remains to be seen how swiftly
other Peruvian companies will take that message on board.
