FT  03 APR 93 / Goodfellas and bad politics: Italy's corruption
investigations are now targeting the links between the state and the Mafia
Mr Giulio Andreotti had just sat down to lunch in the foreign press club in
Rome and was talking with his characteristic mix of understatement and
deadpan humour.
Suddenly the lights went out to the sound of confusion in the kitchens. The
74-year-old veteran of Italian politics was completely unperturbed. The tone
of his voice never altered. When the lights came back on, it was as if
nothing had happened.
Seven times prime minister, in public office since the beginning of the
post-war republic, and a life senator, Mr Andreotti has always appeared
unflappable. Even now that he has been notified by Palermo magistrates that
he is under investigation for consorting with the Mafia, he has not lost his
nerve. He has simply brushed aside the allegation.
But if Mr Andreotti has kept calm, those around him in Italy's Christian
Democrat party have been thrown into complete disarray by the latest turn of
events in Italy's corruption scandals. Collusion with the Mafia is far more
serious than simply taking bribes, and opens up the darker side of the
party's long-standing strength in the whole of southern Italy. It places
firmly on the table the frequently aired suspicion that organised crime has
thrived in good measure because politicians have provided a protective
umbrella.
'The real novelty disturbing the nation's conscience is that we are
confronted by the lid being lifted off the Christian Democrats,' Mr Achille
Occhetto, leader of the former communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS)
said yesterday. 'The whole basis on which their power structure has been
built and exercised has been hit; and hit at its very centre.'
Palermo magistrates are not alone in implicating Mr Andreotti. This week,
parliament's anti-Mafia commission published a report exclusively devoted to
the links between the Mafia and politics dating back to the second world
war. The report, compiled by Mr Luciano Violante, a highly respected judge
and left-wing deputy, observes: 'On the basis of documents at the disposal
of the commission, there is an obligation to ascertain the eventual penal
liability of Mr Andreotti.'
The Christian Democrats have good reason to be alarmed. The involvement of
Mr Andreotti marks a significant new phase in the corruption scandals which
began to emerge in February last year.
Until now, magistrates have concentrated on unravelling an elaborate
countrywide network of illicit financing of the main parties by trading
favours and patronage. The qualitative change involves a shift away from
investigating the abuse of power and influence, often for crude personal
enrichment, to stripping bare the levers of power themselves.
These have been held unchallenged by the Christian Democrats since 1946. The
Socialists, apparently the principal culprits in the corruption scandals,
were late-comers on the scene - essentially from the 1980s onwards. They
have taken part in an extensive rape of the state by controlling, or
sharing, important areas of patronage; but they have never exercised control
of the apparatus of state, the so-called 'sotto governo'.
This is one of those untranslatable phrases that abound in the Italian
political vocabulary. Literally it means 'behind-the-scenes government', and
refers to the less visible side of power exercised by the political parties
through the security services, the tutelage of the bureaucracy and
manipulation of the judiciary.
For decades, it is has been more important to dominate the 'sotto governo'
than the government. The executive branch of government, as represented by
the Cabinet, has rarely had the opportunity to establish its authority,
simply because governments have changed so often. Indeed, the fact that
Italy has had 51 post-war governments has strengthened the 'sotto governo'
at the expense of the executive.
The parallel system of government was reinforced by two inter-related
factors - an electoral system that encouraged weak coalitions and failed to
produce an alternance in power; and the existence of the Cold War. The
Christian Democrats have consistently been the dominant party and the
leading partner in every coalition. Even in last April's elections, when a
disillusioned electorate deserted the traditional parties, they still hung
on to 29 per cent of the vote thanks largely to their patronage in Rome and
the south.
The Cold War enabled the Christian Democrats to present themselves as
champions of anti-communism. Equally important, according to the anti-Mafia
commission, the communist threat encouraged an alliance dating back to 1943
between the authorities and the Sicilian Mafia, the Cosa Nostra. This
alliance was justified for reasons of state security and became part of
undeclared policy, exploiting the Mafia's conviction that the organisation
had most to fear from the advent of the communists.
Arguably, the traumatic process of change now engulfing Italy would not have
happened if there had been a genuine change at the ballot box or if the
second world war alliance with the Mafia had not been extended into the Cold
War. As it was, the Mafia became an arm of anti-communism in return for a
fairly well-defined but tacit agreement on the tolerance of their illicit
activities. Over the years an increasingly complex linkage has grown up
between the 'sotto governo' and the Mafia.
Control of the alternative system of government has ensured that none of the
regime's dirty linen has ever been fully aired in public, only tantalising
glimpses. Dossiers were buried by pliant judges, inquisitive magistrates
were transferred so that the truth never emerged about a number of murky
incidents.
For instance, the obscure circumstances surrounding the kidnap and execution
by the terrorist group the Red Brigades of Christian Democrat prime minister
Aldo Moro in 1978 - was he allowed to be killed because he was seeking to
break his party's traditional hostility, and deal with the communists? Was
General Alberto Dalla Chiesa, the prefect (police chief) of Palermo,
murdered by the Mafia in 1982 on political orders because he knew too much
about the Moro affair? Were the shadowy bankers Mr Michele Sindona and Mr
Roberto Calvi murdered because they were inconvenient to both the Mafia and
certain members of the government? Was the wave of extreme right-wing
violence in the 1970s orchestrated to create a climate of tension?
Only now are these puzzling events involving occult financing, assassination
and political intrigue beginning to become clearer. The anti-Mafia
commission report talks of the Cosa Nostra becoming a 'non-secondary
pro-western front', which was allowed to carry out 'continuous repressive
actions'. This 'co-habitation', the report concludes, 'has contributed to
the weakening of the democratic system and made Italy unique in the western
world for its political assassinations and outrages'.
In other words, the co-habitation between Mafia and politics helps explain
the gaps in a chunk of Italy's post-second world war history. It is now a
likely thesis that the Mafia wanted, for instance, to get rid of Gen Dalla
Chiesa because he posed a threat to their organisation. Certain politicians
also found his presence inconvenient because he knew too much about the Moro
kidnapping and the infiltration of the Red Brigades by the security
services. The latter were exploiting the Red Brigades in a strategy of
tension to discredit the left and prevent the communists sharing power with
the Christian Democrats.
Mr Calvi almost certainly did not commit his improbable suicide on
Blackfriars Bridge in 1982 but was killed by Mafia hit-men, partly because
he double-crossed Cosa Nostra clans over money, but also because he knew too
much about illicit funding of the Christian Democrat and Socialist parties.
The scandal of the secret masonic lodge, P2, run by grandmaster Mr Licio
Gelli, was hushed up because it threatened to lay bare a parallel system of
power in which the Mafia were also involved.
When Mr Tomas Buscetta, a former Mafia boss, first decided to co-operate
with US and Italian justice officials and inform on his former clan members
in the mid-1980s, the one area he refused to discuss was Cosa Nostra's
political connections. Only last September did he judge the time ripe to
make a series of delphic pronouncements.
Times had changed, he said, following the assassination in March 1992 of Mr
Salvatore Lima, the Euro-MP ally of Mr Andreotti and the most powerful
Christian Democrat politician in Sicily, and the brutal killings of the two
anti-Mafia magistrates Mr Giovanni Falcone and Mr Paolo Borsellino. He
confirmed widely held suspicions that Mr Lima was the main link man between
Cosa Nostra and Rome. He was murdered because he failed to find a compliant
judge who would reduce a series of sentences on Mafia bosses.
Of the 175 former Mafia members now 'singing' under special plea-bargaining
programmes, at least three besides Mr Buscetta have pointed the finger at
Rome and implicated Mr Andreotti, as the master of 'sotto governo'. This,
too, is the implication behind this week's anti-Mafia commission report.
Palermo magistrates who are seeking to have Mr Andreotti's parliamentary
immunity waived, yesterday flew to the US to interview Mr Buscetta to see if
he is prepared to name names.
A prominent appeals court judge, Mr Corrado Carnevale, is also under
investigation for being linked to the Mafia (as well as two others in Naples
for their links with the local Mafia, the Camorra). But it is going to be
hard to pin proof on the politicians. The principal evidence comes from the
mouths of the pentiti, the plea-bargaining members of the Mafia who have
changed sides. As Mr Andreotti observed wryly this week, they are no saints.
But as lawyers point out, the state is using these pentiti to bring
prosecutions against Mr 'Toto' Riina, the acknowledged boss of Cosa Nostra,
captured earlier this year.
The corruption scandals themselves have set in motion a chain reaction.
Those who have been either part, or victims, of the system are coming
forward to confess. The governance of the city of Naples, whose economy has
long been supported by a combination of politically tolerated contraband and
theft from the public purse, has been laid bare in less than a month. More
than 400 politicians, businessmen, officials and members of the Camorra have
been arrested.
Palermo is moving slower but there is a will for the truth to come out,
especially as the memory of the brutal murder of loyal servants of the state
like Mr Falcone and Mr Borsellino is still fresh. The Christian Democrats
looked strong enough to survive corruption scandals linked to construction
contracts and personal kickbacks and to reform themselves. But the discredit
from their links with the Mafia is profound, and is hastening the end of the
first republic.
