FT  16 MAR 93 / International Company News: UAP calls on Suez to reopen
talks on Victoire
UNION DES Assurances de Paris, France's largest insurance group, yesterday
called on Suez, the French holding company, to reopen negotiations about the
future of Victoire, the French insurer, and Colonia, its German subsidiary.
Suez, which has been clouded by bid speculation since the announcement
earlier this month that it made its first-ever loss in 1992, last year broke
off the Victoire talks. UAP, a minority investor in both Suez and Victoire,
had for years hoped to swap its Victoire shares for control of Colonia.
Mr Jean Peyrelevade, UAP chairman, said the negotiations 'must be reopened,
sooner or later'. The breakdown of the Victoire talks was seen as a personal
blow for Mr Peyrelevade, a socialist appointee whose position at UAP may be
vulnerable if, as the polls suggest, the conservatives win the elections.
However, Mr Gerard Worms, chairman of Suez, has refused to reopen
negotiations. Suez said the issue was not on the agenda although it was 'not
inconceivable' that talks would resume in the future.
UAP yesterday also secured shareholder's agreement to acquire a 37.35 per
cent stake in Nordstern, the German insurer which is the most profitable
part of Colonia, from Winterthur, the German financial group, in return for
FFr1.5bn (Dollars 260m) of UAP shares.
The Nordstern investment has been interpreted as an attempt by Mr
Peyrelevade to step up the pressure on Suez by trying to restrict Colonia's
control over the company.
Mr Peyrelevade's manoeuvres might be helped by Suez's recent problems. Suez,
which made a FFr1.8bn loss last year, has been badly affected by the
economic slowdown and by the effects of the Paris property crisis on its
banking activities.
Mr Peyrelevade stressed UAP had not participated in the recent buying of
Suez shares. 'Like many other shareholders, we are very concerned with the
situation at Suez and hope the management can address its problems,' he
said.
