FT  01 OCT 93 / Bringing home the shopping: Nikki Tait examines the
potential for television retailing as interest quickens among media and
store groups
The woman on the television screen poses beside a vacuum cleaner. She tilts
it this way and that, demonstrates its internal workings, and then whirls
the machine in action. 'It's light, it's adorable,' she exclaims.
Alongside her is the cleaner's price, Dollars 109.95, and a freephone number
to ring for orders. A clock counts down the remaining display time in one
corner. Then the vacuum cleaner and the woman vanish, and are replaced by a
middle-aged man, who talks enthusiastically about a sterling silver ring.
Welcome to TV shopping, US-style. The items appear on a programme
transmitted by QVC Network, one of the two leading televised shopping
retailers. About three-quarters, or 45m, of the nation's homes with cable TV
have access to QVC; in 75 per cent of them, QVC runs 24 hours a day. Local
cable operators receive monthly cash payments from QVC equal to 5 per cent
of the net sales generated from their respective areas.
From today, British viewers will also have a chance to shop non-stop, when
QVC becomes available on cable and satellite television as part of a package
of 14 paid-for channels offered by BSkyB.
Television home shopping, after failing to produce exciting growth in the
1980s, is suddenly attracting media and retailing groups. Investor interest
quickened last January when Mr Barry Diller - a Hollywood executive who
helped Rupert Murdoch turn Fox into America's fourth national television
network - became chairman and chief executive of QVC, which this month
launched a hostile Dollars 9.5bn takeover bid for entertainment group
Paramount Communications.
Mr Diller quickly persuaded several prestigious names, such as the retailer
Saks Fifth Avenue, to offer merchandise via QVC. Now, QVC wants to take over
its main rival, Home Shopping Network, which is beset by management
troubles, but HSN says talks are on the back burner until the battle for
Paramount is decided.
But QVC is by no means the only dynamic player in the market. Time Warner,
the largest US entertainment group, and Spiegel, a leading specialty fashion
retailer and catalogue company, have joined forces to create two cable
television channels in the fast-growing field. And this summer, R H Macy,
the well-known but bankrupt department store group, announced plans to sell
its wares on Cablevision, the fifth-largest cable TV operator in the US, by
autumn 1994.
Another enthusiast is Seattle-based Nordstrom. In late spring, the upmarket
fashion retailer announced plans to start a catalogue operation, with a view
to using this as a springboard into 'interactive' TV shopping by the end of
1994, where fast-evolving digital technology would allow viewers to call up
information on products, and place orders, via their TV sets.
Yet, in spite of this swirl of activity, US retailers are divided over home
shopping's potential. The believers note that the industry has made sizable
strides in a relatively short time. Ten years ago, neither QVC nor HSN
existed, yet their combined sales last year topped the Dollars 2bn mark.
QVC's sales in the first six months of 1993 rose 18 per cent, to Dollars
535.7m; net profits of Dollars 34.9m compared with Dollars 19.9m for the
corresponding period of 1992.
QVC ships merchandise to customers from distribution centres at West Chester
and Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and Suffolk, Virginia. Delivery is usually made
by UPS or, for lightweight packages, by the US postal service. Products with
a purchase price of more than Dollars 200 go Federal Express.
Critics argue that home shopping must be seen in perspective. In aggregate,
Americans spent about one and a half trillion dollars last year on consumer
products, not counting car sales. The vast bulk of this expenditure went
through conventional shopping channels.
They point out that, after a century of development, the mail order
catalogue sector - the other principal 'non-store' shopping alternative -
notches up only Dollars 70bn in annual sales.
Experience provides a second reason for wariness. In the 1980s, several big
US retailers toyed with the home shopping concept, but concluded that
significant commitment would be premature.
J C Penney, the department store group, for example, tested an 'interactive'
home shopping service in 1987 among consumers in a Chicago suburb. After
investing Dollars 100m in the venture, Penney abandoned it three years
later, claiming that the technology to support the idea was not sufficiently
developed. Another tilt at home shopping about a year afterwards was
abandoned. 'We were not pleased with the sales generated,' Penney explains.
Minneapolis-based Dayton Hudson, another big department store operator, also
had an early brush with TV shopping that led nowhere. Like Penney, Dayton
has not abandoned the concept, and is more enthusiastic than its Texan
counterpart. But it is testing the market carefully before making
large-scale financial commitments.
At present, Dayton's plans centre on 'infomercials' - advertisements with an
editorial spin. Dayton tried to sell bedding material in this way recently,
and describes the project as 'a qualified success'. But the retailer is
careful to stress that it 'is still learning whether this is a format we
want to pursue'.
Not surprisingly, QVC is more positive. 'We're very optimistic - there's a
huge segment of the population which has never even tried home shopping,'
says the Pennsylvania-based company, although it declines to make detailed
forecasts of participating audiences.
Before they can broaden their appeal, however, TV shopping companies - as
QVC acknowledges - may need to change consumers' perception that shopping
via television is a slightly unsavoury occupation, indulged in by bored
housewives and insomniacs. The 'typical' home shopper at the moment is drawn
from the lower-income categories, although a survey by Deloitte &amp; Touche and
Impact Resources, market researchers, suggested that this image had been
exaggerated.
The survey, which covered 6,000 regular TV shoppers, discovered that almost
half were between 25 and 44; 43 per cent were married; more than a third had
graduated from high school; 52 per cent were women. The average household
income was just less than Dollars 35,000, compared with an average income of
Dollars 38,000 for all US households - lower, but not significantly so.
Even if the involvement of high-quality names, such as the designer Diane
von Furstenberg, and Saks, helps home shopping to upgrade its reputation, a
significant challenge lies in the area of presentation. The reasons are
simple: in a store, shoppers see and feel items, and decide within seconds
whether to take a closer look or pass on. With TV shopping, more verbal
detail has to be provided, along with a long-distance demonstration of how
appliances work, how clothes 'wear' and so on.
'Customers need tons of explanation - you can't cut the information,' says
QVC. On average, its programmes devote about five minutes to each item. From
the viewer's perspective, such thoroughness might become wearing.
QVC tackles this problem by grouping products together. For example, the
first six hours one recent Sunday morning were devoted to 60-minute segments
on jewellery, fun and leisure, 'superbargains', cooking equipment, more
jewellery, and housewares. Nevertheless, the type of goods sold through TV
in significant volumes remains limited. Jewellery accounted for about 43 per
cent of QVC's sales last year, clothing and accessories, 17 per cent. At
HSN, jewellery sales made up 49 per cent of total turnover in the 1991-92
financial year.
For dedicated consumers, home shopping is a boon. One Manhattan-based
shopper says convenience is the biggest draw. QVC offers a 30-day,
money-back guarantee, and pays the shipping costs.
That, she argues, beats trudging around a high-street store or mall, and
making a second trip if the goods are unsatisfactory. Moreover, pricing is
often competitive, and some of the items are either exclusive to the TV
shopping channel or not readily available elsewhere. 'I wouldn't use it all
the time,' she says, 'but it's definitely a part of my life.'
