FT  19 APR 93 / UK Gilts: Inflationary pressures cloud over the sector
WORRIES about demand pressures took centre stage on the back of
higher-than-expected inflation data.
The frowns in the bond market are likely to perplex many consumers and
industrialists who still see little sign of any UK recovery. None the less,
talk of a return to UK growth later this year, and its effect on depressing
bond prices, has become a feature in the financial community.
Accordingly, after months in which gilt investors were extremely relaxed
about possible inflationary pressures, the market was taken aback by the
announcement on Friday that the retail prices index rose in the year to last
month by 1.9 per cent, from 1.8 per cent in February.
More frissons of concern were sparked by news that the underlying measure of
inflation, as registered by the RPI less mortgage costs, rose to a
year-on-year 3.5 per cent last month from 3.4 per cent the month before.
Long-dated gilts lost about 1 point on the day, with investor sentiment
being further dampened by the Bank of England's announcement that it will
auction a further tranche of gilts on April 28, when the conventional stock
on offer will have a maturity between 1996 and 1999.
The Bank will announce further details tomorrow. Many are assuming that it
will sell between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 3bn of relatively short-dated stock
as part of the effort of funding this financial year's government deficit,
expected to be about Pounds 50bn.
Over the week as a whole, gilts at both ends of the yield curve were pushed
up, by about 20 basis points for short-dated maturities and roughly half
that at the long end. The yield on a 10-year gilt was quoted on Friday night
at just above 8 per cent, after a long spell at lower levels.
The changes during the week at the short end of the curve were due largely
to impressions that, with a number of signs of increased demand pressures,
the UK government was unlikely to sanction an imminent cut in base rates
from 6 per cent.
Indeed, in money markets on Friday there was even talk, somewhat far-fetched
on the grounds of the subdued state of much of the economy, about the need
for a base rate rise in order to stem possible inflationary pressures.
According to Mr Simon Briscoe, an economist at Midland Global Markets, the
inflation figures were 'quite worrying'. Many in financial markets believe
the government might be forced to abandon its target of keeping underlying
inflation at below 4 per cent.
That is even though the introduction this financial year of the council tax
as opposed to the more expensive poll tax is expected to reduce the tax
burden on the average household and thus help to put a ceiling on the
measure for underlying inflation.
Mr Leo Doyle, an economist with Kleinwort Benson, said he was particularly
concerned about the increase in prices of items such as household goods,
clothing and footwear.
Clothing and footwear prices rose by 1.9 per cent in March from February
after a 1.8 per cent month-on-month rise in February, underlining that
shopkeepers are feeling more relaxed about increasing prices in a bid to
rebuild profit margins.
Food prices have also been pushed up, partly due to the devaluation of the
green pound following the UK's departure from the European exchange rate
mechanism. Meanwhile, the signs of improved economic activity, including
higher house sales and a 4.5 per cent year-on-year rise in the week to April
14 of notes and coins in circulation, may have given a general boost to
price pressures throughout the economy.
Even so, concern about inflation may be slightly overdone.
According to a Midland inflation index, which strips out erratic changes in
prices and accounts for about 75 per cent of the RPI, underlying inflation
has increased from a year-on-year 2.5 per cent in January to 2.9 per cent in
March. However, in September last year inflation on this measure was 3.7 per
cent and in October it was 3.4 per cent.
