FT  10 JUN 93 / Factories fail 'world class' test
ONLY 2 per cent of British factories are 'world class', a study claimed
yesterday. But nearly 75 per cent of UK manufacturers believe that they can
match the best international standards, with some of the lowest-ranked
companies most confident of their ability to compete.
The study, by IBM Consulting Group, the consulting arm of the US computer
giant, examined 202 manufacturing sites across the UK. Plants were rated on
such criteria as lean production, quality, logistics and manufacturing
systems. Those scoring more than 80 per cent were defined as 'world class'.
The study found a further 42 per cent of plants had potential to attain
'world class' standards on the basis of their working practices and
performance. 'It is good to see we have a significant number of strong
contenders', IBM said.
The best-performing industry in world terms was found to be food
manufacturing. That is attributed to the buying power of the big food
retailers. The worst-performing industry in world terms was found to be auto
and aerospace components.
Professor Chris Voss of the London Business School, co-author of the study,
said he believed the proportion of world-class companies in the US or Japan
would be very much higher. No comparative data had yet been collected.
Companies in the south of England scored well above average. Those in the
north-east were weakest. The study suggests that is because the south has a
high concentration of electronics and electrical companies, which have more
sophisticated manufacturing practices. The north-east relies more on older
industries.
Suppliers to the information technology industry scored above average. 'It
has been typical in the IT industry to form very open partnerships with
suppliers and to invest in their success at the same time as making very
strong demands upon them', the study says.
Prof Voss said the poor performance of auto and aerospace suppliers, while
slightly surprising, was borne out by other recent studies. He said that
unlike the IT industry, the Japanese motor manufacturers had perhaps not
been operating long enough in the UK to have an effect on the supply chain.
Possession of the UK's coveted BS5750 quality standard made no difference
unless it was part of a wider quality programme.
There was a marked difference in business priorities between high-ranking
and low-ranking companies. The top 10 per cent of companies gave it as their
chief objective to be world class. The bottom 10 per cent preferred to
concentrate on customer service and market share.
