FT  10 DEC 93 / Nato gets Yeltsin's guarded blessing
President Boris Yeltsin yesterday welcomed the idea of military co-operation
with Nato - but not the prospect of eventual Nato enlargement to include
some of Russia's former allies such as Poland, Hungary and the Czech
republic.
This position, reflecting hardline opposition among the Russian military to
any eastwards expansion of Nato, emerged during talks with Mr Manfred
Worner, Nato secretary-general, at the neutral location of the Stuyvenbergh
chateau in Brussels.
A Nato summit next month is due to open the way towards the admission of new
members from central Europe while proposing a more immediate 'partnership
for peace', which would apply to a wider group of countries including Russia
and other former Soviet republics.
Mr Worner said after the meeting that there was 'a chance' of Russia
participating in the scheme, and he had agreed with Mr Yeltsin to increase
military contacts between Russia and Nato. The US plans to hold a first,
small-scale joint exercise with Russia next year.
Mr Worner said he had reassured Mr Yeltsin that any moves towards Nato
enlargement would not be directed against Russia and would take into account
the security interests of all concerned.
Nato defence ministers meeting in Brussels discussed US proposals to broaden
the alliance's scope to deal with new threats from countries which developed
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and missile delivery systems.
Mr Les Aspin, US defence secretary, said current international efforts on
non-proliferation 'may not be enough'.
He suggested that Nato might co-operate in research and development on means
of counter-proliferation, intelligence and anti-missile defences.
Mr Worner, who said European countries could not afford to develop such
defences on their own, warned allies against further sharp reductions in
their military budgets.
'If further major cuts are made, our ability to meet the challenges of the
future will be seriously compromised,' he said.
Mr Worner's remarks followed additional cuts in UK defence expenditure
announced 10 days ago.
