FT  17 FEB 93 / Business and the Environment: Monkeying about with medicine
/ A look at a project to export macaques from Indonesia
Off the south-west coast of tropical Java lies the 1,000-hectare Deli
island. Indonesia has more than 13,000 islands but Deli is unique because of
its indigenous population - 10,000 Macaca fascicularis monkeys.
The island is under a 25-year lease to CV Primates (Indonesia), an exporter
of monkeys for use in medical research. The first shipment of 100 animals
was made last December to the US. Primates aims to export a further 500 this
year to the US, Japan and Europe.
By 1995, exports from Deli could total 3,000 monkeys or 15 per cent of
current world demand for Macaca fascicularis, which account for at least 85
per cent of laboratory monkeys.
Paul Houghton, foreign partner of Primates, says the Deli island project
should appease environmentalists. As the island comes on stream, the company
will run down its trade in wild monkeys, which have historically provided
the bulk of laboratory animals.
And Primates will consider breeding a different species of macaque, Macaca
nemistrina, if tests confirm it as a suitable model for Aids research.
This would reduce the use of chimpanzees, an endangered species but
currently judged the only suitable model for Aids research.
The monkey population on Deli is free-ranging and Houghton accepts that,
other than supplementary feeding and veterinary care, there is little
difference between a wild monkey and a Deli monkey.
'It's a grey area. Somehow this business is always in the shade,' he says.
But he hopes Deli island will make the business more respectable and,
potentially, more profitable.
With the island as a captive breeding centre, Primates will screen the
monkeys for diseases - and disease resistance - which would make them
unsuitable for medical programmes.
An unscreened monkey fetches between Dollars 200-Dollars 300, while a
screened animal can fetch six times that price.
Perhaps unintentionally, therefore, the campaign against trapping wild
animals has created an opening for Primates - value-added monkeys. 'Within
this decade the average price of these animals will be Dollars 2,000,'
estimates Houghton.
Animal sympathisers might take heart in knowing that captive-bred, screened,
monkeys should reduce the overall number required by laboratories for
research. Deli island may also be used to replenish the wild population in
areas where hunting and destruction of habitat have taken their toll.
Houghton dismisses talk that using monkeys in laboratories is immoral and
insists vaccine-research into diseases such as Aids, hepatitis, malaria,
dengue and arterial sclerosis requires their use. He hopes the Deli island
project will be a first step to attracting more medical research to
Indonesia.
He also believes the project is essential if a wedge is to be driven into an
emerging monkey trade cartel.
Four companies, excluding Primates, currently dominate the trade in monkeys:
Siconbrec and AT Viri of the Philippines, Bioculture of Mauritius and CV
Primaco of Indonesia.
Of these, Siconbrec, Bioculture and Primaco have an exclusive contract with
Bausch and Lomb of the US which, in addition to manufacturing Ray-Ban
sunglasses and alcohol-free mouthwash, also controls up to 70 per cent of
the world monkey trade, says Houghton. Within the European Community,
Houghton estimates Bausch and Lomb hold a 90 per cent market share.
Primates hopes to break this stranglehold but is currently restricted by an
EC ban on the import of monkeys from Indonesia on the grounds of alleged
violations of the international treaty on trade in endangered species.
Houghton believes some members of the EC regulatory body are simply against
research and stresses the damage that restricting monkey imports could do to
the European pharmaceutical industry.
'Those who control the monkeys control the drugs which come out on the
markets,' he explains.
