FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of IMF World Economy and Finance (37): A crop of
failures triggers fears of deepening crisis - African commodities / Natural
and man-made disasters, weak management, and wrong policies have taken a
heavy toll of the heart of Africa's economy
THE TARGET has never been reached before in sub-Saharan Africa, yet the
region's hopes for economic recovery depend on achieving it.
If the agricultural sector does not sustain annual growth averaging at least
4 per cent a year, needed to outpace population increase and to make up lost
ground, the region's crisis will deepen. Failure would mean stagnating
export earnings, a widening food deficit, and further inroads by Asian
countries into Africa's falling share of world commodity markets.
Given the right policies, properly implemented, it can be done, say
planners, who take encouragement from China's achievement of 6 per cent
agricultural expansion in the 1980s.
But they acknowledge that given the record of the past 25 years, and the
obstacles ahead, it will be a target hard to meet.
Natural and man-made disasters, weak management, and wrong policies have
taken a heavy toll of what is the heart of Africa's economy, accounting as
it does for about a third of the region's GDP and around 80 per cent of
export earnings.
The average rate of agricultural growth has stayed between 1.7 and 1.9 per
cent since 1965, well behind population expanding at about 2.7 per cent
between 1965 and 1980, rising since then to just over 3 per cent.
Per capita food output has declined, food imports have increased at nearly 4
per cent a year since 1974, and food aid has risen 7 per cent annually.
Meanwhile, Africa's share in developing country exports of food and
agricultural products has halved between 1970 and 1990 - from 17 per cent to
8 per cent.
Nor has the region's export base diversified. Most African economies still
rely on one or two primary commodities, which altogether account for about
80 per cent of Africa's export revenues - roughly the same as 20 years ago.
The fall in the share of the world market has cost Africa dear. Earlier Bank
analysis has shown that if Sub-Saharan countries had maintained their 1970
market share of non-oil primary exports from developing countries and prices
had remained the same, their export earnings would have been Dollars
9bn-Dollars 10bn a year higher in 1986-87, equal to the region's total debt
service payments in this period.
Africa's leaders place at least part of the blame for their countries' poor
performance on external factors, but as the 1990 UN report, Africa's
Commodity Problems, commented, 'other developing countries in other regions
have had to face similar market problems and they have progressed while
Africa has fallen behind'.
Recovering the market share will be difficult. Africa's competitors have
invested export proceeds more productively, and now maintain economic
reforms and hone their competitive edge more effectively than Africa.
Two startling examples can be found in south-east Asia, as World Bank
researchers point out. In 1965 Indonesia's GDP per capita was lower than
Nigeria's.
In both countries oil has been the dominant export. 'Who could have
predicted then that Indonesia's GDP in 1990 would be three times that of
Nigeria. Or that Thailand (an agriculture-based economy whose GDP per capita
in 1965 was lower than Ghana's) would be one of the best-performing
countries in the world, while Ghana struggles to regain its position as a
middle income developing country?' comments the Bank in a draft report.
Nevertheless, reforms ranging from realistic exchange rates to improved
producer prices are bringing results in Africa, says Mr Kevin Cleaver*. Ten
countries 'already have met the (4 per cent) target or have come close to it
in the late 1980s and early 1990s, although with considerable annual
fluctuations' citing Nigeria, Uganda and Kenya. Given that the list also
includes Botswana, Comoros and Chad, it may be too soon to draw profound
conclusions.
The most striking success story cited is also a salutary tale. Nairobi's
city market is an African cornucopia, stalls piled high with mangoes and
passion fruit, avocados and french beans, carnations, roses, chrysanthemums
and orchids, bound for the tables of Europe and elsewhere. From modest
beginnings in the 1970s, Kenya's horticultural business boomed in the 1980s,
and now brings in more than Dollars 100m a year in much needed foreign
exchange.
But only about 7 per cent of this trade is accounted for by Kenya's African
companies: 'Kenya's Africans have had difficulty maintaining viable
enterprises due to low capitalisation, management weaknesses, and lack of
links to foreign investors. . . Where African companies have worked, family
members living in Europe have been important in managing imports,' continues
the study.
'Long-term trading relationships between exporters and importers are
therefore critical', it concludes, in the provision of foreign know-how,
market knowledge and investment.
As Mr Cleaver points out, private sector investment in African agriculture
and agro-industry is essential, but this in turn depends on successful
implementation of macro-economic reforms.
* A Strategy to Develop Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa, Kevin Cleaver,
World Bank technical paper No 203
 ------------------------------------
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA: % SHARE OF
PRIMARY AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
(AFRICAN SHARE OF WORLD PRODUCTION)
 ------------------------------------
Commodity          1969/71   1989
 ------------------------------------
Coffee                  32     21
Cocoa                   72     59
Tea                     12     17
Sugar                    7      8
Bananas                  6      3
Citrus fruit            10      8
Rice                     2      2
Coarse grains            7      8
Palm oil                55     14
Groundnuts              32     18
Cotton                  11      7
Rubber                   7      7
 ------------------------------------
Source: World Bank
 ------------------------------------
