FT  28 OCT 93 / International Company News: Du Pont takes extra Dollars 920m
charge to cover overhaul
DU PONT took a further Dollars 920m restructuring charge, lifting the total
announced in recent weeks to Dollars 1.3bn, as the US chemicals group
continued a wide-ranging overhaul of all its business units.
The latest charge was boosted by 'major printing and publishing write-offs,'
the company said. This covered write-offs of Dollars 448m of goodwill and
technology acquired through takeovers in the 1980s, as well as a reduction
of manufacturing capacity.
Du Pont recently announced the sale of its Remington Arms subsidiary and the
closure of nylon and other manufacturing plants in the US and Europe with
the loss of more than 5,600 jobs.
'As we stated previously, we expect to have all our businesses competitive
in 1994, and we are determined to take whatever steps are necessary to
achieve that goal,' said Mr Edgar Woolard, chairman.
He added that Du Pont's printing and publishing business had made
'noteworthy improvements' in the past year, but that conditions in the
industry had continued to deteriorate.
The Dollars 1.3bn charge, Dollars 375m of which had previously been
announced, pushed the company into a net loss of Dollars 680m for the third
quarter.
The loss would have topped Dollars 1bn, had it not been for a Dollars 265m
one-off gain after tax resulting from the changes in petroleum revenue tax
in the UK.
Du Pont's earnings were under pressure even without the restructuring
charges: earnings per share would have been 51 cents, down from 56 cents in
the same period the year before. The effects of a coal strike on the
company's Consol Energy subsidiary had cost the equivalent of 7 cents a
share in earnings, Du Pont said.
Earnings in the chemicals operations fell by 36 per cent, to Dollars 46m, as
sales declined by 6 per cent, due mainly to the effects of a stronger
dollar.
The fibres business saw a 22 per cent drop in net income, to Dollars 109m,
due to 'lower results for textile specialities and nylon in Europe'.
Earnings from polymers dipped by 31 per cent, to Dollars 81m, on lower sales
due to the strong dollar.
But the petroleum division recorded a Dollars 33m rise in net income, to
Dollars 181m, due to higher gas prices and crude oil volumes.
Du Pont's shares fell Dollars 1/2 to close on Wall Street yesterday at
Dollars 46 1/2.
