FT  05 JAN 93 / P&amp;O shuts Dover to Boulogne ferry route
P&amp;O European Ferries closed its Dover-Boulogne cross-Channel route
yesterday, in order to strengthen its presence on the shorter Dover-Calais
crossing.
The last sailing on the route, which carried 1m passengers last year, was
yesterday morning.
The company said there would be no job losses among the permanent crews of
the two ships or onshore staff at Dover, who will be redeployed on the
Dover-Calais crossing. The 44 Boulogne shore staff were offered transfers to
Calais, but 39 opted for redundancy.
The long-awaited closure is the latest stage in the concentration of ferry
services on the Dover-Calais crossing as they prepare for the challenge of
the Channel Tunnel, due to open later this year. The two main ferry
operators plan to offer more frequent services on the shortest and busiest
cross-Channel route to compete with the train shuttles running through the
tunnel.
Stena Sealink Line closed its Folkestone-Boulogne ferry service at the end
of 1991. In partnership with the French ferry company SNAT, Stena Sealink
Line last year carried 5.25m passengers on the Dover-Calais crossing.
P&amp;O, which last year carried 7.4m passengers on the Dover-Calais route, is
adding a fifth 'superferry' to its fleet in April. It plans to offer
sailings every 45 minutes in peak periods, with a new loading system to cut
check-in times.
The superferries carry more than 600 cars, three times the capacity of the
ferries on the Boulogne service, the Pride of Hythe and Pride of Canterbury.
The two boats will be sold.
The closure of the route is a further blow to the port of Boulogne, which
cannot accommodate the largest modern ferries.
The SeaCat catamaran service operated by Hoverspeed out of Folkestone is now
the only passenger service into Boulogne. Aimed at the day trip market, it
can carry only 80 cars on each of its six daily return crossings.
However, the direct rail transfer facilities at Folkestone and Boulogne
means the route is used as a link for rail services between London and
Paris, including the privately operated Orient Express.
Boulogne's Chamber of Commerce was instrumental in re-establishing a freight
service between Folkestone and Boulogne in the summer. P&amp;O is to ask the
Chamber to provide financial help for a coach service the company plans for
taking foot passengers between the Calais ferry terminal and Boulogne.
