FT  05 JUL 93 / Labour talks fail at Hyundai
A BREAKDOWN in labour negotiations is threatening to cause widespread
industrial action at Hyundai, South Korea's largest conglomerate.
Hyundai estimates that it has already suffered 262bn won (Dollars 330m) in
lost sales since May, due to labour strife affecting Hyundai Motor, the
largest automaker in South Korea, and Hyundai Precision, a container and
jeep manufacturer.
South Korean President Kim Young-Sam has warned that he may be forced to
make a 'grave' decision concerning the labour unrest at Hyundai if it
threatens to damage the nation's economic recovery.
The government has blamed the job action at Hyundai for a meagre 3.2 per
cent rise in exports last month. Vehicles and containers are among Korea's
leading export items.
Workers at five Hyundai companies, including Hyundai Motor, have already
staged partial walk-outs.
The unions at four other Hyundai subsidiaries, including Hyundai Heavy
Industries and Hyundai Mipo Dockyard, have voted to strike on Wednesday
unless their demands for considerable wage rises, averaging 16 per cent, are
met.
Hyundai estimates it could lose 158bn won from a two-week strike at Hyundai
Heavy Industries, the nation's biggest shipbuilder.
The Hyundai trade unions are among the most militant and well-organised in
South Korea. The concentration of Hyundai manufacturing facilities in the
south-eastern city of Ulsan facilitates collective action among workers.
Prospects for settling the Hyundai labour dispute appeared good last week
when workers at Hyundai Precision, which initiated industrial action within
the industrial group, agreed to return to work. Mr Chung Se-yung, Hyundai
chairman, then proposed to negotiate directly with other Hyundai union
leaders on a final pay deal.
A meeting on Saturday was aborted when the unions insisted on a
comprehensive settlement for all Hyundai companies. Officials wanted to
conclude agreements on an individual company basis, in a bid to weaken the
power of the Hyundai union alliance.
The labour dispute represents a key test for Mr Kim, a former dissident and
the country's first civilian leader in more than three decades.
His implied threat to crack down on labour unrest reverses his government's
recent moves to offer concessions to the union movement.
