FT  26 APR 93 / Risk and Reward: Plotting a safe course along the yield
curve as the slope changes
AS official German interest rates were reduced last week, the D-Mark yield
curve took another lurch towards the sort of positive slope that the bond
markets have been awaiting for some time. If short-dated bonds are set to
outperform longer-dated ones, what are the most effective ways of taking a
position to benefit from the change in the months ahead?
The longer end of the yield curve has swung considerably, with the spread
between five and 10-year yields lurching up as the curve has become
positive. According to some, there is still a long way to go. Mr Jeremy
Hale, fixed income economist at Goldman Sachs in London, points out that the
differential between five and 10-year yields has shifted more slowly that in
other interest rate cycles, suggesting there is a sharper swing to come.
Simply buying short-dated paper has had one big disadvantage: the relative
lack of duration (the life of the bond, taking into account both the
maturity date and the timing of coupon payments) of short-term paper makes
it less price sensitive as interest rates fall. Why pay more for a
higher-yielding bond if it repays anyway in the near future?
One answer has been to move out along the yield curve towards the five-year
area, picking up duration without losing the relative outperformance of the
short end of the yield curve. Also, banks have used the swap markets to
structure instruments specifically aimed at investors wanting to take a
position on the shape of the yield curve. These have sold well in recent
months, though could prove expensive if the curve fails to steepen as
sharply as many investors expect.
This year has seen the issue of more than DM6bn of reverse floating rate
notes, which pay investors a higher return as interest rates fall, according
to Deutsche Bank. The buyers of this paper were almost exclusively German
retail investors.
As expectations of falling interest rates have grown, these instruments have
progressively offered less of a return: the first issues paid 14 1/2 per
cent a year minus the London Interbank Offered Rate, a level which had
fallen to around 12 1/4 per cent minus Libor by the time the flow of paper
began to dry up a month ago.
Medium-term notes specifically structured for investors looking to play the
German yield curve have been produced in abundance in recent months.
Typically, the redemption price of the paper is linked to the fall in
short-term interest rates: the sharper rates fall, the higher the redemption
price.
Mr Paul Abberley, a director of Lombard Odier Investment Management, the
London-based arm of a Swiss bank, said his firm had used such paper to
extend the duration of its D-Mark investments while keeping its exposure to
the short-term end of the market. Such notes bought by Lombard Odier had
been issued by institutions such as the Halifax Building Society and the
Republic of Ireland.
'As recently as a year ago, this type of investment was very innovative  -
no one much in London was doing it,' he says. US investment banks have more
recently been marketing the idea hard both to issuers and investors, and
making considerable headway.
Such swap-based products have a cost, of course - both the market spread,
and the profit margin of the bank that constructs them. As a Deutsche Bank
official says: 'Most of our bigger investors can reproduce these in the
market by taking out a number of swaps.'
Most investors still prefer to focus their efforts on getting the direction
of the market right, rather than on innovative investment products.
