FT  15 SEP 93 / Management: Escape from the ivory tower - A Treasury scheme
to allow high-flyers to stretch their wings in the private sector
Tomorrow's mandarins will, if the Treasury has its way, get their hands
dirty at least once in their civil service careers.
Sir Terence Burns, the permanent secretary, has decreed that the best move a
Treasury high-flyer can make is not up, but out. After a decision taken at
the Treasury Management Board this summer, high-flyers between grades three
and seven are destined to leave the Whitehall cocoon, enter a private-sector
company and spend a couple of years learning about life at the sharp end of
economic policy.
After the spell outside, the Treasury expects its secondees to resist the
lure of better pay and return freshened enough to 'import ideas and
challenge the orthodoxies of internal management as well as its policies'.
The scheme could certainly help salvage the relationship between the
Treasury and business; the department acknowledges criticism that its
officers have rarely left the ivory towers of Whitehall to experience the
constraints and pressures of the wealth-creating sector.
But do managers feel their companies - who will, for a start, have to
reimburse the government for the salaries of the secondees - gain quite so
much from the scheme as the Treasury expects?
While Sir Terence's office has been bombarded with letters of interest since
the FT reported his decision, a minority are openly sceptical.
The reaction of Charles Drace-Francis, the government affairs director of
British Aerospace, is all the more surprising because he is enjoying an
extended secondment from the Foreign Office.
'What on earth makes the Treasury presume that in the middle of a recession,
after we've sacked 7,200 people and about to sack 2,000 more, that its
people are wanted?' he demands.
He is clear, however, about the benefits diplomats can bring business. 'We
know how to negotiate, and we know how to report. A production engineer
never writes anything down. If told to make a table, he would never question
whether it had to have four legs.'
John Emmins, of the Federation of Small Businesses, accepts that it is a
'step in the right direction if only because civil servants, government and
banks seem to know so little about business'.
Beyond that, he doubts the scheme will have the desired effect as civil
servants are too set in their preconceptions to learn much from the private
sector.
Sir Ian Wrigglesworth, the deputy chairman of Livingston Group, the
industrial mini-conglomerate, also has his doubts. 'It all depends on the
firm. Small and medium-sized businesses are pretty lean and would get very
little short-term benefit from installing a civil servant and training him
up to see what the company is all about,' he says.
Others see more mutual benefits - and are keen to grab a mandarin as soon as
possible. Michael Corrigan, the secretary of the Association of British
Insurers, says the ABI held an immediate board meeting to discuss how member
companies might secure civil servants. Since the Financial Services Act, he
points out, the Treasury regulates life assurance companies and they are,
naturally, keen to put their points to the regulators.
The Prudential confirms its approval of the scheme. 'We've always maintained
informal links with Whitehall but the secondments would definitely help us
learn a bit more about how the civil service operates,' it says.
On the whole, though, managers think that it is far more important for civil
servants to learn a bit more about them. John Parsons, founder of Time and
Data Systems, the security-card manufacturer in Dorset that employs 50 and
turns over Pounds 3m a year, supports the scheme. 'It's immensely valuable
for people to get inside information, particularly about small and
medium-sized businesses because they are overburdened with bureaucracy and
regulation,' he says.
Hugh Morgan Williams, the chairman of Canford Audio, the Tyne and Wear-based
manufacturer of professional audio equipment, says he would welcome a civil
servant - but would want a 'matchmaking service' to operate.
'I'd like someone involved in industry or economic planning - not the Health
Service or the Highland Development Board,' he says.
Most important to the company, with its annual turnover of Pounds 8m and
staff of 85, would be the chance to show the man from Whitehall the 'civil
service-related problems' it is currently dealing with - filing Intrastat
returns for the Central Statistical Office's trade figures; and interpreting
standards to comply with the EC's Byzantine Electromagnetic Compatibility
Directive.
It seems clear that industry, for its many reasons, is keen for the
Whitehall secondments to take root.
The Treasury's personnel department will be working overtime on a number of
complex aspects: negotiating with staff and companies about who should go
where and for how long; ensuring that departmental cover is adequate; but
also more delicate questions of civil service confidentiality.
Collective memory still rankles about the Treasury economist who left in the
1980s to become a gilts economist at a merchant bank, having been privy to
key information about how the government calculated the public-sector
borrowing requirement.
So the set of rules about releasing sensitive Treasury staff - which
dictates that a certain amount of time has to elapse before the officer
leaves to do comparable work outside - is likely to apply to secondments,
too. Companies keen to bend the right Whitehall ear are not likely to get it
on their books.
