FT  09 FEB 93 / Czechs and Slovaks agree bilateral payments accord
THE Czech and Slovak parliaments approved a payments clearing accord - just
in time for yesterday's introduction of separate currencies.
As from yesterday the Czechoslovak koruna (crown) has been abolished to make
way for separate Czech and Slovak crowns. Initially, these will be
differently stamped old banknotes as the new national ones are gradually
introduced. The Czech republic and Slovakia continued to share the same
currency after the split of the former Czechoslovak state on January 1 this
year. Old banknotes are no longer valid except for small denominations.
The clearing accord aims to provide a stable framework for trade between the
two states, though bilateral trade is expected to decline as each country
seeks new markets.
On the domestic front, dividing up assets is proving a contentious issue,
made more difficult by the introduction of separate currencies and the
expectation of a Slovak crown devaluation. Czechs and Slovaks are currently
locked in dispute over who owes what.
Mr Ivan Kocarnic, the Czech finance minister, said at the weekend Slovak
banks borrowed 25bn crowns (Dollars 860m) more from the former Czechoslovak
National Bank than their Czech counterparts and this will need to be repaid.
He said payment could be made over a 10-year period. One way would be for
Slovakia to waive transit fees on Czech imports of Siberian gas distributed
by a pipeline running across its territory.
The division of gold reserves and the national banks' foreign securities
assets are also controversial issues. Agreement has been stalled because of
a dispute over 7.3 tonnes of gold which Bratislava says were taken by Prague
at the end of the second world war when the short-lived Nazi-backed Slovakia
was brought back into a unified Czechoslovakia.
The Czech government will accept the transit across its territory of east
European refugees expelled from Germany only if Bonn can guarantee that they
will not remain stranded in the Czech republic, Mr Jan Ruml, the Czech
interior minister, said at the weekend.
