FT  16 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Hoping a healthy future will be diagnosed -
The development of Shield Diagnostics, which is to be floated next month
SHIELD Diagnostics, which will be floated on the Stock Exchange next month,
is that rarity among the crop of biotechnology companies that have come to
the market recently: one that already has products on sale.
The Dundee-based company has 23 products for diagnosing illnesses in use
worldwide. Its sales have increased fourfold in each of the past two years,
partly by acquisition, and reached Pounds 1.7m in the year to March 31 1993,
having been Pounds 110,000 in 1991.
The fact that it has been selling products distinguishes it from four of the
five biotechnology companies which have been listed on the Stock Exchange in
the past 14 months: out of British Bio-technology, Tepnel Diagnostics,
Celsis Diagnostics, Anagen and Drew Scientific, only the last is earning
money from its products.
Yet Shield's path to a listing has been no smoother than many other high
technology companies. Founded in 1982 with eight people, it only started
shipping products in 1990, and last year it lost Pounds 653,000, though that
was better than the previous year's deficit of Pounds 1.4m. It is not
expected to break even until 1994.
Shield was created by entrepreneurial scientists from Dundee university and
the city's Ninewells hospital. Its field has always been that of in vitro
diagnostics - the diagnosing of diseases in tests outside the body.
In 1987 Mr Hamish Hale of the venture capital company Alan Patricoff
Associates (now named Apax Partners) became its chairman and Shield, under
new management, raised Pounds 4.5m of venture capital funding.
It built up a strong team of managers by 'cherry-picking' senior staff from
established biomedical companies. But by 1990 it had already spent Pounds 8m
on research and development without bringing any product to the market.
In that year Mr Hale recruited Mr Gordon Hall from Abbot Diagnostics, the
big US diagnostics company, to be chief executive. 'My task was to get some
products out and get the budget under control', says Mr Hall.
His own diagnosis of Shield was that its strength lay in developing and
manufacturing diagnostic discoveries; but it was hampered, like the other
small biotechnology companies, by high fixed overheads.
Although the company soon began marketing a range of kits that test for a
variety of auto-immune diseases, Mr Hall bought in discoveries from other
companies which Shield could manufacture, thus spreading the overheads
burden.
Last year Shield acquired two products from Northumbrian Biologicals, which
added nearly Pounds 700,000 to its turnover. They were a test for chlamydia,
a sexually transmitted, genito-urinary disease which affects women, and for
cytomegalovirus, an agent which can produce infections and for which donated
blood is increasingly being tested worldwide.
'Our products are consistent, which those of some of our small rivals are
not,' says Mr Hall. 'That means they will have the same characteristics in a
year's time as they have today, which makes them a reliable test.'
Shield, he says, is not dependent on the UK's National Health Service, which
he says pays poorly. It exports two-thirds of its output, mostly to
multinational diagnostic companies in the US, Germany and elsewhere.
The company has high hopes for two of the tests which it has under
development. It is perfecting an advanced form of test, based on research by
Oxford university, to enable doctors to predict whether a person is likely
to suffer heart attacks. With Stago of France it has attracted a grant of up
to Pounds 445,000 from the EC's Eureka fund for promising technology.
It hopes the test, already being sold for research purposes, will be on sale
in three years time. 'It's a big market. Already 500m cholesterol tests for
heart disease risk are carried out each year worldwide', Mr Hall says.
Shield has also started work on a test to identify women at risk from the
disease osteoporosis, which causes brittle bones after the age of 45. Mr
Hall points out that there are 12m women aged 45 or over in the UK alone.
The flotation, which should capitalise the company at Pounds 20m, will be a
placing and will raise new equity to fund future development.
The company intends to acquire other companies and buy in new products. It
would like to become the biggest British-owned company in the field of in
vitro diagnostics.
'Obviously we don't expect to go on growing at the same rate as the last two
years,' says Mr Hall, 'but we expect reasonable growth in sales.' More space
at the company's headquarters on the Dundee Technology Park is being
converted from offices to manufacturing. Staff now total 45.
The company is speaking to analysts ahead of next month's flotation, which
is being sponsored by the Glasgow stockbrokers Allied Provincial.
The existing institutional shareholders are expected to stay on board. Led
by Apax, they also include the venture capital funds Cygnus Ventures, Summa
and Grosvenor Ventures. Scottish Enterprise, the successor to the Scottish
Development Agency which helped Shield in its early days, is a small
shareholder.
Shield will come to the market in the same month as Scotia Pharmaceuticals,
the drug company formerly known as Efamol, which concentrates on products
based on fatty acids and funds its research from sales of evening primrose
oil as a dietary supplement.
Though currently based at Guildford in Surrey, Scotia has strong Scottish
connections, manufacturing some of its products at Callanish in the Western
Isles, and may shortly establish a plant in Dundee.
Scotia was founded by Dr David Horrobin 16 years ago. It made pre-tax
profits in 1991-92 of Pounds 1.1m on turnover of Pounds 16m.
Earlier this month dealings in its shares were suspended ahead of the
flotation, details of which have not been disclosed. The shares had traded
at a price which would value the company at more than Pounds 180m.
