FT  08 OCT 93 / BAe to sell Dutchbuilder for Pounds 180m
BRITISH Aerospace has agreed in principle to sell Ballast Nedam, its
Dutch-based construction subsidiary, to the Dutch dredging company Boskalis
for around Fl 500m (Pounds 180m).
The transaction is effectively a reverse takeover, as Ballast Nedam is more
than twice as large as Boskalis in terms of turnover.
Boskalis, the world's leading dredger, will finance part of the acquisition
through a Fl 300m share issue. It gave no details but said the tie-up with
Ballast Nedam was expected to lead to higher earnings per share in coming
years, provided that market conditions remain stable.
The deal ends a period of uncertainty about the future of the Dutch
construction company. BAe wanted to dispose of the business as part of
efforts to restructure and focus on core activities.
Last month, Ballast Nedam and Boskalis disclosed that they were looking into
'possibilities of co-operation', including the option of a full equity
link-up between them. Earlier, Ballast Nedam's management had attempted to
arrange a flotation, but BAe objected, prompting the Dutch company's
chairman to resign. The sale to Boskalis, which is listed, will fulfil
Ballast Nedam's hopes of gaining access to the Amsterdam Stock Exchange.
BAe acquired Ballast Nedam in 1987 for Dollars 90m (Pounds 59m), mainly for
its expertise in modernising airfields in Saudi Arabia, where BAe had won an
order for Tornado aircraft. The three companies said there was room for
continued co-operation.
BAe said the sale was not expected to lead to an extraordinary book gain
because the proposed price was roughly equal to Ballast Nedam's asset value.
The Dutch companies, both of which are active abroad, are largely
complementary, with Boskalis concentrating mainly on dredging and marine
construction and Ballast Nedam specialising in civil as well as marine
construction. Boskalis had 1992 turnover of nearly Fl 1bn, slightly less
than half of Ballast Nedam's sales of Fl 2.4bn.
Ballast Nedam has a strong reputation in the Middle East with the
construction of the 25km causeway linking Bahrain and Saudi Arabia.
