FT  30 OCT 93 / Need for stronger RSI evidence stressed
STRONGER medical evidence will be required if future legal actions claiming
damages for alleged repetitive strain injuries are to succeed, specialist
lawyers agreed yesterday.
But the number of actions set to come to court is unlikely to fall in spite
of Thursday's ruling by a High Court judge that RSI was a meaningless
medical term.
Lawyers working on personal injury cases were yesterday considering the
implications of the judgment by Judge John Prosser in dismissing the case
brought against the Reuters news agency by Mr Rafiq Mughal, a journalist
formerly with the company.
The judge ruled that Mr Mughal's injuries, although genuine, had been caused
by personal stress rather than his computer keyboard.
Mr Simon Allen, a solicitor with Russell Jones and Walker, a law firm
specialising in industrial injury claims, said more precision would be
needed in proving a causal link between working conditions and RSI-type
injuries.
But his firm would not drop any of the 200 RSI cases - almost all involving
the use of keyboards - it is handling on behalf of white-collar unions.
He suggested that a Court of Appeal ruling on the medical standing of RSI,
which would be binding on lower courts, would assist future cases.
It is unclear whether the Mughal case will result in such a ruling - the
cash-strapped National Union of Journalists, which is bringing another 70
cases, has yet to decide whether to mount an appeal.
Mr Nigel Johnson, a solicitor with Cameron Markby Hewitt, a City law firm
specialising in defending personal injury claims for insurers, said the
judgment was good news for employers and insurers and would deter tenuous
cases being brought to court.
He said: 'Potential claimants might get the message that to succeed they
have to have very strong medical evidence to support their claim.'
Mr David Scrutton of Kennedy's, one of the leading law firms acting for
insurers in RSI cases, thought a fall in the number of cases was unlikely,
however, and warned employers against a cock-a-hoop reaction to the
judgment. 'All the judge has done is highlight the debate. He has not
altered things.'
People suffered genuine injuries, he said. What those injuries were called
might be open to question but employers would still be liable if negligence
were proved.
