FT  24 FEB 93 / Japan acts to aid recovery as top groups shed 35,000 jobs
THE JAPANESE government and three of the country's top companies yesterday
separately took steps to respond to the most deep-seated economic crisis the
country has faced since the second world war.
Nissan, one of the world's top five vehicle makers, and NTT, the
telecommunications group, said they would shed 35,000 jobs between them over
the next three years.
The job cuts came at the same time as news that the board of Matsushita, the
world's largest electronics group which faces a steep fall in profits, had
forced the resignation of its president. The move shook Japan's
traditionally conservative business community where corporate changes tend
to be orderly.
The corporate shake-ups coincided with a decision by Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the
prime minister, and other top policymakers in the ruling Liberal Democratic
party to draw up further measures to stimulate the economy.
These are likely to include bringing forward public works spending and tax
incentives for housing and capital investment, once the budget for 1993
passes through parliament next month.
The move confirms that the government believes the economy is still
deteriorating despite the Y10,700bn (Pounds 62.8bn) emergency package
announced last summer. The economic downturn has spread to embrace finance
and industry in every region.
Gross national product grew at only 1.1 per cent in the third quarter of
last year, over the same period in 1991. Machine tool orders last year fell
by 37.8 per cent and industrial production generally, fell by 6.1 per cent.
Bank lending grew by just 2 per cent in January, the same rate as in the
previous two months.
The gathering sense of gloom was reinforced by Mr Yasushi Mieno, the
governor of the Bank of Japan, who repeated his call to Japan's banks to
speed up moves to write off their mounting bad debts. Mr Mieno, in a speech
to business leaders in Tokyo, confirmed that Japan's banks face their worst
crisis since the second world war. He urged them to rapidly strengthen their
balance sheets by writing off bad debts and raising new equity to make sure
they could create the credit to finance economic recovery.
The restructuring plans unveiled by Japan's corporate sector yesterday
included:
NTT, the world's largest telecommunications group will shed 30,000 of its
workforce of more than 200,000 over the next three years and cut by a third
its 1,300 retail outlets. NTT reported a 22 per cent fall in pre-tax profits
in the half year to September.
Nissan plans to close a production plant near Tokyo by the spring of 1995
and reduce its workforce of 53,000 by 5,000 by 1996 as part of a plan to
save Y200bn. Nissan said it would make a pre-tax loss of Y29bn in the year
to the end of March.
Matsushita may introduce similar changes after its board yesterday suddenly
removed its president Mr Akio Tanii. He will be replaced by Mr Yoichi
Morishita, the vice-president. The company reported a 63 per cent fall in
pre-tax income for the nine months to the end of December.
The government's index of leading indicators for December published
yesterday suggested little hope of an early upturn. It stood at 27 per cent,
the ninth consecutive month below the 50 per cent threshold which signals
that the economy will expand.
DOWNTURN IN JAPAN
Page 3
Japan holds its breath
Bank write-off urged
Matsushita chief quits
Currencies Page 31
World stocks Page 37
