FT  21 DEC 93 / Survey of Sweden (11): Pragmatic party leader - Profile:
Ingvar Carlsson
Two years ago, when the Social Democrats were turfed out office after
slumping to their worst election result since the 1920s, many people were
ready to ring the death-knell for the party and the edifice of industrial
welfarism it had crafted.
But with a new election less than a year away and the Social Democrats
winning as much as 50 per cent support in the opinion polls, Mr Ingvar
Carlsson, party leader, has every prospect of once again becoming prime
minister. From his vantage point, both the Social Democratic Party and the
'Swedish model' are very much alive.
'I don't think the party is in a crisis, although the country is in very bad
shape,' he says.
'We have always been a pragmatic party. We never nationalised much. But we
want a society where there are no great differences between the working
class and the upper class. We want social security guaranteed for all. And
here I see no bad signs for our party with respect to ideology. Look at the
United States. After a decade or more of neo-liberalism, one of President
Clinton's big tasks now is to have health insurance, which is more similar
to our ideas than to conservative ideas.'
He cites recent local election successes for the Social Democrats in Germany
and the Democratic Left in Italy. Italy's former communists are bona fide
social democrats, he says.
'I think the pendulum will now swing back towards our policy where it is
necessary through certain political action to correct the market and create
greater security for people.'
Mr Carlsson, who was 59 last month, became party leader and prime minister
in the most traumatic of circumstances, succeeding when Mr Olaf Palme was
assassinated by a still unknown gunman in February 1986. Mr Carlsson went on
to lead the Social Democrats to victory in the 1988 election.
In that government, he proved his own leadership credentials when he
undertook two important shifts in party policy. As the balance between the
ever-expanding public sector and the private economy skewed, threatening to
make worse a looming recession, Mr Carlsson presided over a significant
reform of Sweden's notoriously high income taxes. Then, in July 1991, he
overturned decades of Social Democratic orthodoxy by lodging Sweden's
application to join the European Community, or Union as it has since become.
It did not save the party from defeat in the 1991 election. But Mr Carlsson
survived as leader, maintaining the pro-EU policy and co-operating for many
months on economic policy with Mr Carl Bildt's conservative-led government
to help steer the country through the worst of the currency and economic
crisis of 1992.
The Social Democrats are careful to stress their pragmatism and are unlikely
to reverse the welfare reforms carried out by Mr Bildt. But those days of
co-operation are now firmly over. Mr Carlsson is keen to stress the
differences between his and the government's economic policies.
He rejects, for example, the central platform of the present coalition that
an oversized public sector is the main cause of Sweden's economic woes and
its huge budget deficit.
'I think it is definitely the wrong analysis. I think you have to go much
deeper than this, because we had this large public sector for many years. In
my opinion, the real problem is that we have negative growth. The cake we
produce is too small and that is what we have to do something about. When
you look at the budget deficit, according to our analysis about three
quarters is due to unemployment. Here is where we have to focus.
'That is one of my main arguments on why Sweden should join the EU. The
strategy against unemployment is at least much easier to outline if we do it
together with other European countries. You can take much larger risks in
the policy of expansion and growth if you do it simultaneously.' He wants to
put the emphasis back on stimulating demand and generating industrial
growth. If the Social Democrats lead the next government, he declares:
'There will be a more positive attitude towards industry.
'We have always pushed for a very positive industrial policy. That doesn't
mean we believe in reducing taxes for the shareholders, but we must have an
increase in industrial investment, and we must have a demand for industrial
products.
'A more efficient, a more competitive and a broader industrial sector will
be the main objective. I think the financial markets in the world will be a
little bit surprised. We had a huge increase in industrial development in
the 1980s which people now tend to forget.'
But, again, comes the line that the Social Democrats are nothing if not
pragmatic. The unstated message seems to be that while the aim is to
preserve the essential elements of the welfare state, the party will equally
try not to disrupt essential market forces.
'We are not doctrinaire,' says Mr Carlsson. 'We say we would like to see
what is best in every single situation. We are certainly aware that Sweden
is in a very difficult situation; a dangerous crisis. We will not come up
with a lot of promises other than that we will concentrate on solving the
economic crisis and getting people back to work.'
