FT  13 AUG 93 / Yamahana offers to quit SDP post: Call for party leadership
ballot
THE SOCIAL Democratic party, the biggest member of Japan's new seven-party
ruling coalition, yesterday entered a potentially divisive period of
soul-searching when Mr Sadao Yamahana offered to resign as leader.
Mr Yamahana, who will retain his job as minister in charge of political
reform in the cabinet formed on Monday, called for an open ballot of party
members. He said he would be a candidate but was submitting to a contest in
the wake of the SDP's poor showing in the general election last month.
Although that brought the party to power for the first time since the late
1940s, the SDP's parliamentary strength was almost halved.
In the year the coalition expects to be in power before holding fresh
elections under a new system, the left-wing SDP, whose support it needs, is
thought likely to be the main stumbling block in establishing policies apart
from those on the political reform agenda.
'I feel indebted to my comrades who failed to win Diet seats,' Mr Yamahana
told party officials in his resignation statement. However, no other
contender for the job immediately emerged. Mr Yamahana from the moderate
wing of the party, the most left-wing member of the coalition, became
chairman only in January. Many SDP activists are uncomfortable at the
alliance he has since formed with conservatives and centrists.
He described his move as aimed at rebuilding the party, but its executive
committee was unable to reach a decision yesterday on how to proceed, with
some party bosses trying to persuade Mr Yamahana to change his mind.
Mr Yamahana and Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime minister and leader of the
year-old Japan New party, have committed themselves to enacting political
reform measures by the end of the year. Coalition leaders yesterday made
little progress towards agreement on the form of electoral system to replace
the current multi-seat constituencies. As these have meant members of the
same party competing, fundraising ability often wins out, fostering
corruption.
The pursuit of alleged misdeeds from the old order continued yesterday with
the indictment of Mr Fujio Takeuchi on charges of taking Y55m (Pounds
348,100) in bribes from Hazama, a construction company, while governor of
Ibaraki prefecture north-east of Tokyo. Also charged was Mr Shigeru Honda,
who stepped down as Hazama chairman after an indictment in a case involving
the mayor of Sendai to the north.
