FT  22 OCT 93 / Delors attacks 'passive' attitude to work crisis
THE European Commission president, Mr Jacques Delors, yesterday attacked
those in Europe unwilling to contemplate the sort of changes needed to get
the Community out of its jobs crisis, comparing this 'passivity'
unfavourably with the 'active' nature of US society.
Mr Delors is not known as a great admirer of the US model of economic
development, but used the comparison to underline that 'the biggest scandal
(in Europe) is that we have the lowest rate of participation of the labour
force (in employment) with the highest rates of unemployment'.
The European welfare model of society was essential to the survival of
Europe, he said, but in achieving this, 'our most dangerous adversaries are
those who don't want to change anything'.
Mr Delors was speaking at a three-day conference organised by the Commission
on employment in Europe, which had earlier witnessed EC employers and trade
union leaders cross swords on how to make labour markets more flexible.
Looking forward to the White Paper on competitiveness, growth and employment
that the Commission is producing for the December summit of EC heads of
government, Mr Delors drew attention to general ideas rather than concrete
recommendations which are still being shaped by Brussels.
'First of all we have to reinsert the long term into our economic thinking,'
he declared. He called on EC leaders to retrieve the threads of economic and
monetary union, arguing that 'we are the victims of frequent competitive
devaluations' by our main trading partners in the US and Japan.
The EC, he said, had to stop thinking purely in terms of shedding labour as
the only way of restructuring industry.
It had to think more of moving charges on employment like social security on
to 'the rare resource of the environment', and of ideas like shorter working
hours in order to share out jobs.
Returning to a frequent theme of recent months, the Commission president
said that how the EC dealt with the jobless crisis would show whether Europe
'is opting for survival instead of decline'.
More than 10,000 steelworkers blocked motorways yesterday to protest against
the German government's plan to reduce social welfare payments drastically,
writes Ariane Genillard from Bonn.
