FT  10 FEB 93 / International Bonds: Eurodollar sector attracts most
activity on quiet day
THE Eurodollar sector attracted most of the activity in a quiet day for new
issues yesterday, as syndicate managers kept their vigil for a
widely-expected dollar deal from Denmark.
Separately, the World Bank confirmed market talk of an imminent global yen
bond issue, which it plans to launch in late February. The underwriting
group will be led by IBJ International, Morgan Stanley and Nikko Securities.
Syndicate managers said the World Bank's third global bond offering in yen
was likely to raise Y200bn and to have a maturity of between seven to 10
years.
There were reports that the Danish deal was still waiting for ministerial
approval but syndicate managers hoped that it would be launched by the end
of the week. One syndicate manager said that any further delay would result
in less favourable terms for Denmark, since the US Treasury's quarterly
refunding auctions this week were likely to temper investor demand.
Among yesterday's Eurodollar deals, the Dollars 300m seven-year offering
from Sandoz Overseas Finance arranged by CSFB was said to be the most
successful. Although the Swiss chemicals company has no rating and the
maturity of the bond exceeded the current preference among Swiss investors
for maturities of five years or less, the deal went in 'two minutes,'
according to one manager involved in the deal, reflecting the company's good
name in the market. The bond was priced at 38 basis points above comparable
US Treasuries, and after the syndicate was broken, the spread tightened to
less than 35 points.
By contrast, distribution of the Dollars 200m 10-year bond for Norddeutsche
Landesbank was 'slow,' according to an official at the lead manager, Salomon
Brothers International.
Several convertible issues in various currencies were launched yesterday.
Sun Alliance, the composite insurer, was the second UK company in less than
a week to bring a sterling subordinated Euroconvertible issue. On February
2, Northern Foods, the dairy and convenience food company, raised Pounds
91.28m through a similar issue, also arranged by NM Rothschild.
As with Northern Foods, demand among investors for high-yielding instruments
enabled Sun Alliance to increase the size of its issue to Pounds 155m from
Pounds 140m. The issue has a 15-year maturity but may be redeemed after five
years.
The semi-annual coupon was set at 7 1/4 per cent, at the lower end of the
indicated range of 7 1/4 -7 1/2 per cent, and the conversion price at 390p
represented a premium of 15.38 per cent over the ordinary share price at the
time of pricing, at the high end of the indicated range of 14-16 per cent.
