FT  25 SEP 93 / In the court of King Sihanouk: Victor Mallet observes
Cambodia's transition to democracy
NORODOM Sihanouk was restored as King of Cambodia after signing a new
democratic constitution yesterday, formally bringing to an end one of the
UN's most expensive - and most successful - peacekeeping mandates.
The 70-year-old monarch, perched on a throne six feet above the ground, took
the oath of office under the chandeliers and painted ceilings of the
glittering throne room in his palace overlooking the Mekong River.
'I swear henceforth to abide by the constitution and to respect all the
interests of the Cambodian people,' he told the assembled diplomats,
Buddhist monks, and members of parliament wearing blue silk pantaloons and
white jackets.
The ceremony was the culmination of a two-year, Dollars 2bn UN operation to
bring peace and democracy to Cambodia after more than two decades of war.
King Sihanouk ended the mandate of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia
(Untac) by appointing the leaders of a new government: the senior prime
minister is his son Prince Ranariddh, whose royalist Funcinpec party won the
most seats in a UN-organised election in May; Mr Hun Sen, one of the leaders
of the previous communist administration, is the junior prime minister.
Yesterday was the occasion for mutual back-slapping, with the UN praising
the king and the king praising the UN.
'Cambodia is a striking demonstration to the world that an intractable
conflict can be resolved, and seemingly irreconcilable views can be
reconciled,' Mr Yasushi Akashi, the Untac chief, told a crowd of thousands
in front of the palace.
'Cambodia will thus stand as a model and a shining example for other UN
member states,' he said in an address from the balcony.
Many Cambodians, however, fear that the coalition government of royalists
and communists will prove to be unstable, and they doubt whether the
whimsical King Sihanouk will be able to confine himself to the ceremonial
role of constitutional monarch.
King Sihanouk, who was protected as usual by North Korean bodyguards armed
with ill-concealed pistols, was first given the crown by Cambodia's French
colonial rulers in 1941. But he resigned the throne after independence to
enter politics in 1955, and was overthrown in a 1970 coup d'etat.
In a speech from the palace balcony, the king quoted Tito and de Gaulle to
support his claim that his regime in the 1960s was a golden age of progress
for Cambodia, but he is remembered as much for his brutal treatment of
political opponents as for anything else.
The success of Untac and Cambodia's political factions in holding an
election and establishing the new constitution is overshadowed by the
daunting and barely begun task of rebuilding one of the world's poorest
countries.
At least King Sihanouk and his courtiers could be cheered by the sight of
about 100 defectors from the Khmer Rouge among the soldiers parading in
front of the palace.
The Khmer Rouge, the extreme left-wing guerrilla organisation blamed for the
deaths of 1m Cambodians when it ran the country between 1975 and 1978,
continues to harass the government from its strongholds in northern
Cambodia, but about 1,300 demoralised guerrillas have surrendered since the
election in May.
Prince Ranariddh, on walkabout in the crowd with his father, hugged some of
the former Khmer Rouge fighters and told reporters: 'Please don't call them
any more rouge or blue or yellow. Now they are back in the national
community.'
