FT  19 AUG 93 / De Larosiere urged to reform with care
THE recently constructed office suite of the president of the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development would not disgrace a Greek shipping
magnate.
It has three ante-chambers, a private bathroom, mirrored ceilings, a deep
white rug and spectacular views of the City of London and St Paul's
Cathedral.
Mr Jacques Attali, for whom the top-floor office was designed, quit the bank
a month ago, just as it was finished.
His successor, Mr Jacques de Larosiere, has less flamboyant tastes. But
given the severe criticism the EBRD has faced for the extravagance of its
spending on its head office, Mr de Larosiere is unlikely to ask for an
immediate redecoration.
Mr Ron Freeman, who has been acting EBRD president since Mr Attali went,
yesterday cautioned Mr de Larosiere to adopt a policy of slow change in
respect of the bank's operations.
Mr Freeman, who remains as first vice-president in charge of merchant
banking, urged Mr de Larosiere not to implement Mr Attali's proposal to
merge the merchant banking department, which makes private sector
investments, with development banking, responsible for infrastructure
projects, many of which are in the public sector.
'The benefits of a restructuring have been way overdone,' he said. 'The
departments are already working much closer together.'
The bank was set up in the spring of 1991 to encourage the development of
market economies in eastern Europe. It later gained responsibility for the
countries of the former Soviet Union.
Some of the countries and agencies which own the bank have become concerned
that it is not making sufficient economic impact on the region. A merger of
those departments was intended to help the bank make investment decisions
based on the needs of the economies rather than purely on the potential
return to be earned.
However, Mr Freeman said that the departments had been working much more
closely together over the past few weeks and that the best way forward was
to create inter-departmental teams to work on individual projects.
On the other hand, he said that there would inevitably be a relaxation in
the stipulation, contained in the bank's charter, that no more than 40 per
cent of investments should be directed to the public sector.
But that does not mean that the bank's commitment to stimulating the private
sector would be reduced, he insisted. The countries of the former Soviet
Union, which only became eligible for EBRD investments after the bank's
statutes were written, are far less developed than many in eastern Europe
and therefore need more infrastructure and public sector investment.
However, the rate at which it has disbursed loan and equity finance, whether
for private or public sector projects, has been slow. In 1992, just Ecu126m
(Pounds 95.13m) was disbursed, compared with a budget 'base case' of
Ecu272m. In total, the bank has now disbursed Ecu274m and made commitments
to invest Ecu1.6bn.
Mr Freeman said that criticism of the slow rate of disbursement was
misplaced. He said he felt the bank should be disbursing more slowly.
Only by keeping back funds could the EBRD put pressure on governments to put
in place conditions necessary for a private sector to flourish.
