FT  14 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Saving Somalia
AT THE heart of Somalia's deepening crisis is the fact that the United
Nations, and in particular the US, have not faced up to the implications of
their military intervention. The humanitarian imperative that prompted it
remains compelling, for Somalia manifestly cannot save itself. To withdraw
now would be to compound a tragedy: it would mean abandoning a country in
terminal distress while undermining the credibility of UN interventions
elsewhere. But for the UN to continue in its present role, neither
peacekeeper nor peacemaker, also invites disaster.
The sequence of events that led to the murder of four journalists by the
Mogadishu mobs shows how serious the crisis has become. It began when UN
forces attacked what was said to be a command centre of General Mohamed
Farah Aideed, the fugitive warlord whose militia have killed 35 UN soldiers
over the past month. The UN said the raid had been successful, and that 16
people had died. Aideed's Somali National Alliance claimed that 74 died, and
that victims included elders of Aideed's clan. In the fury that followed,
mobs turned on reporters once praised for bringing Somalia's plight to the
attention of the world.
Similarly, the warmth with which US marines were greeted last December has
turned to a resentment so deep that many aid agencies which welcomed the UN
as a protector now see association with the troops as positively dangerous.
Key military partners, notably Italy, are questioning the merits of the
exercise.
One tragedy begets another. The UN force is in danger of getting caught up
in the very chain of retaliation and revenge that fuels the bitter clan
rivalry which has destroyed Somalia. Military intervention that sought
primarily to provide security for food convoys appears to have become an end
in itself; but the UN operation was never going to be enough in a country
shattered by civil war.
Intervention should have included at the outset a comprehensive programme to
disarm rival factions, using all the necessary force and offering the
combatants the eventual choice of integration into a national army, or
training in civilian skills. There should have been a long-term programme of
economic reconstruction and constitutional negotiations drawing on the
widest range of Somali leaders.
A new initiative by the UN is now desperately needed. This should involve,
at the very least, greater clarity on the part of the Security Council as to
its objectives in Somalia. It may entail taking full responsibility for
Somalia as a UN trusteeship. This would be a costly and unprecedented
undertaking. But it is the only way of providing a legal basis and political
framework for an effective UN role. The alternative - abnegating
responsibility - would be a dishonourable course. But even that would be
better than the shambles that prevails today.
