FT  16 FEB 93 / Straightforward case adds few fresh insights into takeover
THE TRIAL of Mr Thomas Ward was, by comparison with its forerunners, a
relatively pedestrian affair.
With no reference to the share support operation mounted by Guinness to see
off the rival bid by Argyll, the case against Mr Ward was a straightforward
one of theft.
The jury heard nothing about indemnities and, with the exception of Mr
Saunders, little or no mention was made of the starring characters from the
first Guinness trial.
Figures such as Tony Parnes, Jack Lyons and Gerald Ronson, and institutions
such as Bank Leu, which played a significant role in the exercise of ramping
the share price in the final stages of the bid, were rarely, if ever,
mentioned.
Most of the court time was spent in detailed argument over the invoice
submitted by Mr Ward to Guinness for the disputed Pounds 5.2m.
With characters such as Mr Olivier Roux, the former Guinness finance
director, giving evidence for the third time, no new insights were gained
into the infamous takeover.
However, the entire character of the trial changed when, in a genuinely
dramatic episode, Mr Ward was alleged to have fabricated evidence to support
his case.
Having taken the risk of going into the witness box, he told the court how,
contrary to what had been been previously thought, documentary evidence did
exist to show the Pounds 3m he had placed in Mr Saunders's Swiss bank
account always belonged to him rather than to the Guinness chief executive.
The development visibly stopped the prosecution in their tracks. The
document - a note written by Mr Ward to his brother - was passed by defence
lawyers to the prosecution for the first time.
The two policemen left on the case, by then involved in little except
routine administration for the trial, were faced with genuine detective work
to perform against a tight deadline.
The note, detailing bank accounts in which Mr Ward had an interest, was
supposedly written in August 1986. However, one of the accounts mentioned in
the note - one not connected with the Guinness deal in any way - had not
been opened until four months later.
A Washington bank official was hurriedly flown over in Concorde to confirm
details of when the account was opened.
The authenticity of the note was not resolved during the trial. Mr Ward,
recalled to the witness box, strongly denied the allegation that he had
fabricated it.
The episode provided the only real excitement during the five-week trial.
However, the hopes of the Serious Fraud Office that it had found conclusive
proof of dishonesty were to be dashed by the jury's verdict.
