FT  25 SEP 93 / Croatian demand over UN troops: Peacekeepers in dilemma
after being told to disarm rebels or leave
UNITED Nations diplomats were engaged in intensive discussions in New York
yesterday after the Croatian government demanded that the UN should either
strengthen the mandate for its 14,000 peace-keeping troops in Croatia, or
withdraw completely.
With the peacekeeping mandate in Croatia due to expire in five days, UN
officials admitted the demand had left the Security Council facing another
Balkan diplomatic dilemma.
The Security Council is due to meet Croatian President Franjo Tudjman next
week to discuss the mandate, established 16 months ago after the 1991 war
between the Croat government and rebel Serbs.
UN officials have also asked Security Council members and the German
government, which has had particular influence with the Croat leadership in
the past, to step up their own diplomatic pressure on the Croat government
to withdraw its demand.
But Mr Mario Nobilo, Croatian ambassador to the UN, yesterday insisted the
UN forces should withdraw if they did not forcibly disarm the rebel Serbs
who control about a third of Croatia's territory.
'As a last resort there is the military option, although it is not our
intention to attack these areas immediately,' Mr Nobilo said.
Although most observers believe the Serb rebels could inflict serious damage
on the Croats, the Croatians have become concerned that the proposed
partition of Bosnia could herald the secession of the Serb-held areas from
Croatia.
However, UN officials yesterday insisted that though the UN is deeply
reluctant to withdraw from Croatia, the security council was not prepared to
step up its mandate.
One UN diplomat said: 'This has left the secretary general facing some
unpalatable options. We know if we withdraw there will be war. But it is not
the UN's job to risk lives disarming the Serbs.'
Bosnia's Moslem-led army has ordered Croat forces co-defending Sarajevo to
withdraw to barracks or face unspecified consequences, a Croat military
spokesman said, Reuters reports.
Gen Veso Vegar of the Croat Defence Force said 2,500 of its troops had
helped defend the capital against besieging Serbs for 17 months but the
Bosnian government command was now trying to neutralise them because of
Croat-Moslem fighting elsewhere in the republic.
The move appears to mark a serious threat to the Bosnian government's
attempts to maintain Sarajevo as an ethnically mixed city.
