FT  28 SEP 93 / Companies urge action on Berlin's future status
A GROUP of prominent German companies yesterday launched a campaign aimed at
putting pressure on Bonn to make a final decision about moving the
government to Berlin, preferably by 1998.
The campaign, backed by some of the largest foreign investors in eastern
Germany, is supported by Daimler Benz, Sony, Elf, and 27 other companies
which have invested billions of marks in Berlin and the five eastern states.
The campaign was opened two days before the cabinet considers how much it
will cost to move the government to Berlin. Some estimates put it at DM50bn
(Pounds 20bn).
Mr Mark Palmer, the former US ambassador to Hungary, who is spearheading a
big office development complex at Checkpoint Charlie, said it was
'incomprehensible why the government was dithering'. Mr Eberhard Diepgen,
the mayor of Berlin, said the delay was due to 'regional interests' causing
differences between the political parties.
Bonn, a small university town on the Rhine, became the West German seat of
government after the second world war when Berlin, surrounded by East German
territory, was divided. In recent months, the tireless pro-Bonn lobby has
tried to slow the transfer of lucrative ministries and jobs, arguing that
Germany cannot afford the move.
Some Bonn supporters say the move should be delayed by 10 to 15 years while
others have even suggested overturning the vote to move to Berlin.
An opinion survey in August by the Forsa research institute suggested that
50 per cent of Germans want to reverse the decision to move the government
and another 27 per cent want it at least delayed. The Bundestag, or lower
house, voted on July 20 1991 to move the government to Berlin, possibly as
early as 1995. But the government has repeatedly put back the date. It has
been suggested that the move may not happen until after the year 2000. Mr
Manfred Gentz, a board member of Daimler Benz, said there was no reason why
the move could not take place in 1998.
Companies with interests in the east believe the move to Berlin would be
beneficial for three reasons. Psychologically it would help speed up
unification, in the sense that a government based in Berlin would be more in
touch with the difficulties in integrating the two Germanys.
It would provide a crucial economic boost for Berlin, which on the eastern
side has lost more than 130,000 industrial jobs since unification. Companies
with long ties to the city, including Schwarzkopf, the cosmetics
manufacturer, are closing their factories. And with Berlin as the seat of
government, companies believe there would an acceleration in the upgrading
of the city's infrastructure.
