FT  12 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Government sidesteps Maastricht
confrontation
THE GOVERNMENT suffered its second humiliation of the week in the Commons
chamber last night as it pulled back from a trial of strength with Labour
and Tory Euro-sceptics over forcing an extended sitting to debate the
Maastricht bill.
Tory business managers decided against calling a vote to extend last night's
sitting after 10pm - despite hinting heavily that they planned to do so -
when it became clear that the government risked losing it. On Monday the
government lost its first vote on Maastricht.
The move was dictated partly by the decision of the Liberal Democrats not to
support the government in seeking to extend debate.
Labour was quick to jump on the retreat, claiming the government could not
'control its troops or its business.' Mr George Robertson, front bench
spokesman on Europe, said: 'This now seems to be a minority government; it
is discredited at home and abroad.'
The government's discomfort was increased by the palpable disgruntlement of
some Tory loyalists who argued that the repeated climbdowns were destroying
morale.
It was the second time in a day the government had drawn back from
confrontation. An attack on Tory Euro-sceptics by pro-Maastricht
Conservative backbenchers had earlier been defused at the 11th hour on the
direct orders of Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip.
A crowded meeting of the 1922 committee - the group that embraces all Tory
backbenchers - broke up after just five minutes when officers of the group
relayed the call for a public display of peace.
But before the brief meeting closed, Sir Marcus Fox, the committee's
chairman, admitted he had received a letter signed by some 85 pro-Europeans.
It cited a precedent to back the claim that the committee was originally
formulated to ensure support for the government whip. The letter's aim is to
renew pressure on some five Euro-sceptic members not to oppose the
government in crucial votes on the Maastricht bill.
Belying the spirit of the truce, one leading Euro-sceptic countered that
their opponents' failure to press home their attack represented another
victory for the rebels.
The government last night played down the latest setback to its plans,
saying it was content with the speed with which the Maastricht bill was
progressing through committee. Earlier Mr John Major reiterated his
determination at the weekly cabinet meeting to see the legislation through
and, at question time in the Commons, attacked those keen to delay it.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, also went on the offensive,
concluding a generally conciliatory speech on subsidiarity by asserting he
could imagine no 'more feeble and foolish posture' than that of Maastricht
opponents who nonetheless supported Britain's EC membership.
Unofficial calculations reinforced the feeling at Westminster that the
government faces more trouble, since it appears to be reliant on support
from minority parties to stave off defeat on Labour's controversial social
chapter amendment.
Although the government's law officers have taken the position that passage
of the amendment - which seeks to remove the protocol containing Britain's
social chapter opt-out - would still allow it to ratify the treaty, it would
take Britain into uncharted legal territory.
This was underlined last night as word began to spread of fresh legal advice
in the Euro-sceptics' hands suggesting that if the protocol remained in the
treaty, it could be used as guidance by the European Court in adjudicating
on trade disputes between Britain and other EC countries.
