FT  16 JAN 93 / Bugs infest the boardroom: As demand for business
information grows, Michael Cassell examines the extent of UK company
eavesdropping
Shortly before Christmas, a City of London tour guide was interrupted as she
delivered a brief history of the Bank of England over her coach microphone.
Bemused American tourists found themselves listening to a conversation,
relayed through the coach speakers, detailing the proposed negotiating terms
for the acquisition of a chain of 35 shops in France.
The unwitting informant was on his telephone in the car behind. The details
he imparted were of no interest to a group of Texan farm-equipment dealers,
but someone, somewhere, might have gone to extraordinary lengths to get
them.
The thirst for finding out what the commercial competition is up to -
highlighted in this week's High Court revelations over British Airways'
campaign against Virgin Atlantic - appears unquenchable. Given the odds
against a lucky break outside the Bank of England, companies are
increasingly employing sophisticated corporate intelligence skills and
equipment to ensure they are always well briefed.
The business of seeking or safeguarding business secrets is a growth market.
'There has been a big change in attitudes among UK companies towards sizing
up other businesses,' says Mr Terence Burke, a former US Central
Intelligence Agency and Drug Enforcement Agency officer, who heads the
London office of IGI International, a corporate investigation company.
Whereas companies were once primarily intent on protecting the bricks and
mortar of their business against criminals, the value of commercial
information and the potential damage inflicted by its loss is now regarded
as just as important.
Business executives can also argue that they have a fiduciary obligation to
discover, on behalf of shareholders and employees, what competitors are
doing, providing it is legally obtained and does not invade people's
privacy.
IGI has just stopped a UK company signing a lease on an east European office
block with a bogus intermediary. 'That's a case of due diligence, not
spying,' says Mr Burke.
Mr Blenyth Jenkins, director of corporate affairs at the Institute of
Directors, adds: 'Every director of every company has a duty to know as much
as possible about the competition. Even so, there are lengths beyond which
they should not go in trying to find out.'
But how far are companies, or the agencies they hire, prepared to go down
the road to subterfuge and illegality in order to keep an eye on the
competition? Are many of Britain's boardrooms really bugged, or are tales of
widespread industrial espionage as fanciful as the plot of a detective
thriller?
If current sales of electronic surveillance equipment are any guide, then UK
business is overrun with professional busy-bodies, though they are not
necessarily acting illegally: 'To bug your own employees (at work, as Robert
Maxwell did) may not be very nice but it's not going to land you in court,'
says one bugging expert.
Sales of all forms of surveillance equipment, much of it for protective
rather than intrusive purposes, have risen throughout the recession.
Products include 'bugs' concealed in pens, calculators and credit cars. For
the more stylish businessman, there is an electronic olive on a cocktail
stick.
Estimates by larger suppliers suggest that up to 30,000 bugs are sold
annually, with the large majority going to corporate customers.
David Benn, managing director of Lorraine Electronics, says nearly all his
sales are to businessmen. 'There is a lot of corporate paranoia about
information leaking out. One in 50 times something might be found but leaks
are more likely to be the result of sloppiness.'
It is not only companies, but their professional advisers who are apparently
regarded as fair targets for eavesdropping. One of London's largest law
firms has its meeting rooms regularly swept for devices. A senior partner
recalls: 'Information was leaking out almost as soon as our meetings had
ended. Nothing was found but there were clear signs of tampering.'
A merchant bank executive in the City says his offices are also routinely
scanned, part of a 'safety-first' procedure that puts people and documents
into categories of confidentiality: 'Someone with the wrong category of
documents in their possession can be fired.'
To feed the appetite for information on companies, products and individuals,
a new breed of professional corporate investigator is also emerging. Staffed
with former barristers, bankers and accountants, these companies intend to
dismantle the caricature of the slightly seedy detective agency run by
chain-smoking ex-coppers.
If pushed, however, some legitimate agencies concede they might sometimes be
tempted to stretch good business ethics to the limit. None of them say they
would be prepared to mount a campaign to undermine the standing of their
clients' competitors.
BA found to its cost that such a strategy can backfire, reflecting badly on
the company and on everyone involved in it. The affair cost BA Pounds
610,000 in libel damages and an estimated Pounds 3m in legal costs after it
accused Virgin of seeking publicity in exposing a 'dirty tricks' campaign
waged against it.
As with BA, the underbelly of covert corporate detection work is
occasionally exposed. In 1990, as Laing Properties became the target of a
hostile takeover attempt, it told the Takeover Panel it had found an
electronic bug in its offices.
Three years earlier, three men were convicted for placing a listening device
in a biscuit tin outside the home of an executive of Comet, a subsidiary of
the then Woolworth group which was the object of a bid from Dixons.
A more recent story of corporate espionage involves the tactics adopted by a
large UK retailer to undermine another high-street multiple in advance of a
takeover bid. The potential target, its suspicions aroused by unusually bad
figures from some stores, installed listening equipment to eavesdrop on its
managers. A startling tale emerged.
Several managers had been bribed to depress sales returns, denting the
company's figures and making it more vulnerable to outside attack. Damning
conversations were recorded, and the plotters backed off under threat of
exposure.
At present, there are two significant cases of alleged industrial espionage
before the British courts, one involving the alleged sale of confidential
information and the other centred on alleged attempts to plant a 'spy' in a
competing business.
Most companies, however, are more interested in protecting what they hold
than in extracting secrets from others, with some types of business more
sensitive than others to the dangers of damaging leaks.
Increasing numbers of businesses, such as Heinz, the giant food products
group, implement so-called 'risk analysis' exercises, effectively employing
outside professionals to prowl through the company, seeking out weak spots
from which information might escape.
Takeover bids heighten the need for stronger defences on both sides. BTR,
the industrial conglomerate, used corporate investigators to check the
security of its own information systems before bidding successfully in 1991
for Hawker Siddeley, the engineering group. The company was chastened to see
the quality of information abandoned nightly by staff in dustbins.
More generally, tendering activity is seen as an area particularly
vulnerable to information leaks. Knowing what the opposition is prepared to
bid can pay immense dividends.
The oil industry appears more prone than many to information seepage during
the preparation of contract tenders. Other businesses in which security of
information has a high priority include property development, where inside
data can make a big difference to a deal.
In the intensely competitive consumer products business, advance information
on new brands and pricing strategies can pay big bonuses: 'If people think
we just walk round the stores to find out what the others are doing, they
are very wide of the mark,' according to an executive in one personal
products group.
His company, like many others, now operates a competitive intelligence
department, charged with the task of legitimately monitoring the opposition.
Computer manufacturers, too, run units with the same function.
A minefield of legality awaits those tempted to pursue more adventurous
techniques. While anyone can purchase bugging and scanning equipment, the
Interception of Communications Act and the Wireless and Telegraphy Act limit
its use; to adopt a false guise can constitute misrepresentation, while
tapping into computers can invoke the Data Protection Act or the Computer
Misuse Act.
Infringements can be hard to prove. A Manchester property company allegedly
spying on another was charged with stealing 5p of electricity to operate a
bug, although the case was dismissed.
Mr Patrick Grayson, executive managing director of Kroll Associates, the US
corporate investigator, says there is plenty of corporate information
available on the record, provided people know where to look. Mr Grayson,
whose own Savile Row offices are swept for bugs, says his company's
activities follow a code which is based on strict adherence to the law.
'We sometimes have to make moral judgments and, as importantly, there is the
matter of how any actions may be perceived. Dustbin emptying might not
necessarily be illegal but it is certainly tacky. If some clients do not
care how we get information, we do. Our reputation as well as theirs is at
stake.'
Companies like Kroll and IGI, however, have not escaped accusations of
acting in ways that may not fully measure up to their codes of practice.
Mr Bruce George, the Labour MP for Walsall South - who has had his own
Commons offices burgled - is pressing for legislation to ensure that
corporate investigators and other security specialists are licensed. 'Which
other country would tolerate investigators being allowed to operate as free
agents?'
There will always be some readily prepared to indulge in 'dirty tricks',
says Mr Steve Smith, deputy managing director of Carratu International, a
respected corporate investigation company which itself has been bugged.
He tells the story of the bogus British Telecom engineers who have been
tracked down more than once in the City. 'They have all the right gear and
all the know-how. They tap identified lines from pavement junction boxes and
listen in from a vehicle parked nearby. We've discovered their activities
several times. But it's always too late to catch them.'
