FT  02 APR 93 / Royal Mail monopoly may be abolished
ROYAL MAIL'S monopoly on delivering letters may be abolished under
government plans to sell the Post Office.
Proposals under ministerial consideration would allow private companies to
compete with Royal Mail for the delivery of all letters, provided they
matched Royal Mail's commitment to providing a nationwide service at a
uniform price.
This would be part of a strategy to inject competition into all areas of the
Post Office's business. Royal Mail has a monopoly on all deliveries costing
up to Pounds 1.
Ministers are thought to be keen to avoid the charge that the sale of the
Post Office would amount to the mere transfer of a long-standing monopoly
from the public to the private sector.
Last year's Conservative manifesto committed the party to setting up an
independent regulator to advise on the 'progressive introduction of
competition'. It also promised to lower the limit on the Post Office
monopoly much closer to the price of a first-class stamp - currently 24p -
and to consider requests to 'license limited specialist services to compete
within the Post Office monopoly'.
The government is in the final stages of deciding whether to plump for the
sale of all three Post Office units - Royal Mail, Post Office Counters and
Parcelforce - and is expected to make up its mind soon after Easter.
If full-fledged privatisation is chosen, government business managers would
have to decide whether to make room for the bill in the legislative
timetable for the next parliamentary session beginning in October.
After recent problems subduing backbench revolts on Maastricht and pit
closures, business managers are believed to be anxious for the bulk of next
session's legislative proposals to be either non-controversial or calculated
to unite Tory ranks. It is not certain that a Post Office privatisation bill
would fall into either of these categories.
The current preference in the Department of Trade and Industry would be for
the government to take powers to sell all three arms of the Post Office, but
for the actual sales to take place in at least two stages.
Under present thinking, Royal Mail and the loss-making Parcelforce parcel
delivery business could be floated off in a single unit relatively quickly.
But the management of Post Office Counters would probably remain in the
public sector for longer while a strategy was devised for branching out
beyond the restricted range of products the organisation is permitted to
sell. Financial services is thought to be one area ministers would be keen
for Counters to develop. The government will also need to reassure Tory
backbenchers in rural constituencies that any sale would not result in a
severe contraction of Counters' 20,000-strong network of post offices, which
is the largest chain of retail outlets in the country.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, announced in July that
he intended to sell Parcelforce as a separate unit. But these plans have
since run into difficulties.
Unlike other privatisation candidates, the Post Office is hugely profitable,
having doubled pre-tax profits for the six months to last September to
Pounds 135m on turnover of Pounds 2.5bn. Over the same period, Parcelforce
reduced its losses from Pounds 27m to Pounds 21m.
Any move to take powers to privatise all parts of the Post Office would
probably be welcomed by senior management which has lobbied hard for the
organisation to be kept together.
Private mail operators expressed doubts about the scheme. Mr Alan Jones, UK
managing director of the leading operator TNT, said: 'We couldn't get
involved if it was an open market. That would be ridiculous. If you've got a
dozen postmen walking down the same street, the costs go up and so does the
price to the customer.'
