FT  27 APR 93 / Major reaches dry land
The agenda for Thursday's cabinet meeting is tame. It contains proposals for
new laws that might be introduced in the 1993-94 parliament. We can consider
some of these in a moment. First, note that the very nature of the
forthcoming deliberations must be a relief to the prime minister. A mundane
list of familiar ideas for new legislation is what he needs right now. It
speaks of continuity, business as usual - better yet plain, ordinary,
in-charge, day-to-day government.
Combine it with last week's defeat of the Maastricht rebels, this week's
announcement of the end of the recession, and a smart new line in
speechwriting and you have the makings of a possible reconstruction of Mr
John Major. I have always assumed that Humpty Dumpty can be put together
again, although the cracks will show forever.
The regluing could be interrupted. Fate might reassert itself. Issues of
immediate urgency could arise. It is, however, possible to anticipate some
of these and see how they might quickly be disposed of. An announcement by
President Clinton of US policy in Bosnia? Easy. It was decided last week
that Washington's lead will be followed by the British government. Salt and
pepper has already been ground over the foreign secretary's past words, the
better to prepare them for when they may have to be eaten. In any case, this
is a government that feasts on its own pronouncements.
Further news of the proposed boycott of tests by the teachers? Routine.
There is no solution. Parents want simple pencil-and-paper tests. Teachers
want complicated tests that they can control. The government just wants
tests. It cannot please parents without alienating teachers, and vice-versa.
It cannot cave in. It will therefore pretend that the tests go ahead, while
in fact they do not. Then tests become next year's problem.
Some of this week's lesser decisions will affect later ones. To take a
single example, the lottery bill, which returns to the Commons tomorrow,
provides for a wide range of outlets to sell tickets. This includes small
shops, notably those that act as Post Office sub-branches. The latter depend
on the revenue from both postal business and the handling of social security
payments. They will need to earn money as agents for the lottery if they are
to survive the eventual (but currently postponed) privatisation of the post.
The government has not yet decided whether pubs will be permitted to sell
lottery tickets; if they are, the village Post Office/shop will face what
could be killer competition. This might happen at around the time voters are
lying to pollsters again by telling them that they rather like the Labour
party. This is not a picayune question. Tory constituencies may be at stake.
It will be seen from all the above that Mr Major is lightening up. The long
torture that began with the evaporation of his authority on Black Wednesday
may have come to an end. The life or death of his political career no longer
hangs upon every move he makes. The prime minister can begin to exert
himself at what he does best - normal administration, with a little forward
planning thrown in. The long term is no longer next week; the medium term
further ahead than tomorrow morning. Meetings on the outlook for the
forthcoming year or so have been held with most of his senior colleagues,
and a package for this autumn's parliament is being prepared.
The first draft should be discussed at Thursday's cabinet. It is regarded as
particularly important, since 1993-94 is the session in which most of the
heavy stuff must be ploughed through if it is to be in place and working
well before the next election. So far I have taken it that that will come in
1996, four years after the last one. Nothing anyone connected with the
government has said to me suggests otherwise. But Mr Major's majority is
only 21. A few Tory by-election losses, plus a resurgence of inflation in
late 1994, could make a 1995 election seem suddenly attractive. The fact
that the opposition is working to a 1996 timetable would add to the
attraction of 1995. Mr Major may not have thought of this yet. He will.
Meanwhile he must consider Thursday's agenda. Two broad themes govern the
list of probable legislation: law and order, and deregulation/privatisation.
A third will create itself if the review of long-term public spending
produces any ideas that the government can nerve itself to implement. Thus
Mr Kenneth Clarke will get his police reorganisation, and Lord Mackay his
new controls over magistrates' courts. The Criminal Justice Act, the subject
of a skilful rubbishing campaign by both the higher and the lower reaches of
the judiciary, will be amended. This will be ever so slightly embarrassing,
since the ink on the existing legislation is not yet quite dry. Better a few
blushes now than red faces on polling day as juvenile persistent offenders
get away free and Labour wins points as the party of law and order.
The privatisation/deregulation programme contains well-known items:
railways, coal, London buses, municipal airports if they do not beat the
government to it by privatising themselves; a bundle of regulations
originating in Brussels that Mr Michael Heseltine sniffs out as unnecessary;
licensing laws (particularly affecting public bars); and Sunday trading. The
latter will probably be presented to the House as a list of options upon
which members will be given a free vote.
The key question asked about each one of these proposals is: will it get
through? Outlines of bills disappear into the chief whip's office for
'soundings' and stay there longer than was necessary when the government had
a dependable, and excessively large, majority. This may be one reason why Mr
Major seems to be funking the equalisation of the pensions age at 65 and why
we have to see him cut long-term public spending before we believe that he
will do it.
In short, there is no call to re-evaluate this administration as excellent,
or even good, just because it has climbed out of a swamp and looks less like
sliding back in than it did a few months ago. Its fortunes may have changed
for the better, but its quality remains the same. It is persistent,
workaday, a convincing extension of the civil service in general and the
Treasury in particular. It contains many bits of glass, and a few pearls,
but no string to draw them together. It is the government we deserve.
