FT  27 JAN 93 / Jobs: Why creativity isn't all in the mind - Ability to work
innovatively depends on far more than a talent for thinking up novel ideas
WOULD readers who have proved yourselves creative in your work care to help
the Jobs column in settling an argument?
To avoid misunderstandings, it had better be said that being 'creative in
your work' does not refer to such feats as contriving artistic arrangements
of flowers on your desk before sitting down at it to ensure that precedent
is followed to the letter. For a working achievement to count as creative,
it has to satisfy four conditions.
Firstly it must be novel. Secondly it must be effective in serving a
valuable purpose. Thirdly it must be decisively if not entirely of your own
devising. Fourthly it must meet all the previous three conditions not only
in your own estimation, but in the judgment of at least some other people
with a sound claim to know what they are judging.
Creativity of that sort is the nub of the aforesaid argument. It arose at
the British Psychological Society's occupational group conference this
month, during a session starring Fiona Patterson and Tom Smith of Ford of
Europe, where they are concerned with recruitment and staff development.
Their topic was how a company can best select people with such creative
abilities for its workforce.
One way not to do so, the Ford duo suggested, was by relying on tests
supposedly designed for the purpose. The reason they gave was that, since
would-be recruits can usually see that creativity is deemed important in the
job at issue, the tests tend to make it easy to fake the 'right' answer. And
to show how, the speakers produced three questions from tests on the market.
In the case of the first two of them, the Jobs column readily agrees that
the desirable answer is obvious. Both were of the same type, facing
candidates with a statement and a choice of responses to it, then asking
them to mark the one closest to their own heartfelt reaction.
In both instances, too, the possible responses were (a) strong disagreement,
(b) disagreement, (c) uncertainty (d) agreement, (e) strong agreement. The
first statement was: Creative ideas do not come easily to me. The other
read: I do not feel my ideas are innovative.
Neither seems apt to present much of a stumbling block to an ambitious
job-seeker aware that the recruiters deem creativity a plus-point. Indeed,
the only difficulty would be in deciding whether any candidate who failed to
mark (a) or at least (b) was simply uncreative, or half-witted into the
bargain.
Where the argument arises, however, is over the conference speakers' claim
that the desirable answer is similarly obvious in the third sample question
they cited. Being doubtful myself, I'm inviting readers to try it and see.
The task is to consider the unfinished statement which comes first, then
decide which of the alternative endings best matches your attitude to the
topic concerned. (The original offered three endings. But since one was of
the 'un-decided' type clearly meant to identify folk not creative enough to
make up their mind on the issue, I'm giving only the two firm choices.) OK,
here goes:
Discussion with ordinary, habit-bound, conventional people . . .
A . . .is often quite interesting and has a lot to it.
B . . .annoys me because it deals with trifles and lacks depth.
Now, which of the two is 'obviously right' in the sense of being the answer
that would honestly be given by a really creative worker?
In the view of the Ford duo, it was evidently B denoting belief that there
is nothing potentially to be gained from the comments of ordinary,
habit-bound, conventional people. But while that may be so in some highly
specialised pursuits - pure mathematics might be an example - I cannot
believe that the same applies in more than a very few of the occupations in
which creativity is of value. On the contrary, in most cases, a keen and
attentive ear for such people's observations is surely an essential part of
the ability to work creatively.
Nevertheless, while I disagree with the duo on the response, the ambiguity
of the question leads me to share their scepticism about the tests cited.
What they purport to gauge has too many dimensions to be mapped at all
simply.
That much is yet better illustrated by another test based on the notion that
creativity equates with the capacity to spawn novel ideas. Hence candidates
are asked how many uses they can think of for a builder's brick or the like.
One attendant snag was pointed out by an erstwhile user, a top recruiting
specialist in an outfit then employing half a million. 'We find some people
can produce far more than others. But as the quantity increases, the nearer
they seem to get to being psychopaths. For example, some of the uses they
come up with aren't just obscene, but sadistic. Is that creativity . . .and
even if it is, do you want it in your organisation?'
The root answer is that it isn't. Far from meeting all four conditions set
out earlier, a bent for spawning novel ideas might be incongruent with the
discipline needed to achieve effective and valuable results. In the words of
the American authorities on the topic, James Averill and Elma Nunley*: 'We
must distinguish the creative from the bizarre, the merely eccentric, the
random - all of which can be quite novel or unique.'
Moreover they go on to question the very basis of the tests I've mentioned.
It is the notion that creative people think in a special way which differs
from the mental workings of the more prosaic, thinking intuitively or
synthetically as opposed to analytically or discursively.
'We believe the bulk of the evidence favors those who deny a special process
approach,' the Americans say. 'The same thought processes, whether intuitive
or discursive, are important in all behavior, albeit perhaps in different
combination and degree. There is nothing special about creativity in this
regard.'
Nor do they think it dependent solely on mental mechanisms. Motivation also
plays an essential role. 'People are often motivated to do what they are
able to do,' the authors add.
'Motives help determine mechanisms. Within limits, a person who wants to do
something can, through hard work and practice, develop the relevant
abilities. There are, of course, limits. Not everyone can be an Einstein or
a Beethoven, no matter how hard he works. But the limits are less severe
than we like to think. . . . . It follows that everyone has the ability to
some degree.'
There is something else that follows too. It's epitomised by a pet question
of that giant of motivational theory, Fred Herzberg. 'What's the most vital
thing to do if you want your daughter to be a great pianist?', it went.
Then, dismissing replies about giving encouragement and such, he'd grin: 'No
 -make sure she has a piano to play on, for God's sake]'
His point would be confirmed by the pair from Ford. Their in-company studies
show that everybody's creativity is inhibited unless organisational power
structures are rigged not only to make it possible, but nurture it to boot.
Otherwise, even reliable creativity tests wouldn't be much help. The reason
(having dropped several eminent names already, I might as well drop another)
is enshrined in the philosopher Sir Karl Popper 's comment that the mere
fact that everyone in the world acted in line with logic would not make it a
logical world; just one filled with logical people. By the same token, an
organisation full of creative individuals won't necessarily be a creative
organisation.
*Voyages of the heart. Free Press, New York; UK distributor Marston Books,
Oxford (ISBN 0-02-901108-6) Pounds 16.95.
