FT  18 SEP 93 / Sport: Beijing may pay for the fast pace - Olympics
WANG Junxia's record-breaking feats on the track may just have clipped
Beijing's chances of hosting the 2000 Olympics. The 20-year-old
middle-distance runner pared a huge 16 secs off the women's world 3,000m
record in two separate races at the National Games in Beijing last week.
Yet around the world scepticism, rather than applause, greeted the the news.
The International Amateur Athletics Federation announced it would spend
another Pounds 167,000 on drug-testing next year - most of it in China.
British athletics team manager Joan Allison, an Olympic runner a generation
ago who quit the sport in disgust at Eastern bloc drug-abuse, was
disbelieving.
'You just can't go out and run those times - certainly not at 20. The new
records just can't be taken seriously. I throw my hands back and say 'Here
we go again',' said Allison.
On Thursday night in Monte Carlo the members of the International Olympic
Committee meet to choose between candidate cities for the Millennium Games.
Beijing, with Sydney, is a co-favourite. Already the Olympic elite, with
their precious votes, are talking of little else than Chinese runners.
'To Western eyes, with a sophisticated appreciation of the media, it looks
the crudest and most counter-productive propaganda coup. One could scarcely
credit that the Chinese could be so naive,' said one Olympic 'player' who
has been involved at the highest level for nearly a decade.
However, the adjective most often used by insiders to describe the Beijing
bid is 'brutal'. It is now Chinese policy at the highest level to secure the
Games. It shows in many ways. At the East Asian Games in Shanghai earlier
this year, 1,000 postmen were trained for months to ride illuminated
bicycles into the stadium in the formation of the number 2,000.
Clearly the Beijing mandarins have failed to gauge the sensitivity of the
drugs issue in the Olympic movement. With the Butch Reynolds litigation
hanging over the US Olympic team (the runner claims a drugs-test exclusion
from the team was unlawful) and the spectre of Ben Johnson still too fresh
to be ignored, the elite of the IOC in Lausanne react to even the suspicion
of chemically-induced improvement like a vampire faced with garlic.
There are 91 members of the Committee entitled to participate in the secret
ballot. Probably only 89 will do so. President Juan Antonio Samaranch choses
not to vote and Bulgarian member Ivan Slavkov is not allowed to leave Sofia
by the post-communist regime.
The 1992 games regenerated Barcelona, indeed Spain as a whole. National
self-esteem climbed as international praise flowed and the government said
national GNP was lifted 1 per cent by the Olympics. The five contesting
cities know that 45 ayes could change their nation's history. Beijing has
been letting it known that they have 30-35 votes 'in the bag'. This is
almost certainly an over-estimate but few would doubt that the Asian group
of IOC members are behind China. Even Taiwan's IOC member Ching-Kuo Wu has
pledged his support.
It seems clear that either Berlin or Istanbul will be first to be
eliminated. Berlin has suffered the dreadful handicap of a vociferous - and
potentially dangerous - anti-Games campaign within the city. The safety of
IOC members has been threatened by the 'NOlympics' campaign and graffiti
painted on the walls of the IOC headquarters in Lausanne. Most damagingly of
all, the support of the two German IOC members has seemed at best lukewarm.
Whether Istanbul survives beyond the first ballot - the least-supported bid
is eliminated in each round until there is a clear majority - depends on the
existence of an 'Islamic bloc' within the IOC. Traditionally regional
solidarities have played an influential role in the early stages of voting
but this may be a decreasing phenomenon. While technically adequate, the
Turkish proposal suffers from the lack of a clear identity.
It does not even have the comfort of a compromise role. Should the rival
attractions of Beijing and Sydney, the one geo-political, the other
sybaritic, prove deadlocked. Manchester will probably emerge as the middle
way.
In 1990 the candidature of Britain's foremost northern city was scarcely
credible and it won only five IOC votes. Much has changed in the intervening
four years. Bid chairman Bob Scott has become one of the most persuasive and
popular figures in the Olympic movement. Within his own country he has
charmed Pounds 75m out of John Major's government for infrastructure
beneficial to a 2000 Games.
'I sense that we can win, although I'd be a fool to say that we will,' said
Scott, who will have Major and Olympic gold medallist Linford Christie
flanking him when he makes the final presentation in Monte Carlo.
Australian prime minister Frank Keating will be banging the drum for his
home town, Sydney. The cry for justice which has echoed down the Australia's
past is still in evidence. 'Oceania has had the Games once this century'
(Melbourne in 1956). If the five rings mean anything then it must be our
turn,' said spokesman Hamish Fraser.
