FT  28 OCT 93 / France's grassroots shake the union tree: The prospect of
social chaos strikes fear in the political establishment
'IT WAS a revolt as we have not seen since 1968,' said Mr Bernard Bosson,
French transport minister, explaining to parliament why he had backed down
in the face of the Air France strike.
Mr Bosson was exaggerating in order to defend his action to sceptical
deputies; according to some reports, he may have over-interpreted
conciliatory signals from Mr Edouard Balladur, his prime minister, and gone
further than intended in appeasing the strikers.
Nonetheless, the prospect of social chaos - still epitomised by the 1968
insurrection - strikes fear in France's political establishment. It remains
an ever-present possibility, ironically, because of the feeble structure of
France's unions. The generally weak hold of union leaders over their
rank-and-file was amply demonstrated yesterday when ground staff at Charles
de Gaulle and Orly airports defied their advice and voted to stay on strike
until Mr Bosson puts his promise of no compulsory lay-offs into writing.
The unions feel they have won a famous victory, which they hope to extend.
'The government's retreat has boosted union credibility,' said Mr Marc
Blondel, head of the Force Ouvriere (FO), one of the three main federations.
'We are going to use this in other state enterprises which have announced
redundancies, like Bull,' he warned.
Other possible targets are state-controlled Snecma, the jet engine-maker,
and Aerospatiale, the aircraft company. Both have announced redundancy plans
which, unlike Thomson, the defence electronics group, they are sticking to,
so far. Employees of SNCF, the state railways, may also take advantage of
the fact that they share the same presiding minister, Mr Bosson, as Air
France.
It will take a lot, however, to reverse the French trade union movement's
long decline and fragmentation, as evidenced by the fact that:
France has the least unionised workforce of any industrialised country. A
1991 survey by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
put France's degree of unionisation at 12 per cent, even below that of
Turkey or the US. Mr Rene Mourieaux, a French academic specialising in
labour relations, estimates that rising unemployment has reduced this
further to an average of 8-9 per cent, because workers stop paying their
union dues when they lose their jobs.
It has three big competing union organisations: the left-wing but
anti-Communist FO; the Communist-dominated Confederation Generale du Travail
(CGT); and the more moderate Confederation Francaise Democratique des
Travailleurs (CFDT). Representation of all three in individual companies is
declining, so that for the first time in 1990, 'non-unionised'
representatives won the largest slice of seats in elections to companies'
works councils.
Some of the 'non-unionised' are members of what are called 'co-ordinations'.
These are ad hoc bodies which have sprung up as a liaison between competing
unions (as in the railways), or in protest at the feebleness of existing
unions (as in agriculture and teaching) or to fill a union vacuum (as among
nurses and social workers).
Farming apart, these bodies have mushroomed in the public sector because the
private sector has become steadily less fertile soil for union radicalism.
The number of work days which private industry has lost through strikes has
declined progressively from 5m in 1976 to less than 500,000 last year. The
last big private sector strike was at Peugeot in 1989. Recession has imposed
its own industrial peace in the private sector, where the unions know that
most companies have no choice but to trim to the needs of the market.
In the public sector, where the unions can always hope that the state will
bankroll their demands, Mr Mourieaux sees a remobilisation of organised
labour. Grassroots pressure is pushing federation leaders into more joint
action - the CFDT stayed out of the CGT-FO's day of action on October 12,
but plans to join the other two in striking at state companies on November
18. The paltry Socialist-Communist presence in the National Assembly now
gives the unions no parliamentary voice, though the latter know they can
count on President Francois Mitterrand's sympathetic ear.
So far, the Balladur government has tried to insure itself against a winter
of discontent by making a show of consulting union leaders on a variety of
issues. For this consultation to work, 'we need strong trade unions,' says
Mr Michel Giraud, the labour minister. Instead, he has got workers airing
strong feelings on the streets but without strong unions to channel them.
