FT  28 JAN 93 / Favoured five await the presidential nod: Mexicans spot
clues to new president
A YEAR, or less, before President Carlos Salinas anoints his likely
successor, Mexico is asking who looks favoured to receive the chief's dedazo
(nod), and wondering how independent the presidential election in 1994 might
be.
Most political commentators - who believe Mr Salinas will follow the
practice of his predecessors and choose the ruling party's candidate for the
election - conclude that the immediate effect of recent cabinet changes is
likely to be even greater presidential control over the political system.
The displacement of the seasoned interior minister, Mr Fernando Gutierrez
Barrios, by the hard-line Chiapas state governor and distinguished lawyer,
Mr Patrocinio Gonzalez Garrido, removed at least one potentially independent
voice.
The vast experience of Mr Gutierrez Barrios at the interior ministry proved
invaluable in the first stormy years of the Salinas administration but the
president had grown wary of his negotiations with opposition parties, which
seemed only to weaken the morale of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary
Party (PRI) and encourage more demonstrations after elections in various
states.
The change at interior was accompanied by others no less significant by way
of signals.
The new under-minister for electoral matters in the interior ministry is Mr
Cesar Agusto Santiago, former electoral chief of the PRI and seen by the
opposition as the alchemist behind the party's victory in the 1991
Congressional elections.
The new head of the nominally independent Federal Electoral Institute (IFE)
is Mr Arturo Nunez Jimenez, another long-time PRI member, who was
under-minister in the interior ministry until his job was given to Mr
Santiago.
The former head of the IFE, Mr Emilio Chuayffet, is now an advisor to the
interior minister and strongly tipped to be the next governor of the state
of Mexico.
With these moves, the government has turned away from putting independent
officials in charge of electoral organisations.
The president, no doubt remembering the divisions in the PRI caused by his
own selection as presidential candidate in 1987, appears determined to put
his own men in charge of the key organs for the party - interior ministry
and electoral institute.
However, the president has dropped the attorney-general, Mr Ignacio Morales
Lechuga, in favour of the human rights commission president, Mr Jorge
Carpizo. 'This sends a signal about the government's very clear decision to
end impunity both for government officials and criminals,' said a
presidential spokesman.'
The president also appointed his close friend and university colleague Mr
Emilio Lozoya to head the new energy ministry.
This extended the list of possible PRI presidential candidates to at least
five: Mr Lozoya, Mr Pedro Aspe, the aristocratic finance minister, Mr Manuel
Camacho, the populist mayor of Mexico City, Mr Donaldo Colosio, the
determined and pragmatic social development minister, and Mr Ernesto
Zedillo, the grey-seeming education minister.
All five worked under Mr Salinas when he was budget minister - another
indication of the president's almost total control of the political elite.
All five are in their 40s, share broadly the president's commitment to
economic reform, and went to graduate schools at US Ivy League universities.
Mr Camacho and Mr Aspe are widely believed to have lost ground by the recent
cabinet changes. The former is said to have hoped to leave Mexico City,
where his political fortunes have been falling as the city's pollution
levels have been rising. Also, his love of dialogue and conciliation is the
very attitude that seems out of favour in the interior ministry and the
presidency.
Mr Aspe is thought to have allied himself with Mr Gutierrez Barrios, so the
latter's departure from the interior ministry would have hurt the finance
minister, who was rash enough recently to declare publicly that rising
unemployment, falling investment, and declining wages were all 'myths'. This
led to a series of cartoons and articles depicting him as out of touch, and
indifferent to the poverty of most Mexicans.
All this sugggests that, although Mr Salinas has presided over impressive
cohesion among ministers for the past four years, the race to succeed him is
likely to lead to increasingly bitter in-fighting during the next year.
