FT  02 JUN 93 / Kohl urges calm after protests in Germany: Anger over racist
attacks on Turkish community
THOUSANDS of Turkish and German demonstrators took to the streets of German
cities again last night to protest against racist violence, in spite of an
appeal for calm from Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The continuing wave of anger followed the deaths at the weekend of two
Turkish women and three girls in an arson attack, blamed on teenage
skinheads professing neo-Nazi sympathies.
One youth was in police custody last night, and the authorities issued the
description of four more skinheads suspected of involvement in the attack,
in the steelmaking city of Solingen, north of Cologne. Later they withdrew
the description, saying it might be a hoax.
Autobahns in several parts of the Ruhr industrial region were blocked by
Turkish protesters on Monday night and yesterday morning, after a second
night of rioting left windows smashed in banks, shops and restaurants in
Solingen.
Demonstrations were under way again last night in Solingen, as well as other
big centres of Turkish migrant workers like Bielefeld, Munster, Dusseldorf,
Dortmund and Kassel.
Mr Kohl, who had failed to issue any immediate response to the deaths on
Saturday night, yesterday issued a joint appeal for calm with Mr Johannes
Rau, the prime minister of North Rhine-Westphalia, and caretaker leader of
the opposition Social Democratic party.
They expressed their understanding for the anger, as well as fear and
sorrow, which has exploded in Germany's 1.7m-strong Turkish community. They
also expressed support for peaceful demonstrations.
However, they urged the community not to react with violence. 'We must
prevent injustice causing more injustice,' they said. 'There is no
justification for violent excesses.'
They also condemned attempts by 'small groups of Turkish fanatics' to settle
their internal disputes under cover of the mass demonstrations, after
several incidents of faction-fighting were reported.
'If German and Turkish rioters now career through our towns, then that makes
no contribution to the peaceful and friendly co-existence between Germans
and foreigners, even if these actions are carried out in the name of the
fight against xenophobia,' they said.
President Richard von Weizsacker announced that he would be attending a
funeral service at the mosque in Cologne for the five murder victims. On
Friday, Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, will attend the burial of the
victims in their former home, 125 miles north-east of Ankara.
German reaction to the latest atrocity has been both horror-struck and
helpless, as the authorities blame a rash of skinhead gangs, without any
very coherent political philosophy, for a spate of arson attacks on
foreigners.
They have sparked an increasingly urgent debate on the whole question of
immigration law, and German naturalisation laws. The SPD yesterday repeated
its call for a dual citizenship right for all those born in the country.
Three draft laws on the issue are now before parliament.
At the same time, media comment has focused on the damage caused by the
murderers to Germany's good name abroad.
'The shameful deeds of a few fanatics have meant that Germans in the entire
world have once again been condemned to the corner of moral inferiority,'
the Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper said in yesterday's edition.
