FT  02 FEB 93 / Iraq arms inquiry swamped with papers
THE VOLUME of material gathered by the judicial inquiry into the
arms-for-Iraq scandal is so great that it is likely to delay its conclusion
at least until the end of the year.
Lord Justice Scott, who is heading the inquiry, is believed to have hoped to
conclude his findings by early summer. This is now seen as the earliest date
by which witnesses - including former and current ministers - will begin to
be called. Lord Justice Scott was appointed to lead the inquiry in November
after documents released during the trial of senior management of
machine-tool makers Matrix Churchill indicated the possible involvement of
some government departments in trade with Iraq.
The Scott inquiry has been gathering a large number of documents, many
previously classified, from government departments detailing the involvement
of those departments in Britain's trade with Iraq in the 1980s. Those papers
are in addition to documents made available during the Matrix Churchill
trial and material from extra-governmental sources.
Among documents already made available to Lord Justice Scott's temporary
offices near Victoria, London, are believed to be some from customs
officials that raise questions about the extent of knowledge within the
government about secret projects in Iraq, such as the supergun programme.
Lord Justice Scott, soon after his appointment, invited anyone who had
information relating to alleged breaches of the government's policy on
exports to Iraq - and to what ministers knew about them - to entrust it to
his secretary, Mr Christopher Muttukumaru, an assistant Treasury Solicitor.
Lord Justice Scott has decided to read all relevant documents before
deciding who to call as witnesses.
It is understood that no decision has been made on what evidence, if any,
will be heard in public, or whether the inquiry will seek to subpoena
witnesses.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, has promised the fullest co-operation
from government departments.
One source close to the inquiry said: 'The kind of co-operation we have been
getting already would have been unthinkable had Mrs Thatcher been prime
minister.'
