FT  07 DEC 93 / Arafat insists Israelis stick to deadline
Rising Arab-Jewish bloodshed and deepening tension between Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organisation threatened the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process yesterday, as PLO chairman Yassir Arafat insisted Israel stick to a
deadline six days away for the start of military withdrawal.
In the first of three incidents, Palestinian gunmen killed a Jewish settler
and his son and wounded three children in an ambush in Hebron, flashpoint of
recent Arab-Jewish tension, where Jewish settlers toting guns attacked Arab
vehicles. Two other settlers were wounded in a firebomb attack on a bus near
the occupied West Bank village of al-Jib. Israeli undercover troops shot
dead a Palestinian outside his house near Rammalah in the West Bank.
The latest killings are bound to inflame the tit-for-tat violence which has
left at least 18 Israelis and 34 Palestinians dead since the peace agreement
was signed in September, and raised to five the number of Israelis killed by
Palestinians in the past five days.
Israel's premier Yitzhak Rabin yesterday condemned the Palestinian killings
of Jewish settlers. 'I have no doubt the goal of the Palestinians who did
this terrible murder (they have just one goal) is to create a chain of
events that will bring the negotiations to an end.'
Mr Rabin rejected Mr Arafat's demand that Israel keep its promise and start
withdrawing troops from the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank area of
Jericho next Monday. A two-to-three-week delay was inevitable because both
sides had yet to reach agreement on security, military and economic issues,
he said.
Israel welcomed two humanitarian gestures by Syria to grant exit permits to
Syrian Jews and co-operate in searching for seven missing Israeli soldiers.
The moves were seen in Jerusalem as confidence-building signs of progress in
the stalled Israeli-Syrian peace talks, the focus of current Middle East
shuttle diplomacy by Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state.
Mr Arafat, who met Mr Christopher in Amman yesterday, said he had asked the
US to press Israel to meet its obligations under the Israeli-Palestinian
peace accord and start the phased troop withdrawal next Monday. Mr
Christopher has refused to intervene, but has urged 'timely implementation'
of the agreement. He is due to return to Damascus on Thursday after another
round of talks with Israeli leaders.
In Cairo, where the two sides are seeking agreement on military and security
issues, Mr Nabil Shaath, chief PLO negotiator, said the talks were at a
standstill. The two sides have yet to agree the size of the Jericho area and
the control of border crossings. Israeli foreign minister Shimon Peres said
they were near agreement providing for Israeli control of the crossings but
with a Palestinian presence.
In Paris, Israeli finance minister Avraham Shochat met Mr Ahmed Qurie to try
to advance talks on future economic relations between Israel and the
Palestinian economy. Disagreements focus on an Israeli proposal for a
customs union with harmonisation of taxes and duties.
Editorial comment, Page 16
