FT  24 NOV 93 / Book pricing scheme faces review: OFT will consider
public-interest aspects of publishers' accord
An unexpected decision to re-examine the net book agreement, which governs
the price of most books sold in the UK, was announced yesterday by the
Office of Fair Trading.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of the Office of Fair Trading, said he
would consider whether the scheme operated against the public interest.
It was more than 30 years since the restrictive practices court had decided
that the agreement did not operate against the public interest, he said.
Because of enormous changes since then in the economics of publishing and
retailing 'we must now consider the possibility that the court would reach a
different judgment today on the effects of the agreement'.
The agreement allows publishers to decide on the minimum price for a book.
It is one of the most contentious issues in British publishing.
Its opponents, such as Mr Terry Maher, the former chairman of Pentos, owners
of the Dillons bookshop chain, argue that by preventing discounting it keeps
the price of books artificially high. In turn, that limits the numbers sold.
The Publishers Association argues, however, that the agreement supports the
publishing of a wide range of titles and is important to the survival of
independent bookshops.
Sir Bryan appears to have taken his decision because the government has not
found parliamentary time this session for proposed legislation prohibiting
anti-competitive agreements.
He said: 'I consider, therefore that I should review the case under existing
legislation, in order to decide whether to apply to the Court for leave to
have its decisions reviewed.'
The Publishers Association expressed regret at his decision because the OFT
reviewed the agreement in 1989 and concluded 'that there had not been such
changes in circumstances as to justify seeking a new reference to the
court'.
The OFT can apply to the Restrictive Practices Court for leave to have its
decisions reconsidered if there is prima facie evidence of a material change
in circumstances relevant to the court's original reasoning.
The OFT intends to look at everything from changes to the cost and
technology of producing books to the profitability of book publishing and
retailing.
