FT  30 NOV 93 / Van Miert heads off shipping dispute
Europe's exporters yesterday claimed to have seen off an attempt by European
shipowners to broaden anti-trust rules on shipping cartels.
EU transport ministers last night withdrew a draft resolution calling for
clarification of the rules for maritime transport, after the European
Commission promised a report on the scope of its regulations by the middle
of next year.
The shippers - big exporters such as ICI and United Distillers - claimed
Europe's shipowners were trying to protect themselves from the latest, and
largest, investigation into an alleged shipping cartel.
Both the Commission and the European parliament had warned the ministers
against interfering with Brussels' sole authority to examine big European
anti-trust cases.
But Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, was able to defuse a
potential row yesterday by promising a report, which he said would take into
account the interests of shipowners, shippers and member states.
The idea of a resolution finally had to be abandoned when Ireland threatened
to veto the proposal. Ms Joan Burton, its transport minister, argued that
agreements between big shipowners punished Irish exporters who were obliged
to pay unfair prices to ship goods to big transatlantic container ports.
Mr Van Miert said the Commission would press on with its cartel
investigation into the Trans-Atlantic Agreement, signed by 14 shipowners
last year in an attempt to combat overcapacity and losses on transatlantic
services. He would not say whether Brussels was about to issue a statement
of objections to the TAA, but said more information on Brussels' attitude
would be available 'very soon'.
Several other member states were equivocal about yesterday's resolution,
among them France, Spain, Portugal, Greece and Britain. Lord Caithness, the
British minister, said the UK would have supported the idea of a resolution
because there was a need to clarify the treatment of new door-to-door
container services.
