FT  08 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Doubts about US recovery
PITY POOR Mr Bill Clinton. He is held responsible for everything, but is so
hemmed about in what he can do. This is particularly true of economic
management, which is one reason why even a 'domestic' president finds
himself drawn to the pleasures and pains of foreign policy activism.
How difficult a president's life can be is shown by the reaction to just
three months of subdued economic growth. Provisional estimates suggest that
the economy grew at an annualised rate of 1.8 per cent in the first quarter
of 1993. But this followed growth at 4.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of
1992, which means that average growth in the two quarters was 3.3 per cent.
This would seem to be perfectly satisfactory. But Mr Ron Brown, the commerce
secretary, responded to the news by saying that the economy was growing at
'an unacceptably low rate'.
As is usual in almost any recovery, the signals are confusing. Yesterday's
announcement on employment in April, for example, showed a constant
unemployment rate and an increase in non-farm employment of 119,000, which
was somewhat less than generally forecast. Earlier in the week it was also
announced that the March index of leading indicators had shown a fall of 1
per cent, while there was also a sharp decline for April in the widely
followed Purchasing Managers' Index.
Yet the Federal Reserve's latest beige book survey of regional economic
conditions had been more optimistic. It cited a 'modest improvement in
economic conditions across much of the nation' last month, following a dip
in activity in March, which was caused mainly by severe winter weather.
Manufacturing output, retail sales and home sales were all said to be
improving.
Halting expansion
All in all, after eight successive quarters of growth that have followed
what was only a mild recession, there is nothing in this performance worth
getting particularly worried about. As Mr Greenspan has often pointed out,
this was always likely to be halting recovery in an economy that was weighed
down by debt.
There is also rather little the authorities can do to help. Monetary policy
is already as loose as can be imagined. The administration may blame Senate
republicans for blocking its plans for short-term fiscal stimulus worth
Dollars 16bn (Pounds 9bn). But the loss of such a marginal amount of fiscal
pump priming can only be a convenient excuse for a baffled administration,
not a plausible reason for economic sluggishness.
Rather more plausibly, the president responded to the latest index of
leading indicators by arguing that it reinforced the case for enactment of
his deficit-cutting bill. This package might help reduce long-term interest
rates, or at least keep them as low as they already are. But the modest
scale of Mr Clinton's proposed deficit reduction means that their enactment
would not make all that much difference.
What seems to have been affecting the US economy most is the recession
abroad. Last year US exports defied recessionary forces, growing at a real
rate of about 6 per cent. But in the first quarter they contracted at an
annual rate of 7 per cent relative to the fourth quarter.
European recession
Given the combination of domestic recession with a current account surplus
in the year to March at Dollars 126.1bn, which is also about 3 per cent of
GDP, Japan is already under strong US pressure to boost its economy still
further. Its close political and economic relationship to the US ensures
that Japan is likely to yield to that pressure, however reluctantly.
While this would give the US a part of what it wants, there is still the
little matter of the European recession. France has managed to lower its
interest rates, as credibility of the franc parity has increased, but the
pace of Germany's monetary easing remains glacial. This week the six German
official research institutes called for faster reductions in interest rates.
They believe that their forecast of a 2 per cent decline in west German GDP
between 1992 and 1993 justifies a firmer step on the accelerator. The
Bundesbank remains unpersuaded.
Fortunately for Mr Clinton, the US economy is not that obviously becalmed.
He is fortunate because there is little he could do about it. US exports
depend on the whims of the foreign exchange markets and recalcitrant foreign
powers, such as the Bundesbank. US domestic sales depend on his fellow
citizens and equally recalcitrant powers, like the Federal Reserve and,
above all, Congress. Mr Clinton is learning the same lesson as Mr Bush. The
president's responsibility for the fate of the US economy is as burdensome
as his ability to change it is small.
