FT  06 DEC 93 / UK joins row over EC spending plan: Clarke links up with
Germany and France in dispute on public works
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, stepped into the long-simmering power
struggle between European finance ministers and the European Commission last
night over plans by Brussels to spend nearly Ecu124bn (Pounds 93bn) on
public works programmes in Europe over the next six years.
The plans include a new scheme for the Commission to borrow on the
international capital markets to finance the projects.
They are central features in a White Paper on employment and growth, to be
presented by Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, to the European summit
on Friday.
After a ministerial meeting in Brussels, Mr Clarke joined his French and
German colleagues in complaining they had been unable to vet the final
version of the paper agreed hours earlier by the Commission.
Mr Clarke said: 'I don't think there is anybody in this room who would
engage in expenditure of a couple of thousand pounds without having a
document explaining how. The governments of Europe will not conceivably
expect to agree to new arrangements for borrowing between Ecu20bn a year
without so much as a sheet of paper on the table. This is no way to run a
sensible organisation.'
Mr Theo Waigel, German finance minister, quoted Chancellor Helmut Kohl as
saying the idea for 'off-budget' Commission borrowing was unrealistic. Mr
Gunther Rexrodt, German economics minister, said: 'We don't accept it.'
Mr Edmond Alphandery, French economy minister, said he was unhappy about not
seeing the white paper, but he supported the idea of extra finance for big
road, rail, telecommunications and environmental projects.
The power struggle involves Mr Delors's non-binding paper setting out
long-term ideas for promoting economic growth and competitiveness, and the
legally-binding but diluted version of the macro-economic guidelines for the
EU which finance ministers agreed last night. These guidelines stress price
stability and budget discipline.
The Commission said yesterday that only Ecu7bn of the proposed annual
spending of Ecu20.6bn was new money. The rest has already been earmarked in
the budgetary guidelines approved last December at the European summit in
Edinburgh, or through the European Investment Bank.
Mr Henning Christophersen, Commissioner responsible for economics, said the
plan was to allow governments and companies to borrow funds via the European
Commission which has a good credit rating and can obtain funds at
preferential rates.
