FT  30 SEP 93 / Opec acts to halt slide in oil prices
THE Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries last night agreed to a new
six-month output plan that aims to halt the sharp downward trend in oil
prices by reining in production in a period of rising demand.
The accord came after high-level political intervention in the Middle East
persuaded Kuwait to accept the scheme. The countrydropped its demand for an
individual output quota of 2.16m barrels a day and accepted a cut to 2m b/d
after president Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran spoke by telephone with the Emir
of Kuwait on the need to reach an agreement.
The new production pact covers the six months from October to the end of
next March. It calls for the 24.42m barrels-a-day overall production ceiling
which was agreed on Monday for the fourth quarter of this year to be
extended to the first quarter of 1994. This level of output is well below
expected demand during the northern winter.
Opec set itself a 23.6m b/d ceiling in June but this was widely ignored and
analysts estimate actual output has been more than 1m b/d higher, inundating
markets and depressing prices.
The agreement came five days after Opec's 12 oil ministers began
negotiations amid fears of an impending oil price collapse. The Opec basket
price - an average of prices from seven Opec countries - had fallen below
Dollars 15 a barrel. The organisation's target price is Dollars 21.
The agreement is likely 'to shore up prices by as much as Dollars 1.50 to
Dollars 2 (a barrel) and keep them there', according to Mr Vahan Zanoyan,
senior director of the Petroleum Finance Company in Washington. 'It will
last as long as the prospect of Iraq re-entering the market does not pop up
and there are no signs that some Opec members are resuming overproduction.'
Kuwait had pulled out of Opec's production ceiling mechanism last June
because it wanted a higher quota. Its reintegration into the regime was a
main goal of the negotiations as its continuing exclusion would have
undermined market confidence that Opec's future production could be kept
within the ceiling.
Iran, which had been pressing for a production quota of 4m b/d, helped to
pave the way for a pact when it agreed to keep its fourth-quarter output
this year to 3.6m b/d.
Mr Gholamreza Aghazadeh, Iranian oil minister, said: 'We hope the price will
go up because the ceiling is very good. Failure to act could have led to oil
prices collapsing to as little as Dollars 10.'
The market responded positively to the agreement, with Brent blend for
November delivery closing up 69 cents at Dollars 17.35 in London.
Commodities, Page 40
