FT  16 AUG 93 / The Week Ahead: Results Due
The UK's two biggest insurance brokers, Sedgwick and Willis Corroon are
expected to post pre-tax profits roughly the same level as last year when
they report interim results.
Sedgwick, reporting tomorrow is expected to register pre-tax profits of
between Pounds 48m to Pounds 58m (compared with Pounds 51.7m last year),
while Willis, which reports on Thursday, is expected to make between Pounds
58m and Pounds 63m (Pounds 56.7m).
Both brokers are universally expected to maintain dividend rates, 3p for
Sedgwick and a second quarterly dividend of 1.65p for Willis. Difficulties
in the US market, which remains competitive, are one of the main factors
holding back further improvement.
Meanwhile Argos, the catalogue retailer, is expected to benefit from the
elimination of losses from the ill-fated Chesterman furniture business when
it reports its interim results today.
Pre-tax profits of between Pounds 12m and Pounds 14m are expected against
Pounds 9.5m last time. However the main focus of attention will be on
current trading to see whether the post-Christmas pick-up is continuing.
Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate, is tomorrow expected to announce pre-tax
profits of between Pounds 240m to Pounds 280m for the third quarter. This
compares with Pounds 274m in the comparative year-ago period.
The group has been adversely affected by the strike at Peabody Coal in the
US, which has cost it around Pounds 30m. However, the stronger dollar is
expected to benefit it by a similar amount since more than half its profits
are generated in North America.
BICC, the cables and construction group, is expected to report a fall in
half year profits, from Pounds 58m to around Pounds 53m, on Wednesday. The
company has suffered from the longevity of the UK recession, which has
affected most of its markets.
On Thursday Wickes, the do-it-yourself group, is expected to show a 35 per
cent improvement to about Pounds 3.5m when it reports interim results. The
growth is likely to be the result of lower losses in its Hunter timber
business, and some advance in the UK DIY retail chain.
