FT  05 FEB 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: German group plans temporary
zinc closure
RUHR-ZINC'S smelter at Datteln, Germany, is likely to close for about two
months from the middle of April, taking about 30,000 tonnes of refined zinc
out of the market this year, said Mr Heinz Schimmelbusch, chairman of
Metallgesellschaft's executive board, yesterday.
He was responding to market rumours that MG, the German metals and
engineering group, would follow Cominco of Canada, which last week announced
poor market conditions were forcing it to cut production this year at its
Trail smelter in British Columbia by 50,000 tonnes.
MG has close connections with Cominco and Mr Schimmelbusch said MG welcomed
the Canadian group's move. He admitted: 'We have actively been considering
how we could contribute to improve conditions in the zinc market'.
The opportunity would arise because further technical changes were to be
made at the Datteln smelter and it would be advantageous to shut it down
rather than keep it running while these were carried out.
In normal circumstances the smelter would be kept operating but the present
depressed state of the zinc market made it more sensible to shut it down
temporarily, as this made the work less risky.
MG owns 45 per cent of Ruhr-Zinc, which recently expanded the Datteln
smelter's annual production capacity from 130,000 to 200,000 tonnes. MIM of
Australia also controls 45 per cent of Ruhr-Zinc and Mr Schimmelbusch said a
decision would be made at meetings next week at which he would recommend a
temporary closure.
He suggested present London Metal Exchange prices were not reflecting the
true value of zinc. Prices were abnormally depressed by a surge in exports
from the former eastern bloc countries and by the liquidation of market
positions built up during the technical squeeze in the exchange's zinc
market for many months last year.
LME zinc stocks reached a record 525,000 tonnes this week and the
International Lead and Zinc Study Group estimates that exports from eastern
bloc countries more than doubled last year to 250,000 tonnes compared with
western consumption of about 5.36m tonnes.
