FT  18 NOV 93 / Sunday trading opponents unite
THE two campaign groups opposed to deregulation of Sunday shopping in
England and Wales joined forces yesterday and said they would present a
single option to MPs, who will vote on the issue within the next few weeks.
The Keep Sunday Special Campaign, backed by the main churches and the John
Lewis retail group, and Retailers for Shops Act Reform, which is backed by
retailers including Marks and Spencer, House of Fraser, and Burton, support
strict regulation of Sunday opening, but had previously presented separate
options.
They differed over RSAR's proposal that all shops be allowed to open on the
four Sundays before Christmas, and KSSC's insistence that workers should
receive double time payments on Sunday.
Negotiations aimed at uniting the groups foundered last month, but the
groups announced yesterday they were combining their options after KSSC
dropped its opposition to pre-Christmas opening.
The decision removes the danger of the anti-deregulation vote being split.
The Home Office said it welcomed the decision and had agreed to reduce the
number of options in the forthcoming Sunday Trading Bill from four to three.
MPs will choose between:
Total deregulation.
Partial deregulation allowing small shops to open all day and large stores
to open for six hours.
Strict regulation, prohibiting large shops from opening except on the four
Sundays before Christmas, but allowing some small shops, garden centres and
DIY stores to open.
The first reading of the bill is expected within days.
The KSSC and RSAR said the move followed representations from cross-party
MPs, and the groups agreed a need for 'a unified front to protect the more
vulnerable elements of society and the long-term interests of the consumer'.
It is also thought to have been prompted by the decision of Usdaw, the
shopworkers' union, to switch its support from KSSC to the Shopping Hours
Reform Council, which is sponsoring the partial de-regulation option. The
union said its decision was conditional on adequate protection being
extended to Sunday workers, but it had recognised the support among its
members for Sunday working.
The SHRC, backed by retailers including J. Sainsbury, Tesco, Boots and
Kingfisher, said the KSSC and RSAR move was an 'admission of defeat'.
