FT  23 DEC 93 / Technology: Cool and cost effective - The invention of a
self-chill can
A self-chilling can would be such an obvious boon to the brewing and soft
drinks industries that it is hardly surprising a lot of inventors have
attempted to create one over the years.
At least 10,000 patents have been filed worldwide, according to Michael
Anthony, chief operating officer of MicroCold Technologies of Florida.
'But nobody, so far as I know, has ever come up with a self-cooling can that
not only works but does so cost-effectively. Until now.'
Anthony, an engineer who emigrated to the US from England 13 years ago,
returned to London last week to demonstrate to the UK's leading brewers the
self-chilling can he has invented.
He was working on cooling techniques for instrumentation when he met
Mitchell Joseph, head of a long-established US beverage company, who had
spent several unsuccessful years trying to develop a self-cooling can.
Their partnership, they claim, has now made the breakthrough. As evidence,
they placed an ordinary-looking cola can on a table, pulled the tab, and
recorded the fall in temperature of its contents from 73'F (23'C) to 40'F in
about 30 seconds.
The cooling device is a small canister of gas inserted in the can. When the
tab is pulled to open the can, it also releases the gas in the canister. The
gas swirls rapidly. Heavier cold molecules separate from lighter hot
molecules, cool the canister, and then the liquid around it. The heat
exchange unit displaces only two fluid ounces of liquid in a 12 fl oz can.
It is simple and relatively inexpensive to produce from readily-available
materials, says Joseph.
Fitting the device into the can will require little modification to
high-speed filling lines, he claims. 'The process involves no chemicals, no
toxics, no hazards to the ozone layer; in fact, no hazards at all. And the
can is fully recyclable.'
Patents for the technology have been filed and, after test-marketing, Joseph
expects to be ready for production within a year.
