FT  16 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Heaviest setback for nearly a year
DISTURBING news on the progress of inflation and the domestic economy,
reflected in heavy falls in British government bond prices, hit the UK stock
market hard yesterday, bringing the largest daily fall on the FT-SE 100
Index for nearly 12 months and taking it well below the 3,000 mark captured
only at the beginning of last month.
The Footsie fell by 38.6 to 2,989.4, with only a 38.7 points fall in
February standing ahead of the 103.4 setback suffered on October 5 last year
when currency concerns began to circulate in Europe.
An unexpectedly large rise in the domestic August retail price index cast
doubts on the stock market's conviction that inflation has been beaten in
the UK.
However, the fall of around 1.3 per cent in the London equity market was
inside the bracket of losses on bourses in continental Europe. UK equity
strategists remained calm in the face of what was described as controlled
selling in the domestic market. Yesterday's fall in the London market was
regarded as a correction, rather than a sell-off.
'London performed relatively well against other markets,' commented Mr Ian
Harnett of Strauss Turnbull, although he added that the latest statistics on
domestic retail sales and the retail price index (RPI) were 'bad news for
equities'.
The RPI for August showed a year-on-year rise of 1.7 per cent, against
market predictions of plus 1.5 per cent, and gave a severe blow to stock
market optimism based on belief that domestic inflation has been conquered
and will remain under control. At the same time, an annualised rise of 3.3
per cent in August retail sales, contrasting with hopes for a 3.7 per cent
gain, challenged faith in the revival of the domestic economy.
Market strategists expressed particular concern over the heavy setback in
bond prices ahead of the impending auction of Pounds 3bn of UK government
bonds. The indication that domestic inflation may have returned to the
investment scene implied 'a whole new ball game', according to a leading
analyst.
The setback may cause the market professionals to take a fresh look at their
year-end forecasts for the Footsie which range from around 2,900 to 3,500,
with Nomura heading the list of bulls.
The confidence which took the FT-SE 100 to a trading peak of 3,115 at the
end of August has been progressively challenged over the past fortnight as
disappointing company results have unsettled a stock market already feeling
withdrawal symptoms as US investors appear to have switched attention to
other European securities markets.
Weakness in the US dollar, coupled with falls on Wall Street overnight, and
also in early trading in yesterday's session, brought setbacks in London's
blue chip stocks, which were also unsettled ahead of the expiry of the
Footsie future on Friday morning. Attempts to arbitrage between equities and
a September futures contract trading briefly at a discount were thwarted by
downward pressures on the underlying share prices.
Trading volume increased sharply to 741.8m shares from the 594.7m traded on
Tuesday, when retail, or customer, business worth Pounds 1.31bn indicated
significant profit-taking by the institutions.
