FT  30 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Destruction Derby
IN THE past week, the battle between General Motors and Volkswagen has
escalated into a commercial war of a bitterness without parallel in recent
memory. What on earth is it all about? One suggested cause can surely be
ruled out: that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, whose defection to VW
sparked it all off, is a manager of irreplaceable talent. His record in
cutting GM's costs in Europe is undeniable. But it must be absurd to suppose
that the gap between him and the nearest equivalent from GM's three quarters
of a million workforce is wide enough to account for the scale of the
dispute.
There is an altogether murkier alternative. GM, like VW, is engaged on
developing a small car for the world market. Historically, the car industry
has been unusual in its dependence on new models and the secrecy in which
they are enveloped. But the level of aggression between GM and VW suggests
there is more at stake than the shape of the boot or the design of the
dashboard. GM has toiled for years to transform itself from a
mass-production dinosaur to a flexible lean producer on the Japanese model.
What if, for instance, GM has come up with genuine cost-saving innovations
on the production line as a result of its labours on the multi-billion
Saturn project?
This is speculation, and is likely to remain so. Were GM to have any such
innovations up its sleeve, it would scarcely be ready to share them with the
world's press. But the idea would fit the accusations GM levels at Mr Lopez:
that - for example - he requisitioned data from GM amounting to 90,000
sheets of paper, and that he tried to poach another seven top GM employees.
VW's counter-accusations, lurid though they sound, merit serious
consideration. Their main thrust is that GM has sought to plant commercial
secrets in VW's computer system as a means of incriminating Mr Lopez: and
that boxes of secret data found in a flat formerly occupied by defecting GM
executives were planted by persons unknown or by GM itself. But that would
imply that GM felt so threatened by Mr Lopez's managerial talents as to hand
over sensitive commercial data in order to discredit him.
In a case so bafflingly short of facts, the field is open to speculation.
But two conclusions are clear. The first is that this dispute is getting to
the point where both managements stand to suffer serious damage. The second
is that the passionate commitment of both parties is clear evidence of an
industry in trouble. The underlying issue has to do with declining sales and
chronic overcapacity in the world car market. The more clamorous the
argument, the more cause the car industry has to worry.
