FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget: How others saw the speech
'It won't harm the recovery, that's the important thing. Iwanted him to do
as little as possible, and that's what he did. Not a single adjustment was
out of harmony. It will give a lot of confidence to business, especially
that the government is starting to tackle the fiscal gap. But he has left me
to go on running my business, and that's what I wanted to be able to do.'
Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons, The UK's biggest electrical retailer
'Our customers in retailing are no worse off and no better off. As retailers
we were particularly pleased with the freezing of the unified business rate
for another year. But the biggest problem is still the housing market. I
think raising the threshold for stamp duty will have a positive effect on
that, but we have got a long way to go. There were not many surprises in it,
but I don't think it was lacklustre.
Geoffrey Maitland Smith, chairman, Sears group (including Selfridges,
Wallis, Warehouse, Adams, Hornes, Olympus and Dolcis stores)
'This Budget means tax increases this year., tax increases next year and tax
increases the year after, a massive betrayal the election pronises.'
Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor
'His proposals for 1993-94 are sensible. But his fiscal stance for 1994/95
makes a rather firm assumption that economic recovery will be under way
before it has actually happened.'
Nigel Whittaker, executive director of Kingfisher and chairman of CBI retail
trade committee
'This cautious and cold-hearted Budget offers little joy for the jobless and
little hope for the homeless.'
Rodney Bickerstaffe, general secretary of Nupe
'The statement is based on the assumption that economic recovery is well
under way and can be sustained. But in construction the recovery is still
very limited and fragile. It is important, therefore, that the Budget paves
the way for a further cut in interest rates as soon as possible.'
Sir Brian Hill, president of Building Employers Confederation
'This Budget does nothing to bring about the massive switch from consumption
to investment which is essential for lasting recovery.'
Neil Johnson, director-general of the Engineering Employers Federation.
'This is close to the budget the CBI asked for ..but we would have liked an
assurance on the continuation of improved investment allowances, and the
Budget comes with a sting in the tail: future tax increases.'
Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry
