FT  10 JUN 93 / Parties favour voting systems that favour them
THE choice between one or two rounds of voting has become the major point of
difference among Italy's political parties as they struggle to agree on
electoral reform.
Having accepted the principle of majority voting for the chamber of
deputies, attention has now focused on whether to adopt a French-style
run-off among leading candidates or the British first-past-the-post system.
Politicians' views have been influenced by the experience of last Sunday's
municipal elections involving nearly a quarter of the electorate. The
elections for mayors used for the first time the majority voting system with
a second round run-off between the two leading contenders due on June 20.
The results showed it is almost impossible on the first round for any
candidate to win an outright majority since there are so many parties and
none had overwhelming support. The same would almost certainly apply in a
general election. Sunday's elections also demonstrated which parties are
likely to benefit most from different methods of voting.
The populist Lombard League, fresh from its success throughout northern
Italy, is arguing strongly for a single round of voting. With this system
the League would secure more parliamentary seats since its vote is now on
average double that of its nearest rivals.
Until Sunday the Christian Democrats favoured a single round because the
party believed it could count on a minimum 25 per cent of the vote
nationwide and stood to do well with one round of voting. Mr Sergio
Mattarella, the Christian Democrat head of the electoral reform commission,
not surprisingly proposed in his draft earlier this month the single round.
The Mattarella draft also contains a proposal to limit the majority vote to
30 per cent, the remainder on the basis of proportional representation.
Voters would have two votes: one for a candidate to be elected on the
majority system, a second for a party list elected via proportional
representation. In this way, the many small parties would be guaranteed
representation.
These proposals no longer satisfy all the Christian Democrats and are
opposed by many others outside the party. With the Christian Democrat vote
falling to 18 per cent nationwide, several influential members believe the
party could build a broader support base on a second round run-off. They
also regard the idea of two votes, split between candidate and party list,
as clumsy. One commentator termed this idea as 'one vote from the head, the
other the heart'.
The most vociferous backer of the second round run-off is the Party of the
Democratic Left (former communists). The PDS is too weak nationally to rely
on a single round, but as a centrist force around which other parties could
ally it could do well in a run-off. Mr Mario Segni, the leader of the
referendum movement, responsible for the April 18 referendum introducing
majority voting to the Senate, also favours a second round. He has
recognised that in Italy votes for alliances offer greater stability than
backing individual parties.
In arguing for a run-off, the PDS would like to see the second round open to
all those who achieve 12 per cent of the vote - not limited to two
candidates. This is another issue likely to split the parties if and when
they accept the principle of two rounds of voting.
