FT  28 JUN 93 / Law and order party draws police support: Ariane Genillard
goes to the Republican congress in Augsburg
OUTSIDE, eight Bavarian policemen forced a demonstrator to the ground at the
weekend in front of the hall in which Germany's far-right Republican party
held its annual congress. Inside, 591 party delegates, many of them police
themselves, were fine-tuning the programme with which the Republicans will
project themselves as the law and order party in next year's federal and
state elections.
With street violence and the number of foreigners in the country on the
rise, the Republicans say the electorate is ripe for their patriotic,
be-tough argument.
And, with scandals marring the image of Germany's mainstream parties, they
hope to tap into a rich vein of protest votes.
But their trump card, according to Mr Franz Schonhuber, the populist party
leader, will be to speak out to the large part of the German population
which stands against Maastricht and fears a common currency.
Mr Schonhuber claims the Republican party, which represents a legitimate
nationalist force to the right of Germany's alliance between Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Bavarian-based
Christian Social Union (CSU), will gain 10 per cent of the national vote
next year.
After poor results in the 1990 national elections, where it attracted the
support of 2.1 per cent of the electorate, the party gained ground in state
elections by securing 10.9 per cent in the Baden-Wurttemberg parliament last
year and by winning nearly 8 per cent in local elections in Hesse in the
spring.
But the Republicans claim the worsening domestic situation will now allow
them to win seats in the federal parliament.
In a long litany to the congress in Augsburg Mr Rudolf Seuffert, party
leader for Bavaria and formerly active in the CSU, pointed to the growing
number of asylum seekers in Germany and the billions of D-Marks spent to
cover their living costs.
His colleague, Mr Georg Wischnat, a civil servant from Hamburg and a former
supporter of the opposition Social Democrats (SPD), says the party will
stand for 'the small people' and denounce 'the growing corruption in public
life'.
'We must do something because both in Europe and in our own country, Germans
are being sold down the river,' adds Mr Hubertus Vierhaller, an export
company manager who used to support the CDU, as he leans against a table on
which party organisers display tapes of German patriotic songs.
But above all, anti-foreigner arguments pervade the party's populist
rhetoric. The programme calls, for example, for the nationality of criminals
to be disclosed, for asylum seekers to be put in camps until their cases are
judged, and for German families to enjoy special rights when seeking
accommodation.
'We Germans have to find ourselves again,' says Mr Schonhuber, a former
Waffen SS member, who is calling on his fellow men to overcome their
post-second world war sense of guilt. 'Otherwise, we will have lost the war
only today.'
