FT  05 AUG 93 / Talks in jeopardy as Sarajevo noose tightens
PEACE TALKS on Bosnia yesterday appeared on the verge of collapse despite a
decision by Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian president, to end his
three-day boycott in protest at a Bosnian Serb assault on heights
overlooking Sarajevo.
Last night, after Mr Izetbegovic said he would return to the talks, Bosnian
Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and Mr Mate Boban, his Croat counterpart, left
Geneva. Mr John Mills, a spokesman for the Geneva peace talks, said they
might return tomorrow. The presidents of Serbia and Croatia, were also due
to leave.
Mr Mills said international mediators Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg
hoped that there would now be a meeting of the three main protagonists
tomorrow.
Mr Izetbegovic's return to the negotiating table hinged on Serb forces
complying with a 24-hour deadline to withdraw from key mountains around
Sarajevo they seized over the past few days.
General Ratko Mladic, commander of the Bosnian Serb forces, refused to
withdraw from positions on Mount Bjelasnica and Mount Igman, despite Nato
acceptance of US proposals earlier this week to carry out air strikes if the
Bosnian Serbs did not end their 'strangulation' of Sarajevo.
Gen Mladic reportedly told a UN commander at Sarajevo airport: 'Our forces
are at the summits of Bjelasnica and Igman. If you want you can go see for
yourselves.'
The fall of Mt Igman would tighten the Serbian siege around Sarajevo and
give the Serbian artillery strategic control over Sarajevo's airfield. Last
night, however, Brig Gen Vere Hayes of the UN said Sarajevo was being
strangled by a Moslem offensive in central Bosnia which was blocking relief
supplies, rather than the Serb assault on Mt Igman.
Mr Karadzic said he was 'going home to calm the situation' after a blunt
message from Mr Reginald Bartholomew, President Bill Clinton's special
envoy. After meeting Serb leaders, Mr Bartholomew made clear that he had
underlined the seriousness of the Nato communique.
Nato officials met UN officials in the former Yugoslavia to discuss the
logistics of the air strikes. But diplomatic sources indicated disagreement
remained about how the Nato-endorsed action would fit in with UN
resolutions.
Although Washington has demanded that any air strikes be carried out under
the control of Admiral Jeremy Boorda, the US Nato commander of Allied Forces
Southern Europe, France continued to insist that the action should be
co-ordinated by the French commander of UN troops in Bosnia, General Jean
Cot.
In London, a ministerial delegation from the Organisation of the Islamic
Conference sought to step up pressure on the UN to defend the Moslems.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
