FT  09 DEC 93 / Brazil's 'if' plan to beat inflation: A pledge reminiscent
of an alcoholic's promise to quit
As with alcoholics who keep promising to quit, Brazil's latest pledge to
kick its inflationary habit was greeted with equanimity by a country which
has seen six previous attempts fail in the last seven years.
Within hours of finance minister Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso's announcement
of his fiscal stabilisation programme, it became known as the se plan
because of the number of occurences of the Portuguese word for 'if'.
Despite initial scepticism, however, the programme has won support from the
government's coalition partners and a cautious backing from business groups.
These and other leaders agree the package is the last chance to tackle
inflation, running at more than 2,000 per cent a year, before the
government's term runs out.
They also agree that if the package fails, with presidential and
congressional elections in November, there is a serious threat of
hyper-inflation in the second half of next year.
Mr Cardoso's package involves three phases to be implemented over several
months. The final stage, introducing a new currency, may not be ready before
the government's term ends.
The most important element, and a pre-requisite for the others, is a set of
fiscal reforms designed to balance next year's budget, otherwise likely to
show a deficit of Dollars 22.2bn. This would be equivalent to 20 per cent of
projected expenditure. In the past the deficit has been highly inflationary
because the government has financed it by issuing short-term securities at
high interest rates.
The budget and related measures need approval from congress, which is
expected to reach a decision before the new year. If it is approved, the
government will introduce a new index which, instead of measuring historical
inflation as do current indexes, would be adjusted daily by the central bank
in line with the devaluation of the currency.
Wages and many important prices in Brazil are linked to the inflation
indices. By introducing this new index, economists say, the government would
be able to influence inflation by slowing the depreciation of the currency
through foreign exchange market intervention using foreign reserves that
currently exceed Dollars 20bn.
In time, the index could be linked to the US dollar or a basket of
currencies. At this point, the government would have de facto abandoned
indexation, since the currency would by definition not depreciate.
Furthermore, the index would become the unit of exchange and would replace
the existing currency, the cruzeiro real.
'You would have a very sharp fall in inflation and, with the fundamentals in
place, this fall will be sustainable,' says Mr Winston Fritsch, economic
policy secretary.
The package has some important advantages over its predecessors. For one, it
concentrates on the budget deficit instead of relying on 'tricks', such as
price freezes, which have worked for only a few months.
A constitutional revision under way in congress may also help.
Constitutional changes, some of which will not come into effect until 1995,
would allow the federal government to regain control of spending which has
been devolved to other levels of government in recent years. With more
control over the allocation of its resources, the government would have less
excuse to run deficits.
Mr Roberto Macedo, a former economic policy secretary, says Brazil is still
not ready to make the cuts and sacrifices Mr Cardoso is seeking. 'He's going
in the right direction, but the problem, as always, is in the political
dimension.'
Opposition is likely to come from congress on two fronts. A proposed 5 per
cent increase in federal taxes will be unpopular. More important, Mr Cardoso
plans to divert 15 per cent of money the federal government transfers to
states and municipalities to an emergency social fund.
The proposal has antagonised several powerful state governors, who have
patron-client relations with congressional deputies. Mr Orion Herter Cabral,
finance secretary of the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, doubts Mr
Cardoso's plan will work. 'The governors won't give up the money,' he says.
Another worry is the paralysis in congress as a result of corruption
hearings involving more than 30 politicians.
But Mr Cardoso hopes congress's problems, and its discredited public image,
offer him an advantage. By placing responsibility for the programme on
congressional approval he is betting congress will not run the risk of being
blamed for its failure.
Even with congressional support, the package faces problems. Probably the
most difficult to quantify is the role of President Itamar Franco. Although
so far supportive of his finance minister, the president is famously erratic
and has a populist view of economics. He is thought to have pressed Mr
Cardoso to introduce a price freeze or some similar 'magic' measure. If
inflation increases in the next few months, as is possible in January for
technical reasons, such pressures may re-emerge.
Problems also lie ahead on salary policy. Salaries for public sector and
many private sector employees are re-adjusted by reference to indices
measuring past rates of inflation. Moving to the new index will either
require persuading employees to take a real pay cut, or allowing past
inflation to seep into the new index.
