FT  07 JUL 93 / Nigerians told to defy Babangida
NIGERIA'S political crisis deepened yesterday as Mr Moshood Abiola, apparent
winner of presidential elections scrapped by the military government, urged
defiance of an ultimatum from President Ibrahim Babangida.
The stand-off came as unrest increased in Lagos with businesses closed and
thousands of protesters said to be blocking roads and starting fires. There
were unconfirmed reports that at least eight people had been killed - the
first such reports since civilian protests began on Monday. An army
spokesman denied claims that soldiers had shot dead at least 10 people in
the suburb of Ikoyi.
General Sani Abacha, chief of defence staff, gave the Lagos state governor
24 hours to restore order and the armed forces were ordered to help the
police.
At least two African airlines cancelled flights to Lagos and expatriates
trying to get their families out of Nigeria found their way to the airport
blocked by protesters.
Earlier yesterday Gen Babangida offered the two civilian political parties -
Mr Abiola's Social Democratic party and the National Republican Convention -
a role in an interim national government. This would involve dissolving all
democratic institutions and was proposed as an alternative to holding fresh
elections at the end of July.
The proposal is an apparent attempt to meet the deadline for ending military
rule on August 27 without confirming the victory of Mr Abiola in the June
polls.
The president has given the two parties until tomorrow to consider the
options. If they accept the national government proposal, all the elected
civilian arms of government are likely to be dissolved, including local
councils, state governors and the House of Assembly. The two parties could
also be scrapped.
Mr Abiola, speaking from Lagos, last night urged elected officials to stay
in their positions and 'damn the consequences'. Other members of the SDP
may, however, be prepared to take up the president's offer.
According to a state radio broadcast yesterday Gen Babangida said the
proposed national government would not include him and he urged the parties
to adopt the plan in the national interest, 'to achieve a termination of the
military regime by August 27'.
