FT  10 NOV 93 / Europe offers Russia trade concessions: EU to present
package to Yeltsin tomorrow after all-night negotiations
THE European Union yesterday agreed to wide-ranging trade concessions to
Russia as part of its drive to secure a new trade and political pact with
Moscow before the parliamentary elections in December.
The package will be presented to President Boris Yeltsin tomorrow at a
one-day meeting in Moscow which Brussels views as a useful show of support
for the forces of democratic reform in Russia.
The Belgian presidency of the European Union, accompanied by Mr Jacques
Delors, president of the European Commission, will attend the summit.
It was agreed after an all-night negotiating session in which member states
were torn between the political goal of backing Mr Yeltsin with the pain of
offering economic concessions which could hurt European industry still
trapped in recession.
After intervention by Sir Leon Brittan, chief trade negotiator, ministers
came down in favour of a compromise.
Sir Leon's new negotiating mandate offers marginal concessions in terms of
improving market access for cheap Russian imports such as steel and
aluminium, but it does modify the use of the draconian weapons which
Brussels can deploy against alleged unfair traders.
Thus, Russia will no longer be labelled a 'state trader' or 'command
economy' such as North Korea or China, but as an 'economy in transition'.
Officials hope this will meet Moscow's demands to be treated more as a
capitalist than a Communist country.
The chief advantage of the new trading status is that Russia would be less
liable to automatic anti-dumping suits. In future, the Commission will have
to prove 'substantial injury' to European producers, and to consult Russia
before imposing levies.
Similarly, the EU has agreed to tighten up on the use of so-called
'safeguard clauses' which can be invoked to protect European industry. Under
the new mandate, Europe must show that Russian goods are both under-priced
and that there has been a significant surge in imports.
A final concession is to offer Russia 1998 as the date when the Union and
Russia will decide on whether to create a common free trade zone. The aim is
to underscore Europe's long-term willingness to lower trade barriers,
despite worries that state subsidies have created artificial prices in
sectors such as energy.
In Moscow, Mr Alexander Shokhin, the Russian deputy prime minister who has
negotiated the agreement with Sir Leon, said yesterday that no substantial
barriers remained between the two sides.
Two of the touchiest issues - on the EU demand to include a standard clause
on human rights, and on the right of foreign creditors to seize Russian
property abroad - were settled only after reference up to President Boris
Yeltsin and Mr Delors, he said.
