FT  25 MAR 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Profits and the
white-collar conscience - John Gapper looks at the Co-op bank's success
One of the most difficult problems facing British retail banks is how to
attract the right customers. The explosive growth of personal bank accounts
during the 1980s has gained banks many customers with unprofitable accounts.
They are now trying to improve the mix by being more selective.
The customer that banks want has two characteristics: he or she holds a high
balance in a current account, thus providing the bank with deposits it can
re-lend, and so paying for the cost of clearing services; and he or she is
likely to buy other products such as insurance.
This has led many banks to concentrate on 'high net-worth' individuals,
well-educated, aged 25-40, with a white-collar job paying at least Pounds
20,000 per year. The banks' marketing challenge is to devise ways of sifting
out these sort of customers.
An eclectic way of doing so has been discovered by the Co-operative Bank, a
small bank owned by Co-operative Wholesale Society. It has been running a
Pounds 1m advertising campaign in cinemas and newspapers advertising the
bank's 'ethical' stance towards selecting business. The advertisements
emphasise the bank does not deal with companies involved in blood sports,
factory farming and the production of animal furs. It also refuses financial
services to tobacco companies, cosmetics manufacturers who test products on
animals and companies that pollute.
The response to the campaign has been striking. The bank's retail deposits
rose by 13 per cent last year following the public launch of its stance last
May. Half its new customers - among a total base of 2.3m - mentioned the
ethical stance as a reason for joining the bank in its internal surveys.
The suggestion that this campaign is so neatly targeted as to be duplicitous
is greeted with a twinkle of the eye by Terry Thomas, Co-operative Bank's
managing director. 'There is certainly a very good fit. But what bank would
want to attract low income, badly-educated, ignorant people?' he says.
The idea of the Co-op having a disproportionate number of customers in the
ABC1 social bracket often provokes disbelief, because of its roots in the
early socialist movement. Yet it is well-placed because it has always
attracted public-sector professionals such as architects.
The campaign is intended to reinforce this market position and boost
products such as the gold card which it offers to high earners.
There was internal debate about making the stance public because directors
were concerned it could repel people. Thomas says it lost a few accounts
from disgruntled customers. It has also faced external challenges. The
Chemical Industries Association and the Cosmetics Association complained to
the Advertising Standards Authority about references in advertisements to
the 'spewing of toxic waste' and animal testing. Both complaints were
rejected.
Despite the hurdles, the campaign has been effective in appealing to a
precise set of customers whom most retail banks now covet. Efforts by others
to appeal to individuals with both finely tuned social consciences, and
money to spend, would not come as a surprise after the Co-op's success.
