FT  26 MAY 93 / Mayhew to testify at arms for Iraq inquiry
SIR PATRICK MAYHEW is to give evidence to the Scott inquiry into arms for
Iraq in a hastily convened appearance following allegations that he tried to
prevent evidence about the Supergun affair coming to court.
Sir Patrick, the Northern Ireland secretary and a former attorney-general,
is to appear before Lord Justice Scott tomorrow, taking a break from his
efforts to restart talks on Ulster's political future in order to do so.
Sir Patrick will be the first member of the present cabinet to give evidence
to the inquiry. He is expected to try to rebut this week's allegations by
Sir Hal Miller, ex-MP and former Conservative party vice-chairman, that he
tried to dissuade Sir Hal from giving evidence in support of a businessman
accused of illegally exporting parts for the Supergun.
Sir Patrick has denied the claim, saying he had never urged Sir Hal to
withhold evidence which would benefit a defendant.
In a statement yesterday Sir Patrick told a hushed Commons he had been
invited to 'take an opportunity to give oral evidence to Lord Justice
Scott's inquiry on Thursday. I very gladly shall avail myself of that
opportunity.' Like other witnesses, Sir Patrick will not be under oath.
Challenged elsewhere, ministers stonewalled questions on topics being
considered by Lord Justice Scott.
Asked by Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, for an assurance
that the government had not coached witnesses from Walter Somers, a Midlands
engineering company, before they gave evidence to a parliamentary Supergun
inquiry last year, Mr Tony Newton, the Commons leader, said the most
'appropriate' course for ministers was to allow the Scott inquiry to
proceed.
For Labour, Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, tried to
draw other ministers into the arms-for-Iraq web, naming 10 members of the
present cabinet - including Mr John Major, the prime minister.
The controversy over Sir Hal's allegations has effectively forced Lord
Justice Scott to rearrange his schedule of hearings. After Monday no further
public hearings were planned until June 11.
Separately, Mr Gerald Kaufman, former shadow foreign secretary, said last
night Sir Hal's evidence was in flat contradiction to a letter sent to him
last November by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary. The letter said the
government did not learn of the involvement of British companies in
supplying tubes for the Supergun until March 30, 1990. Sir Hal has said he
alerted three government agencies about the project in June 1988.
Secretive service exposed, Page 9
Observer, Page 19
