FT  05 OCT 93 / Survey of Distribution Services (7): Opinion divided over
tunnel - Rail and intermodal services
THE advent of the Channel tunnel and development of related intermodal
road-rail transport facilities could open up a range of new European
distribution services.
On the other hand, say some distribution industry sources, the tunnel could
fail to attract the freight volumes anticipated - and hopes for general
expansion of intermodal transport could be dashed by a lack of investment
and suitable facilities.
The Channel tunnel will provide the distribution industry with two transport
options. First, it will carry rail-based freight and passenger services
between the UK and continental Europe. Second, it will carry rubber-tyred
traffic - lorries, cars and coaches - on specially-designed shuttle wagons
which will move between Folkestone and Calais via a loop system.
The second option, for both freight and passenger, will be operated under
the brand name 'Le Shuttle'. On the freight side, specially-designed
shuttles will accept vehicles up to 44 tonnes total vehicle weight, 18.5
metres in length, 4.2 metres in height and 2.6 metres wide. Each freight
shuttle will be able to accommodate 28 heavy goods vehicles.
Supporters of the Channel tunnel envisage it becoming a vital link in a
planned Europe-wide high-speed rail system connecting centres as far north
as Edinburgh, Glasgow or Copenhagen with southern points such as Rome,
Lisbon and Seville.
British Rail subsidiary Railfreight Distribution (RfD) predicts that this
sort of development should help to treble railfreight traffic between the UK
and mainland Europe over the next seven years. At present, trainferry and
'lo-lo' (lift-on/lift-off) railfreight traffic in that market totals about
2m tonnes, says RfD. It forecasts that by the year 2000 the figure will be
about 6.5m tonnes.
For the moment, however, general UK distribution industry opinion on the
viability of the Channel tunnel is divided, with debate continuing between
those who see the project as a potential catalyst for a much wider
development of European rail and road-rail intermodal transport services and
those who see it as a vast waste of money and effort. At this year's UK
Institute of Logistics &amp; Distribution Management conference in Birmingham,
for example, Mr Brian Bolam, managing director of TNT Contract Logistics
Europe, commented that 'there is a very big chance that the tunnel will be
one of the biggest white elephants of all time'. However, Mrs Ivy Penman,
head of international planning for NFC distribution company Exel Logistics,
said her company welcomed the Channel tunnel as a 'major catalyst for future
efficiency and growth'. She said the two competitive offerings from the
tunnel - the road or 'Le Shuttle' option and the through-rail alternative -
would provide a 'real choice for all logistics users'.
Over the past few months, general UK distribution industry interest in the
Channel tunnel and intermodal road-rail transport has begun to pick up with
the emergence of a steady stream of more positive news concerning
tunnel-related freight developments.
Last month, for example, saw the opening by British Rail's Railfreight
Distribution (RfD) division of a new Pounds 18m European freight operating
centre in North London which will process all freight trains transiting the
tunnel. And in Scotland, the main structural work for a new Pounds 8.6m
'Eurocentral' railfreight terminal in Mossend, Lanarkshire, was formally
inaugurated.
A month earlier, construction of a Channel tunnel-linked railfreight
terminal to serve north-west England was completed. The new Pounds 11m
Euroterminal, located at Trafford Park, Manchester, is one of nine such
facilities being developed in Britain by RfD. It is equipped to handle as
many as 100,000 containers/swapbody units a year and is designed to complete
rail-to-road transfers in less than three minutes.
Individual distribution service companies are also pressing ahead with new
developments designed to help them make use of the tunnel. Freight forwarder
Davies Turner, for example, is developing a new Pounds 2.5m terminal next to
the Manchester Euroterminal and will shortly open a Pounds 5m terminal at
Dartford, Kent.
Mr Philip Stephenson, Davies Turner joint managing director, says the
company's new Manchester facility is a 'good example of the way the private
sector can invest in the opportunities presented by the tunnel'.
The Dartford terminal, he says, will be used both for intra-European traffic
and as a gateway for freight coming in from overseas and destined for onward
distribution by road or rail in continental Europe. The company anticipates
using the Channel tunnel for some of that traffic.
'We definitely believe the Channel tunnel will have a role to play in
distribution. In continental Europe, the urge to put goods on rail is
enormous, particularly in countries such as Switzerland and Austria,' adds
Mr Stephenson.
That 'urge' is being further stimulated by European Commission support for
plans to establish a network of intermodal transport 'corridors' between the
biggest European centres, with rail providing the linehaul and road
operations being used to handle collection and delivery activities at either
end. The Commission plans to introduce further legislation to make it easier
for new combined transport companies to access European rail networks.
Mr Michael Browne, BRS professor of transport at the University of
Westminster, believes one of the big influences on the future growth of
intermodal distribution will be road haulage costs.
He told a recent intermodal transport industry seminar that road transport
was viewed by many companies as a relatively cheap resource. And short-term
costs might fall. But longer term, road transport costs were likely to rise
in real terms because of increases in fuel taxes, traffic congestion, more
road tolls and commercial vehicle bans. As a result, combined transport
would become more attractive.
However, other distribution industry observers warn that immediate prospects
for greater use of railways in the UK for moving freight could be inhibited
by uncertainty arising from the planned privatisation of British Rail. That
development is, for example, raising new insurance issues for companies
planning to operate or use Channel tunnel freight services.
