FT  25 MAY 93 / BCCI depositors sue Bank of England
DEPOSITORS in the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International
yesterday issued a writ against the Bank of England for allegedly failing in
its role as regulator.
Liquidators at Touche Ross, the accountancy firm, co-ordinated the legal
action. It is believed to be the first time the Bank has been sued under
banking law.
The move - which had been hinted at by liquidators over the past few weeks -
was delayed by questions over whether the law would permit BCCI itself to
sue the regulator.
But Touche Ross recently received a legal opinion from Sir Patrick Neill,
QC, that while BCCI or its liquidators could not sue directly, individual
depositors might be entitled to damages from the Bank.
The writ was issued in the names of a small number of depositors and alleges
that the Bank failed to regulate BCCI properly in accordance with the 1979
and 1987 banking acts.
The Bank of England said yesterday: 'We have been aware for some weeks that
the liquidators were considering whether proceedings could be brought
against the Bank. We believe we have a complete defence to them.'
The Bank was criticised last year in a US inquiry chaired by Senator John
Kerry and in a report commissioned by the government from Mr Justice
Bingham, following which it introduced a number of supervisory changes and
proposed amendments to legislation.
Three of the joint liquidators at Touche Ross wrote yesterday to depositors
encouraging them to add their names to the writ. They said it would be
'extremely difficult, expensive and impractical' for depositors to take
action individually.
But the government of Abu Dhabi, BCCI's majority shareholder, hinted that it
might commence its own legal action against the Bank.
'We have been actively looking at what claims we may have against the Bank
of England and these investigations are at an advanced stage,' a spokesman
said.
The Touche Ross letter said it had been advised by Sir Donald Nicholls, who
as vice-chancellor is the senior chancery judge, that it could use
liquidation funds to take legal action on behalf of depositors provided it
distributed any award to creditors in proportion to their claims.
It stressed that the outcome was uncertain and there was little precedent
but that it had been advised that the claim 'has a fair prospect of
success'.
The 1987 Banking Act says the bank and its employees will not be liable for
any actions or omissions unless it is shown to be 'in bad faith'.
