FT  17 JUL 93 / Money Markets: Dutch rates fall
THE DUTCH central bank yesterday buttressed its continued support for the
Danish krone by cutting 10 basis points off a key money market rate, writes
Stephanie Flanders.
Lowering its special advances money market rate to 6.60 from 6.70 per cent
was a surprise move by the Dutch authorities. But some in the markets
considered it a 'dry run' for Bundesbank official rate cuts at its council
meeting on July 29.
Although the official German interest rates cannot fall until then, the
relaxed liquidity conditions in Germany created by Wednesday's generous
Bundesbank tender might allow German call money rates to fall substantially.
Yesterday afternoon German overnight money stood at around 7.10 per cent,
against 7.30 per cent at the beginning of the week, and 7.18 on Thursday.
Dealers speculated that the Bundesbank will set a lower, fixed repo rate
next week if it wishes to appear more supportive of the ERM. But since the
market is likely to take the repo rate down, with or without the central
bank's assistance, the policy shift would be somewhat cosmetic.
Yesterday's turbulence drove up the Danish short-term interbank interest
rate to over 40 per cent. In the afternoon, the Danish National Bank
announced that it would raise its key deposit and discount rates to 9.25 per
cent from 7.25 per cent from Monday to give the krone extra support.
The Bank of England forecast another sizeable shortage yesterday morning of
Pounds 1.35bn. In contrast to the previous day, the shortfall was quickly
dealt with in the early rounds. The majority of the funds consisted of bills
for repurchase at an interest rate of 5 29/32 per cent. Overnight rates
began at 5 5/8 per cent and finished at 4 5/8 per cent.
Sterling money markets were very quiet for most of the day, with period
rates little changed at the end of trading. Rates for sterling futures were
similarly subdued. The December sterling contract edged down three basis
points from Thursday's close to end the week at 94.37.
Liquidity conditions next week look set to be more changeable, with
settlement of the BT3 share offer on Monday. 'Some people may be concerned
about Thursday's Maastricht vote, but the underlying uncertainty for the
next few days is about money, not any shift in policy', said one London
trader.
