FT  17 NOV 93 / Government borrowing rises sharply again
ANOTHER BIG rise in government borrowing last month left public sector
finances still heading for their biggest annual shortfall on record.
Official figures showed yesterday that the government borrowed Pounds 2.7bn
in October, taking the public sector deficit since the start of the
financial year to Pounds 26.9bn from Pounds 20bn in the same period last
year.
The latest figure, slightly higher than forecasts, suggests that the public
sector borrowing requirement for 1993-94 will be slightly lower than the
last Treasury forecast of Pounds 50bn.
It will impress on Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, the need to bring down
borrowing as he prepares for the November 30 Budget. The Treasury said the
figure was in line with forecasts.
Last month's shortfall disappointed expectations mainly because tax
receipts, particularly of corporation tax, were particularly low. In the
first half of the financial year corporation tax receipts, which are usually
volatile, were 0.6 per cent up on the previous year, but the October figure
was about 15 per cent lower.
Excluding the proceeds from privatisation, the cumulative PSBR in the first
seven months of the financial year was Pounds 30.4bn. There were no
privatisation proceeds in October.
Although much of the deficit is cyclical, arising from higher social
security payments as a result of the recession, part of the deterioration in
public sector finances reflects a structural shortfall.
According to economists at UBS, the Swiss bank, the PSBR excluding
privatisation proceeds as a proportion of gross domestic product is expected
to be about 5 percentage points higher this year than it was at a similar
stage in the last business cycle.
Speaking yesterday at a lunch on the Budget given by Arthur Andersen, the
accountancy firm, Lord Lawson, the former chancellor, urged Mr Clarke to
raise taxes at the earliest possible opportunity, pointing out that the
interest the government will have to pay on the national debt next year will
be about Pounds 7bn more than it was two years ago.
He said: 'Any increase in taxation should be imposed at the earliest
opportunity and not dragged out over a period of years.'
The notion that tax increases would damage the recovery showed 'no
understanding of the hard evidence of the 1980s' and wildly exaggerated the
extent to which fiscal policy could affect the economy in the short term, he
said.
Ms Harriet Harman, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said
lower-than-expected tax receipts in October suggested that the recovery was
not strong enough to make significant inroads into the deficit. 'Cutting
spending or raising taxes on ordinary people in the Budget will not ensure a
sustainable reduction in the deficit, and will merely exacerbate the
short-term and medium-term weaknesses in the economy,' she said.
Confidence in the housing market dipped slightly in October in the light of
fears that the government will abolish mortgage tax relief, according to a
survey by Gallup, the market research company.
It also revealed that half of all existing homeowners under 35 in the survey
claimed to have zero or negative equity in their property.
