FT  29 NOV 93 / Ulster politics of discontent poisoned further: PM will try
to stem damage by publishing documents
There is nothing new about contacts between British governments and
representatives of Sinn Fein. Nor is it the first time in 25 years of
carnage that the IRA has made private overtures about peace. But the storm
whipped up by the revelation of extensive contacts between Mr John Major's
administration and Mr Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein was no less
embarrassing for that.
After months of painstaking effort to nurture a climate of reassurance to
allow the resumption of talks on a political settlement in the province, Mr
Major faced a barrage of criticism at the weekend.
Opposition leaders joined hard-line Ulster unionists in accusing Mr Major
and Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, of lies at worst and
skilful duplicity at best.
The Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party appeared confident that it
now had the ammunition to blow up efforts by London and Dublin to agree a
constitutional framework for Ulster which would marginalise the terrorists.
British ministers acknowledged that the disclosure of the talks - just a
week after the damaging leak in Dublin of the Irish government's draft
proposals for a political settlement - would poison further the atmosphere
of distrust which permeates Northern Ireland politics.
But Downing Street insisted that no direct lies had been told. Mr Major's
constant disavowal of negotiations or talks with Sinn Fein was technically
accurate. Replies through intermediaries were not quite the same thing.
That, in the famous words of a former cabinet secretary, is what is known as
being economical with the truth.
But Mr Major hopes the publication later today of all the documents which
passed between his government and Sinn Fein will begin to repair the damage.
Significantly, the message from Number 10 Downing Street was that he had
fully approved of the contacts and would stand firmly by Sir Patrick. He
would also press ahead with efforts to end the violence and to put in place
a durable political settlement.
Officials said the documents would show that the government had been as
constant in its approach in private as in public. It had offered a place at
the negotiating table to Sinn Fein, but only after a permanent end to
violence.
The officials were unapologetic about the contacts - Mr Major's view was
that the government could not possibly ignore the possibility that the IRA
was serious about an end to violence. That possibility was taken seriously
by British intelligence and by the Irish government and Mr John Hume, the
leader of Ulster's mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party.
As one British official said recently, most of the terrorist organisations
which have plagued the west since the 1970s - from the Red Brigades to the
PLO - had given up. Even Libya appeared reluctant now to sponsor terrorists.
So 'we have to allow for the possibility that the IRA has had enough'.
Sir Patrick hopes that the mainstream Ulster Unionists led by Mr James
Molyneaux will accept that the contacts did not amount to anything
approaching a conspiracy to undercut the government's constitutional
guarantee on the future of Ulster.
His fear must be that if Mr Paisley manages to take grassroots Protestant
opinion with him, then Mr Molyneaux also will be dragged towards complete
disavowal of a search for a comprehensive settlement.
There were one or two hopeful signs yesterday. Conservative MPs strongly
committed to the preservation of the union chose not to attack the prime
minister. Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, said it would have been
wrong not to respond to the IRA. Mr Molyneaux, briefed in advance of the
revelation, appeared ready to reserve judgment.
But trust - or rather the absence of it - has always been the deciding
factor in efforts to restore peace to Northern Ireland. Nobody in London
could argue that the latest revelations would not heighten suspicion and
hostility.
Mr Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, will try to
rebuild confidence at their forthcoming summit, still pencilled in for
Friday of this week. Mr Reynolds does not want the issue to sour the
atmosphere at the meeting.
The two leaders will seek to reassure the unionists with a communique
restating Dublin's willingness to drop its constitutional claim to Northern
Ireland and to accept the Protestant majority's veto over changes in the
status of the province.
Mr Reynolds wants to complement that with a statement designed to reinforce
the pressure on Sinn Fein to come in from the terrorist cold - a 'framework
for peace' which would recognise the aspirations of the nationalist
community while offering guarantees to the unionists.
But Mr Major will find it hard if not impossible now to maintain contact
with Sinn Fein. The need to reassure Mr Molyneaux will make still harder the
compromises essential to any political settlement.
In her recent memoirs Baroness Thatcher warned her successors of the
intractability of Northern Ireland. Distrust mounting to hatred and revenge
was never far beneath the political surface. 'Those who step on it', she
concluded, 'must do so gingerely'. Mr Major no longer needs telling.
