FT  14 JUL 93 / Management: Female progress by the book - Why have women
made it to the top of publishing but so few other professions?
Frances Coady is not Oxbridge educated. With her black leather jacket, mini
skirt and scarlet lipstick she does not fit the classic picture of a boss.
Yet this 34-year-old has just been given one of the best jobs in British
publishing: running the literary imprints of Random House - Jonathan Cape,
Chatto and Windus, Vintage and Pimlico.
At the same time, Kate Parkin, also in her early 30s and just back from
maternity leave, has been put in charge of the more mass-market publishing
names Century and Arrow. Carmen Callil, 20 years older and the industry's
grande dame, has become grander still as publisher-at-large of the Random
House group.
The glass ceiling is lying in shards at the feet of the Random House women.
At the centre stands Gail Rebuck, who became chief executive 18 months ago,
and is the most powerful of the lot.
'This shouldn't be a great story, but it is,' says Coady. When she started
in publishing in 1982 as a secretary at Faber &amp; Faber there were only two
women close to the top: Callil who founded Virago and went on to manage
Chatto, and Liz Calder who was the first woman on the board at Jonathan
Cape.
Now both have moved on to greater things (Calder has set up Bloomsbury)
while the list of big female names in British publishing has lengthened.
Paula Kahn is managing director of Longman. Philippa Harrison runs Little,
Brown. Other women have started their own companies: Victoria Barnsley at
Fourth Estate and Sarah Mahaffy at Boxwood.
But have women really made it in publishing? And if so is publishing a model
for other industries, or is it somehow a special case?
In sheer bulk, book publishing is dominated by women. They make up more than
60 per cent of the workforce, but only 40 per cent of the managers and 20
per cent of the directors, according to the Hansard Society Commission. That
is still much better than in the economy as a whole, where 25 per cent of
junior managers and less than 2 per cent of senior ones are women.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that women are increasingly making their
presence felt in senior, if not in the most senior, jobs. One London
Business School student was surprised to find himself interviewed
exclusively by women at each of the four publishing houses to which he had
applied for a job.
But according to Kahn, nearly all the big decisions are still being taken by
men. 'There are a number of very high-profile women managing major editorial
departments, but when it comes to women with significant financial and
commercial power, there are really only two, Gail Rebuck and myself,' she
complains.
So two things need explaining: why women do better in publishing than
elsewhere, and why their absolute majority at the bottom still translates
into a minority at the top. One answer to the first question is that
publishing is something women are good at. Calder sees it as an 'enabling,
servicing job', with editors playing a 'shepherding and championing' role.
Rebuck talks about the feminine traits of creativity, the instinct and flair
needed in a publisher, but then thinks better of it. 'That's all rubbish,'
she says, deciding that the real reason is the entry policy. Traditionally,
a young woman with a degree but no particular training could get a job in
publishing as a secretary or assistant. 'No one else would employ them.'
The pay for these young hopefuls was pitifully low. When Coady, who has
degrees from Sussex and Essex Universities, was taken on in 1982 she was
offered less than Pounds 3,000. 'I couldn't believe it. They obviously
expected me to have a private income,' she says.
She, in common with many others, proved her worth and was rapidly promoted.
'Because many of the women had brains and gumption they got on,' says
Rebuck.
But why haven't they got on still further and in greater number? One reason
may have been a lack of ambition, at least on the part of some of the older
women. 'Women of my generation have not wanted to be the ultimate boss, but
younger women don't all feel that way,' says Calder.
Another problem, says Rebuck, is that women who have made it as editors may
fear - wrongly - the financial responsibility that comes with moving up the
mangement ladder. 'It's not as hard as it's cracked up to be. I haven't had
any formal training with numbers and I don't need one. All you need is a bit
of common sense.'
Recent changes in the industry may also be in women's favour. Until
recently, publishing was a shambolic cottage industry with highly
paternalistic ways. According to Kahn, women lost out in this informal
environment. 'In a small family firm it is only great if you happen to be
the daughter,' she says.
The bigger companies have given the industry its first taste of formal equal
opportunities policies: a decade ago maternity leave - if any - was decided
on an ad hoc basis. Now companies are vying with each other to offer the
best maternity deals. Faber &amp; Faber and Longman have recently agreed to pay
towards employees' childcare costs.
The reorganisation has also started a game of musical chairs in senior
positions: men who had seemed likely to remain forever in their jobs have
moved, and some have been replaced by women.
Just as the balance is shifting towards women at the middle and the top of
the industry, the reverse is happening at the bottom. The higher salaries
are drawing in more men, who are increasingly prepared to start as
secretaries. 'The young men don't come with all that baggage any more.
They've got mothers who worked,' says Rebuck. Both Rebuck and Coady have had
male secretaries - something that would raise no eyebrows in the US where
some 60 per cent of publishing assistants and secretaries are male.
The experience of the women who have made it in publishing, and of those who
work for them, suggests that the sex of the people at the top does make a
difference. Coady says that women's attitude to power is less political: 'I
look at power in relation to what I am doing. Power is desirable to me if it
means I can put my ideas about writers and books into work.'
Rebuck agrees: 'There is that element of Machiavellian charm of men in
publishing. They meander around the point, and you walk out of the office
and do not realise until later that you have been carved up. Women are more
direct.'
Women are also said to communicate better. One female employee commented
with approval that when Rebuck took over she went round the office talking
to everyone. 'You wouldn't find a man doing that.'
They work harder, says Coady, who admits to being a 'complete workaholic'.
Rebuck, who hurries home every night to see her two children, has had to
become an efficient user of time. However, their view from the top is not
altogether pleasant. As pioneers, they are constantly subjected to a great
deal of attention, not all of it flattering. Carmen Callil is used to
reading that she is a nightmare to work for, while Rebuck learnt from the
trade press that she got the job by stabbing her predecessor in the back.
Such talk, argues Coady, is heard every time a woman gets into a position of
power. 'You've always got people trying to explain why you've got the job,'
she says. Rebuck complains that 'women in power are often criticised for
being tough. But if they are not tough there is a suggestion that they are
not up to the job.'
She also finds that many men do not know how to deal with her. 'They have
run out of stereotypes,' she says. She tells the story of a middle-aged male
journalist asking her whether she could sense any sexual tension when she
chaired board meetings. She rolls her eyes and laughs.
That brave new world is still a fiction in which women are in charge and the
men do the typing without either party feeling they are doing anything odd.
But if one day it is to become fact, it could well be in books first.
