FT  30 SEP 93 / The Labour Party Conference: Arm-twisting allies win the day
in late show
MR JOHN PRESCOTT, the Labour traditionalist's traditionalist, and the
left-wing MSF white-collar union were the unlikely heroes of Mr John Smith's
victory.
A barnstorming speech by Mr Prescott, fast becoming the Labour conference's
Michael Heseltine in his ability to appeal to the party's grassroots, ended
in an urgent appeal to delegates.
He contrasted the modernisers within the party who blamed the unions for the
election defeat with the way Mr Smith had 'put his head on the block by
saying, 'I fervently believe in a strong relationship between the trade
unions and the Labour party'.'
His speech was the outward sign of frantic behind-the-scenes and last-minute
efforts by the leadership to win over as many delegates as possible by
arm-twisting and persuasion.
MPs with local parties against the change were told to ring their general
management committees back in the constituencies and put pressure on them,
while those with 'sound' constituency parties were told to talk to other
local parties or to the smaller unions.
The National Communications Union delegation met seven times and was
repeatedly lobbied by senior party members, including Mr Neil Kinnock, the
former party leader, before deciding that they would persist in their
opposition to the rule changes.
Mr Kinnock was among the most active figures, seeing delegates and putting
the argument for change loyally and effectively in a series of television
and radio interviews. Mr John Major must envy Mr Smith his predecessor.
But as late as lunchtime - after Mr Smith had made his speech - his aides
were saying that up to 250 constituency parties were undecided or proving
hard to pin down.
Then came the turning points, with the decision for Mr Prescott to wind up
the debate, and with a meeting of the MSF - which was already committed to
vote for the TGWU motion which the leadership opposed.
Away from the conference hall, at the supposedly secret location of the
Brighthelm community and civic centre, the delegation met and decided by
just two votes - 19 to 17 - not to cast their 4.5 per cent of the conference
vote against the rule change, but to abstain.
Ms Hilary Armstrong, Mr Smith's parliamentary aide and an MP sponsored by
the MSF, is credited with finding the way out for the leadership by
highlighting how the changes to parliamentary selection procedures would
affect women. The MSF's opposition to the change in the role of the unions,
was cancelled out by their support for its moves to increase the number of
women candidates.
It worked, but anger at the way in which the two issues had been linked
showed through in some of the speeches from delegates who felt
outmanoeuvred.
At the end of the debate, Mrs Margaret Beckett, the deputy leader, could
only watch as Mr Prescott won his second standing ovation of the conference.
She had lost any chance she might have had of making that speech by virtue
of her less than enthusiastic support for Mr Smith earlier in the week.
Talk in the corridors and bars turned quickly to speculation that Mr
Prescott would and should run for the deputy leadership next year.
Just before 6pm, after a day of impassioned argument, two voting procedures
and six different coloured ballot papers, to cheers and applause from most -
but not all - sections of the audience, the conference heard that the rule
change had been passed. Mr Smith's margin of victory on the key vote was
below 3.5 per cent - less than the size of the MSF vote.
It had been about an additional payment for union political levy payers of
just Pounds 3 a year, but it had also been about the leadership of the
party.
