FT  08 FEB 93 / Survey of Iran (11): Crisis looms - Population Growth
FIFTEEN years ago, under the rule of the late Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi,
Iran was hard put to meet the needs of its 29m population. Now, after
revolution, eight years of destructive war, a fall in the oil price and an
explosion in the birth rate, it faces a far worse population crisis.
Even before the revolution, many Iranians saw having many children as a sign
of God's blessing. With the accession to power of Ayatollah Khomeini,
producing more Moslems became a political as well as religious duty. Every
Iranian born was an arrow through the heart of the Great Satan (the US), he
told his flock. The nation took up his call with an enthusiasm that resulted
in today's population of 60m.
The war with Iraq, with its human-wave tactics and devastating casualties,
added extra impetus to the task of giving birth to more Moslems.
Fifteen years later, the Health Ministry admits that some 37 per cent of
Iranian children under seven are malnourished. Homelessness, unemployment,
illiteracy and poverty have increased.
Mr Mohammed Hashemi, head of the Iranian Broadcasting Service, is often
taken to task for not doing enough to spread the family planning message. He
says: 'You say put on programmes about birth control, but when I do our
phone lines are jammed with fathers saying 'My 14 year-old daughter is
listening, take this programme off.''
According to Mr Mohammed Reza Malakzadeh, health minister, the birth rate
now stands at 33 per thousand of population with 45.5 per cent of Iranians
aged under 14. 'The proportion of employed to unemployed people is 1:1 in
Iran, compared with 2:32 in Japan,' Mr Malekzadeh says.
'In the last ten years the gulf between the resources the country needs and
what is available has grown alarmingly. We have not had time to catch up
with the hospitals and beds needed, because of the growth of the
population,' he explained. To cope with the present population, Iran needed
40,000 new classrooms, 500,000 residential units, 600,000 new jobs and
Dollars 5bn invested in the agricultural sector.
Mr Mohammad Ali Najafi, education minister, faces similar problems.
'Uncontrolled student population growth is one of the dire consequences of
the rise in population. To keep up with the population growth we need 10,000
university-educated teachers each year. At present we can only answer 60 per
cent of educational needs,' he said.
For Mr Massoud Roghani-Zanjani, vice-president and head of the Plan and
Budget Organisation, the answer is to remove all the incentives previously
introduced to encourage reproduction. Two years ago, the government actively
encouraged large families, giving them extra ration coupons, help with
housing, and subsidies for childrens' clothing. Most incentives have now
gone, but Mr Roghani-Zanjani wants to see the last ones removed and
penalties imposed.
Although the population growth rate has eased slightly - 3.3 per cent in
1988-89 to 2.7 per cent this year - more women are now reaching reproductive
age and they are the ones the government is most anxious to reach with its
family planning message.
Mr Malekzaden says that population control is top of his agenda. Measures
introduced include free contraception and free sterilisation at 400
hospitals nationwide. His ministry claims that 200,000 people were
sterilised in 1991.
But at the end of the day, it was the policies of the clerics which
aggravated the problem and it is they who must solve it.
Foremost in the war on population growth is Ayatollah Makarem Shirazi, a
senior theologian at the Qom seminary. He admits that the Koran encourages
large families. But he argues that an important factor in Islam is the
instruction to 'take account of time and location'.
He argues that no religious 'law-maker' would argue that 'it is better to
have 100bn uneducated, poor and unhealthy people, than to have 60m living in
good conditions.'
Today's message, according to the Ayatollah, is that 'the man who stood
proud and said I have seven children must learn that he must apologise
instead.'
