FT  30 JAN 93 / MPs criticise Treasury and electricity watchdog: Subsidy
urged for generators
THE BENEFITS of expanding the market for coal far outweigh the costs, Mr
Richard Caborn, chairman of the Commons trade and industry committee, said
yesterday.
The report is harshly critical of the Treasury and Professor Stephen
Littlechild, the electricity regulator, and includes recommendations which,
if implemented by the government, would significantly affect the nuclear,
gas, coal and electricity industries in the UK and overseas.
The MPs' main conclusions are in the following areas:
Coal: a subsidy should be provided to the electricity generators to burn up
to 16m tonnes of extra coal a year for the next five years on top of
existing contracts. It would be equal to the difference between the price of
overseas and British coal.
In addition, the government should consider financial assistance for 3m
tonnes to be sold elsewhere and require the generators to buy 4m tonnes for
one year only in 1984-85.
There would also be subsidies for clean-coal technology. The committee
believes the total subsidy needed over five years would be less than Pounds
500m. The money should come either from the fossil fuel levy 'which raises
more money than is needed for its main purpose' or from the taxpayer, but
not from the electricity consumer.
More worrying for British Coal is the committee's suggestion that opencast
output be reduced gradually through stricter planning guidelines from its
present 18m tonnes a year to about 10m.
The corporation welcomes the committee's suggestion that a high priority be
placed on reforming working practices, particularly the reform of working
hours.
The unions will welcome the committee's proposal that any colliery proposed
for closure should be put into the Modified Colliery Review Procedure, a
move opening the possibility that no pits be closed within the next nine
months.
Nuclear power: Nuclear Electric will be relieved the committee rejects calls
from some environmentalists for early closure of the Magnox stations and
against commissioning Sizewell B next year. It also welcomes a committee
proposal, unlikely to be adopted by the government, that Nuclear Electric
ceases to receive income from the fossil fuel levy and ceases to be
responsible for discharging inherited nuclear liabilities. The report
suggests diverting Pounds 380m a year of the levy towards coal.
The committee recommends that the nuclear review scheduled for 1994 be
brought forward by a year.
Major energy users, who have since privatisation complained of high
electricity prices, are backed. The committee says major users should not be
disadvantaged by high electricity prices relative to overseas competitors.
It suggests a cross-subsidy from small consumers by tapering the fossil fuel
levy so large users pay a small percentage.
Electricity: Perhaps the most significant means of increasing the market for
coal would be achieved through the committee's recommendation that the
liberalisation of the electricity market be delayed by four years from 1994.
Under its proposal, the boundary non-franchise market - where there is
competition between regional electricity companies - would remain at 1MW.
Some regional companies have suggested this would enable them collectively
to buy 15m tonnes more a year of coal-fired electricity because they would
be certain they could sell it to customers.
The committee of MPs says retention of the existing franchise boundary would
be conditional on the regional companies agreeing to larger coal contracts.
It also says the prices of the generators and regional companies would have
to be tightly regulated.
Under present licences the generators are not directly regulated and some
regional companies say this enables them to hold on to some of the money
resulting from falling coal prices.
The committee also advises the government to require the generators to hold
total stocks of not less than 20m tonnes of coal a year.
The committee wants Prof Littlechild to review regional companies'
distribution charges immediately so he can introduce tighter controls on
charges and pass the benefits of privatisation on to consumers.
The MPs are dissatisfied with the way Prof Littlechild has discharged his
duties. They criticise him for 'over-reliance' on competition and an
apparent lack of urgency in resolving problems.
The report says his duties should be amended to make protection of consumers
one of his primary duties. He should be required to consider long-term
interest of indigenous fuel producers.
The Department of Trade and Industry is asked to review the power of energy
regulators, with the aim of acquiring more parliamentary and govern-ment
control over their work.
Operation of the pool wholesale market for electricity is strongly
challenged because of the way the bidding system appears to disadvantage
coal. A review is suggested.
The report suggests controversially that electricity supplied from France be
subject to the nuclear levy and that Electricite de France's ability to
negotiate long-term contracts to supply power be made conditional on UK
generators having access to the French system. The committee believes this
would create room for 6.5m tonnes of coal.
Gas: Rapid expansion in the market share of combined-cycle turbine gas
generators are accepted as inevitable - the committee estimates 30m tonnes
of coal-equivalent in 1997 against 1m this year.
The committee says the independent power projects involving CCGT have a
protected market through long-term contracts and 'we do not necessarily rule
out draconian ways of reducing their impact on the market for coal'. The
report asks the government to look at the possibility of some CCGTs being
used as mid-merit or peak instead of baseload capacity.
Environment: Oil plants which burn orimulsion, the South American fuel which
is an emulsion of bitumen and water, should fit flue gas desulphurisation
units, which the committee believes would make them prohibitively expensive.
The committee says the government should resist the introduction of a carbon
tax unless it is essential to achieve commitments on carbon dioxide
emissions and is more cost-effective than other measures.
Government: The Treasury is criticised for its role in the pit closures
programme. The MPs say: 'We find it disappointing that the Treasury
apparently failed to conduct any comparison between the costs of closing the
31 pits and the costs of a temporary subsidy to enable British Coal to
enlarge its markets.'
The report says this could have suggested phased closures at least. 'We also
consider it reprehensible both that negotiations with the Treasury over the
redundancies were so protracted and that the Treasury then required all the
redundancies to take effect within the remainder of the financial year.'
British Energy Policy and the Market for Coal. HMSO. Pounds 29.00
