FT  25 JAN 93 / International Company News: Chile proposes reform of capital
markets
CHILE will today send a draft bill to Congress aimed at implementing the
'deepest and most complete reform to the domestic capital markets' since the
early 1980s.
The reforms aim to widen the investment horizons of private pension funds
and insurance companies, which manage Dollars 15bn-worth of funds, almost 45
per cent of Chilean gross domestic product.
The legislation, which has been two years in the making, is long overdue.
Private pension funds, known as AFPs, are growing at Dollars 200m a month
and have often complained about the dearth of investment options in Chile.
Under the proposed legislation, AFPs will be allowed to diversify their
equity portfolios and invest in new instruments such as securitised bonds
and the closed-end Entrepreneurial Development Funds.
They will be allowed to invest in shares and corporate bonds abroad.
At present, their foreign investment is restricted to AAA rated bank debt
and gilt-edged securities.
Mr Alejandro Foxley, the Chilean finance minister, told a news conference
the reforms had become imperative because pension funds were accruing so
quickly. Government projections estimate AFPs will be handling domestic
savings worth 90 per cent of GDP by the turn of the century.
Mr Foxley expects Congress will approve the capital market reforms within
two to three months.
Senior advisers to the finance ministry say US companies are particularly
interested in launching the securitisation business in Chile.
The reforms have called upon some elements of US trustee legislation in the
introduction revenue bonds for the finance of large infrastructure projects.
Under this scheme, the money raised by bond issuers is managed by a trustee
which disburses funds as the project develops.
The finance ministry sees revenue bonds as an important vehicle for
substituting foreign finance for big projects. Endesa, the biggest
privatised utility in Chile, is said to be planning a Dollars 70m issue to
help finance its Dollars 450m Pangue hydroelectric dam.
Insurance companies will be allowed to invest up to 15 per cent of their
funds in foreign equity and bonds and in the derivatives markets at home and
abroad.
