FT  02 JAN 93 / Truckers wary of their new freedom
MR John McCann's 38-tonne refrigerated truck was one of two dozen commercial
vehicles on board the Pride of Kent, the first ferry to dock at Dover after
the removal of border controls at midnight on December 31.
He had hoped for an earlier arrival in Britain but when he made his usual
two-hour detour to Steenvoorde on the Belgian border to pick up his
documents, the clearing agents had jumped the gun on the single market and
had stopped issuing them. They advised him to wait for the first boat
arriving after midnight, when the papers would no longer be necessary.
Agents are private companies that prepare export and import documents for
customs. For years Mr McCann went to Steenvoorde because clearing agents
there were open at more convenient times than those in Calais.
Creation of the single market means most of the 55m customs documents for
trade within the European Community will no longer be needed.
Mr McCann, a driver for 20 years, said the removal of routine customs checks
at borders would be a 'big improvement' although he was unsure whether there
would still be controls on food health certificates. (Customs said later any
checks would be carried out on factory premises).
However, uncertainty abounds about the impact of the changes.
Mr Kenneth Ross-Steven, whose cargo of Dutch chicken livers was the last
truckload to pass through Dover under the pre-single market system of
controls, clutched a wad of documentation. He is concerned about any easing
of health controls and the pace of change. 'We were just getting used to the
old system where we knew what we were doing.'
Another of his fears is that customs posts elsewhere in Europe will not be
prepared to clear drivers without the traditional documentation. And with
many clearing agents around Europe going out of business advice may be
difficult to get if problems arise.
British Customs and Excise officers, however, are convinced of the benefits.
Mr Derek Leach, in charge of VAT, excise and duty collection on freight
traffic, said customs officers in Dover handled about 2.5m import and export
documents a year. These would be reduced to about 300,000 documents, mainly
covering non-EC shipments, he estimated. Checks for smuggling will be
carried out only on suspicious vehicles.
This has led to the loss of 550 customs jobs at Dover, Ramsgate, Folkestone
and Sheerness, although most staff have been transferred to other jobs or
will move to the Channel tunnel when it opens.
But even the removal of most customs controls will not mean drivers have a
completely free run. The immigration department has taken over some of the
space occupied by customs. And controls on drivers' hours remain; Mr
Ross-Steven had to wait 11 hours in Dover yesterday because of EC tachograph
rules.
