FT  24 MAR 93 / Survey of Czech Republic (1): Ready to go it alone - After
the 'velvet divorce' from Slovakia, the new republic is preparing to reform
its economy, restructure its industry and modernise its infrastructure.
Anthony Robinson explains how the 10.3m people are coping with the
tumultuous changes
THE CZECHS were always the most westerly of the Slav nations of Europe but
for nearly 50 years their incorporation into the Soviet empire turned them
reluctantly towards the east. The collapse of communism and the divorce from
Slovakia on January 1 have unshackled their drive to integrate into the
hitherto exclusively western European Community as soon as possible.
Czech and Slovak negotiators managed to dissolve the Czechoslovak federal
state in an orderly, peaceful fashion without the violent ethnic conflicts
which have accompanied the collapse of Yugoslavia. But the speed with which
the former common currency split, and their formerly integrated economies
started to diverge after the divorce, bears witness to the strength of the
forces now likely to widen their differences after 74 years of cohabitation.
Without Czech subsidies and free access to the Czech market, Slovakia faces
a period of economic and political stress which will require sympathetic
handling not only by Prague but also by western governments, including the
US. At least, that is the message which senior Czech politicians left with
the Clinton administration during a recent visit to Washington.
Many among the 10.3m Czechs in the new republic admit to a sense of relief
that they are no longer responsible for what happens in Slovakia. But this
is tinged with concern that Prague, along with ethnic minorities such as
Hungarians and gypsies, may be among the scapegoats who will be blamed if
independence does not bring the promised prosperity to independent Slovakia.
Those Slovaks who opposed the nationalist fervour whipped up before last
June's elections and wanted to keep a modified federal relationship with
Prague are now being joined by others who feel resentful that, in the words
of a senior Slovak diplomat, 'Slovakia has been dumped by the Czechs'.
In the short run, the diminution in trade between the two republics will act
as a drag on growth in both republics, rather as the collapse of Comecon and
the Warsaw Pact deepened the recession which accompanied the shift to
market-orientated reforms throughout central Europe.
The expectation in Prague, however, is that the increasingly privatised
Czech economy will respond by building up already growing markets in the
European Community, especially Germany, which surrounds the Czech Republic
on two flanks, and with Austria. Such re-orientation will be much more
difficult for Slovakia which is saddled with a less flexible industrial
base.
Even before the split the Czech Republic attracted around 90 per cent of the
foreign investment flowing into the old federation. The republic's medieval
and baroque cities, ski resorts and spas also earned the lion's share of
tourist revenue, a crucial factor keeping the Czech balance of payments in
the black.
Last year the Czech Republic earned Dollars 1.2bn officially from tourism
and at least another Dollars 500m in unrecorded tourist payments. This was
roughly equivalent to the foreign capital inflow, although total foreign
investment, including the transfer of plant and equipment, was considerably
higher.
German companies, in particular, attracted by a skilled labour force at
around 10 per cent of German wage rates, have been closing their German
plants and transporting equipment together with a handful of key personnel,
to new sites in the Czech republic, mainly just across the border in
Bohemia, the most westerly part of the country.
Stripped to essentials, the combination of low wages and high skills is the
main Czech draw card. But wages rose 22 per cent between the first and third
quarters of 1992, according to labour ministry figures, reflecting the
rising demand, especially for skilled workers, from foreign companies and
the fast growing private sector.
Foreign investors are often impressed by the skills, and willingness to
learn, of their Czech employees. But three waves of emigration, 50 years of
totalitarian rule and the attempted destruction of 'bourgeois' traditions by
successive communist governments have left their mark on the older
generation's willingness to accept responsibility and take decisions.
As elsewhere in the region, decades of communist party rule also reduced the
quality and effectiveness of local and state administration, a problem which
has been exacerbated by the loss of key personnel to the higher-paying
private sector.
The lack of an efficient administration has increased the burden on
ministers and a handful of senior officials. It has also contributed, for
example, to long delays in finalising some large foreign investment
privatisations, such as the planned investment by Siemens of Germany in the
Skoda-Pilsen engineering group, and the revised joint venture plans of
Mercedes-Benz for the Avia truck company.
Years of low investment, or at least low innovation, have also run down the
former Czech industrial power house and left a legacy of often run-down,
giant plants built to supply standardised products for Soviet-bloc markets
which can no longer pay for them. The country faces a massive programme of
industrial restructuring and infrastructure development, including crucial
areas for foreign investment, such as telecommunications and modernisation
of the banking system.
The centre-right coalition government headed by Mr Vaclav Klaus which
emerged after the elections is committed to retaining the historical role of
the Czech lands (Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia) as one of the most highly
industrialised areas of Europe. To ensure the rapid transformation of
industry towards new markets and products it has sponsored the most
extensive mass privatisation programme in central Europe and encouraged
foreign investment with new laws and institutions modelled on EC practice.
Modernisation involves high costs and complex issues. The communist-imposed
concentration on heavy industry, for example, has turned some of the oldest
industrial towns into ecological disaster areas. The worst pollution is to
be found among the string of industrial and mining towns in northern Bohemia
and Moravia fuelled by a chain of coal-burning power stations. Their
smokestacks continue to spew out poisons which have led to infant mortality
levels generally found in the third world, and to shortened life-spans. The
chemical-laden smoke has destroyed nearby forests and contributed to the
acid rain which has killed life in lakes as far away as Scandinavia.
Faced with this reality, the government has opted to complete a 2,000MW,
Soviet-designed nuclear power station at Temelin in southern Bohemia, the
construction of which was first ordered in 1977. It will be equipped with
fuel rods and safety equipment from Westinghouse of the US and will employ
western contractors to ensure the complex complies with the highest safety
standards when it comes on stream in the second half of the decade.
Once on stream the aim is to phase out the worst-polluting coal-fired
stations in the north and equip the remainder with expensive anti-pollution
scrubbers. But, like so many of the hard choices facing resource-starved
governments throughout the region, the nuclear option has been attacked by a
vociferous anti-nuclear lobby as another example of government arrogance,
while coal-miners facing closure of pits have joined steelworkers and others
facing unemployment in anti-government protests.
For all the problems facing the new state, however, few would return to the
stultifying atmosphere of the communist era, with its humiliating insistence
on outward conformity in exchange for a quiet life. Like millions of other
involuntary members of the Soviet empire, Czechs lived without perspective
or hope for change. Over the past three years stagnation has been replaced
by tumultuous change in all directions. Since January 1, Czechs have
regained the independence they first lost 370 years ago. They seem
determined to make a success of it.
