FT  20 OCT 93 / Lonrho power balance slips away from Rowland
MR TINY ROWLAND'S reign as the undisputed master of Lonrho came to an end
yesterday after the international group's board agreed to the appointment of
non-executive directors for the first time in 20 years.
In a meeting that lasted barely 20 minutes the 12-man board voted
unanimously to appoint its first non-executive directors nominated by Mr
Dieter Bock, the group's joint chief executive, Mr Peter Harper, a director
of the conglomerate Hanson, and Mr Stephen Walls, chairman of the food
group, Albert Fisher.
In a last-minute move, however, Mr Rowland succeeded in having two other
directors appointed: Sir John Leahy, former ambassador to South Africa as a
non-executive, and Mr Terence Wilkinson, managing director of Lonrho's South
African interests who has been with the group since 1973, as an executive.
Although the much-heralded boardroom showdown between Lonrho's charismatic
guiding force for 30 years, and Mr Bock, the steely German financier
appointed last year, ended bloodlessly, there was little doubt that the
balance of power had slipped decisively away from the company's 75-year-old
elder statesman.
The real negotiations had taken place the previous afternoon in private at
the company's Cheapside head office in the City of London where a deal was
struck that preserved the appearance of compromise.
Mr Rowland insisted that Mr Bock's nominees should be balanced by a further
two appointments. Mr Bock acquiesced, because he 'did not want to embroil
the company in an expensive public row', according to one of his advisers.
Mr Rowland has been opposed to non-executives - whom he once described as
'decorations on a Christmas tree' - since 1973 when the 'straight eight'
directors tried unsuccessfully to remove him. Mr Rowland succeeded 12 days
ago in delaying the appointments of Mr Harper and Mr Walls.
Mr Bock believes, according to the adviser, that both Sir John and Mr
Wilkinson will act as impartial directors. Colleagues of Sir John and Mr
Wilkinson said yesterday that they were 'individualists'.
Mr Bock, who acquired 18.8 per cent of Lonrho's shares at the start of the
year and then became joint chief executive, is therefore convinced that the
balance on the board, which now has 16 members, has been tipped in his
favour, because he believes he already has the backing of several
executives.
Lex, Page 20
