FT  13 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Finding security in an open market - The
export drive at Kenrick &amp; Jefferson
VISITORS penetrating the West Bromwich fortress which is the headquarters of
Kenrick &amp; Jefferson do not just sign a book to acknowledge their presence.
They sign a declaration of security and secrecy.
They will make no disclosure about customers' orders they might see being
processed, or, indeed, about the plant's technology or the general strategy
of the company.
If this seems at odds with the greater openness associated with the European
single market, it is simply because the kernel of the Kenrick business is
security print and systems.
Kenrick is pitting its skill against the counterfeiter, adding special inks,
holograms, magnetic stripes and so on to the special papers used in items
like building society pass books, passports and labelling packages for the
freight business.
The company is interested in any security printing, short of currency
production.
But the privately-owned company is also pitting its skill against European
competitors. Executives acknowledge that it has drawn some benefits from the
moves towards a single European market. Mr Stephen Adams, director of
Kenrick's security print and systems division, listed three.
There is a spin-off from the development of common standards, documentation
 -'the physical things in shipping goods' - is easier and the more open
trading procedures which 'allowed us to compete on a flatter playing field'.
The trading procedures which interest Kenrick are the tendering regulations
for public sector contracts. It was a public sector contract which took
Kenrick into the European market. It is public sector contracts which remain
crucial.
After Kenrick had supplied the British Post Office with a documentation
package for the start in 1986 of a new express mail service, it heard that
the French Post Office was interested in a similar product and won a
contract.
It then began to look for others and found them with the post offices of
Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland. It went into
Tahiti and Gabon on the back of the French contract. It has expanded into
Argentina, Cyprus and Russia, but it has not yet managed to do business with
the Bundespost in Germany.
'We are competing mainly now on open tender,' said Mr Adams, but, he added
with a nod towards twisting the terms of tender to the company's advantage,
'if we can encourage a particular specification, we will.'
Security print and systems account for about Pounds 10m, or a third of
turnover and of that 40 per cent comes from direct and indirect exports.
Such exports go beyond labelling packages for express mail systems
including, for example, the printing of passports for east European
countries, citizens of which are adjusting to new travel freedom.
But maintaining a steady growth in the overseas market became more hazardous
immediately sterling left the exchange rate mechanism and devalued. Dealing
with a fluctuating currency, coming to terms with a new instability, is of
more immediate importance to the company than the moves to the European
single market.
'It is difficult to quote prices. We now have to look at each case
carefully,' said Mr Adams, noting that quotations were made in the currency
of the customer.
Kenrick has been forced to revert to the practice it adopted before sterling
joined the exchange rate mechanism. It is covering its currency exposure by
taking forward contracts on the foreign exchange markets. 'So we know at the
outset what we are going to get.'
The devaluation gave the company a competitive edge, but said Mr Adams,
'customers are saying they want some benefits of that devaluation.' They are
wanting price cuts giving them a slice of the extra margin Kenrick might
have obtained.
At the same time devaluation 'will make raw materials more expensive. It
hasn't done yet. But it will,' asserted Mr Adams.
He gave as an example the specialised papers the company uses, which might
be based on Portuguese pulp with a special coating provided in Italy or
Belgium. In addition the cost of plastics, which cover Kenrick labelling
packages, is linked to the price of oil, which, in turn, is quoted in
dollars.
