FT  29 NOV 93 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 29 NOVEMBER
Hosokawa rides high
Debate on the government's plans to reform Japan's scandal-prone electoral
system begins in the upper house of parliament, having passed the lower
house on November 18. The position of prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa
(above) has been strengthened by an opinion poll last week which gave his
cabinet a 73.5 per cent approval rating.
Milk shake-up: The UK government's consultation period on plans for
liberalising the milk market ends, when minister of agriculture Gillian
Shephard must weigh up
proposals by the Milk Marketing Board to turn itself into a voluntary
farmers' co-operative called Milk Marque. The plan has been attacked by
dairy
companies which think it will restrict competition and mean higher prices
for consumers.
Today is also the start of the Smithfield agricultural show at London's
Earls Court exhibition centre.
Gatt delegations from the 116 nations engaged in the Uruguay round in Geneva
begin 'evaluation' of all market access offers for goods and services on the
table.
Loans to Iraq: Christopher Drogoul, former Atlanta branch manager for Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro, faces sentencing in Atlanta on 70 counts of
conspiracy, mail fraud and wire fraud in connection with the bank's illegal
loans to Iraq.
Russia's first deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar meets mineworkers' leaders
to try to negotiate a solution to a strike threat from Wednesday.
Moldova, a former republic of the Soviet Union, is slated to introduce its
own currency, the Leu.
Feruzzi Finanziaria, the holding company for Italy's second largest private
company, and Montedison, its main industrial subsidiary, are due to hold
board meetings in advance of Tuesday and Wednesday's shareholders' meetings
in order to assess banks' response to the group's ambitious multibillion
lira rescue plan - one of the biggest corporate restructurings Europe has
seen.
Rousseau to go: Tonight Christie's in London auctions the most important
painting by the eccentric French post-Impressionist artist Henri Rousseau to
appear at auction in 20 years. It is a portrait of the dealer Joseph Brummer
and is estimated at Pounds 2m.
TUESDAY 30 NOVEMBER
Mr Clarke gives his Budget
In the UK Budget, attention will be focused on how Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, rises to the challenge of reducing the projected Pounds 50bn
public sector deficit. He has indicated that he intends to stimulate
industry and that tax rises will be targeted at consumers rather than
business.
CSCE meeting: Foreign ministers from the 52 states of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) meet in Rome to review
peace-keeping efforts and the monitoring of actual and potential conflicts
from Bosnia to Tajikistan. High on the agenda will be a discussion of
Moscow's attempt to gain western moral and financial backing for Russia's
controversial 'peace-keeping' operations beyond its southern borders.
Franco-German summit: The regular twice-yearly Franco-German talks take
place in Bonn (to Dec 1). French president Francois Mitterrand and Helmut
Kohl, the German chancellor (pictured below), are expected to discuss Gatt,
the next European summit and the outlook for the EU after Maastricht. Also
present will be French prime minister Edouard Balladur, various of his
ministers, and their German counterparts.
Glaxo, The largest pharmaceuticals group in Europe, and the world's biggest
spender on drugs R&amp;D, is to brief analysts on details of its drugs under
development. The company will reveal for the first time since December 1991
how it has been spending its R&amp;D budget, some Dollars 1.15bn this year.
Details of the group's products and international operations will also be
given.
Feruzzi Finanziaria holds an extraordinary general meeting to discuss the
the L2,932bn (Dollars 1.7bn) recapitalisation and creditors' debt-for-equity
conversion swap.
How low can they go? The first UK Costco store opens at Thurrock, Essex. The
US warehouse club operator is bound to intensify the price war among food
retailers.
WEDNESDAY 7 DECEMBER
UN sanctions against Libya
Further UN sanctions against Libya are due to take effect after a grace
period. They come in the face of the continued failure of Tripoli to hand
over the two agents suspected of planting the bomb that destroyed a Pan-Am
jumbo jet over the Scottish town of Lockerbie in 1988.
Libyan assets abroad will be frozen, with the exception of those which come
from the sale of oil, gas and farm produce. There will be an embargo on
Libyan imports of technology, with the exception of spare parts for the oil
and gas industry. The US and UK had called for tougher measures; their
mildness is due to the insistence of continental European countries.
United Airlines dispute:
The large US carrier is due to resume talks with unions representing its
pilots and machinists. The company's restructuring plan, intended to improve
profitability, involves staff lay-offs and a sale of assets which its unions
oppose. A fortnight ago, United rejected a union offer to acquire 60 per
cent of the company in return for staffing concessions.
Trade talks: Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, is expected to
begin critical talks in Brussels with Leon Brittan, EU trade commissioner.
They are under mounting pressure to complete an agreement on cutting tariffs
on manufactured goods and farm products.
Agreement is an essential precondition for successful conclusion of the
Uruguay round by the December 15 deadline.
Russian coal miners in Vorkuta, the main coal mining area in the arctic
circle, are threatening to strike and could be supported by miners in
Siberia. The political implications of the strike could be as important as
their industrial consequences. The miners played a vital role in bringing
down the Communists in 1989. A strike against President Boris Yeltsin's
reform programme could deal it a heavy blow.
Montedison holds an extraordinary shareholders' meeting to discuss the
L5,170bn (Dollars 3bn) recapitalisation and creditors' debt-for-equity
conversion swap.
Japan: The Bonen-kai (forget the year) season of corporate cocktail parties
begins and lasts all month. Proceedings are expected to be muted this year
in view of the recession, which saw the Nikkei decline 6.8 per cent last
week.
THURSDAY 2 DECEMBER
Bundesbank council meets
The policy-making body of the German central bank gathers for the
last-but-one session this year. Following last week's fall in inflation,
many market operators are expecting another 50 basis-point cut in the
official discount and Lombard rates.
Foreign ministers' slog: Nato foreign ministers, hot-foot from the CSCE
meeting in Rome, fly to Brussels for a meeting at Nato headquarters. In the
evening, 12 of them travel across town for an all-night European Union
session on the Gatt Uruguay Round world trade talks, which has been called
by France.
The French have said a 'pre-accord' between the EU and the US must be on the
table for examination at this meeting, otherwise the December 15 deadline
cannot be met.
On Friday, the 12 foreign ministers change hats again and return to Nato
headquarters for a meeting with foreign ministers from eastern Europe and
the former Soviet Union.
Spanish labour unrest: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez is due to meet union
leaders and employers' representatives in a bid to ease mounting industrial
tension and avert a possible one-day general strike. Unions object to the
government's plans to reduce dismissal costs and remove rigidities from
domestic labour legislation.
Royal Doulton: Shares in the fine-china manufacturer which is being demerged
from Pearson, the media conglomerate and owner of the Financial Times, are
expected to begin trading at between 180p and 250p. Pearson's existing
shareholders are being offered one Royal Doulton share for every 10 held in
the media parent.
In the saleroom: The veteran car Genevieve, a four-seater 12hp Darracq, made
famous in the 1953 film of the same name, is to be auctioned by Brooks of
London. The price may top Pounds 300,000.
FT Traveller, Zurich: A guide to the Swiss financial capital.
FRIDAY 3 DECEMBER
Ulster peace initiative
UK prime minister John Major and Ireland's premier Albert Reynolds are
scheduled to hold a summit in Dublin, intended to add momentum to the latest
peace effort in Northern Ireland.
However, it is uncertain whether the meeting will take place as planned or
be postponed.
Gatt: Negotiators in Geneva will debate the US-EU market access package
which they hope will have been unveiled in Brussels two days earlier. A full
assessment of the impact of the round on developing countries should also be
tabled.
Japanese economy: The world's second biggest economy is struggling with its
worst recession for 20 years. Today, the OECD releases an economic report on
Japan and the FT publishes a survey of Japanese Industry.
WEEKEND 4-5 DECEMBER
Electors of Brandenburg
Sunday's local government elections in this eastern German state should
indicate how far voters are disillusioned with mainstream political parties
ahead of next year's 19 polls.
Jacques Delors, EU president, will try at a special meeting of finance
ministers on Sunday to get his plan for tackling unemployment adopted.
Venezuelan elections: Opinion polls show 77-year-old former president,
Rafael Caldera, ahead of 17 rivals in the presidential contest on Sunday.
There are also congressional and 22 state elections.
Speakeasy: From Saturday, the UK's BT telephone company is cutting the price
of calls anywhere in the country to 10p for 3 minutes.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
