FT  22 OCT 93 / Logic was no match for foreign policy: How Pounds 234m of
public money was committed to Malaysia
AS MALAYSIANS face power blackouts and a mounting crisis over the supply of
power in the decade ahead, there will be questions over whether the Pergau
hydro-power project being built by Britain's Balfour Beatty is a blight
rather than a blessing.
A damning report from the National Audit Office, released yesterday, says
the project in peninsular Malaysia's eastern state of Kelantan 'would result
in Malaysian consumers paying over Pounds 100m more for electricity over its
35-year life than if the money were invested in an alternative'.
Nor will the British taxpayer be spared: Pounds 234m in aid is to be spent
on the project. The public-spending watchdog says in its report: 'Even if
costs were discounted to their present values, the chosen method of
implementation would cost the UK Pounds 56m more than it might otherwise
have done.' It adds that under the most economical option, aid funds of only
Pounds 108m would have been paid.
Amid sweeping criticism of ministers - including Mr Douglas Hurd, the
foreign secretary - for approving the project in spite of repeated advice
that it was uneconomical, the report illustrates how 'big' projects in
sectors such as power, telecommunications and defence technology have more
to do with foreign policy strategies than with commercial logic.
It says the government went ahead in spite of contrary commercial advice
because 'failure to support the project would have serious consequences for
British relations with the government of Malaysia'.
It also shows how the contractor - in this case a Malaysian associate of
Balfour Beatty - may in the end be the sole beneficiary. The project,
involving the largest cash sum ever provided by the UK government for one
scheme, will for most of the remainder of this century gobble up more than
one fifth of the UK's Pounds 117m budget for aiding British exporters in
contracts in the developing world.
Balfour Beatty first proposed a hydro-power project on the Pergau river in
1988, shortly after Mrs Margaret Thatcher, then prime minister, visited
Malaysia. It ended a difficult decade in which Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
Malaysia's prime minister, had enforced a 'Buy British Last' policy.
The initial Balfour Beatty proposal, provisionally estimated at between
Pounds 200m and Pounds 300m, followed a World Bank report concluding that
Malaysia should concentrate on gas-fired electricity generation.
By January 1989, when Balfour Beatty presented a formal contract proposal,
the estimated cost had risen to Pounds 317m. Even at this early stage, the
Overseas Development Administration, which is responsible for managing
Britain's aid policy, said that the project 'presented major problems in
terms of size, price and timing'.
By February 1990, after several further appraisals, and a rise in the
proposed contract price to Pounds 397m, the development body concluded:
'Pergau would be a very bad buy and a burden on Malaysian consumers.' It
proposed delaying the project for nine years after a study of the Malaysian
power sector concluded that Pergau would be uneconomic before 2005.
The body's accounting officer said in a memorandum to the Treasury that his
responsibility to ensure aid funds were 'administered in a prudent and
economical manner' was not consistent with supporting Pergau.
Nevertheless, in July 1991 Mr Hurd instructed the accounting officer to
commit Pounds 234m against the aid programme for the project.
The accounting officer was equally disturbed by funding arrangements for the
project, the Audit Office report shows. Faced with three options - a simple
mixed credit; a combination of soft loans and mixed credit; and a full soft
loan - the government chose the third, in spite of the fact that over the
14-year life of the project this would cost taxpayers Pounds 56m more.
Mixed credit would have involved private bank funding, with the government
providing an up-front grant of about Pounds 70m in the peak year.
The soft loan will involve a five-year grace period on repayment, and
subsidised loan interest charges of less than 1 per cent. The report says
the latter option was chosen, in spite of its higher long-term cost, because
budgetary constraints barred it from committing such a large lump sum in one
financial year. The soft-loan option kept peak costs below Pounds 27m in any
one year.
Ironically, stricter international rules agreed last year on mixing aid with
commercial credits would have made the project ineligible for aid. Power
projects are seen as 'commercially viable' and should be funded
commercially.
