FT  01 DEC 93 / Budget 93: The Speech
Mr Deputy Speaker, a politician presenting his first Budget is like a
lion-tamer trying out his act for the first time. I have decided to tackle
the difficulties I face in a direct way, on the basis of the clear policy
objectives I set myself when I became chancellor.
My first priority has been to sustain the economic recovery now underway and
to create the right climate for growth and jobs.
I have been determined to take no risks with inflation.
We have brought inflation down to the lowest level for a generation and low
inflation must now remain a permanent feature of the British economic
landscape.
To achieve these objectives, the task of my first Budget has been to set the
government's finances on a sustainable path for the rest of the decade. To
make the decisions necessary now to secure lasting recovery and rising
living standards in the future.
The Financial Statement and Budget Report, together with a number of press
releases filling out the details of our spending plans and my Budget tax
proposals, will be available from the Vote Office as soon as I have sat
down.
Economic situation and prospects
Mr Deputy Speaker, Britain's economic performance this year has been
encouraging.
It is now clear that the recovery started in the first half of 1992, well
before sterling's departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism. GDP has risen
for six successive quarters. And in 1993 as a whole, I now expect the
economy to grow by about 1 3/4 per cent.
Unemployment has fallen since the beginning of the year, at a much earlier
stage in the economic cycle than past experience would suggest.
And crucially, the recovery has been accompanied by continuing low
inflation. Underlying inflation has not been lower since 1968. And unit wage
costs in manufacturing have actually fallen this year, allowing British
industry to establish a durable improvement in competitiveness.
As a result, despite the weakness of activity in the other major European
countries, Britain's trading performance over the last year has been
excellent. Exports to countries outside the EU were up by no less than 14
per cent in the last three months compared with a year ago  - a sharp
increase in our market share. After the last three difficult years, that
performance convincingly demonstrates the strength of British manufacturing
today.
Continued growth in consumer spending, together with further increases in
exports and investment, should bring faster growth in 1994.
Economic forecasting is an unreliable art, to which far too much importance
has been attached in recent years. But on the best judgement I can make,
growth next year should be about 2 1/2 per cent.
With considerable spare capacity in the economy, inflationary pressures
remain subdued. The tax measures announced in March, and the further
measures I shall be announcing today, will push inflation up a little in the
next few months.
But this should not feed through into higher inflation over the medium term.
I expect underlying inflation to remain inside the government's 1 to 4 per
cent target range over the year ahead, and to decline steadily into the
lower half of that range by the end of this parliament. Monetary policy will
continue to be directed towards meeting that objective.
Monetary policy
As now, my decisions on interest rates will be based on a careful assessment
of monetary conditions and inflationary trends, focusing particularly upon
the growth of narrow and broad money, changes in the exchange rate and
movements in asset prices.
On the basis of these indicators, I felt able last week to reduce interest
rates to 5 1/2 per cent, the lowest level for 16 years. Since 1990,
industry's interest bill has been slashed by nearly Pounds 12bn a year, and
the typical mortgage borrower is paying Pounds 170 less each month.
That is a massive boost to spending power, fully justified by the remarkable
progress we have made on inflation.
Starting with last week's change, I decided to give the Bank of England
responsibility for the precise timing of interest rate movements. This
underlines my commitment to the new framework for monetary policy
established by my predecessor last September.
Funding policy
Mr Deputy Speaker, the increasing credibility of that framework has brought
our long-term interest rates down to their lowest level for over 25 years.
That fact also demonstrates the ease with which this year's borrowing
requirement has been financed. But the very success of the funding
programme, coupled with last year's substantial gilt sales to banks and
building societies, has squeezed the liquidity of the banking system,
complicating the task of managing the money markets.
To offset the purchases made by banks and building societies last year, I
intend to sell some Pounds 7bn fewer gilts than would otherwise be necessary
to fund the public sector borrowing requirement through to the end of
1994-95.
Using this flexibility in our established funding policy will ease money
market pressures, while continuing to ensure that borrowing is financed in a
non-inflationary way.
World economic developments
As we look towards 1994 the prospects are encouraging.
But two substantial risks remain.
First, the continuing weakness of world economic activity, particularly in
continental Europe.
With Britain the only major country in the European Union likely to have
grown at all in 1993, what manufacturing industry needs most is a pick-up of
activity in the rest of Europe.
But economic recovery on the continent will not be enough on its own.
Europe's economic problems are not just cyclical. The continent as a whole
faces a number of deep-rooted and long-standing challenges - inflexible
markets and declining competitiveness, which have combined to produce
mounting structural unemployment.
There were more jobs created in Britain in the 1980s than anywhere else in
Europe. And in the period ahead, we must not only fight to export our goods
and services, but also to win the battle of ideas in Europe. We must
continue to work for more flexible and deregulated labour markets across the
continent. And we must continue to fight for free trade, not just within the
European Union, but between the Union and the rest of the world. The first
essential step is to secure a satisfactory conclusion to the Gatt round.
The public finances
The second major risk to the recovery in Britain is the public finances. The
overriding need is to place the public finances on a sound footing. That is
the immediate task of the government and the main theme of my Budget today.
Business can plan ahead with confidence only if it knows that government
borrowing is under control. My task today is to deliver that confidence.
In his excellent Budget in March, my Rt Hon Friend the member for Kingston
announced a series of tax measures designed to reduce public sector
borrowing over the medium term.
But necessary and controversial as those measures were, they still left the
prospect of a borrowing requirement of over 4 per cent of GDP by the end of
this parliament.
In my judgment, we now need to go further. The first Budget that combines
decisions on taxation and spending, a reform instituted by my Rt Hon Friend,
gives me the opportunity to do so.
As a prudent government, we cannot sit by, simply hoping that faster growth
and forecasting changes will come to our rescue.
As a government committed to high quality public services, we must prevent
ever larger sums being swallowed up in debt interest payments.
As a government with a long-term tax-cutting agenda, we must stop ever more
national debt piling up for future generations to pay.
And as a government determined to deliver sustained recovery, we must ensure
that billions of pounds of the nation's savings are not poured into the
public sector - savings that are better used by the private sector, to
support investment, expansion and jobs.
It might seem easier to take the short-term view.
But Britain's recovery can only be sustained if we tackle the deficit now.
In my opinion, the Budget must sort out the problem of public borrowing once
and for all.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the measures I am announcing today will in themselves
reduce the public sector borrowing requirement by a further Pounds 5 1/2 bn
in the next financial year, by Pounds 7bn in 1995-96 and by Pounds 10 1/2 bn
in 1996-97, equivalent to 1 1/4 per cent of GDP by the end of this
parliament.
Coming on top of the measures announced by my Rt Hon Friend in March, these
are substantial sums. But in my judgment, this is the minimum necessary to
ensure that the public finances are on a sustainable track for the rest of
the decade. It will help to reduce the public sector borrowing requirement
from just under Pounds 50bn in the current year to about Pounds 38bn next
year. It should eliminate borrowing to finance current spending by 1997-98
and eliminate government borrowing entirely by the end of the decade.
In short, Mr Deputy Speaker, my proposals today should meet their objectives
in full - establishing sound public finances into the next century.
VAT on fuel and power
Before I set out the government's new plans for public expenditure over the
next three years, I have one piece of business to conclude from the March
Budget.
My Rt Hon Friend's decision to extend VAT to domestic fuel and power was in
my view fully justified and I have no intention of asking parliament to
change the measure which it has already voted in favour of and put on the
statute book.
To reduce borrowing, we had to raise revenue. In a full year, VAT on
domestic fuel will raise nearly Pounds 3bn, without affecting the
job-creating sectors of the economy. It will also help to meet Britain's
commitment to aim to return carbon dioxide emissions to their 1990 levels by
the end of this decade.
But the government recognised from the outset that the poorest would need
extra help. I can now announce to the House our detailed proposals.
First, even before the extra help we intend to provide, all those on
income-related benefits will get a substantial increase next April under the
normal uprating rules. Benefits will rise by 3 1/2 per cent - a lot more
than many people in work will get next year.
But on top of that automatic increase, the government has decided to provide
further substantial help.
For poorer households other than pensioners and the disabled, we will
calculate the benefit increases that would be paid at the April 1995
uprating from VAT on fuel, and pay them a year early - this coming April.
This will ensure that extra help is available before the bills arrive.
In April 1995, we will adopt a similar approach, bringing forward the VAT
element in the benefit uprating once more.
And in April 1996, this extra payment will remain as a permanent addition to
benefit.
For poorer pensioners and disabled people on income-related benefits, we
intend to go further. Next April, we will give a special increase on top of
the normal uprating: 50 pence a week for single people and 70 pence a week
for couples. In April 1995, this will be doubled to Pounds 1 a week for
single people and Pounds 1.40 a week for couples, partly through the normal
uprating and partly through a further special increase. And by April 1996,
benefits will be Pounds 1.40 a week higher for single poorer pensioners and
Pounds 2 a week higher for couples than they would otherwise have been.
The immediate impact next April will be to give a pensioner couple on income
support a total increase in benefit of Pounds 4 per week.
Cold weather payments will also be increased, to help the most vulnerable
groups during periods of exceptionally cold weather. Next winter these
payments will go up from Pounds 6 to Pounds 7 a week; and there will be a
further increase to Pounds 7.50 a week from November 1995.
This, Mr Deputy Speaker, is a substantial package of help, which fully
discharges the promise we have made.
It will ensure that the introduction of VAT does not put the cost of fuel
beyond the reach of the poorest in our society.
That promise was, of course, restricted to people on means-tested benefits,
benefits which exist precisely in order to help those in the greatest need.
But, Mr Deputy Speaker, I do recognise that there is another group who have
struggled to cope over recent years and will also have difficulty in meeting
their higher fuel bills.
Many retired people on modest incomes have worked hard all their lives and
have been careful to put something aside each week. Often these savings mean
that they cannot claim benefit. Yet while millions of families and
businesses have benefited from falling interest rates over the last three
years, many of these people feel that they have lost out again. Falling
inflation helps to preserve the real value of their savings, but the
interest retired people receive on their savings has dropped very sharply.
The government has therefore decided to give extra help not just to those on
modest incomes, but to all pensioners.
We will do so in three ways.
First, my Rt Hon Friend the secretary of state for the environment has
decided to boost the Home Energy Efficiency Scheme by Pounds 35m a year over
the next three years. An equivalent extension will be made in Northern
Ireland. This will provide substantial financial assistance with home
insulation, helping people to reduce their fuel bills whilst staying warm.
By almost doubling the present provision, we will be able to extend
eligibility to all pensioners and all disabled people.
Second, I shall help savers and particularly those whose incomes are made
unpredictable by changes in interest rates. I intend to introduce a new
pensioner's guaranteed income bond which will combine a fixed rate of
interest, guaranteed for five years, with regular monthly interest payments.
Full details will be announced in the new year, but I can tell the House now
that the rate will be a competitive one. Pensioners will be able to invest
their savings, with complete security, and know exactly what income they
will be getting - month in, month out.
Third, and most significant, I intend to make a special addition to pensions
 -and to the benefits linked to them - over and above the normal uprating in
line with the retail prices index. Over the next two years I propose to give
to all pensioners exactly the same extra help with their fuel bills as those
pensioners on income-related benefits will be getting.
This extra help will build up over time. By April 1996, the weekly
retirement pension for a pensioner couple will be Pounds 1.85 a week higher
than it would otherwise have been without the VAT increase. A single
pensioner will receive Pounds 1.30 a week more.
The help I have outlined for pensioners will not precisely match increases
in fuel bills in each and every household.
But on average, pensioners are likely to find that, after taking account of
falling real fuel prices, the extra help they receive will broadly cover
changes in fuel bills, including VAT, over the course of this Parliament.
This is the first break since 1980 from our policy of uprating pensions
strictly by the retail prices index.
It must be regarded as wholly exceptional and it cannot be repeated whenever
a particular tax or price increase is opposed on the grounds that retired
people should not pay it.
In a very difficult year for public spending, this amounts to a huge package
of extra help. Fifteen million people will benefit. We shall be providing
around Pounds 400m of extra help next year, and around Pounds 1 1/4 bn extra
in the year 1996-97. These massive sums more than deliver the government's
firm commitment to help the less well-off groups in society.
They extend that significant help to all our pensioners.
I am sure they will be welcomed by everyone who wants to see revenue raised
in a sensible and fair way.
Public spending
Mr Deputy Speaker, let me now turn to the government's new spending plans
for the rest of this parliament.
In June, the cabinet imposed tight ceilings on public spending over the next
three years - a real terms freeze in the new control total over the next two
years, with growth limited to 1 per cent a year thereafter. In my view,
nothing tougher has been attempted since this government came to power in
1979.
Anyone who has actually run one or more of the big departments of state
knows how unacceptable it would be to contemplate cuts in the health
service, in our education system, or in the resources needed to improve law
and order.
In a modern and civilised society no one can regard all public spending as a
bad thing.
Of course, more spending is not the only way to improve our public services.
Quality public services also depend crucially on greater efficiency, better
value for money, and where sensible, on the involvement of private sector
money, management and advice.
Earlier this year, my Rt Hon Friend the chief secretary launched a series of
fundamental public expenditure reviews to establish more clearly what the
government's spending priorities should be. Already this programme is
producing dividends. The first four reviews have played a key role in this
year's public expenditure survey.
I can now announce to the House that overall, even including the package of
help with fuel bills, the government's new spending plans are fully
consistent with the tough limits agreed by the cabinet in June.
For the next three years, total government expenditure will grow by
substantially less than the projected growth of the economy. Public spending
will therefore fall as a proportion of national income, from around 45 per
cent this year to 42 1/2 per cent in 1996-97.
To achieve this, we have started with a rigorous approach to the
government's administrative costs. Central government running costs,
including paybills, will be frozen at this year's cash level. Pay increases
for public sector staff will therefore have to be paid for by greater
efficiency or savings in the cost of running government.
But, Mr Deputy Speaker, we have also had to conduct a searching examination
of spending on government programmes. That examination began with the
largest spending programme of all, social security.
Social security
Social security spending is increasing at an underlying rate of more than 3
per cent a year in real terms, well above the sustainable growth rate of the
economy as a whole. If this trend continues it will place a quite impossible
burden on the working population in the future - our children and our
children's children.
If we do not plan the social security programme properly, we shall be unable
to give effective help to those who need it most.
A good social security system - under which the better off and people in
work pay to support the poor and the disadvantaged - is an essential feature
of a modern civilised state.
In reviewing the social security budget, the government's objectives have
been to ensure that the social security system is better targeted on today's
real needs and to make it simpler and less susceptible to fraud.
Job seeker's allowance
Let me start, Mr Deputy Speaker, with two proposals designed to help people
back into work. The present convoluted system for supporting the unemployed
includes two entirely separate benefits - income support and unemployment
benefit - and two quite separate bureaucracies for delivering them - the
Employment Service and the Benefits Agency, employing between them no fewer
than 44,000 civil servants to do the job.
We intend to cut through this bureaucratic maze by introducing, from April
1996, a single benefit for the unemployed - the job seeker's allowance. This
will align rates and rules and reduce the contributory element of the
benefit from 12 to 6 months. But it will also build on the success of the
Restart programme introduced in the 1980s, by drawing a much closer link
between the receipt of benefit and the claimant's demonstrated willingness
to look for work. And it will be reinforced by a strengthening of Restart
itself; by an extension of community action places; and by the introduction
of pilot schemes offering intensive guidance, assessment and a financial
incentive to long-term unemployed people who need it most.
Family credit
Our second proposal should have a more immediate impact.
The House will be aware of the rising level of concern about the causes,
consequences and costs of the growth of lone parenthood in this country.
There are many lone parents - and married mothers as well - who have no
desire to remain trapped in poverty or dependent on benefits, but who
believe that they have no choice. As a result of the cost of childcare, they
simply cannot afford to go out to work.
That cannot be right. The government has therefore decided to introduce next
autumn a new allowance available to all those on family credit who need to
pay for childcare.
This will be worth up to Pounds 28 each week per family and it should help
tens of thousands of mothers to get back into work and off income support. I
am sure it will be warmly welcomed by all those who want to see the poorest
parents back on the road to financial independence.
I turn next to statutory sick pay.
At the moment, employees who go sick and meet the qualifying conditions are
entitled to receive sick pay at specified rates. After the first three days
of sickness, their employers are entitled to reimbursement from the
government for 80 per cent of the cost.
We have no plans to reduce the sick pay entitlements of employees. But, with
effect from next April, we propose to stop reimbursing the cost of statutory
sick pay for the largest employers.
For smaller companies, the current special exemptions will be extended. At
present, those with national insurance bills of less than Pounds 16,000 a
year are fully reimbursed after the first six weeks of each statutory sick
pay claim. I propose to increase that threshold to Pounds 20,000, to bring
more companies into the scheme, and to provide full reimbursement after only
four weeks. Two thirds of all employers will therefore continue to get help.
Employers' national
insurance contributions
The transfer of these costs from the taxpayer to business will reduce public
spending by around Pounds 700m a year over the next three years. But to
ensure that business as a whole does not lose, my Rt Hon Friend and I have
decided to reduce the main rate of employers' national insurance
contributions by 0.2 per cent from next April. This means that for
well-managed companies with low sickness rates there will be a net reduction
in the cost of employing people. Other companies will have a much sharper
incentive to improve their management of sick leave and to take a greater
interest in the health of their employees.
But with unemployment in Britain still far too high, it is vital that we do
everything we can to reduce the cost of providing employment. Having
reviewed the position, I have therefore decided that, even in a year of
acute fiscal stringency, we can and should go further.
Long-term unemployed people are most likely to find unskilled and
semi-skilled work at the lower end of the pay scale. To improve companies'
incentives and ability to provide that kind of job, I propose, again from
next April, to reduce each of the lower rates of employers' national
insurance contributions by one full percentage point. Overall, the
reductions in national insurance contributions I have announced will reduce
the cost to employers of providing jobs by Pounds 830m next year, rising to
Pounds 1bn by 1996-97, well above the overall cost to employers of the
reform to statutory sick pay.
In our discussions within the European Union, my Rt Hon Friend the prime
minister and I have repeatedly made clear our view that the surest route to
higher employment is not the dirigisme of the Social Chapter, but measures
to reduce the cost of creating jobs. This is the message we will be taking
with us to the European Council in Brussels next week. My Rt Hon Friend the
secretary of state for social security also plans a significant reform of
the current regime for invalidity benefit. For those who are disabled and
incapable of work, invalidity benefit is important and necessary. But the
astonishing growth in the numbers receiving the benefit in recent years
indicates that it is now being claimed by many people who are not genuine
invalids.
The government has decided to make a number of changes to the benefit, which
will refocus it for the future on those who are genuinely incapable of work.
My Rt Hon Friend proposes to introduce a new benefit  - incapacity benefit -
to replace sickness and invalidity benefit. The new benefit will involve a
tighter and more objective medical test.
The government has always made clear its intention to bring the tax
treatment of invalidity benefit into line with that of the retirement
pension and most other income-replacing benefits. Now that the necessary
administrative arrangements can be made, I propose from April 1995 to bring
its replacement, the new incapacity benefit, into tax.
State pension age
Finally, I can announce one further decision which will have little
immediate effect, but will make a considerable difference to the
affordability of the modern welfare state in the next century.
After careful consideration, the government has decided that the state
pension age should eventually be equalised at 65. The change will be phased
in over 10 years, starting in the year 2010, so it will not affect anyone
currently aged 44 or older. By the year 2020, the state pension age in
Britain will be broadly in line with that of most of our industrial
competitors, though we will still have more generous arrangements than in
the US, where the pension age is to be equalised at 67. All developed
countries are making similar changes for similar reasons. Women nowadays
tend to spend more of their lives in paid employment. They also live longer
than men. Pension schemes need to recognise this, and end the current
discrimination between the sexes.
In the next century the ratio of working people to retired people will fall
sharply and the burdens on taxpayers will rise. The government's decision
will moderate those burdens, eventually by some Pounds 5bn a year, and so
help to ensure that they are sustainable. The basic pension is, and will
remain, a cornerstone of the welfare state. The government is committed to
it and to retaining its value.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the proposals I have announced today will in themselves
save some Pounds 2 1/2 bn a year by 1996-97. Nevertheless, even taking these
savings into account, we will still be spending Pounds 5bn more on social
security in that year than we planned last year. The social security budget
will continue to grow in real terms, but at a more affordable rate than we
have seen in recent years.
At the same time, we have honoured our manifesto commitments, we have fully
protected the real value of pensions and benefits, and provided generous
help with fuel bills.
These are not short-term measures to deal with today's problems. This
government has the courage to take a clear and far-sighted view of the
modern social security system.
We must make sure that it is a system that future generations will be able
to afford. This government will never take part in any attempt to dismantle
the welfare state. We want to see a better welfare state, well-run,
well-judged and one that meets the priorities of modern society.
My Rt Hon Friend the secretary of state for social security will fill out
the details in his uprating statement tomorrow.
Mr Deputy Speaker, let me turn now to a number of other areas where savings
have been found this year.
Local authorities
First, local authorities. Growth in total standard spending in England,
adjusted for changes in responsibilities, will be limited to 2.3 per cent
next year. There will, in addition, be extra provision for community care.
The government will continue to use its powers to cap excessive spending by
local authorities where that is necessary to protect the local taxpayer.
Housing
Second, housing. Here too savings have been made on last year's plans.
Nevertheless, the new plans for social housing provide for more than 153,000
new homes over the three years to 1994-95, fully meeting our manifesto
commitment. In addition, the government will press ahead with plans to
improve value for money in the housing association sector and to introduce
more private finance into the development of social housing.
Transport
Third, transport. British Rail's and London Transport's investment
programmes will be maintained at levels substantially higher than in the
1980s.
But to make room for this continuing investment in public transport there
will be modest reductions in the previous planned provision for the roads
programme. In the past five years, real expenditure on roads has grown on
average by more than 10 per cent a year. With construction prices next year
more than 25 per cent lower than when the roads programme was announced in
1989, the new plans will sustain the recent improvements in our roads
network - at less cost to the taxpayer.
Defence
Finally, defence. In the next two years, spending will be some Pounds 250m
and Pounds 500m lower than previously planned. In 1996-97, it will be about
the same in cash terms as in the previous year.
The new plans will be delivered in part by lower procurement and employment
costs, and through the planned sale to a private sector housing trust of
married quarters for service personnel. In addition, my Rt Hon Friend the
defence secretary has set in hand a major review of all aspects of support,
right back to the headquarters in Whitehall. Savings can and will be made
without affecting our foreign policy commitments.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the new method of controlling the total of public
spending has brought big improvements in the system of cabinet government.
The cabinet decides its priorities collectively and brings to the House a
single package that reflects our key policy objectives. Savings identified
in a number of programmes have allowed the government to meet in full the
priorities and promises set out in our manifesto. I turn now to those
priorities.
Health
We are all proud of the contribution that the National Health Service makes
to the quality of life in this country. Even in a very tough year, we have
decided to increase once again the level of real resources going into the
health service. NHS spending will be over Pounds 1 1/2 bn higher next year
in cash terms and over 1 1/2 per cent higher in real terms than this year's
plans. Indeed, the programme is set to rise in real terms in each of the
next three years.
To ensure that these very substantial extra resources are translated into
more and better health care, my Rt Hon Friend the secretary of state for
health will be insisting on substantial increases in efficiency and firm
containment of pay and the drugs budget. The NHS will be able to maintain
the steady improvement of recent years in treating more patients, better.
Education
Second, education. Increased educational opportunities and better standards
are an essential investment in the future. Over the next two years, we will
therefore be adding more than Pounds 1bn to the plans for the education
programme. This will ensure record levels of participation in further and
higher education. Our manifesto predicted that one in three young people
would be in full-time higher education by the year 2000. With seven years to
go we have virtually reached that target already.
But with a third of our young people now going to university, the ordinary
taxpayer cannot be expected to pay for all their costs. Tuition is free; but
why should the bus driver or the pensioner also pay higher taxes to finance
the living costs of tomorrow's lawyers?
I am glad to say that the recent explosion in student numbers has revealed
as ridiculous the fears that the student loan scheme might deter students
from poorer families. My Rt Hon Friend will therefore be bringing forward
proposals to reduce the level of the means-tested grant for student
maintenance and replace it with an expanded loan entitlement for students.
Even taking this into account, spending on education will still be no less
than Pounds 1 1/2 bn higher in 1996-97 than this year.
Employment and training
Third, training. the secretary of state for employment plans to introduce a
new apprenticeship scheme. This will provide a significant boost to
work-based training and increase substantially the number of young people
obtaining the technical and craft skills which the economy has been lacking,
as both employers and trades unions agree. There will also be an increase in
training opportunities for the adult unemployed.
Science
Fourth, science. The plans fully protect the real value of spending on basic
science and technology next year.
Finally, the vital area of criminal justice. Previous plans for home office
spending will be maintained in full. Next year, spending on the police
service will increase by more than 4 per cent. And, over time, the
management reforms and reduction in paperwork announced by my Rt Hon and
Learned Friend the home secretary, could put over 5,000 more police officers
on front-line duty. A re-ordering of priorities will also allow for extra
provision to be made for more prison places and for victim support.
Efficiency improvements will meet in full the costs of new policies,
including our proposals to deal with juvenile offenders.
Mr Deputy Speaker, spending on health, education, training and science
contributes significantly to the long-term economic performance of the
economy, by improving the nation's stock of human capital - the health,
knowledge and skills of the population as a whole.
Important as it is, this contribution is very difficult to quantify. This
year, however, as promised last autumn, the public sector accounts will
identify separately the amount the government plans to spend on physical
capital projects, including improvements in the nation's infrastructure.
Overall, the new plans provide for total public sector capital spending over
the next three years of about Pounds 22bn a year. But just as that figure
takes no account of the massive investment programmes of the former
nationalised industries which are now thriving in the private sector, so too
it ignores the very large amount of investment which is stimulated by
government policies, including investment in housing and urban regeneration.
On top of this, the private finance initiative is adding to spending in
areas for which the public sector has traditionally taken responsibility.
To make a success of this initiative - and to deliver the increase in
capital spending within the public services that I want to see - will
require a complete change of culture within government, together with
imagination and innovation on the part of the private sector. This cannot be
expected to happen overnight. Even so, the flow of private finance projects
to date has still, in my view, been disappointingly small.
To speed the process up, I have already announced the establishment of a
working group chaired by Sir Alastair Morton, who I am sure can be expected
to work alongside me as a veritable warrior in this cause. In the meantime
the government is today giving the go-ahead to three substantial new
transport projects.
First, the extension of the Docklands Light Railway to Lewisham. Second, a
new air traffic control centre for Scotland. Third, the refurbishment of the
west coast main line, one of our most important routes, linking some of the
biggest cities in the country - London, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool
and Glasgow.
The private finance initiative also offers great opportunities for improved
services in the NHS. There are almost 40 NHS projects where private finance
is already involved or being considered, ranging from cardiac units to
hospital car parks.
At Aintree, in Liverpool, a scheme involving the construction of a 100-bed
patient hotel, four operating theatres and other facilities is going ahead -
a model for other private finance projects.
In addition, my Rt Hon and Learned Friend the home secretary will be taking
forward proposals to finance and build six new prisons using private
finance. He has already announced that he also intends to involve the
private sector in the provision of secure training centres.
Finally, I have always made clear my view that roads provide a big
opportunity for private finance. My Rt Hon Friend the secretary of state for
transport will be informing the House shortly about the government's plans
for taking forward motorway charging in the light of responses to his Green
Paper. But I can announce today that when the technology is ready, we intend
to introduce a system of electronic motorway charging in this country. This
will be a massive high-technology project in its own right. In the meantime,
the government plans to introduce new contracts under which the private
sector will design, build, finance and operate roads. My Rt Hon Friend will
hold discussions with the construction industry and others to identify the
best road schemes to start with. Bringing private finance and management
into the roads programme offers the prospect of substantial benefits for the
construction industry, the motorist and the taxpayer alike. I am sure this
will be warmly welcomed.
I have one other announcement to make to improve the way the taxpayer's
money and public sector capital is used and accounted for.
Government accounting for public spending has become archaic. In my view,
the time has come to move to a system of accounting which identifies more
clearly the cost of resources. This will put departments onto a similar
accounting basis to commercial organisations and many other parts of the
public sector. I shall be publishing a paper in the first half of next year
on the introduction of accruals-based resource accounting by departments,
and its implications for the way expenditure is planned and controlled and
money is sought from Parliament.
Public spending summary
Mr Deputy Speaker, the new spending plans reflect the carefully chosen
priorities of an enlightened and responsible government.
We have taken strong measures to keep public sector pay and administration
costs under tight control.
We have taken a number of crucial steps to restrain the growth in social
security spending, while fully meeting our commitments to the poorest
members of society.
We have increased resources to support the government's priorities,
particularly health, education and training and science.
We have protected spending on law and order.
We have injected new momentum into the private finance initiative.
And we have honoured all our manifesto commitments.
But most important of all, we have managed this substantial re-allocation of
resources without breaching the spending ceilings agreed by cabinet last
June.
This significant achievement owes a great deal to the new arrangements for
the public expenditure survey introduced last year by my Rt Hon Friend, the
member for Kingston. But a great deal of credit is also due to my colleagues
on the cabinet's EDX committee, and particularly to my Rt Hon Friend the
chief secretary, to whose skill and tenacity I should like to pay the
warmest possible tribute.
Taxation
Mr Deputy Speaker, I now turn to my proposals for taxation. My task is
simple. I need to raise revenue, but to do so in a way which does least
damage to the economy. At a time when taxes are having to go up, it is
particularly important to collect all the tax which is properly due. So let
me begin with my proposals to counter tax avoidance.
Suggesting that Budgets should close tax loopholes is stating the obvious.
Every Budget over the past 14 years has closed tax loopholes. This is not a
big new idea. The tax avoidance industry is always ingenious, but it is one
industry which this government has never helped.
My Budget today contains a particularly good crop of new proposals to combat
tax avoidance, starting with an end to the ploy under which salaries are
paid in gold bars, coffee beans, cowrie shells, or other exotic payments in
kind, simply to avoid national insurance contributions and delay paying tax.
I also intend to counter the abuse of the tax relief for profit related pay;
tackle the avoidance of stamp duty on property transactions; halt the use of
shell companies to avoid payment of tax; and end the use of indexation to
create or increase capital gains tax losses.
These measures will yield about Pounds 2bn in the next three years. Claims
that more might be found in this way are, I regret to say, much exaggerated.
Next, I propose to broaden the tax base. I have never disguised my personal
view that the coverage of Value Added Tax in this country is too narrow.
Under the EC's Sixth VAT Directive there are serious limits on the
Government's ability to extend it to things which are exempt. But we do have
the freedom to introduce separate taxes, and that is what other European
countries do. I propose to follow their example - in two particular areas,
which I believe are well-suited to this country.
Air passenger duty
First, air travel is under-taxed compared to other sectors of the economy.
It benefits not only from a zero rate of VAT; in addition, the fuel used in
international air travel, and nearly all domestic flights, is entirely free
of tax. A number of countries have already addressed this anomaly.
I propose to levy a small duty on all air passengers from UK airports. This
will be set at Pounds 5 for departures to anywhere in the UK and the
European Union; and Pounds 10 for departures to other destinations. The new
duty will come into force next October, and will raise some Pounds 330
million in a full year.
There will be exemptions for transfer passengers and small planes. This
means, for example, that most flights between the Scottish islands will not
bear tax.
Insurance premium tax
Second, we have always tended to tax financial services in this country much
more lightly than other sectors, including manufacturing. In this Budget, I
have decided to tackle one sector of this industry which is exempt from VAT.
Virtually every other member state charges an ad valorem tax on insurance
premiums. I propose now to do the same.
The rate will be 3 per cent, among the lowest in Europe, and the tax will
apply to most general insurance of risks located in the United Kingdom. It
will come into force next October, and will raise over Pounds 750m in a full
year.
To avoid driving business offshore, I propose to exempt the re-insurance of
risk, and the insurance of most ships, aircraft and international transit
goods.
To avoid taxing exports, I propose to exempt export credit. And to avoid
taxing savings, I shall exempt long-term insurance such as life assurance,
including assurance for endowment mortgages.
For the typical family with motor, home contents and building insurance,
this tax will cost about 35 pence a week.
Income tax
Mr Deputy Speaker, I shall return later in my statement to the existing
indirect taxes, and particularly to VAT.
But before I do, let me set out my proposals for direct taxation.
First, I propose to freeze again the personal allowance for income tax, the
threshold for higher rate tax and the income limit for the age-related
allowances. I do not propose to change the inheritance tax threshold or the
exempt amount for capital gains tax; or the lower, basic or higher rates of
income tax. The 20 pence lower band will be extended by a further Pounds 500
next year as planned, to Pounds 3,000.
I intend to raise one allowance which has been frozen for the last four
years - the blind person's allowance.
This will rise next April from Pounds 1,080 to Pounds 1,200.
These proposals will yield Pounds 550 million in 1994-95, relative to an
indexed base, rising to Pounds 720 million in 1995-96.
Married couple's allowance
Now that husbands and wives are taxed independently, the married couple's
allowance is a bit of an anomaly. As announced in March, from next April it
will be limited to 20 per cent. Given the need to raise extra revenue, I
propose to reduce the rate of relief further, to 15 per cent from April
1995.
This will yield Pounds 830m in 1995-96, rising to over Pounds 1bn in a full
year.
Mortgage interest relief
I propose to take a similar approach to mortgage interest relief. As the
House is aware, the rate of mortgage interest relief will fall from 25 to 20
per cent in April. From April 1995, I propose to reduce it further, to 15
per cent, raising an additional Pounds 950m in 1995-96. For those with
mortgages of Pounds 30,000 or more, this will cost around Pounds 10 a month.
This is a tiny fraction of the benefit borrowers are still receiving from
the very substantial reduction in mortgage rates in the last three years.
The limit on loans qualifying for mortgage interest relief will remain at
Pounds 30,000.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the tax increases I have announced will enable me to give
some modest help to businesses.
Corporation tax
There will be no change to the main rate of corporation tax, which remains
the lowest in the European Union, or to the small companies' rate. But I
propose to raise the profits limit for smaller companies by 20 per cent.
This will reduce corporation tax bills for 30,000 companies.
Foreign income dividend scheme
To help reinforce Britain's place as Europe's most attractive location for
international business, I shall implement proposals to make surplus advance
corporation tax repayable on dividends paid out of profits earned abroad by
companies based in the United Kingdom.
Export credit
For exporters, I propose to make an extra Pounds 200m of export credit cover
available in 1996-97, and to cut export credit premiums for certain
important developing markets, including India, Mexico and Turkey. British
exporters of capital goods have been very successful in winning orders over
the last year, particularly outside Europe. The President of the Board of
Trade and I want to see that continue.
Uniform business rates
The business rates poundage increase next year, based on the 1.8 per cent
September retail prices index, will be the lowest since introduction of the
uniform business rate. For properties in England and Wales still protected
by transitional relief, I propose to cut the maximum real increase in rate
bills next year by a half, to 10 per cent for larger properties and 7 1/2
per cent for smaller properties.
Small properties which are used for both domestic and business purposes  -
the shop where the owner lives at the back - will face no real increase at
all. Separate arrangements will be made in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
This will bring significant relief next year to over 600,000 business
properties throughout the UK. It will cost a little over Pounds 100m next
year.
Small businesses
But my particular priority this year has been to help small businesses. In
my opinion, the biggest contribution any Chancellor can make to reducing
unemployment over the medium term is to ensure that the conditions are in
place for new businesses to become established and for small businesses to
grow. As a country, we generate plenty of budding entrepreneurs and any
number of good inventions and ideas. Yet all too often those ideas stay on
the drawing board as money is channelled instead into the safer larger
companies.
My proposals seek to address three separate problems facing small businesses
today: the burden of regulation;
the shortage of external finance; and cashflow.
Deregulation
I can announce today four contributions to the Prime Minister's campaign to
turn the tide of excessive regulation which threatens to engulf our smaller
firms.
First, the Finance Bill will include the initial tranche of legislation to
implement the plans announced in March to reform the current regime for
assessing personal tax.
The new system will be simpler and more efficient. The changes will be of
particular benefit to the self-employed.
Second, the Secretary of State for Social Security published last month the
report of the Working Group set up to consider the options for aligning
income tax and national insurance contributions. My Rt Hon Friend and I
agree with the Group's conclusion that there are significant savings to be
had from using the same definitions, same paperwork and same audits for
income tax and national insurance. We are now looking at the Group's main
recommendations and will be bringing forward proposals early next year.
VAT threshold
Third, VAT. Firms are currently required to register for VAT when their
turnover reaches Pounds 37,600 a year. I intend to raise this to Pounds
45,000 with effect from tomorrow. This will allow up to 75,000 more traders
to opt out of VAT altogether.
Finally, the statutory audit. The Companies Act requires all companies to
have their accounts audited. But for the smallest companies the expense can
be out of all proportion to the benefit.
When I was at the Department of Trade and Industry I continually pressed for
a change to this. My predecessor announced consultation in the March Budget.
I can now announce the conclusions.
The President of the Board of Trade and I have decided that most companies
with a turnover between Pounds 90,000 and Pounds 350,000 a year in future
need only get an independent accountant's report on whether the company's
accounts correctly reflect its books.
But for the 40 per cent of companies with turnover of less than Pounds
90,000, we propose to take the deregulation a step further. For these small
companies, the audit requirement will be abolished altogether.
But I don't just want to lighten the burden of regulation. I believe that
positive steps are required to increase the flow of risk capital into small
businesses.
Capital gains tax
For managers and employees to leave steady jobs and take a chance by going
into business on their own, the risk must be worthwhile. At 40 per cent, our
top rate of income tax is the lowest in the European Union, and I intend to
keep it that way. But our capital gains tax regime still bears
disproportionately on the successful entrepreneur.
In 1991, we increased the capital gains tax relief for business people who
sell up on retirement, by providing a complete exemption from capital gains
tax on the first Pounds 150,000 of capital gains and a half exemption on the
next Pounds 450,000. I now propose to increase these limits to Pounds
250,000 and Pounds 750,000 respectively.
By rewarding those who have been successful in the past, this measure will
encourage potential entrepreneurs in the future.
In addition, I propose that any individual facing a capital gains charge
should be able to defer the tax indefinitely by reinvesting those gains in
an unquoted trading company.
I also intend to create a new type of investment, a venture capital trust,
which will channel savings specifically into unquoted trading companies.
Investors will receive dividends and capital gains entirely free of tax. And
by investing through a trust they will also be able to spread their risk
across a number of different companies.
The Financial Secretary will shortly be issuing a consultation paper
fleshing out the details.
Enterprise investment scheme
In my view, there remains, too, a strong case for encouraging direct equity
investment in unquoted trading companies.
I propose to introduce a new scheme, the enterprise investment scheme, to do
just that. The enterprise investment scheme will differ from the old
business expansion scheme in several important respects.
To target the money where we want it to go, property-related investments
will be excluded. Up-front tax relief will be limited to 20 per cent. But
any losses on investments will qualify for income tax and capital gains tax
relief;
and all capital gains within the scheme will be entirely free of capital
gains tax. The limit for investors will be Pounds 100,000 a year.
Most important of all, to help those who are looking to invest their
expertise as well as their money, people previously unconnected with the
companies they invest in will be able to take up paid directorships.
The cost of the new scheme could eventually rise to some Pounds 50m a year.
Taken together with my proposals on capital gains tax and the new venture
capital trust, I believe it could generate substantial new investment in the
unquoted company sector.
Late payment
Finally, I turn to the problem of small companies' cashflow. There is one
issue, which year after year tops the list of Budget representations made to
all of us by the small business community - the problem of late payment.
There can be nothing more frustrating than delivering a quality product on
time at a competitive price and then finding that you don't get paid for
months. Late payments wreak havoc with cashflow, and for many small firms
they can make the difference between survival and failure.
The habit of late payment is corroding our business culture. I am quite sure
that it needs to be dealt with.
There are many options for tackling this, and my RHF the President of the
Board of Trade and I will be looking at two in particular: first, a new
British Standard for payment performance; and second - more significant -
legislation to provide for interest on late payments. Late payment was a
serious problem for small businesses throughout the last recession. I
believe the time has now come to take this issue head on.
Indirect taxation
Mr Deputy Speaker, the Government's clear policy has always been to shift
the burden of taxation, over time, from income to spending. This reflects
the Government's underlying political philosophy - that people should be
allowed to keep as much of their own money as possible.
Provided the less well-off are helped, it is fairer and less damaging to the
economy to tax people on how much they consume than on the work they do.
In line with this policy, even in a very difficult year, I have been able to
avoid any increase in income tax rates. But to do this I have had to raise
further revenue from indirect taxation. Let me start with the excise duties.
Road fuel duty
and vehicle excise duty
First, I propose a modest increase in the vehicle excise duty on cars - the
tax disc - of Pounds 5 a year. The duty on lorries will be unaffected.
Second, road fuel duties. With effect from 6.00 pm tonight, I propose to
raise all the road fuel duties by 3 pence a litre. Even so, petrol will
still cost less in the United Kingdom than in most countries in the European
Union and it will be cheaper than it was in real terms in the early 80s. It
is not good policy in these environmentally conscious days to keep road fuel
costs so much cheaper than they used to be. Taken together, these increases
will raise around Pounds  3/4 bn next year. Bus fuel duty rebate will be
held at pre-Budget levels.
In March, my predecessor announced that fuel duties would increase on
average by at least 3 per cent in real terms in future Budgets, in order to
restrain carbon dioxide emissions. The Secretary of State for the
Environment subsequently announced in July that the Government would be
looking at further measures in this area to help to meet our Rio commitment.
I have now decided to strengthen the March commitment by increasing road
fuel duties on average by at least 5 per cent in real terms in future
Budgets.
This will complete Britain's strategy for meeting our Rio commitment. We are
the first country in Europe to do this; and we have done so in a way that
minimises the additional costs to industry.
Mr Deputy Speaker, others in this country and in Europe continue to canvas
unrealistic blueprints for a new European Union-wide carbon tax, which would
impose massive new burdens on British industry. Any critic of the
Government's tax plans who claims also to support the international
agreement to curb carbon dioxide emissions will be sailing dangerously near
to hypocrisy.
Tobacco
Next, tobacco.
With effect from 6.00 pm tonight, the total tax on a packet of 20 cigarettes
will go up by 11 pence - a duty increase of 7.3 per cent. The duties on
other tobacco products will rise by the same proportion.
In addition, I have decided to strengthen the commitment on tobacco duties
that the Government has given in the past.
I intend to increase tobacco duties on average by at least 3 per cent a year
in real terms in future Budgets.
I believe that the approach we are adopting in Britain is the most effective
way to reduce smoking. It is clearly a nonsense for some European countries
to ban advertising to protect state-owned tobacco industries, but then
impose markedly lower levels of tax.
Wine, beer and spirits
Turning next to the duties on alcohol, let me start with beer. I have
listened carefully to the arguments put by the industry about the declining
consumption of beer in this country, the effect of the change to end-product
duty and the growth of cross-Channel imports of beer. Taking all these
factors into account I have decided that for the first time in five Budgets,
there will be no increase this year in the duty on beer.
Let me assure the House that this decision has nothing whatever to do with
the drinking habits of the Chancellor of the Exchequer] And to prove this, I
am also proposing to freeze the duty on spirits for a further year.
The spirits industry, which is a major UK export business, is facing similar
problems to the brewers. I know that my proposals will be warmly welcomed by
the House, and will give RH and HMs from Scotland something to celebrate on
St Andrew's Day.
For wine, sparkling wine and cider, I propose to raise the duty in line with
inflation. This will add 2 pence to a bottle of wine. But it will not take
effect until after Christmas.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the overall effect of all the tax measures I have
announced will be to raise revenue next year by a little under Pounds 1 3/4
bn. By 1995-96, that will rise to about Pounds 5bn, and to Pounds 6bn by
1996-97, about  3/4 per cent of GDP.
These sums fall a long way short of the reduction in the borrowing
requirement I judge necessary. As I announced earlier, I intend with my
Budget to reduce the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement next year, not by
Pounds 1 3/4 bn, but by Pounds 5 1/2 bn, with a reduction by 1996-97 of
Pounds 10 1/2 bn.
The central challenge I have faced in finalising this Budget is how this gap
could be bridged. Every commentator realised that one of my options would be
to extend the VAT base. The main candidates are food, children's clothes,
transport, sewerage and newspapers. A powerful case for each of them can be
made, and no amount of lobbying need put us off. But before looking at that,
I have always made clear that my first responsibility as Chancellor is to
get public expenditure under the firmest possible control.
I have already announced that the Government's new spending plans fully meet
the remit agreed by Cabinet in June.
But when the House comes to study the Red Book it will see that the figures
for the new control total in each of the next three years are different from
those set out in the March Budget and the cash ceilings agreed by the
Cabinet in June.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the explanation for this difference is simple. The
Cabinet has decided to establish new spending plans which are not just
consistent with the ceilings set in June. We have decided to set plans which
in each of the next three years are lower than the June ceilings.
Our spending plans for the coming year have been reduced by more than Pounds
3 1/2 bn. The new control total for next year will be Pounds 3 1/2 bn below
the level we set last year, and Pounds 8 billion below the plans that we
first set two years ago.
And that is not all. In 1995-96 we have reduced the new control total by
Pounds 1 1/2 bn and in 1996-97 by nearly Pounds 3bn. Taking into account
lower debt interest payments resulting from lower borrowing, I expect that,
as a direct result of the Budget, total public spending over the next three
years will be around Pounds 10bn less than we assumed in March.
Including also the reduction in cyclical spending as the economy recovers,
and other changes, the total reduction in public spending over the next
three years compared to the March Budget projections will be no less than
Pounds 15bn.
Those public expenditure savings dramatically reduced my need to raise taxes
to get the borrowing requirement down. As a result of that achievement - and
only because of that - I can now confirm that I have no need this year to
propose any changes to the VAT base.
Throughout the public spending round, all my cabinet colleagues understood
that the essential job in this Budget was to move back towards a balanced
budget.
And we all understood the clear preference on this side of the House for
this to be done, so far as possible, by firm control of public spending.
That is what we said we would deliver.
And that is what we have delivered. Because that is what is required to keep
the recovery going.
Mr Deputy Speaker, my Budget today puts Britain firmly on course for a
sustained period of rising prosperity and falling unemployment, based on low
inflation and healthy public finances.
This is a no-nonsense Budget which deals directly and firmly with the main
challenges facing the country today.
Above all, it is the Budget of a responsible Government which is determined
to bring lasting recovery to Britain.
I commend it to the House.
