FT  03 JUN 93 / Europe tries to shut the floodgates
FT writers assess the immigration crisis in W Europe as EC ministers in
Copenhagen agree tougher guidelines
WESTERN Europe is turning to stricter border controls, tougher police
methods and deportations in its struggle to keep out a tide of unwanted and
illegal immigrants.
Mr Charles Pasqua, the hard-line interior minister in France's new
conservative government, yesterday announced that France did not want to be
a country of immigration any longer. 'The objective we have set ourselves is
zero immigration,' he told Le Monde, on the same day as he presented draft
legislation restricting immigrants' rights to family reunion and extending
police powers.
Last week in Bonn, despite heavy street protests from demonstrating
liberals, the German Bundestag revised the constitution to tighten up the
country's asylum laws. Yesterday in Copenhagen, European Community
governments agreed tougher guidelines for combating illegal immigration.
It is the asylum seekers, demanding the right of asylum under the 1951
United Nations convention that have prompted the most anxiety. Ten years ago
the total number of people seeking asylum in 23 European countries, from
Poland to Portugal, was just over 71,000. Last year the figure was over
700,000.
Over 2m people have claimed asylum in European countries in the past four
years. Small numbers have now started claiming asylum in eastern Europe, but
the overwhelming majority have sought entry into western Europe.
Cumulatively, Germany has taken over 1m asylum seekers during the past four
years - more than half the European total - with 438,000 registered last
year. The scale of the influx helps explain the waves of violent xenophobia
in Germany, which culminated this week in the killing of five Turks in
Solingen.
Germany has been the chief destination of people fleeing from war,
starvation and persecution because its asylum law has until now been the
most liberal. But all of western Europe has been affected by the wars and
political disintegration that have followed the end of the cold war. Sweden
received 3,000 asylum requests 10 years ago; last year it had 83,000, France
received 27,000, and Britain 25,000.
Now at crisis point, most European countries are introducing tighter
restrictions. Austria has hardened its asylum law, a new asylum law is
before parliament in Spain, the Netherlands has introduced tougher
legislation, and a new asylum law is going through the British parliament.
There are limits to governments' freedom to change their asylum laws,
however. Under the UN Convention, asylum is not a privilege which
governments may give or withhold arbitrarily; it is a right which they are
required to extend to any individual who can show a 'well-founded fear of
being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group or political opinion'.
Since asylum is granted individually, each application must be examined and
decided individually. which, with the recent surge in asylum seekers, has
meant a large backlog. The principle is manifestly unsuited to large waves
of people escaping from civil war or political disintegration.
Those fleeing the fighting in Somalia or the former Yugoslavia, are
obviously not just 'economic migrants' seeking a more comfortable life, as
right-wing politicians sometimes claim. On the other hand, they may not meet
the criteria of the Convention. Governments are thus caught between the
desire to shut out all illegitimate immigrants, and the reluctant
recognition that many of them simply can not, on humanitarian grounds, be
sent back where they came from.
As a result, the migrant flood has spawned a whole new category of people
who are neither given formal refugee status, nor expelled. In most
countries, asylum is granted in only a minority of cases, and the proportion
has fallen as numbers of applicants have risen.
Last year in Britain, just under 6 per cent of decisions were positive and
20 per cent were negative; but 74 per cent were neither, instead receiving
'Exceptional Leave to Remain'.
According to a 15-country study by the European Consultation on Refugees and
Exiles (Ecre), the umbrella organisation for European refugee groups, 'at
least 80 per cent of all rejected asylum seekers remain in one way or
another'. The good news from a humanitarian point of view is that they are
not sent back to their civil war. The bad news is that their civil rights
are far fewer than under asylum status.
In Germany, Britain, Austria, and the Netherlands, this lesser right to
remain is short-term, usually for a year at a time. It gives no right to a
travel document, and no right to family reunion. In France, Belgium, Greece
and Italy, de facto refugees are left in limbo without any rights at all.
In response to an appeal from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, some
western countries have agreed to take in small numbers of victims of the war
in Bosnia. However, they have given them a new and still more precarious
status of 'temporary protection', usually valid for only six months.
After last week's vote in Germany, any asylum seeker who comes through a
'safe' neighbouring country can be sent back there. This will bring German
policy in line with Community principles, as agreed in Dublin in 1990. But
many experts doubt the policy will work in practice: if asylum is
unavailable, would-be migrants will simply go underground.
The European Consultation on Refugees believes that the concept of asylum
should be revised and broadened to bring it into line with the facts in the
real world; and ideally, the 12 should develop a European Asylum Agreement.
Mr Philip Rudge, the general secretary of Ecre, is openly contemptuous of
the results of this week's Copenhagen meeting. 'This is just a temporary
holding operation', he says. 'They have not yet reached the maturity for a
comprehensive, shared European refugee policy. It is called the Ad Hoc Group
on Immigration: it is brilliantly named'.
