FT  22 FEB 93 / Retailers under assault: The big increase in violence faced
by shops
THE abduction and murder of the Merseyside toddler James Bulger from a
shopping centre in Bootle, Merseyside, has focused attention on what
retailers say is an increase in violent crime in shops and shopping centres.
The blurred pictures of two boys leading him from the shopping centre - and
the enhanced images from the security cameras that prompted a flood of calls
from potential witnesses to police when they were shown on television - are
testimony to the efforts retailers have made to protect their staff, their
customers and their businesses.
Mr Allan Sayers, chief executive of the British Shops and Stores Association
which represents 15,000 department stores and retailers, says that while no
statistics are available, there is much anecdotal evidence of a rise in
threats to and attacks on shoppers and staff.
'Three or four years ago that kind of problem was almost unheard of,' Mr
Sayers says. 'It is now causing great concern among retailers.'
Most of the crime, he says, is committed by groups of young people, often
unemployed or playing truant from school.
Mr Frank Pegg, of Volumatic Systems, a manufacturer of security devices with
30 years' experience of advising retailers, says the rise in violent crime
is 'frightening'. There has been a big increase in armed robberies, attacks
and violent vandalism such as ram-raiding. This is in addition to the petty
theft that has always plagued retailers.
Home Office statistics show a 9 per cent increase in theft from shops in the
year to June 1992. There was a 9 per cent increase in violent crime overall,
and a 7 per cent increase in violence against the person.
Marks and Spencer, which is leading a campaign against crime in association
with the British Retail Consortium, says crime costs retailers Pounds 2.5bn
a year.
'Violent crime is increasing quickest of all,' it says. 'We have had people
threatened with everything from knives and syringes to guns.'
Marks and Spencer loses Pounds 30m a year through theft, and is spending
Pounds 21m this year on counter-measures. Tesco, the UK's second-largest
food retailer, says it is spending 'a very large amount of money' on
securing its stores. Only last weekend a customer was wounded during an
armed robbery at its store in Wandsworth, south London.
Although video cameras cannot prevent crime, they can help police trace
those responsible.
Mr Harold Couch, president of the British Council of Shopping Centres, which
represents 900 centres, says the council will revise the guidance notes on
safety already prepared by its security committee. Up to now these have
dealt mainly with terrorism and bomb scares. He says many shopping malls are
safer than traditional high streets because of the presence of security
staff and closed-circuit television. 'A well-managed centre, if it sees any
undesirables, can get rid of them,' he says.
Surveillance equipment is installed as standard in most new shopping
centres, and many older centres and shops are ordering equipment in spite of
the recession.
Mr Robert Haymon-Collins, marketing manager at the British Security Industry
Association, says: 'Some companies have decided that security is one area
they can cut back on. But many others see the benefits of greater investment
not less.'
The security industry has grown during the recession. Mr Haymon-Collins says
total turnover of member companies grew from Pounds 1.1bn in 1989 to Pounds
1.4bn in 1992. Spending on closed-circuit television equipment rose from
Pounds 37m to Pounds 64m.
Mr Mel Jordan, a sales consultant with Visual Information Systems, says
retailers use CCTV systems to monitor shops where health and hygiene are
important, and to gather market intelligence.
'The camera can capture a shopper picking up a particular item and then
maybe discarding it . . . that is useful information to a manager,' he says.
The security industry expects the Merseyside incident to focus the minds of
less committed retailers on improving security.
