FT  27 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Labour anger as Scott inquiry
awaits Mayhew
LABOUR yesterday made its strongest complaint yet that ministers are failing
to give adequate answers to questions about the arms-for-Iraq affair, on the
eve of an appearance at the Scott inquiry by Sir Patrick Mayhew, the
Northern Ireland secretary.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said the parliamentary
authorities had blocked his attempts to table a question for ministerial
answer. This was 'particularly objectionable' because the Scott hearings
were taking place in public.
Mr Cook's remarks came at a time of increasing public interest in the
inquiry in the wake of claims on Monday by Sir Hal Miller, an ex-MP and
former Conservative party vice-chairman, that Sir Patrick, then
attorney-general, had tried to dissuade him from giving evidence in support
of a businessman accused of illegally exporting parts for the Supergun.
Sir Hal says this exchange took place between May and November 1990 in the
House of Commons lobby. Charges against the businessman - Mr Peter Mitchell
of Walter Somers, a Midlands engineering company - were dropped in November
1990 following advice from Sir Patrick.
The allegation has given a new lease of life to an issue the government must
have hoped had died away.
But Sir Hal's remarks raised more questions than they answered. And their
impact was softened for many by the fact that he was not prepared to give
evidence to a Commons committee inquiry completed before the last general
election. Others have commented on the lack of precision in what he said.
When exactly did the lobby encounter take place? Did Sir Nicholas Lyell -
the then solicitor-general who has since succeeded Sir Patrick as the senior
law officer - witness the exchange, as parts of Sir Hal's testimony appear
to suggest?
And what did he say to Sir Nicholas in a December 1990 letter referred to in
his evidence in connection with the Matrix Churchill affair? He seems to
have dispatched it after an approach by The Sunday Times. 'I gave them a
great deal of information about Somers which they subsequently threatened to
publish on a number of occasions and may still appear,' Sir Hal said.
It was last year's release of previously classified government documents
during the trial of senior Matrix Churchill management which indicated the
possible involvement of government departments in military-related trade
with Iraq and eventually triggered the Scott inquiry. There is also the
question of what Sir Hal told Treasury ministers in the wake of the Somers
arrests in May 1990, and who were the ministers concerned?
Sir Hal said on Monday that he had raised the question of the powers
available to Customs and sought for them to be circumscribed. But how much
detail about the Somers case did he go into? He said he made the approach
'after all this died down', suggesting there was some delay after the
arrests.
Between May and the shake-up which followed Baroness Thatcher's replacement
as party leader in November, Treasury ministers included Mr John Major, Mr
Norman Lamont and Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip.
Mr Peter Lilley, now social security secretary, was financial secretary to
the Treasury between July 1989 and July 1990. Mrs Gillian Shephard, now
employment secretary, became a Treasury minister in November 1990.
Another question is what did Sir Hal tell Lady Thatcher in two letters in
April 1990? Sir Hal has tried to deflect criticism from the former prime
minister, arguing that she may have at worst been 'badly briefed' on the
issue of exports to Iraq. On Monday he insisted that when he wrote the
letters she did not know about the Supergun.
Yet Sir Hal also told the Scott inquiry that the British intelligence
service knew about the supergun in June 1988.
Sir Patrick will be the first of a number of government members who are
expected to be invited to give evidence to the Scott inquiry, which is
likely to take special note also of evidence provided by intelligence
officers and Customs investigators. Information from intelligence officers
is understood to have been already gleaned in private.
Within the Customs service, there remains a lingering resentment as well as
suspicion about the decision not to take the Supergun affair to court. As an
independent prosecuting authority, British Customs could have proceeded, but
something convinced its senior officials not to, even though investigators
were convinced they had a good case.
