FT  11 MAY 93 / Raw material prices held down by sterling strength
UPWARD PRESSURE on raw material prices eased considerably last month,
reflecting the relatively stronger pound and a fall in world commodity
prices.
Prices of raw materials and fuel purchased by UK manufacturing industry rose
by 7.2 per cent in the 12 months to April, compared with a rise of 8.4 per
cent in the year to March.
The fall in the year-on-year rate was caused partly by a rise in the value
of sterling last month. The pound rose significantly against the dollar and
other European currencies, making raw materials cheaper for importers.
Imported materials and fuels account for about 66 per cent of British
manufacturers' costs of raw materials.
The official figures contained evidence that manufacturers are not yet
passing on the higher costs of imports to retailers.
The output prices index - the prices of manufactured products as they leave
the factory gates - rose by 3.8 per cent in the year to April, compared with
3.7 per cent in the year to March, with increases in excise duties in the
March Budget adding 0.2 per cent to the index.
The output prices index, excluding food, drink and tobacco,
is only 0.2 percentage points higher than a floor of 2.4 per cent reached in
November last year.
Mr Robert Lind, economist at UBS, said: 'The figures suggest that
manufacturers can afford to keep the lid on prices because they are
benefiting from lower unit wage costs.'
He added, however, that upward pressure on input prices should soon resume
as commodity prices recover.
The Treasury said the figures showed that inflationary pressures were
contained and fairly weak.
The Central Statistical Office said that falls in the prices of fuels,
metals and other imported materials were partly offset by higher prices for
home-produced food raw materials.
Between March and April the seasonally adjusted index of input prices fell 1
per cent, the first fall since August last year.
A growing share of the UK food market is supplied by imports, although home
producers are capable of supplying many of these foods more competitively,
according to Seymour Cooke, a consultancy specialising in food distribution.
The deficit on food worsened by more than Pounds 350m last year to exceed
Pounds 5bn, it said.
A report by the consultancy suggests there is no good reason why the UK
should not be a net exporter of foodstuffs. 'Yet the UK has a worsening
trade balance in food because its suppliers are too slow in responding to
market trends.'
The UK Food Trade, Seymour Cooke Food Research International, 42 Colebrooke
Row, London N1 8AF.
