FT  13 JAN 93 / PM rejects statutory controls on press
PROPOSALS FOR statutory controls on the press were rejected by Mr John Major
yesterday amid disclosures that at least one member of the Royal family had
sanctioned leaks about their personal life to tabloid newspapers.
Downing Street officials said the prime minister would not support the
creation of a tribunal with legal authority to impose sanctions against
newspapers judged to have breached strict new privacy rules.
His stance was revealed as ministers tacitly confirmed reports that the
Princess of Wales had played a behind-the-scenes role in press coverage last
year of the break-up of her marriage to Prince Charles. There was no
confirmation that Prince Charles had done likewise.
The disclosures were judged at Westminster to have delivered another
damaging blow to the standing of a monarchy which has been plagued by
controversy for more than a year. They had also undercut much of the recent
criticism of the press by those MPs seeking tougher controls.
Mr Major's opposition killed the central recommendation of the report on the
press drawn up by Sir David Calcutt, QC, even before it was officially
published.
According to leaks of the report - confirmed as accurate by officials - Sir
David calls for the replacement of the present Press Complaints Commission
by a statutory tribunal with the powers to impose large fines on newspapers.
The report was handed to ministers last week and will be considered by the
full cabinet tomorrow but one senior minister commented bluntly last night:
'There is not a hope in hell of a statutory body.'
Lord McGregor of Durris, the chairman of the PCC and a fierce opponent of
statutory regulation, said last night that it was 'game, set and match' to
opponents of the Calcutt report. He described the section of the report
devoted to the PCC as 'reeking with prejudice and malice'.
Downing Street stressed that the prime minister's judgment had not been
affected by the latest revelations concerning the role played by Princess
Diana in the sensational reporting of her marriage problems.
Mr Major and other senior colleagues still backed the idea of new
legislation to outlaw electronic eavesdropping and other 'intrusive'
practices which involved trespass on private property.
The aim would be to protect all individuals from unjustified invasions of
privacy rather than to shield specifically the Royal Family and other
prominent public figures.
But the reports that close friends of Princess Diana fed information on her
behalf to the tabloids to ensure her case was present in stories about the
marriage break-up caused acute embarrassment in Downing Street.
It also raised new question marks among MPs about Mr Major's insistence last
month that the subsequent separation of the Royal couple would not prevent
Princess Diana at some stage being crowned Queen.
The disclosure was made in a letter sent by Lord McGregor to Sir David as
part of his inquiry. Lord McGregor revealed that Buckingham Palace had
apologised to him after first denying and then, in effect, admitting that
Princess Diana had actively collaborated in reports. Officials confirmed
that Mr Major and other senior ministers had been kept informed last year of
the charge laid by Lord Mc-Gregor.
Flood of recriminations, Page 8
