FT  16 OCT 93 / Fraud squad investigates former ODA procurement agent
FRAUD SQUAD detectives are investigating the suspected misappropriation of
Overseas Development Administration funds by one of the ODA's former
procurement agents, it emerged last night.
The ODA, which is a wing of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, last night
named the procurement agent as Hundhill Ltd, based in Keighley, West
Yorkshire, and said it had ordered the investigation in May.
A spokesman for West Yorkshire police fraud squad last night confirmed that
his department was investigating the company although the investigation
remained at an early stage.
Police have made a preliminary assessment of the funds involved, which they
estimate at running into 'hundreds of thousands of pounds'.
Hundhill Ltd, which ceased trading in May, is a subsidiary of the Hundhill
Group, which has offices at a separate address in Pontefract. The group is
not under police investigation.
Mr Donald Schofield, managing director of Hundhill Group, said last night he
had no knowledge of the fraud investigation.
The ODA manages Britain's aid programme to developing countries. It selects
procurement agents to supply the client in the third world with material
ranging from school text books to heavy engineering equipment which the
agents have purchased from other companies on behalf of the department. They
effectively act as the official middle-men in the overseas aid package which
runs at over Pounds 1.8bn a year.
Hundhill Ltd was one of two private companies picked by the ODA on the basis
of its supposed 'cost-effectiveness' when the government put out the
department's procurement programme to competitive tender in the late 1980s.
According to ODA officials, the company was involved in providing 'a wide
range of materials' required by developing countries from September 1987 to
May 1993. Hundhill Ltd is now in receivership according to company records.
The company describes its principal activities as 'exporters of scientific
teaching equipment and related sundries'.
