FT  31 DEC 93 / CBI cool on government school 'promoters' scheme
Business yesterday gave a lukewarm reception to the government's initiative
to help 'promoters' establish new grant-maintained schools in England and
Wales.
Under the scheme, 'promoters' may establish schools, which can have
different specialisms and selection policies, provided they pay at least 15
per cent of building costs, and their plans are approved by the education
secretary. The government will pay the remaining 85 per cent.
The Confederation of British Industry said yesterday: 'In the past, there's
been very little enthusiasm on the behalf of members for industry funding of
education. On the whole companies feel that schools should be paid for by
general taxation.'
When the City Technology College initiative, which was intended to harness
business sponsorship on a much more ambitious scale, was launched in 1988,
the CBI remarked that businesses already paid corporation tax. Just 15 CTCs
 -fewer than planned - have been completed.
The Institute of Directors said: 'Our view is that the state provides funds
for education at least up until the age of 16 but the state doesn't have to
be the provider of those services. Diversity in the people having services
funded by the state seems to be an entirely good thing.'
The government's move will also be the cue for intensive efforts by the
Moslem community to gain public funding for Moslem schools. There are 20
Moslem schools in England and Wales, all independently funded. Community
leaders are keen to gain access to public funds, along the lines of
voluntary-aided Anglican, Catholic and Jewish schools.
The education department has sent copies of its draft guidance on the new
schools to two Moslem education groups.
Mr David Hart, general secretary of the National Association of Head
Teachers, doubted that many schools would be created by 'promoters'. He
expects the Funding Agency for Schools, an education department quango which
will start work in April, to be much more powerful in establishing new
schools where the need exists.
