FT  02 JAN 93 / Tomorrow's world: Last year confirmed many of the gloomy
forecasts made 12 months ago. Answering the most pressing questions for
1993, FT writers do not expect a great change in global fortunes - but there
are one or two sparks of optimism
Last year was an annus horribilis for the Queen. It was an annus horribilis
for Mr George Bush and Mr Neil Kinnock. But what sort of year was it for the
reputation of the FT writers who were asked a year ago for their forecasts
for 1992?
Joe Rogaly wondered whether the Labour party would win the general election.
'Possibly, but not probably' was his answer, one that proved closer to the
truth than the polls and most pundits. Asked whether George Bush would be
beaten, Lionel Barber replied 'no, but he will have a run for his money'. He
did, indeed, but then he was beaten.
Asked whether the economy faced a great depression, Samuel Brittan replied
robustly that 'this constant harping on the great depression is an enemy to
serious thinking'. Certainly, it did not happen in 1992. Barry Riley
predicted that 'all in all, you are likely to make some money on shares over
1992'. So you were. Meanwhile, John Plender correctly predicted that UK
house prices would fall in another year of gloom for homeowners.
Martin Wolf predicted that the European Community's exchange rate mechanism
would be realigned, which was hardly conventional wisdom a year ago. He also
thought the Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations would be
completed in 1992. He was right in judging the differences over agriculture
too small to be an obstacle forever, but that agreement took longer than
expected to reach.
John Lloyd argued correctly that there would not be a civil war in what used
to be the Soviet Union, but noted that several small wars were raging
already. Judy Dempsey said Serbs and Croats would not make up, and also
pointed to the dangers in other republics of the former Yugoslavia. Her
warning was wise, as was the forecast from Roger Matthews that there would
be no peace treaty between Arabs and Israelis in 1992. Meanwhile, Alexander
Nicoll concluded that the Chinese Communist party would not go the way of
the Communist party of the Soviet Union.
Finally, David Lascelles thought the First Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
would be mostly hot air, but also hoped it would focus the world's minds.
The summit was at least more successful than its host, Mr Fernando Collor de
Mello, who resigned this week faced with impeachment.
In all, 1992 was a good year for FT forecasters. What a pity about the
world.
Will there be a global recovery?
Martin Wolf writes: No, not in the countries of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development as a whole, if recovery means
substantially faster economic growth than the 1 1/2 per cent expected for
1992.
The OECD forecasts growth of aggregate OECD gross domestic product of 1.9
per cent between 1992 and 1993. Even this improvement is unlikely, unless
the US economy achieves growth substantially greater than the 2.4 per cent
now forecast.
The OECD believes Japan and Germany will grow by 2.3 per cent and 1.2 per
cent, respectively, between 1992 and 1993. This is already far below the 3.1
per cent and 2.3 per cent forecast by the OECD last June. In the present
recession, however, mainstream forecasters have tended to underestimate
economic weakness. There is a good chance that the Japanese economy will
grow very little between 1992 and 1993, while German GDP will shrink.
Will there be peace in the Balkans?
Edward Mortimer writes: Alas, most unlikely. The war in Bosnia might peter
out, but only on the basis of a de facto Serb victory which neither the
international community nor the Moslem losers would ever accept de jure. In
this case the Moslems would prepare for another round, smuggling in weapons
from Moslem states. On top of that, Croatia may have a go at recapturing
territory lost to the Serbs in 1991, when the UN mandate in those areas
expires in March.
In Serbia proper, clashes are likely between Serbs and Hungarians in
Voivodina, which could draw in Hungary; between Serbs and Moslems in the
Sanjak; and above all between Serbs and the Albanians who form 90 per cent
of the population in Kosovo. Both Albania and the Albanian minority in
Macedonia would then be sorely tempted to help their kith and kin, which in
turn could bring Serbian reprisal raids across their borders. It would not
take much to upset the delicate balance in Macedonia between Slav majority
and Albanian minority; and chaos in Macedonia could lead to intervention by
any combination of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey. If the last two are
both involved, the Balkans could become the scene of the first war between
two Nato allies.
Will John Major still be UK prime minister at the end of 1993?
Philip Stephens writes: Yes. If there is a single lesson from 1992, it is
that political predictions are as useful as the average long-range weather
forecast. Most people thought that John Major would lose the April election.
No one anticipated the calamities that befell him a few months later.
But the storms have abated and the satellite pictures tell us that there is
a much clearer, if dull, spell ahead. There will be more unexpected squalls
but, having survived the disintegration of his economic strategy, Mr Major
is unlikely to be swept away.
An end to the recession should help the prime minister restore some of his
battered authority. Even Labour's John Smith - who will also still be around
at the end of the year - believes that Mr Major will fight the general
election due in 1996-97. But both leaders need to make an effort to persuade
us that politics and politicians have the capacity to excite and enthuse as
well as to survive.
Will the Maastricht treaty be ratified and what difference does it make?
Lionel Barber writes: The Danes remain capable of pulling off surprises, but
the odds are that the Maastricht treaty will be ratified after a divisive
referendum in late April or May. Britain will follow, thanks to Mr Major's
deft handling of the EC summit in Edinburgh and the probability that Tory
Euro-sceptic opposition peaked in early October, shortly after the petit Oui
in the French referendum.
The treaty itself is flawed. Monetary union for the 12 by the end of the
decade looks fanciful. Germany is wavering about giving up the D-Mark. The
big question this year is how the EC will respond to crises beyond its
borders, in eastern Europe, Russia and the former Yugoslavia. The answer
will determine whether the EC strengthens Maastricht's provisions for a
common security and foreign policy - or once again defers to the US.
Will there be an ERM at the end of the year?
Martin Wolf writes: Yes, but a further reduced one. The current European
exchange rate mechanism is likely to collapse into a narrow D-Mark zone,
while exchange rates among all five major European economies - Germany,
France, Italy, the UK and Spain - either float or become readily adjustable.
If this outcome is to be avoided, German monetary policy must be loosened
both substantially and soon.
The Bundesbank believes that the ERM is making a welcome return to the
adjustable exchange rates of the period before 1987. But the absence of
effective exchange controls makes any such ERM unstable.
The persistently slow economic growth of today exacerbates the ERM's
unavoidable fragility. Markets may accept that the Benelux countries are
prepared to import restrictive German monetary policies, whatever their
consequences. They do not believe that large countries will tolerate slow
economic growth indefinitely. When the problem is restrictive German
monetary policy, the only escape is in the possibility of substantial
exchange rate movement, in both directions. Since such movement has been
precluded by the D-Mark's anchor role in the ERM, the system will have to be
modified substantially.
Will there be peace in the Middle East?
Hugh Carnegy writes: The crisis over Israel's deportation of 415
Palestinians and the spate of killings that preceded it by Islamic
fundamentalists in the occupied territories showed how easily violence can
dominate events in the Middle East, disrupting peace negotiations begun in
late 1991.
In any case, Israel has yet fully to bite the bullet on yielding the Arab
lands it has occupied for more than 25 years, despite the election of Mr
Yitzhak Rabin's Labour-led government. The terms so far on offer from Israel
fall well short of the minimum that the Palestine Liberation Organisation
could accept without risking a grass-roots rebellion within its own ranks
and within the Islamicists.
Nevertheless, the fundamentals which drove Israel and its Arab neighbours
into talks still apply: the US is dominant in the region following the
demise of the Soviet Union; all countries engaged in the negotiations have
deep strategic and economic reasons for maintaining good relations with the
US and the west; the ultimate alternative to peace - non-conventional war,
possibly involving a resurgent Iran - scares everybody.
The Washington talks will almost certainly resume after the Clinton
administration takes over. But, as the deportation crisis illustrates, the
'window of opportunity' for peace may be narrowing. Awareness of this should
spur all sides on to a breakthrough this year. But never discount the
volatility of the conflict, which could as easily destroy the chance of
agreements.
Where are the next global hotspots?
Edward Mortimer writes: The problem with the new world disorder is that
almost anywhere can be a hotspot. Explosions can happen without detonating a
superpower conflict, because there is only one superpower left. The
disintegration of the other superpower has, however, left plenty of fissile
material around - figuratively and, alas, literally. Watch for signs of a
more truculent Russia, ready to intervene on behalf of Russian minorities in
other ex-Soviet republics: most dangerous would be Ukraine.
Likewise watch Hungary, surrounded on three sides by countries with large
Hungarian minorities, living on territory that was Hungarian before 1918.
Further afield, Africa and the Middle East are full of unresolved conflicts.
If US intervention appears to succeed in Somalia, there may be demand for it
elsewhere, such as Sudan. In Asia, Cambodia seems almost certain to blow up
again, as the Khmer Rouge is sabotaging the UN peace plan.
Veteran communist rulers Deng Xiaoping of China, Kim Il Sung of North Korea
and Fidel Castro of Cuba are presumed to be mortal. Should any of them pop
off this year, the temperature would rise in and around their countries.
Will US President Bill Clinton get it wrong in the year ahead?
Jurek Martin writes: Probably not, unless he is simply overwhelmed by
events. Lack of big-league experience notwithstanding, few presidents have
come to the job so well prepared in policy terms, so keen to deploy a
formidable intellect on practical problems, and with such highly developed
political and populist instincts. Critically, he may also be 'lucky', if the
recent modest improvement in the economy he is inheriting can be sustained
and if the opposition Republicans remain in their present state of disarray.
The pitfalls are obvious: a double handful of external crises, which may
require more US military involvement overseas and, relatively, less of his
promised 'laser beam' focus on the domestic and economic programme;
structural issues at home, like healthcare, welfare and education reform,
which will bring him up against powerful vested interests; and financial
market scepticism about his determination to control the budget deficit.
But with the Democrats running Congress and as keen as Mr Clinton to end
'gridlock', and with every new president enjoying a honeymoon of varying
length, there is no reason why he should not have a productive first year.
The betting is that the new policies to be set in train will more resemble
in their longer-term impact the very different agenda of President Ronald
Reagan's first year in 1981. For most new presidents life gets harder after
year one, as the first mid-term elections to Congress loom.
Will reform continue in the former Soviet Union?
John Lloyd writes: Most things will get worse in Russia this year. The
policies of President Boris Yeltsin and Yegor Gaidar began the march to the
market. Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the latter's successor as prime minister,
must choose between continuing the (relatively) tight money policies brought
in by the Gaidar team - and thus risk mass unemployment - and debauching the
currency, courting financial collapse. The decisions which must be made this
year - on the economy, the constitution, the integrity of the Russian state,
the form of the Commonwealth of Independent States - should not be further
postponed.
Ukraine has just begun economic reforms from a position of near
hyperinflation, and with most of its industries suffering a severe loss of
markets. In the three Baltic states - especially tiny Estonia - financial
reforms have begun and have yet to hit employment.
The three Caucasian states of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia are now all on
militarised footing, their rackety economies (with the exception of the
Azeri energy sector) ignored. The four central Asian states of Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are suffering from a big market loss
in Russia. Tajikistan is also rent with civil war.
Only Belarus in the west and Kazakhstan in the south remain relatively
stable, so far avoiding both nationalist excess and plunges in living
standards.
But there are no hiding places from the effects of the excruciating
painfulness of integration into the world economy. This pain will deepen in
1993.
Is Chinese economic reform set to last?
Alexander Nicoll writes: China's economic growth rate, at about 12 per cent,
is probably the world's fastest in 1992, the result of a push for reform by
88-year-old Deng Xiaoping. Production, investment and exports have shot up.
After 14 years, reform has considerable momentum, especially in the
prosperous south. It is probably irreversible, even if it suffers setbacks
as after the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
Most of the economy is effectively in the private sector, and prices of many
goods have been freed in 1992. But the bloated public sector presents huge
challenges.
Two doubts remain: when Deng dies, will economic reformers survive in power
without him? More immediately, will fast growth lead to overheating and
austerity - slowing reform - as did two previous booms? A third question
looms ever larger: will economic freedom lead to greater pressure for
political freedom? The Communist party is determined to resist such demands
at any cost.
Will Brazil realise its potential as Latin America's economic powerhouse?
Stephen Fidler writes: No. Brazil seems determined not to lose its
reputation as 'the country of the future'. Brazilians face more stagflation
in 1993 or, worse, another ineffective economic shock plan.
The government is now fighting inflation by keeping real interest rates high
 -which is why the economy is so weak - but has not fundamentally addressed
the core of the problem: a budget deficit of 40 per cent of GDP.
President Itamar Franco, who took office after the impeachment on corruption
charges of Collor, seems inclined to lower interest rates to reactivate the
economy. If he does, inflation will accelerate. But if he does not and
interest rates stay high, the economy will remain weak.
Either way, many Brazilians are betting that 1993 will see another shock
plan - unorthodox measures such as freezing bank deposits and fixing prices
and wages, which will fail without necessary fiscal reform - in a vain
attempt to magic away the country's problems.
