FT  18 JUN 93 / Survey of North American Business Travel (2): Cost-cutting
by stealth - Hotels, the choice is widening
TRAVELLERS returning to the US after several years' absence are unlikely to
notice that some 70 per cent of hotels could now be considered financially
distressed.
Nor are they likely to observe that financial institutions have become
America's biggest hotel owners.
What they are likely to notice is the wider choice of accommodation, the
bargains and the eagerness of hoteliers to please patrons.
There is enough choice to satisfy every taste and budget, thanks largely to
a glut of hotel rooms - the legacy of the booming 1980s when the industry
expanded into the arms of a recession. In Chicago alone, 5,000 of the city's
23,000 downtown rooms were added after 1987. As a result of this untimely
expansion, room-rate increases have lagged inflation since 1987.
In their efforts to survive this painful period, hotel chains have tried to
make their cost-cutting measures invisible to their customers. Hyatt, for
example, trimmed 10 per cent from its annual bed-linen bills by switching to
white sheets from beige. Other cost-saving measures include offering
optional bed turn-down service and reducing the number of hand towels.
Other moves have been more visible. In recent years, chains have introduced
frequent-stay programmes to cultivate customer loyalty. Many groups also
offer weekend packages and off-peak promotions to boost depressed occupancy
rates.
For example, the Inter-Continental group is wooing customers with a summer
'options' programme. This includes offering a choice of room upgrade to a
suite, free overnight parking, a daily credit of Dollars 25 towards food and
drink, an adjoining room for half the summer rate or 1,000 bonus
frequent-flier miles towards American or United Airlines frequent-flier
plans.
At the chain's Manhattan hotel, guests will automatically get the bonus
airline miles and a Dollars 20 discount on Friday and Saturday nights, in
addition to a choice of other 'options'.
Other hotel chains are offering similar lures to attract customers in a
competitive environment. Although Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountancy firm,
has found that more than half the hotels in the US were profitable in 1992,
for the firs time since 1989, last year's occupancy rate of about 62 per
cent is still significantly below the 68 per cent considered necessary for
sustained profitability. Things are even worse in Canada, where last year's
average room occupancy was 57 per cent compared with 69 per cent in 1988.
As a result, the type of haggling usually associated with an Arab souk is
not unusual at a hotel front desk in North America. Any big company which
discovers that it is regularly paying the published 'rack' rate for rooms
should get a new travel agent. A good travel agent should be able to
negotiate a discounted corporate rate ahead of arrival. Even individual
travellers without the clout of a big company can often get reduced rates in
slower markets just by asking.
The extended-stay segment, catering for travellers who stay five or more
days, is one of the few growth areas in the North American hotel market. In
the US, the sector had an average occupancy rate of 80 per cent last year.
Some chains, such as Marriott's Residence Inns, cater almost exclusively to
extended-stay travellers (and families) with rooms that include separate
kitchens, bedrooms and living areas. Prices average Dollars 75 a night,
about Dollars 15 higher than the average hotel room.
Consumer Reports gave Residence Inns a top rating in its last hotel survey
in 1990, and this year's Zagat survey of US Hotels, Resorts and Spas
confirms the endorsement with a room rating for the chain on a par with more
expensive hotels. Zagat, which is known for the pithy comments which
accompany its ratings on US restaurants and hotels, also recommended
Radisson, Guest Quarters, Embassy Suites and Doubletree among the
moderately-priced chains.
Among the least expensive chains, Zagat gave higher room ratings to
Fairfield Inns, Hampton Inn and La Quinta.
At the top end, the Four Seasons hotel chain has maintained its leading
position since the 1990 Consumer Reports survey, with top ratings from Zagat
across the board - for rooms, service, dining and public facilities.
Ritz-Carlton had similarly high marks, while Loews, Inter-Continental,
Westin and Hyatt were all recommended.
Unfortunately, in spite of increasing efforts to please patrons, there are
no guarantees of a perfect stay. At some of the more impecunious chains,
carpets and furnishing is often threadbare. And a common complaint across
the board centres on advance reservations. It is still not unusual to
discover at check-in that all traces of a reservation have disappeared from
the computer system. In addition, there are often discrepancies between
rates quoted by a chain's central reservation system and those offered at
the front desk.
