FT  15 DEC 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Argentines angry over extension
of fishing zone
A report in Argentina's press yesterday has thrown into confusion
negotiations over the presentation of the 1994 fisheries agreement with
Britain.
Argentina and the UK agreed in October substantially to raise next year's
catch of the prized illex squid, the most sought-after resource in the
waters surrounding the Falkland Islands.
Argentina will increase its catch by 70 per cent to 220,000 tonnes but the
Falklands will retain their 1993 quota of 150,000 tonnes.
However, Clarin, Argentina's largest-selling newspaper, yesterday reported
that the Falklands would open a sector of their waters closed to fishing
since 1990. It criticised this as a 'new step in the British government's
policy of faits accomplis' and implied that Argentina had been duped.
Argentina has not lifted its claim over the islands, despite its defeat in
the Falklands conflict of 1982. It resents British policy decisions in the
region as an affront to its sovereignty. President Carlos Menem says
Argentina will 'recover' the islands by the year 2000.
However, British officials say they told Argentina in October of their
decision to open the Falklands Outer Conservation Zone, a 50-mile-wide
sector of sea north-east of the islands. The zone, set up in 1990 in the
first fishing agreement with Argentina, had been renewed every year until
now.
London was able to defuse anger in the islands over the sharply increased
Argentine catch, by saying that opening the zone would make Falkland
licences more attractive to Asian fishing fleets.
Licence sales, the islands' largest revenue source, have fallen sharply in
the face of strong competition from Argentina. British officials say 1994
Falkland licence prices have increased by about 10 per cent.
A British official claimed that as a concession to Argentina, London had
played down the opening of the zone. He said: 'We are looking for ways to
give the Argentines a soft landing and make things presentationally helpful
for them'.
But in a statement yesterday, Argentina's foreign ministry portrayed its
agreement to opening the zone as a concession to Britain. 'It is not (our)
objective to generate economic problems for the islands'.
