FT  22 OCT 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (27): Seek advice
and be wary of mailshots - The choice / Trusts are useful for many
objectives, but unsuitable for short-term needs, because of their charges
and markets' ups and downs
POTENTIAL INVESTORS, faced with the ever-expanding choice of unit trusts,
could be forgiven for adopting the blindfold-and-pin selection method. More
often, this takes the form of dashing off a cheque to the first company
whose advertisement or mailshot catches the eye.
After all, you may reason, if the warning that 'past performance is not
necessarily a guide to the future' is true, how can you be expected to make
a more informed decision?
Chance can sometimes throw up the ideal investment opportunity, but
frequently it does not. A little research, and some unbiased advice, can
make the difference between choosing a poorly performing investment and an
above-average one.
The first task is to formulate a clear idea of your investment objectives.
Do you want income or capital growth, or a combination of the two? Over what
period are you looking to invest? Can you tolerate a high level of risk for
the chance of greater returns, or are you depending on getting your money
back?
Once you have answered these basic questions, narrowing down the choice of
trusts becomes considerably easier: if you want income, you can cross off
all the low-yielding funds; if you want a low-risk investment, you can throw
out all the emerging-markets prospectuses.
The next stage is to look more closely at the funds in suitable sectors.
Although past performance is not a reliable guide to how a fund will do in
future, it can give some indication of a fund manager's skill, particularly
in funds with a wide spread of investments.
This does not mean just picking the fund that is top of its sector over the
past month or year. If you look for funds which are consistently in the top
25 per cent of their sector over a number of years, your chances of getting
a reasonable return are probably higher than if you pick a fund which has
bounced around from top to bottom over the years.
Very specialised trusts  - investing in one small country or a single
commodity, for example  - are more volatile, so past performance is not a
good guide to their prospects.
A useful source of information on unit trusts for small investors is Money
Management, the monthly sister magazine of the Financial Times, which
publishes comparative performance tables in every issue.
Other published sources can be too expensive for individuals, but financial
advisers often have access to them. David Harris, of Chantrey Financial
Services, swears by Fund Research, which provides detailed information on
each fund, assigns it a rating, and publishes regular updates, such as on
the movements of fund managers between groups. If a star fund manager is
poached by a rival company, it is as well to know that before choosing to
put your redundancy pay-off into his or her old fund.
Hugo Pring, investment adviser at Fraser Marr, says that the strength of the
management group and the size of the fund are also factors to be taken into
account.
'It is not an exact science, and there is always a gut-feeling element to
the choice you make,' he says, 'but I think you are never going to go too
far wrong if you stick with good companies with strong records, and the
resources to keep good fund managers.'
Sudden success can be problematic for small funds, he says. 'With a very
small fund with one or two good stocks, as soon as money starts pouring in
in any quantity, the fund manager loses control.'
Once you have narrowed your choice down to a handful of funds, it is worth
looking at the level of charges, and the charging structure. Unit trusts
generally have higher charges than investment trusts: often 5-6 per cent
initially, and 1-1.5 per cent annually. A difference of one or two
percentage points in the initial charge, and half a point in the annual
management charge, can make a noticeable difference to the size of your
investment after a few years. All else being equal  - type of fund,
investment strategy, strength of the company  - most advisers would plump
for the fund which charges less, but the appeal of low charges should not
override investment considerations.
'I would argue very strongly that, while administrative charges are
important, if you just go for the cheapest, it is a bit like the old adage
 -if you pay peanuts, you are likely to get monkeys,' says Harris.
Another decision you will have to take is whether or not to spread your
money between a number of funds. Picking a loser is less of a disaster if
only a portion of your money is in it. Pring usually recommends his clients
divide their unit trust investments with half in UK funds, and half shared
between Europe and the US, for a relatively low-risk portfolio suitable for
school fees planning. However, if you only have a couple of thousand to
invest, it may not be worth splitting your money between funds, as the
paperwork could be out of proportion to the sums involved.
Unit trusts are an easy vehicle for many investment objectives, but advisers
emphasise time and again that they are not suitable for short-term needs,
because of their charges and the regular ups and downs of equity markets.
'You must view collective investments generally as at least a five-year
investment,' says Pring.
One of the most common specific uses for unit trusts is in school-fees
planning, if parents or grandparents can start to save five or 10 years in
advance. A useful feature for this type of planning is that most unit trust
management groups allow investment either of lump sums, or of small amounts
through regular savings plans, so monthly contributions can be topped up
with any gifts or windfalls.
Unit trusts can also be used as an alternative to an endowment policy to pay
off an interest-only mortgage. Costs are lower than for endowments, and the
investment is more flexible: contributions can be varied, and if the
investment grows fast enough, the mortgage can be paid off early.
In both these cases, it may be more efficient to invest in unit trusts
through a personal equity plan (see page 19 of this Review).
Cash unit trusts are rather different from other sectors, but are growing in
popularity. They are mainly used either as a place to park your money
between selling out of one trust and buying into another, or as an
alternative to a building society account. The income paid is based on money
market rates, and charges are lower than for other unit trusts  - commonly
no initial charge and 0.5 per cent annually.
