FT  12 MAY 93 / Survey of North American Free Trade (5): Conflicting
predictions - Jobs and Labour Migration
'THE first rule of war is don't shoot yourself. Our trade agreements,
including this one, violate this rule.' Pithy comments like this entrance
the worshipful hordes which still support Mr Ross Perot, the Texas
billionaire and former presidential candidate.
It was with these words that Mr Perot announced that because the North
American Free Trade Agreement could 'suck' as many as 5.8m jobs out of the
US economy, he would oppose the pact. Even worse news for the Clinton
administration is that he is buying television time to broadcast 'an
educational campaign' against the Nafta.
The study Mr Perot produced to support his conclusion focused particularly
on US manufacturing industries with high costs and easily transferred
technology. It contradicts one of the most cited reports - Nafta: An
Assessment - released in February by Mr Gary Hufbauer and Mr Jeffrey Schott
of the Institute of International Economics. Their report shows a gain of
about 171,000 net new US jobs by 1995, although the authors also acknowledge
that in the long run the US could show a small net loss.
The Economic Policy Institute, which receives labour support, has predicted
a loss of 500,000 American jobs in 10 years. The US International Trade
Commission has projected long-term gains in aggregate employment at less
than 1 per cent for the US and Canada but up to almost 7 per cent for
Mexico.
From more than 20 studies of the Nafta, only this much is clear: No one
really knows how many jobs will be created or lost, numbers can be found to
boost every contention, and whether or not there is a Nafta, US workers will
continue to lose jobs as companies seek cheaper labour south of the border
or in Asia.
Although the ITC also concluded that there would be an almost indiscernible
effect on US wage rates for both low-skilled and high-skilled wages,
American unions worry that US wages will be forced downward as workers
compete with lower-paid brethren in Mexico.
To assuage labour's concern, the Clinton administration has promised to
negotiate a side agreement which would ensure that Mexico enforces the
strong labour laws it now has on the books. Otherwise, the unions say, the
'exploited' young Mexican workforce - 30m strong and growing - will never
freely share in the Nafta benefits and rising living standards.
Labour is supported by a number of Democratic congressmen and senators.
Rarely does a month go by without a group of lawmakers flying down to
Mexico, only to return shaken by the working conditions. Mr Richard
Gephardt, leader of the House of Representatives Democratic majority,
recently described a visit with a group of Mexican workers.
'Despite their living conditions, they all were proud people. They couldn't
understand why the system didn't work for them. Why the unions didn't
represent them. Why the rich got richer and their lives never seemed to
change,' he told a congressional committee.
He talked of the workers at a Sanyo plant in Tijuana who earn an average
Dollars 50-Dollars 55 a week, and whose manager said that once the Nafta was
signed, no US companies with labour-intensive production would be able to
survive the competitive pressures without moving to Mexico.
'I will not support a Nafta on a leap of faith,' he said.
Most of the US business lobby believes that market forces alone will raise
the income levels in Mexico, creating a strong market for US and Canadian
goods. The conservative Heritage Foundation puts forth this scenario: With a
Nafta, Mexican economic modernisation will accelerate. Because about 80 per
cent of all its capital equipment is US made, American industries are likely
to expand production and hire more workers.
These companies will not relocate because the Mexican workers and
infrastructure are not capable of supporting high-technology production. As
Mexico grows, the demand for skilled manufacturing in the US will grow,
placing upward pressure on US wages.
Advertising ventures by Mexican entities hoping to lure American companies
to their areas have been throwing fuel on the flames of union discontent. A
recent advertisement in World Trade magazine sold the Yucatan as a
businessman's paradise 'where labour costs average under Dollars 1 an hour
including benefits and the employee turnover rate is less than 5 per cent a
year. 'You could save over Dollars 15,000 a worker. . .' said Yucatan's
Department of Industrial and Commercial Development.
If the Clinton administration is ever to overcome the fears produced by such
untimely advertising ventures, then money must also somehow be found to
retrain American workers who lose their jobs to the Nafta. President George
Bush promised Dollars 10bn in new funding over five years on training and
adjustment assistance (Dollars 335m would be for Nafta); President Clinton
has yet to reveal his plans.
In its negotiations on the side agreements, the administration seems to
envision the establishment of a tri-national commission which is more a
watchdog than an enforcement agency. Mr Ron Brown, the US Commerce
Secretary, urged business in Mexico to reform itself voluntarily.
'You must demonstrate your commitment to high environmental and labour
standards, to job growth and the health of the North American economy,' he
told businesses in a recent speech. 'For some this may require a fundamental
change in attitude, a willingness to re-examine your operations and maybe
even a change in your processes.'
Even some business leaders believe such exhortations will not be enough. The
Economic Policy Council of the United Nations Association of the US,
composed of business and labour leaders and academics, recently called for
an effective enforcement mechanism and a timetable for the upward
harmonisation of North American labour standards.
Mr Paul Allaire, chairman of Xerox Corporation and co-chairman of the
Council, said the supplemental labour pact must ensure an equitable
distribution of benefits of Nafta and protect US interests in a more
integrated North American economy. Mr Jack Sheinkman, the other co-chairman
and president of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, said
that only 'steady improvement in Mexican incomes will alleviate competitive
downward pressure on US and Canadian wage rates, reduce the incentive for
illegal immigration and increased Mexican demand for US and Canadian goods.'
While the Nafta negotiators have been wrestling with the make-up of the
Trilateral Labour Commission, Mr Jagdish Bhagwati, professor of economics at
Columbia University, has found a way around the administration's reluctance
to interfere with Mexican sovereignty.
The US Congress can legislate rules for American companies in Mexico which
require that they 'act entirely up to our standards,' he said.
'It would thus strengthen the ability of the Clinton administration to
reject the outlandish demands that Mexico, despite its poverty, do much more
for the environment and labour than it can current afford and that it
replicate our regulations and standards on each industry,' Mr Bhagwati
concluded.
