FT  23 DEC 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Fat profits for
pharmaceuticals - Drugs companies' approaches to the potentially huge
obesity market are weighed up by Paul Abrahams
As surely as famine follows feast and hangovers follow New Year's Eve, the
decision to diet inevitably follows Christmas's excess calorific intake.
Help could be at hand from the pharmaceuticals industry, which believes the
potential market for drugs designed to assist weight loss could be huge.
In the US alone, anything between Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.3bn) and Dollars 8bn
a year is spent on weight-loss products ranging from sports club memberships
to low-fat frozen food.
While the overall US weight-loss market is already immense, the prescription
pharmaceuticals market is tiny, worth between Dollars 50m and Dollars 70m.
The problem is that there is no widely accepted safe and effective
weight-loss drug available.
Undeterred, drugs groups are investing hundreds of millions of dollars to
develop safe, effective and non-addictive drugs that will assist weight
loss. New York-based industry consultants The Wilkerson Group believe the US
and European market for pharmaceutical obesity products could each be worth
Dollars 1bn by 2000.
If the idea of a safe, non-addictive weight-loss pill sounds attractive,
that is part of the drugs companies' problem. Regulators are worried that
the medicines, which will probably be licensed only for people medically
threatened by obesity, would be used in the more general population. Doctors
would come under intense pressure from non-obese patients to prescribe an
effective treatment.
The regulatory authorities are worried that any new drug could be abused in
the way that amphetamines were in the 1970s. These drugs are effective
appetite suppressants but were addictive, with serious side-effects.
Definitions of obesity change from country to country, warns Christine
Nathan, director of scientific affairs at Servier, the French drugs group.
Its incidence ranges from 10 per cent to 50 per cent of the population,
according to how it is measured. Technically, there is a difference between
being overweight and being obese, says Shade Cronan, associate consultant at
The Wilkerson Group. Overweight means excess poundage, while obese means
excess fat tissue. Probably about 8 per cent of the population in developed
nations is obese.
The causes of obesity are complex and multiple. The obvious one is a
long-term imbalance between energy intake and output, produced in two ways.
One is when the body's metabolism is too efficient - it needs very little
energy to sustain itself and therefore stores the excess as fat. The second
cause is that calorific intake is too great. This is often a behavioural
problem, but excessive intake can also be caused by medical disorders. When
empty or full, the gut produces different hormone peptides that act on a
region in the brain called hypothalamus. This contains feeding and satiety
centres that control the feelings of hunger or fullness.
The peptides released from the gut tell these centres in the brain whether
the body is hungry or satiated. Excess production of certain peptides leads
the feeding centre to believe the body is hungry when it has enough food. A
shortage of peptides acting on the satiety centre indicates the body is not
satiated when in fact it is. Activity in the hypothalamus is partly
regulated by neurotransmitting chemicals such as serotonin and dopamine,
although their precise mechanism is unknown.
Whatever the causes, obesity is medically dangerous.
Mervyn Busson, director of medical sciences at Boots Pharmaceuticals of the
UK says it is associated with increased mortality. 'Those seriously obese
have twice to 2 1/2 times the mortality of someone their own age of normal
weight.' The most common problems linked with obesity include non-insulin
dependent diabetes, high blood pressure, gall-bladder disease, and possibly
cancer.
Given the complexity of obesity, a number of different tacks have been
taken. Normal dieting and exercise are the most common methods. Heroic and
unpleasant means such as wiring people's jaws and surgery to cut out fat or
remove sections of the bowel have largely stopped.
In the pharmaceutical world, most attention has been directed towards
creating drugs designed to suppress appetite.
Amphetamines worked by interacting with the appetite centre, probably
through neurotransmitters in the brain such as dopamine and noradrenalin.
Following the problems associated with amphetamines, a second generation of
drugs called fenfluramines was developed. These also interact with the
neurotransmitters in the brain and are less addictive than the amphetamines,
but their use is not widespread. The best-selling compound is Servier's
Ponderax.
More recently, a new generation of appetite suppressants is awaiting
regulatory approval. These are selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) which increase levels of serotonin in the brain.
Eli Lilly deposited its dossier for its SSRI appetite suppressant Lovan with
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1988. The drug, which is
marketed as Prozac, an anti-depressant, has still not been approved for an
obesity indication.
Meanwhile, last May, Servier filed its FDA dossier for its SSRI Adifax. The
drug was developed in the US by Interneuron, a small biotechnology group,
and Lederle, the pharmaceutical division of American Cyanamid. The drug,
already available in Europe, is effective in about 40 per cent of patients,
and has limited effect in a further 20 per cent, according to Nathan.
Other SSRIs in development include Pfizer's anti-depressant Zoloft, and
Boots' sibutamine. Busson says his company's drug allows patients to sustain
weight-loss of 1lb to 1.5lb a week over extended periods compared with a
placebo.
Other means of suppressing appetite are also being explored. Some companies
are developing drugs to raise levels of gut peptides known as
cholecystokinins, or CCKs, which increase the sense of satiety.
Peter Johnson, research and development director at Fisons, the UK group,
says tests involving direct injection of CCK failed because the chemical has
a short half-life and quickly disappears. His group is developing a CCK
selective agonist which increases levels of the hormone either by increasing
production or reducing the speed it is broken down by the body. Abbott of
the US also has a CCK-agonist in pre-clinical development.
Other routes being explored include attempts to create drugs that increase
the metabolic rate. A number of companies are developing 'thermogenic'
agents such as beta3-agonists which may affect fat tissue. But progress has
been slow. Zeneca of the UK recently abandoned its thermogenic compound,
while SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group, licensed its drug,
Fastin, to Mochida of Japan.
Another tack is to reduce intake of fat through the gut. Roche of
Switzerland has a compound in early development called Oristat. This is
believed to reduce production of enzymes in the gut that break down fat and
allow it to pass through the gut wall.
Shari Samotin, a principal at The Wilkerson Group, warns there is unlikely
to be a magic bullet. The causes are so complex that no one drug will work
in all patients. Most will need multiple therapies.
In spite of the demand, or maybe because of it, the latest generation of
drugs face substantial barriers before they reach the market. Unless the
long-term safety and efficacy of these drugs is proven, regulatory
authorities, particularly in the US, are likely to remain reluctant to
license these products for fear of huge demand from the non-obese public.
Nevertheless, the rewards for the first compound to be cleared are huge.
Weight loss drugs could lead to fat profits.
The series continues next month with a look at wound healing.
