FT  09 OCT 93 / Arts: The price Wagner pays
IF IT was a musical they would extend the run: if it was the FA Cup Final
they would charge twice the price of entry for a regular football match. But
it is Wagner. So they restrict the number of performances to six, charge a
small premium on tickets and watch the house sell out.
Last night, Wagner's Die Meistersinger opened at Covent Garden, the first of
only six performances (Max Loppert reviews it on Monday). Even with the
cheapest tickets at Pounds 29, the night was all but a sell-out. Later this
season English National Opera stages nine performances of Lohengrin. Tickets
are selling rapidly. Is it not peculiar, then, that London's opera houses
have not responded to demand by increasing the supply of what sells so well?
This, say the opera planners, is because staging Wagner is an elaborate
affair. Of course we would like to give the public more, but you try
building the sets, getting the singers, fitting in rehearsals and paying
overtime to orchestra and chorus for productions that start at 5.30pm and
end towards midnight. Impressario Raymond Gubbay also has doubts: 'From a
promoters point of view, Wagner is very difficult because the pieces are
long and that inevitably calls for vast financial resources.'
Their arguments go down badly with James Pritchard, editor of Wagner News,
who complains of a Wagner 'drought' in the UK. 'Wagner plays a very large
part in the repertoires of even small companies in France, Germany and
Scandinavia,' he said. 'The British companies always trot forward the
argument that it is too expensive, but they don't say that about big Verdi
productions. I think in this country, for some reason, we are a bit down on
Wagner.'
Even so, both of this season's operas last five hours and overtime payments
for exceptionally large orchestras and choruses are high. Both companies are
charging a premium, which does not look like much per ticket, but which
substantially increases the takings of the whole house. Top priced tickets
for Die Meistersinger at Covent Garden, for example, cost Pounds 129
compared with Pounds 119 for Puccini's Madame Butterfly, also on this
season. At ENO, the mark-up is about 10 per cent.
But with a dedicated fan club willing to travel long distances to hear
Wagner, why not charge even more? 'There are a lot of Wagner groupies out
there,' said a spokeswoman from Scottish Opera, which is planning a
production of Tristan and Isolde for next year. 'But you can't fill the
theatre every night with dedicated Wagner fans and anyway it wouldn't be
acceptable to regular audiences to double the price of tickets over night.'
But the biggest obstacle to staging Wagner is the shortage of Wagner
singers. 'For every 20 singers who could sing the lead role in Puccini,
there are only three for Wagner and they are all very busy,' said ENO's
Jeremy Caulton. Rarity value also means the singers command a bigger fee.
And once the singers are secured, the demands of the operas mean their
voices need to rest in between performances. At ENO, the rule is a maximum
of three performances every fortnight. That compares with three performances
in one week of Puccini's La Boheme.
Meanwhile, the length of the operas puts pressure on rehearsal time. For
most operas, ENO and Covent Garden are able to use their theatres for
morning rehearsals. But with Lohengrin and Die Meistersinger starting at the
unusually early times of 5.30pm and 5pm the theatres are out of bounds all
day as the stage is prepared.
At Bayreuth, which hosts a Wagner festival every year, some of the practical
restrictions of staging Wagner are avoided. The kudos of singing there means
the management gets away with paying less for singers. 'Most singers who go
to Bayreuth are prepared to sing for less than their international fees,'
says Caulton.
Surprisingly, Glyndebourne, due to open next year with a new and bigger
theatre, does not intend to tap into the public demand for Wagner, even with
its own international reputation and lengthy pre-season rehearsal period.
'Wagner doesn't loom large in our plans,' said a spokeswoman. 'But this is
more for artistic reasons than practical ones. We want to stick to the kind
of operas we have always done best.'
By restricting performances of Wagner, UK opera houses have ensured a stiff
demand. But are they depriving themselves of an easy income by holding back?
The risk is that unrationed Wagner would soon lose its pulling power. As
Caulton says: 'The ultimate success of Wagner next to Verdi and Puccini is
never really tested, because it is simply not staged as frequently.' And
Gubbay, who says it would be 'wonderful' to stage Wagner on the same scale
as Aida at Wembley is not convinced that there would be an audience. 'Wagner
might be popular with the cognoscenti,' he said. 'But you know what they
say: a Wagner opera starts at 5pm. After an hour and half you look at your
watch, and it says 5.20pm.'
