FT  09 NOV 93 / Survey of Business Travel (20): Maxims that should be obeyed
 -Traveller's Tale / David Munns talks to Michael Skapinker
MR David Munns has visited Japan three times this year and Australia twice.
He has been to Philadelphia, Los Angeles, Nashville, Miami and New York. He
has just spent seven days in Spain, Holland and France.
Mr Munns, in charge of the marketing of pop music at PolyGram International,
the London-based recording company, estimates he spends between 30 and 40
per cent of his time travelling.
He has only had one frightening flight, when the aeroplane could not land in
Nashville because of a storm. He has never been mugged. He has lost his
luggage only once.
He puts not being mugged down to common sense. He learns his way round the
cities he visits and he never walks down dark alleys.
Losing his luggage was the result of disobeying two of his travel maxims.
The first is to reduce the stress of travelling by always using the same
airline - British Airways in his case. When he lost his luggage, he was
flying to Bali with Garuda, the Indonesian state airline.
His second rule, broken on that occasion, is to travel with hand luggage
only. Mr Munns reckons he can live out of a carry-on bag for 10 days.
Another means of reducing stress is always to use the same car firm to take
him to Heathrow's Terminal Four. The drivers know him and his routine. The
firm is near his home and the cars do not get lost in the traffic.
Somewhat inconsistently, he does not like having a driver meet him when he
arrives at his destination. Looking out for a sign with his name on it is
irritating, he says. He prefers to hop in a taxi, except in Tokyo, where the
airport is too far from the city centre. There, he uses a driver.
He tries not to work on aeroplanes, or at least not the sort of work one
does with pen, paper or laptop computer. 'I will take something along if
I've got to do it, but I don't store up things to take along,' he says.
Instead, he does work of the more relaxing sort. As a senior executive of a
recording company which has ambitions in the film business, he watches the
in-flight movie and listens to music on his Walkman.
He eats a full meal before he gets on a flight. He does not like to wait,
stomach rumbling, for the airline meal to arrive.
He flies first class on long flights and if he is travelling overnight.
Otherwise, he goes business class. He flies from London to New York business
class because it is a day-time flight. He flies back to London first class
because it is a night flight and he can get some sleep.
Jet lag worries him less than it used to, but he has not entirely conquered
it. Nevertheless, he likes to start working the moment he arrives, rather
than giving himself time to recover.
He tries to visit cities when one of PolyGram's artists is performing there.
He stays in the same hotel as the performer. He is thinking about making
greater use of video conferencing, but in the music business there is no
real substitute for watching artists perform live and talking to them
face-to-face, he says.
