FT  06 FEB 93 / Clinton sees end to gridlock: But the president's first law
was an easy one
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton signed his first act of Congress into law yesterday,
in a ceremony that he and his supporters said signalled an end to the
gridlock that has pitted a Republican White House against a Democratic
Congress for the past 12 years.
'Today marks the end of gridlock and a new beginning,' said Vice-President
Al Gore at a signing ceremony in the White House Rose Garden.
The Family Leave Act, which will require companies with more than 50
employees to allow workers up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for the birth of a
child or to take care of a sick relative, was twice vetoed by President
George Bush.
Washington gridlock, however, may prove harder to kill. The act was
relatively uncontroversial, supported by a quarter of the Republicans in
Congress; its real impact on business is expected to be slight, as most
people work for companies which are either too small to be covered by the
law or already offer similar leave.
'This one was a very easy one. It's going to get a lot tougher when we get
into health care and budget matters,' said Sen Christopher Bond of Missouri,
a leading Republican supporter of the family leave bill.
Mr Clinton and his wife Hillary, whom he has put in charge of the
administration's healthcare reform project, have spent the past two weeks
massaging Congress in a way that some observers say recalls President Lyndon
Johnson.
The passage of the Family Leave Act shows that the new administration may be
able to win Republican support for some of its agenda - despite efforts by
some Republicans to booby-trap the bill by linking it to Mr Clinton's
controversial efforts to end the ban on homosexuals in the armed services.
Under the Senate's procedural rules, which are very protective of the rights
of the minority, the 41 Republican senators ought to be able to block any
bill they object to. In practice, however, there are few issues on which
they will vote as a party.
Democrats, however, are no more likely to respect the party whip, and some
of Mr Clinton's toughest opposition may come from the conservatives in his
own party, such as Senator Sam Nunn. Mr Nunn has already made Mr Clinton
dilute his position on admitting homosexuals into the armed forces, and may
withhold support from his economic plans if they do not include a convincing
assault on the budget deficit.
