FT  01 APR 93 / World Trade News: Washington report raises anxiety levels
abroad
THE US yesterday released its eighth annual foreign trade barrier report, a
grievance list which features prominently Japan and the EC and sets the
agenda for US trade actions in the coming year.
Mr Ira Shapiro of the US Trade Representative's office said the report was
part of the process of market opening, now the foundation of US trade
policy.
American officials, he stressed, negotiate to reduce trade barriers on a
most favoured nation basis so that markets are opened to all members of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The report is greeted with anxiety in many foreign capitals, where the US
often is seen as throwing its weight around by negotiating bilaterally.
Mr Shapiro said many US complaints could be resolved by completion of the
Uruguay Round, where the US hopes for 'significant progress by summer,' but
he pledged a new emphasis on bilateral efforts.
'In the last Administration bilateral efforts were often given short
shrift,' he said, indicating that this would no longer be the case.
Japan, not surprisingly, came in for the most attention, with complaints
ranging from taxes on alcohol, shipbuilding and aerospace subsidies, and
restrictive business practices in the soda ash market and structural
restrictions on direct investment.
'The regulatory environment of the Japanese insurance industry emphasises
stability and company solvency at the expense of competition,' the report
says. Foreign market access is also blocked by the distribution system,
which does not permit insurance brokers. Restrictions also existed in
securities, accounting and banking.
The EC threw up the usual suspects: variable levies in agriculture; market
access for wine, whiskey and telecommunications; and 'buy national'
government procurement policies.
The US trade surplus with the EC last year dropped from Dollars 16.9bn to
Dollars 8.8bn.
A new 'area of contention' in the Airbus section concerns the financing of
aircraft and engines by government export credit agencies into the home
markets of aircraft producing countries.
