FT  02 JUL 93 / Square Mile gets a ring of confidence: But terrorism experts
warn that a cordon couldlead to a false sense of security
POLICE plans for a checkpoint cordon around London's Square Mile will be a
welcome boost for the City's confidence, business and banking institutions
in London said yesterday.
But security experts yesterday warned that the scheme could create a false
sense of security - and small businesses servicing the City predicted
soaring traffic congestion.
Judging from the experience of security checkpoints in Belfast, most
security analysts accepted that the scheme, although low key, should be a
powerful deterrent to terrorist vehicle attacks.
'Terrorists don't like being caught,' said Professor Paul Wilkinson of St
Andrews University, an expert on international terrorism. 'The very fact
that there is a chance that they will be stopped will make them think twice
about the risk.'
But amid police calls for businesses to step up their own security checks,
he warned that experience in Northern Ireland suggested terrorists were
likely to respond to the new threat by moving their targets.
'Obviously the City remains the most attractive target. But terrorists could
switch out to the suburbs or to other cities, and we can't set up
checkpoints in all the cities,' he added, stressing that the only way of
beating terrorists in the long term was through improved intelligence.
Although the police plans for new X-ray vehicle search machines and
electronic sniffer devices were considered technologically feasible,
analysts warned that they were still not entirely reliable.
Mr John Wyatt, security expert at Search Training International, said: 'This
will probably serve to screen out the big vehicle bombs. But it's not going
to stop the small bombs in the bins or even on motorcycle panniers -
although those will never cause nearly as much devastation.'
Business leaders, who have been warning that without tighter security
measures London's reputation as a financial centre could suffer, yesterday
said that they did not expect the low-key scheme to present many problems.
However, small businesses servicing the City yesterday warned that if, as
suggested, the checkpoints carried out regular searches of commercial
vehicles and closed vans, it could hit their trade hard.
Mr Andrew Conroy, a truck driver with Harvey's Office Furniture company
which provides the City with office furniture, said: 'It's bloody
ridiculous. It can't last. If you've got 200 filing cabinets in the back of
your lorry it will take hours for the police to search it.'
Mrs Denise Jenkins, who tends office plants in the City, said: 'It will all
take much more time and that will cost money. Of course it will make
business harder.'
With more than 90 per cent of London's business community using public
transport to commute to the City, many regular workers also backed the
measures. 'I'm all for it,' said Mr Paul Blackman, a money market dealer
with the Sumitomo Bank, who travels into the City by train.
