FT  26 JUN 93 / How To Spend It: The top tables
ANYBODY in London this weekend and with even the smallest interest in
wining, dining and setting a fine table should head for The House &amp; Garden
Eating In Show. It runs until tomorrow evening (10 am to 6pm today, 10 am to
4.30 pm on Sunday) and there is so much going on I hardly know where to
start.
There will be wine tastings, table settings and complete kitchens as well as
demonstrations by some of our most famous cooks - Michel Roux (Cooking For
Your Pleasure), Antonio Carluccio (A Passion for Pasta), Anthony
Worrall-Thompson (Bistro Cooking at Home), Bruno Loubet (New Season's
Vegetables) and more. There will, of course, be masses to eat - the catering
is being run by Anton Mosimann and all around will be mouth-watering
temptations of every kind.
Those who have always wanted a more dashing sort of table will be inspired
by settings by Garrards, Liberty of Regent Street, Wedgwood, Tricia Guild
and Zandra Rhodes's own idiosyncratic approach to the art of the table,
photographed here left.
Zandra has come up with a rich, exotic table setting, part modern, part
ancient, part British, part foreign. The table cloth is her own design. The
cutlery is Acripole Dore (Pounds 850 for a 44-piece canteen) from Harrods,
but rumour has it that it will be reduced in the forthcoming sale. The
quirky bowls and setting plates are by Carol McNichol, one of our leading
ceramicists, and cost Pounds 42 each for the bowls, Pounds 60 for the
plates.
The flowers are by Paula Pryke of 20, Penton Street, Islington, London N1
(tel: 071-873-7336) while the four-tiered tulip vase is 18th century and
costs Pounds 800; similar versions can be ordered through Zandra Rhodes'
shop at 85, Hammersmith Road, London W6. The printed silk cushions are all
made by Zandra Rhodes - to order - at Pounds 150 each. The little figurines
are by Albany China.
The show is on at The Business Design Centre, Upper Street, Islington,
London N1. Tickets cost Pounds 9 and can be bought at the door or by ringing
the ticket hotline, 071-288-6888.
