FT  28 SEP 93 / US company to create 660 jobs in Belfast
VALENCE TECHNOLOGY, the US electronics company, is to create 660 jobs in
Northern Ireland by investing Pounds 76m in a factory making an advanced
rechargeable battery.
It is one of the biggest inward investment projects won so far by the
province's Industrial Development Board.
The plant, at Mallusk on the outskirts of Belfast, will start production
early in 1994 with full staffing expected by 1998.
Valence already has a Pounds 65m agreement to supply batteries from the
plant to Motorola, the world's biggest maker of portable radios and cellular
communication products. It also has a Pounds 13m contract with Delco Remy, a
subsidiary of General Motors, to develop Valence technology for automotive
uses.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, said the plant would
become Valence's main production centre for the new battery, selling to
customers worldwide.
He added: 'I am also pleased that Valence are showing the depth of their
confidence in Northern Ireland's technological expertise by setting up a
research and development facility here.'
Mr Cal Reed, Valence president, said Ulster was chosen because 'it is a good
fit with our strategic plan in that a supportive pro-business climate exists
and we have access to a good workforce, particularly university-educated
engineers, making it possible for us to begin production as soon as
possible'.
Valence's battery is based on lithium and polymer technologies and the
company's decision to locate in Northern Ireland will give the province
direct contact with decision makers in the electronics companies of Silicon
Valley in the US.
The company has been making prototypes at its San Jose plant since 1991 and
claims the battery now ready to move into production has a longer operating
life and reduced size and weight.
Mr Reed said: 'Our batteries offer significant advantages over the much
heavier conventional batteries which currently power cellphones, portable
computers, camcorders and hand-held tools.'
Seagate Technology - another 'Valley' company - will start production in
Londonderry next year, making components for computer disc drives and
eventually employing 500 people. Sir Patrick said the decision by the IDB to
open its first office in Silicon Valley had been validated by the two
investments.
