FT  20 MAR 93 / Markets: Long, dull and infernal - Serious Money / The
Budget and You
THE DEVIL is in the detail, said Ross Perot, the US tycoon, and he might
easily have been speaking about the Budget. Norman Lamont's speech might
have seemed both long and dull, but there was plenty for investors to ponder
in the small print.
Most tax allowances were frozen, such as the personal allowance, the higher
rate band, the annual CGT allowance, the age allowance and the inheritance
tax threshold. The married couple's allowance was not only frozen but
restricted to 20 per cent from April 1994.
Mortgage interest relief is also being restricted to 20 per cent, as from
April next year. At the same time, citizens can look forward to another 1
per cent rise in National Insurance contributions on earnings between Pounds
56 and Pounds 420 a week.
Taken together, those changes could take Pounds 645 in 1994-95 from a
married person with a mortgage who earns Pounds 30,000 a year. The sole
concession is the widening of the 20 per cent rate band, which works out at
a whopping Pounds 25 per person over each of the next two years.
Do not spend it all at once, especially as the chancellor decided to round
up the usual victims - smokers, beer-drinkers and motorists - for their
annual clobbering. He added VAT on fuel for bad measure.
The implications of the above changes are at least relatively
straightforward. Where matters become more complicated is in the detail and,
in particular, the change in the way that advance corporation tax is levied.
The figures are spelt out on page III, but the upshot is that, other things
being equal, higher-rate taxpayers, non-taxpayers and Pep holders will all
see a 6.25 per cent cut in their dividend income.
It might be that companies will increase their net dividends to compensate,
but, in the context of a weak economy and low dividend cover, it seems far
from certain.
The perverse impact of all this is that the elderly, who have saved
prudently for their retirement so as not to be a burden on the state, will
be the group much the worst hit by the Budget. They will probably see their
dividend income fall, while also paying the Chancellor's other levies.
What should private investors do? In spite of industry protests, the
benefits of a Pep have always been less obvious for a basic rate than for a
top rate payer. Even more so than before, basic rate payers should carefully
examine plans to ensure the charges do not outweigh the tax break. Indeed,
Guinness Flight has cut the charges on its Temple Bar PEP precisely to
address this point.
The change may also tilt the investment argument slightly towards bonds and
away from shares. A portfolio with a 65/35 per cent split between shares and
bonds might be shifted to a 60/40 split.
According to Whittingdale, the gilt fund managers, the change will produce a
benefit, in the form of a slightly higher yield, for basic rate taxpayers
who hold bond funds. However, the chancellor did not allow bond funds to
qualify for Peps so the news is not all good.
Whether or not you find gilts more attractive after the Budget probably
depends on whether you are convinced that the government has made sufficient
effort to bring the budget deficit under control.
If you are unconvinced, you may still find that index-linked gilts are
appealing. The real yields of over 3.5 per cent on long-dated issues compare
very favourably with the 4 per cent dividend yield on the equity market.
Although index-linked issues offer little income, they have distinct tax
advantages. Do not forget index-linked National Savings either - the limit
has been doubled to Pounds 10,000.
One wrinkle also worth noting is that company convertible bonds are
unaffected by the ACT change (since they pay interest), whereas convertible
preference shares, however, do suffer (because they pay a dividend).
This might increase the attractions for private investors of convertible
bonds, which offer a steady income and the possibility of profits if share
prices rise.
It is also important to return to the argument advanced by Robin Angus, of
NatWest Securities, that private investors should concentrate on total
return.
Although the chancellor did not increase the CGT threshold, at Pounds 5,800
it still represents an allowance that most investors fail to use.
A return of 5 per cent capital and 3 per cent income is just as good in
gross terms as a return of 8 per cent income and no capital growth. Given
the different tax treatments, the former option may be much better in net
terms.
This just scratches the surface of the technical changes which the
chancellor made. Those who have company cars, BES plans, their own
businesses or who are long-suffering Lloyd's names will find relevant
articles in the next few pages.
In short, there are a lot of details - and a lot of devils too.
