FT  07 MAY 93 / City security row flares as bombed offices report looting
NEW QUESTIONS were raised yesterday over security in the City of London
after it emerged that a number of buildings damaged by the IRA bomb in
Bishopsgate have been looted in the past week.
City companies, including the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, whose 26-floor
tower was severely damaged, disputed police statements that responsibility
for securing the bomb-damaged buildings rested solely with their owners.
The looting incidents, it emerged yesterday, all occurred after police last
Friday handed over responsibility for security in the 21-acre cordoned-off
area around the site of the explosion to the Corporation of London and
private security groups employed by the owners of the affected buildings.
The most serious incident appears to involve 99 Bishopsgate, owned by the
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank. Several tenants allowed back in the building for
the first time on Tuesday discovered evidence of widespread pilfering.
According to the bank, the latest incidents to be discovered affected three
floors, including offices previously occupied by the Saudi International
Bank. Additional damage and theft were reported yesterday by tenants on
other floors.
A spokeswoman for the bank gave no details of the thefts but said: 'There
has been pilfering and damage not caused by the bomb. Desks and cupboards
have been rifled through and things have gone missing.'
Police were also called into the area at the weekend after security staff
working for the bank reported suspected looting of several shops.
Another international firm said last night: 'We discovered that our offices
have been looted. Cupboards had been forcibly opened, someone had tried to
break into our safe, and several items have been stolen.'
The City of London Police said yesterday five arrests had been made at the
weekend and they were investigating the latest Hongkong Building incident.
Detective Chief Superintendent Thomas Dickinson of the City CID said the
security of the buildings was the responsibility of the occupiers and their
security companies.
City crime cut, Page 10
Letter, Page 16
