FT  16 OCT 93 / Letters to the Editor: Proposal to split charities' role
destructive
Sir, Alan Pike in Monday's FT ('Charity tins may rattle to a different
tune') and your leading article, 'An attack on the voluntary sector'
(October 13), commented on the launch of a new research study, 'Voluntary
Action', by the Centris group. This report proposes that charities and
voluntary organisations should be split into two categories - service
providers and campaigners - and that organisations must choose between them.
Such a recommendation is simplistic and destructive.
Our sector is very aware of the high standards demanded by our unique
position as recipients of gifts from individuals and funding from statutory
funders. It would be naive to believe everything in the charitable world is
rosy, but this report exaggerates the problems and fuels unnecessary fears.
Charities that provide services are engaged in a lively debate about how
they combine their increasing role as providers of services under contract
to government or government agencies and retain their independence to
campaign and lobby forcefully.
Charities can combine these roles effectively and they should not be
separated. Experience in service provision informs and enriches campaigning
work. Except for a very few examples, it is essential that voluntary
organisations undertake both roles. They would be failing in their
responsibility to their donors and supporters if they ignored the causes of
the social and economic crises faced by many people in need. Government is
much better informed and advised by charities through allowing the voices of
those at the sharp end to be heard.
However, I have significant concerns about two trends which are particularly
strong in the community care and health fields and which will risk the
goodwill of charities. Statutory funders often fail to pay the full cost for
services provided under contract. This is done deliberately in order to
provide a 'cheaper' service. Such irresponsibility leaves charity trustees
with the difficult choice between subsidising services out of charitable
funds or withdrawing services. The second fear is that statutory agencies,
with the current pressure on resources, will cease to fund the new projects
which supplement the basic statutory provision and lead to new and improved
services.
The report went further and suggested that tax reliefs should be withdrawn
and the Charity Commission abolished. This would be a significant
disincentive to donors. The Gift Aid scheme and the use of covenants would
be in peril. Withdrawal of fiscal benefits enjoyed by charities would have
very serious consequences, making it more difficult to stimulate people to
give in a planned and thoughtful way. Loss of supervisory support from the
Charity Commission might erode the trust people rightly have in charities.
I believe that the debate on the future of voluntary actions should focus on
how more people can be involved as volunteers and help to solve the problems
of our society - crime and youth unemployment, environmental degradation,
the challenge of helping the third world and the issues around the effective
provision of care in the community.
Judy Weleminsky,
director,
National Council for Voluntary Organisations,
Regent's Wharf,
8 All Saints Street,
London N1 9RL
