FT  20 JUL 93 / Bull market for adaptable economists: Treasury and Bank of
England staff are in demand as City groups change the role of the
forecaster. Peter Marsh examines the job description that goes with a
lucrative contract
IF YOU are a numerate teamworker and can bluff your way out of a tight
corner, you could do worse than try your luck as a City economist.
In spite of the recession and squeeze on employment in financial services
generally, international financial groups are stepping up efforts to recruit
such people, in an effort to link their financial research more closely to
trading of currencies and securities.
Mr Avinash Persaud, a currency economist who has just moved from UBS to JP
Morgan, said: 'A few years ago City economists hardly ever met traders. Now
the view is that economics research is only useful if it helps the bottom
line.'
The moves have sparked lucrative contracts for headhunters and a flurry of
job changes among top economists in an increasingly tight market.
There has also been a steady flow of bright young economists from the Bank
of England and the Treasury to the City.
According to one firm of headhunters, in the past year recruitment companies
have conducted 10 to 20 searches for senior economists in London, up from
about six two years ago.
Among those taking on more economists are JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley and
Merrill Lynch of the US, Yamaichi and IBJ of Japan, and Swiss Bank
Corporation.
Those most in demand will have expertise in exchange-rate turbulence and
large issues of government bonds from debt-laden industrialised countries,
which have added to uncertainties in financial markets.
An estimated 400 economists work in financial research in the City - more
than ever before. Exact figures are difficult to come by because many people
may have other titles, such as markets strategist.
UBS, with 32 economists in London, is thought to employ more than any other
City group.
Although 12-hour days are common, the rewards are high. Roughly 35 of the
top City economists are thought to earn more than Pounds 100,000 a year
including bonuses, with a handful pulling in more than Pounds 200,000.
A good economist aged about 35 can expect Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 60,000.
Salaries have risen gradually in recent years.
Economists with stockbrokers and investment banks work increasingly in teams
with traders. They are frequently called on to talk to clients such as
pension funds. Rather than worry about how bonds or currencies will behave
long-term, the accent is on supporting trading operations.
Mr Roger Nightingale, a stockbroking economist for 25 years who runs his own
financial-research consultancy, said that in view of this trend virtually
all City economists should be considered as part of their employers' sales
staff. He added: 'City economists are like pop stars: they are out to sell
records, not be the best economists who ever lived.'
Views differ as to how much forecasting accuracy matters. One top City
economist, speaking anonymously, said: 'Being an economist is unlike many
other professions. As long as you can can come up with a plausible argument
for the next pattern of events, being wrong has rarely been all that
important.'
However, in the tougher competitive environment in the City, traders and
fund managers appear to be taking more notice of economists' errors  - at
least the big ones. Mr Paul Temperton, formerly a top UK economist at
Merrill Lynch, was ousted recently, partly because he argued incorrectly
last year that Britain would stay in the European exchange rate mechanism.
Another City economist who was also wrong about Britain's ERM membership
said: 'Last year was a killer for economists. The abrupt change of policy in
Britain left a lot of us exposed. If you make mistakes and don't rectify
them, clients and traders can make your life very difficult.'
The high demand for young economists with experience at the Treasury or the
Bank of England is partly because they are prized for their understanding of
government policy. Also, they are considered young enough to switch to the
different working methods of the City. Their salaries can easily double, to
about Pounds 50,000.
Mr Julian Jessop, a former Treasury economist in his late 20s, received
'half a dozen' serious approaches before deciding to leave Whitehall a year
ago for a job at Midland Global Markets.
Mr Darren Winder, aged 28, who joined SG Warburg Securities in May after
five years at the Bank of England, said the higher salary was only one
factor influencing his move.
After his spell at the Bank, where most officials are forbidden to talk to
the outside world, he wanted to work in a less restrictive environment with
more opportunity to broadcast ideas.
He said: 'There's probably more chance of Kenneth Clarke reading my views
now compared with when I was at the Bank.'
