FT  11 DEC 93 / The icy test of popular democracy in the new Russia:
Russians vote in free elections this weekend faced with a chaotic array of
parties
At minus 40'C, the doors of aircraft freeze shut and must be prised open
with powerful hot air blowers, standard equipment at all Siberian airports.
When the temperature drops below minus 40'C, natives warn you not to wear
metal glasses or drink from a metal cup - they will stick to your face.
In Kemerovo, an industrial city deep in forest, it is so cold that the air
burns and your breath freezes into fine ice dust.
This is the land to which countless thousands of Soviet citizens were
transported to become slave labourers in Stalin's prison camps. In recent
weeks Siberians have been testing a political structure, unfamiliar to
Russians: popular democracy. Bravely, this weekend they will take part in
the first free elections amid a chaotic array of parties, interest groups
and eccentrics.
Many of those standing have only the haziest idea how political parties
might be organised - or offer a credible agenda for government. Many of
those voting seem bewildered by the dense piles of ballot sheets awaiting
them tomorrow - with votes for both the upper and lower house of parliament
and a constitutional referendum as well.
Galina Parshentseva is one of those gamely battling to make sense of this
blizzard of electoral paper in frozen Kemerovo. A young lawyer known for her
long blonde hair and mini skirts, she came to Kemerovo 17 years ago, and
moved swiftly through the party ranks. Now, as Deputy Director of Social
Protection for 18 cities, she is a candidate for for the Women of Russia
party. As she is taken to the day's first meeting in her chauffeur - driven
Volga, she is briefed by Galina Pushkaryova, a member of the campaign team:
'At two, you meet pensioners, at four, you're giving a speech to medical
students, then at six, we've got the miners.'
She starts off well with the pensioners of Azhero-Subzhensk, a miner's town
in a landscape of tiny wooden houses and red-cheeked women carrying
firewood. Her message could have come straight from the notebook of any
seasoned western politico. 'My mother is in the same situation as you. She
is living on a pension of 30,000 rubles. We need to raise pensions to keep
up with inflation.'
But with the medical students she falters. When a girl in a white coat asks
about protection for medical workers she smiles: 'I don't have a concrete
programme, I am a dilettante in these questions.'
'You have a lot to learn,' her friend Pushkaryova says when they are back in
the car. 'Study, study and keep studying, Lenin said - but you probably
missed that.'
Several thousand miles to the West, in a plush hotel in Novgorod, Igor, a
candidate for the Russian Unity and Accord party, shows a similar touching
naivety: 'Tell me - do you have any contacts with the British Conservative
Party?' he asks. 'I would quite like to join with them, in the name of
international democracy.'
But why? Is not his party's programme for a 'caring' economy, just the
reverse of Thatcherism? Igor shrugs. He believes in establishment and
'conservative' values. 'I mean, why talk about the 'left' and 'right' - who
needs it?' he says.
It is a valid question for voters trying to make sense of the conflicting
ideas, in a completely new kind of politics, where there is little real
debate between the parties. They find themselves in a world where 'left
wing' can mean pro - market, 'conservatives' lean towards preserving some of
the old communist system and communists and fascists may embrace each other
in a 'red - brown alliance'. In this sudden uncontrolled flowering of
democracy, many political disputes are often based on personal rivalries, so
the ironies of the new political language hardly seem to matter.
The obscurity of party names only adds to the confusion. For example, the
Civic Union, supports Russia's still mainly state-owned industry. Russia's
Choice is the pro-western, pro-reform party, closely allied with the
President, Boris Yeltsin. The Yavlinsky group, known by the acronymn 'Apple'
in Russian, wants more private property rights. But learning the names of
the 13 official parties is only a start: the parties contain as many
factions as the characters in a Russian novel.
At least everyone knows what the Agrarian Party stands for: the interests of
the 'red barons' of the threatened state farms. But the Liberal Democratic
Party, now running second to Russia's Choice in some opinion polls, is the
opposite of liberal. Its crypto-fascist leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky promises
summary executions and plans to 'curb the power of Jews'.
Of course, all the pro-reform democratic parties promise better social
protection, less corrupt government and market reforms - without mentioning
how the better life is to be achieved.
'To build better cars than Mercedes and better planes than Boeing, we simply
need to work harder,' says Svyatoslav Fyodorov, the wealthy eye - surgeon
and leader of the Russian Democratic Reform Movement.
Westerners may scoff at the amateurishness. But in a country where
advertising has only recently arrived, western-style hype does not
necessarily feel right. The most striking television promotion so far shows
black and white footage of a Soviet world ice hockey championship defeat of
Canada, with a soothing male voice promising to make Russia great once more
 -if voters opt for the Russian Party of Unity and Accord. But the party's
ratings are poor. And the most effective advertisement has been
Zhirinovsky's which simply offers himself. In a Russia where many voters are
so demoralised they might not vote at all - simplicity is attractive.
Yet for Russians this is one of the most serious episodes in their turbulent
history - a second chance this century to shake off its tradition of
authoritarian rule. One chance was lost in the 1917 Russian revolution. The
vote tomorrow will be the first to let them choose their parliament freely.
In Russia's presidential election in 1991, the choice was simple: vote for
reform, or a communist. Yeltsin won 60 per cent of a heavy poll. This time
the questions are much more complicated: what kind of reform? and what kind
of people? Most of the Russian cabinet are running. So are pop stars,
businessmen, cosmonauts - even priests.
And there has been no shortage of ordinary volunteers. In the Urals city of
Chelyabinsk, the selection meeting for Russia's Choice drew dozens of
hopefuls, who faced public interrogation about their motives, salary, mental
balance - and KGB record.
'I'm offering myself because we have to defend these reforms,' declared
Boris Mizrakhy, a local official, who sported a slick business card, and had
financial backing from a local pig processing plant.
Few doubt that Russia's Choice, backed by many of Yeltsin's ministers, has
had access to the most resources. But funds seem to have been flowing quite
freely into some of the rival parties too. The Unity and Accord party, for
example offered free alcohol at its launch in Novgorod.
'This is a great way to have a political meeting. I've never been in a hotel
like this,' said one tipsy delegate from Buryatiya. And who paid for the
luxury? An organiser muttered: 'Businessmen and banks. A lot are backing all
the parties, to ensure that one of theirs gets in.'
Not all parties could rise to hotels. The now-dissident Communists, held
their own launch in a run-down institute and explained: 'This election is a
farce, but we will take part anyway - we cannot abandon the people'.
However, perhaps the strongest protest against this sea of grey suits is
from the group called 'Women of Russia'. It is protesting against the fact
that so few women have achieved political power - only 5.5 per cent of the
last parliament were female.
Like all fledgling political movements, Women of Russia is short on
experience - but this may be its greatest asset among parts of the
electorate wary of the grandiose promises littering the campaign.
However, adjusting to the election spotlight, as Ekaterina Popova, a
candidate admits, is difficult for both sexes. Soviet society discouraged
individualism and so for Russians, western style glitz and the focus on
personalities seems embarrassingly egocentric. 'It's difficult
psychologically. We were raised to believe that the interests of society,
not our own interests, came first.' says Popova. 'Now something in society
has changed. But it's impossible to transform yourself inside.'
Not everyone would be as gloomy. Russia's steps into democracy might be
wobbly, but lessons are being learnt. A political ferment has emerged that
cannot easily be stamped out. But with Zhirinovsky's crypto-fascists rising
in popularity, the crucial question that will hang in the frozen air across
Russia tomorrow is will this 'democracy' outweigh the authoritarian
traditions that have shaped so much of Russia's past?
All power to the president, page XVII
