FT  22 MAY 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Why obsession is on the menu - Rich foods
WHY is it that rich men and women become obsessed with making wine, serving
meals and running hotels. It must be love because having made money the
sensible way they are ignoring commercial discipline and lavishing cash on
their labours. So have California Cabernets been born, French chateaux
renovated and grand Spanish hotels reopened.
One of the latest businessmen to do it is Jean Michel Signoles who, in 1967
at the age of 19, founded a children's wear company called Chipie. Today,
his textile empire has outposts on high streets from Tokyo to London and
boasts an annual turnover of more than Pounds 100m.
Chipie is still based in Signoles's home town of Carcassonne, in south west
France, now home to his smaller culinary empire. Signoles was born in a
house in a poor quarter of the town and grew up in the shadow of the cite of
Carcassonne, the 12th century walled city that was reconstructed by
Viollet-Le-Duc in the 19th century and, more recently, acted as Nottingham
Castle for Kevin Costner in his film reconstruction of Robin Hood.
Situated between the cathedral and the castle was a bishop's palace which,
over the centuries, was host to saints, popes and various kings of France.
In 1909 the palace became an hotel and guests included Maurice Chevalier,
Grace Kelly, Walt Disney and the British middle classes touring in their
Singers and Wolseys. During the second world war it acted as the
headquarters of Air France after it fled Paris.
The hotel closed in 1986 and eventually Signoles bought it. Chipie was
attracting so many business clients that finding suitable accommodation was
becoming impossible. But this does not explain adequately the Pounds 5m
investment in this hotel, its sister hotel next door, the Dame Carcas, and
the lively bistro, Les Coulisses du Theatre, in the 13th century Rue Saint
Louis. Civic pride and the chance to paint his design talents on to a larger
canvas have also played a part.
It has also allowed Signoles' strong anglophile tendencies to prevail. The
bedrooms are decorated courtesy of Colefax &amp; Fowler, all the bathroom
fittings are British and the garage houses his meticulously-maintained, pale
blue Jaguar Mark 2 3.8. The library houses a complete set of Guide Michelin
back to its first appearance in 1900, while the bar and dining room look and
feel like a cross between an Oxbridge college and a Spanish parador.
In fields where Signoles is not expert he has taken expert advice. The wine
list, although it contains many reasonably priced bottles from the
surrounding vineyards, reads like the catalogue from a Christie's wine
auction: 12 vintages of Chateau Margaux back to 1929, 14 vintages of Petrus
back to 1954, 13 vintages of Lafite to 1902 and the same number of different
vintages of Chateau d'Yquem.
In the kitchen, Signoles has hired an extraordinarily talented chef, Michel
del Burgo, aged 30, and given him a kitchen that most chefs only dream
about. The main section is dominated by an enormous Molteni stove  -
considered to be the Rolls-Royce of its field - while at one end of the
kitchen, and visible from the dining room, is an open spit oven that gives
the air of a medieval banqueting hall. I ate the farmyard chicken, stuffed
with herbs, spit-roasted and served with cep mushrooms. It was delicious.
So too were our first courses. A thick, cold but luxurious potato soup
topped with generous shavings of truffles; one of Del Burgo's signature
dishes, a risotto made from epeautre, the eye of a local strain of wheat
instead of rice, with wild asparagus, and a carpaccio of duck served with a
slice of foie gras on country bread. Del Burgo has managed to combine the
region's penchant for trencherman-like servings at every course with
refinement and even tweaked the local speciality, cassoulet, by making his
with duck, hare and tender young pork. He has also had the modesty to put at
the bottom of his menu the names of his sous chef and patissier. The
latter's art is obvious from the delicious breads to the petits fours that
followed a memorable hot chocolate souffle with a white chocolate sauce.
The consequences of all this investment, hard work and talent is the
restaurant's first star in the 1993 Michelin guide. After only two years,
this is a considerable feat in the conservative world of French gastronomy.
My biggest criticism of the restaurant is certainly one that would not
bother any French reviewer. Although the service is attentive and friendly
it lacks, I feel, a personality to orchestrate the imposing dining room and
bar. But possibly Signoles intends to solve that by importing a British
maitre d'. Now that would show style.
Hotel de la Cite, Place de l' Eglise, 11000 Carcassonne. Tel 68-71-60-60,
fax 68-71-50-15. Rooms FFR800 to FFr1,000. Restaurant, La Barbacane, set
menu from FFr250. A la carte FFr500.
Dame Carcas, tel 68-71-37-37. Rooms FFr420 to FFr650.
