FT  25 JUN 93 / Kurds free Munich hostages after Turkish consulate siege
KURDISH MILITANTS last night freed the final 10 hostages they were holding
at the Turkish consulate in Munich and surrendered, bringing to an end a day
of co-ordinated attacks on Turkish interests across western Europe.
Munich police said the gunmen - at least eight men - seized 21 hostages 12
hours earlier, then released 11, and threatened to burn the building if
police stormed it.
Bonn rejected their demand that Chancellor Helmut Kohl appear on TV and
'call on the Turkish government to stop the war against Kurdistan'.
The militants gave themselves up peacefully after hour-long negotiations
with Mr Bernd Schmidbauer, state secretary in the chancellery, and were
taken to a Munich police station.
The surrender marked the end of an unprecedented wave of attacks by Kurdish
militants across Europe.
In Berne, Switzerland, one demonstrator died and seven were wounded when
gunfire erupted among militants, police and Turkish embassy personnel, the
Swiss government said.
Switzerland threatened to ask the Turkish ambassador, Mr Kaya Toberi, to
surrender his diplomatic immunity if the embassy refused to help find out
who shot dead the demonstrator.
Small groups of militants wielding iron bars and axes also went on the
rampage in 20 German cities and towns - including Berlin, Hamburg, Hanover,
Dortmund, Bonn, Frankfurt and Stuttgart - breaking windows and furniture in
Turkish shops and banks. The North Rhine-Westphalia police said they had
arrested 28 militants.
In London, police arrested 24 who forced their way into a Turkish bank
through a fire escape. They were expected to be charged with criminal damage
and public order offences.
Turkish tourism offices, airlines and banks in Geneva, Zurich, Copenhagen,
Stockholm and Lyon were also attacked.
In Marseilles, Kurdish attackers released some 10 hostages at the Turkish
consulate unharmed and surrendered to police after a siege lasting nearly
three hours.
The attacks took place around 10am (8am GMT). Police said the degree of
co-ordination was unprecedented.
Reuters news agency reported that the Marxist Kurdistan Workers' party
(PKK), fighting a guerrilla campaign for a Kurdish state in south-east
Turkey, claimed responsibility for the attacks. However, police in Munich
said the gunmen denied acting as PKK agents.
Kurds take campaign to streets of Europe, Page 3
