FT  23 OCT 93 / Travel: Kenya - just beating around the bush - Afraid of
being eaten, Michael Thompson-Noel still got close to elephants and seven
cheetah
DAY 1, 2pm: Happiness is seeping into me, like a welcome dose of painkiller.
I am at Rekero Farm, under the crest of Kipeleo hill, in the north-western
part of Kenya's Masai Mara conservation area, watching elephants drinking at
a water-hole which is fed by a year-round spring. The elephants snort and
push, and spray themselves with dust.
I arrived from London yesterday and was transferred at once to Nairobi's
smaller airport where I caught a charter flight to an airstrip in the Mara.
Total travelling time from Heathrow: 12 1/2 hours. Impact on the psyche:
immediate and considerable. My regret at transiting Nairobi: absolutely
zero.
Richard Leakey, director of the Kenya Wildlife Service, admits that the back
streets of Nairobi, where lynchings are commonplace, some by necklacing, are
now no safer than the back streets of Miami, and that the city's vice and
violence have played a role in the decline in Kenyan tourism.
Ron Beaton, who runs Rekero Farm with Pauline, his wife, says: 'Staying
overnight in Nairobi is a complete waste of time. It used to be a fun city;
now it's a den of iniquity.'
So to hell with Nairobi.
By now the wind has shifted slightly. The elephants have smelt me. Irritably
they wave their trunks. They glare across the water-hole. Crossly, they move
away.
The peace at Rekero - a private home with accommodation for six guests  - is
as fine as its old-time hospitality. Guests sleep in twin thatched cottages
which overlook the water-hole, 30 yards away. There is wildlife all around,
including, says Ron Beaton, three prides of lion.
Beaton is a third-generation Kenyan with a farming and wildlife background.
'If clients are hyper on seeing the Big Five (lion, leopard, Cape buffalo,
black rhino and elephant),' he cautions, 'then they'd be better off in the
game lodges. Here, we put more emphasis on an authentic African experience
than on cut-glass luxury.' Yet Rekero is perfectly civilised.
This morning Ron led our little group on a game-drive and walk. I much
preferred the drive. Game-walks make my heart race. You can trudge along for
hours, scarcely seeing a thing. You could easily be eaten. I imagine it
happens often: a roar and a thud and - arrghhh]
What surprised me this morning was that we saw seven cheetah from a range of
a few feet. They virtually ignored the vehicle. First we saw two males,
walking slowly across the plain, their cheeks bloodied from breakfast. Then
a female with a cub (the only survivor of three). And then a female with two
cubs, barely four weeks old, vulnerable and mewling. When they skittered
away, the female called to them anxiously.
Day 2, 6pm: I am sitting alone on Rekero's veranda. The others have gone for
a walk, heedless of gathering lion and of other unspeakable dangers. I am
flipping through the pages of African Hunter, a dinosaur of a tome even when
it was published in 1975. It is a reverential guide to the business of
slaughtering wildlife by a man, James Mellon, who had shot approximately 450
African game animals.
In Chapter II, in a section about Tanzania, Mellon discusses methodology:
'Leopard occur virtually everywhere in Tanzania and can be attracted to dead
bait without much difficulty. Many huge old toms have been taken in the
north along the korongos (dry watercourses) of Masailand, but with luck a
trophy cat can be shot almost anywhere. Where circumstances permit, leopard
can sometimes be drawn out of thick cover by beaters and shot on the run
with 00 buckshot. But baiting in trees with putrid carcases is usually more
successful.'
Today, Richard Leakey says that Kenya's conservation efforts are producing
good results. Nearly 28,000 square miles are protected areas. In the past
two years Kenya has attracted more than Dollars 150m (Pounds 99.3m) in
outside aid to spend on wildlife conservation and the necessary
infrastructure.
'It is often claimed,' he says, 'that in Kenya more and more tourists are
clustering round fewer and fewer animals. Yet of 52 national parks and
reserves, only seven are accessible to mass tourism.
'Our security is excellent. We have 900 armed men, plus good surveillance
and intelligence. In general, the standard of safety for tourists in our
parks is good, and commercial poaching has been reduced virtually to zero.
'One of the biggest problems now is destruction of crops by elephants. We
are losing 50-60 elephants a year - no more than 10 in the national parks -
as a result of attacks by villagers, compared with the thousands being lost
previously.
'Kenya is firmly opposed to any renewal of trade in ivory and rhino horn for
at least five years. If trade in ivory were to restart in any part of
Africa, the black market would start again and we would face renewed serious
security problems in our national parks.
'Numbers? Kenya's black rhino population is certainly now 400-450, compared
with 300-350 four years ago. There are 80 white rhino, which are not
indigenous, mostly on private land, and about 26,000 elephants, compared
with a low of possibly 18,000.'
Day 3, 4pm: Now I am at Ol Donyo Wuas - it means spotted hills in Masai -
more than 200 miles south-east of the Mara, in the foothills of the Chyulu
hills which run between Amboseli and Tsavo national parks. This is supremely
beautiful country: semi-arid, with a short-grass plain stretching to the
horizon on which, 45 miles away, Mt Kilimanjaro is propped. Annual rainfall
hereabouts: 20 inches annually. The nearest source of water: a village 23
miles away.
Ol Donyo Wuas is owned and run by Richard Bonham, a buccaneering bachelor -
he is a qualified commercial pilot - who specialises in unusual safaris,
including walking-and-boating adventures from his camp on the Rufiji river
in Selous game reserve, southern Tanzania.
Accommodation at Ol Donyo Wuas is in four comfortable cottages, limiting
guests to a maximum of eight. Activities available include game drives and
walks, horse riding, horse safaris (you stay in camps each night) and bird
shooting (July to October). Because of the dryness there is less game here
than in the Mara, but there is still quite enough. Unsurprisingly, Bonham
rates the location of his home one of the most startling in Kenya. He
discovered it from the air.
Like Ron Beaton in the Mara, Bonham works closely with the local Masai, who
view him as a friend and from whom he rents his land. I asked Bonham what he
did to help the Masai, beyond his role as an employer.
He said: 'I represent them on a wildlife committee; run a cropping
programme; have set up a women's workshop, which I use as a forum for
wildlife education; have established a trust which pays for wildlife
scholarships and for schoolbooks. And if someone gets mauled by animals, I
try to cover the cost.'
A year ago he was asked to rescue a 17-year-old Masai who had been badly
mauled on a lion hunt. The lion had killed a cow, so a dozen warriors hunted
it. Three speared it; then the 17-year-old was mauled. Bonham rescued him
and flew him to the best hospital in Nairobi which patched him up. Medical
bills alone ran to Dollars 1,500. The warrior recovered; now he is a herder.
A Masai lion-hunt must be a sight-and-a-half. The warriors run the beast
down - stamina is not its forte - and are armed only with spears. The most
courageous warrior is the one who grabs the lion's tail and holds on to it.
Usually the warriors are juiced-up on a decoction of the bark of acacia
nilotica, which acts as a powerful stimulant.
It is a fine plant, the acacia. Other members of the subfamily are used by
medicine men for treating diarrhoea, intestinal worms, itchy rash, female
sterility, snake bite, malaria, bubonic plague, bleeding, skin eruptions,
brain infections, swellings, and head or body sores.
Day 4, 5pm: For a final dose of painkiller I have travelled, via Nairobi, to
the comfortable tented camp on Funzi Island, 40 miles south of Mombasa,
where the pleasant mindless life of small tropical islands anywhere is
abundantly in evidence: fishing, goggling, swimming, or idling through the
mangroves. In an hour's time I start my return trek to London. It gets
harder every time.
Michael Thompson-Noel's trip was organised by Worldwide Journeys and
Expeditions. The company's new brochure is published next week: 8 Comeragh
Road, London W14 9HP, tel: 071-381 8638, fax: 071-381 0836. There is a
15-day 'Homes of Kenya' holiday in the new brochure which takes in Ol Donyo
Wuas, Rekero Farm and Funzi Island, plus Sangare Ranch in the foothills of
the Aberdares. Based on four people travelling together, the price is Pounds
2,795 per person (Jan-Nov) or Pounds 2,930 (Dec). However, Worldwide
Journeys and Expeditions will put together almost any itinerary you want,
for Kenya or elsewhere.
Details of other visits to Kenyan homesteads can be had from Ron Beaton: Off
the Beaton Track, PO Box 14398, Nairobi, tel: 506139/502491. Richard Bonham
can be contacted via PO Box 24133, Nairobi, tel: 882521. For Funzi Island:
PO Box 90246, Mombasa, tel: 228677.
