FT  19 OCT 93 / Serbs again warned of Nato strikes
MR Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, has again warned the
Serbian president, Mr Slobodan Milosevic, of possible Nato air strikes to
halt any Serb effort to strangle the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, the State
Department said yesterday, Reuter reports from Washington.
The department's spokesman, Mr Mike McCurry, said the Serbs had been warned
of the 'consequences of that strangulation'. Asked what those consequences
were, he referred to a Nato communique in August that warned of possible air
strikes against Serbian guns.
In Sarajevo yesterday, United Nations officials complained that organised
Moslem disturbances were disrupting their operations in central Bosnia and
negotiated for the return of two stolen armoured vehicles.
The Bosnian capital was hit by renewed shelling and fighting between the
three warring sides in the civil war was reported across the republic.
Peacekeepers in central Bosnia said women and children in Moslem-controlled
Zenica blocked a UN convoy and looted fuel from a peacekeeping patrol in
what UN sources called a systematic effort to disrupt their operations.
'We believe we are looking at organised civil disturbances,' said a UN
source in Vitez, about 12km from Zenica, where the incident took place.
'Clearly someone wishes to make a point. We're trying to find out what that
point is.'
The UN convoy aborted its mission and returned to a warehouse after about
150 women and children blocked its route out of Zenica. A similar crowd
surrounded and looted a UN Land Rover and trailer in the early afternoon,
stealing nine containers of fuel.
The UN said an 'uncontrolled' Bosnian army unit held up two armoured
personnel carriers carrying nine UN soldiers outside Sarajevo over the
weekend. They let the soldiers go after a few hours but kept the APCs and
other equipment.
General Francis Briquemont, commander of UN troops in Bosnia, met Bosnian
army commander General Rasim Delic yesterday to complain and demand the
return of the vehicles.
International mediators trying to come up with a peaceful solution to the
war were working on a new 'global approach', Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN
secretary-general, said. Mr Boutros Ghali told the French daily Le Monde he
met the UN mediator, Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, on October 9 to discuss all
options in case a peace plan for Bosnia failed and the situation
deteriorated in Croatia and Serbia.
'We worked on the idea of a global approach and a new international
conference following the London conference,' he said, referring to a meeting
in London last November which gave Mr Stoltenberg and Lord Owen their
negotiating mandate.
Diplomats said last week a global approach would be based on the premise
that the west might have a greater chance of extricating itself from the
Yugoslav quagmire if it tried to solve all the region's problems together
rather than tackling them piecemeal.
The UN leader said the plan to divide Bosnia into three ethnic mini-states
was not dead. 'No, nothing is buried,' he said. 'We must be very flexible,
very pragmatic. Suppose that tomorrow the parties in ex-Yugoslavia suddenly
come to agreement. One can never know.'
But there was no sign of any such agreement.
Moslems, who have declared autonomy in the north-west Bosnia's Bihac
enclave, yesterday claimed that government forces launched an attack on
Kudici, a village 25km south of the rebel stronghold of Velika Kladusa.
