FT  04 MAY 93 / Netherlands 'likely to escape recession'
THE outlook for the Dutch economy is 'mediocre', with growth likely to fall
below 1 per cent in 1993 before rebounding to around 2 per cent in 1994,
according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Despite its predictions of a lacklustre immediate future, the OECD seems to
provide additional support for the widely held Dutch view that the economy
will probably be able to escape the recession plaguing neighbouring Germany,
which is the Netherlands' biggest trading partner and accounts for up to 30
per cent of its exports.
Like most other European economies, Dutch growth is faltering. 'But in the
Netherlands this cyclical episode is likely to be relatively mild, in part
because of the absence of many of the imbalances that typically characterise
the end of a period of expansion,' the OECD says in its biannual report on
the country.
However, it cautions that its predictions of a muted downturn were based on
projections made in late February and that the German economy has
deteriorated further since then. It warns that Dutch growth rates may have
to be revised downwards to take this into account.
The OECD cites a number of strengths in the Dutch economy. Inflation, which
increased to 4.1 per cent in 1991, is already falling and is significantly
below that of Germany. The current account surplus is healthy and the
guilder strong, a factor that has enabled the Dutch central bank to trim
interest rates independently of the German Bundesbank several times in the
past six months without affecting the currency's firmness.
An important weak spot in the economy is the labour market.
Although 'narrow' unemployment is about 6 per cent and low by international
standards, there are nearly 1m people receiving disability benefit out of a
population of only 15m, suggesting a large degree of 'hidden unemployment'.
The Paris-based organisation believes the Dutch government should
concentrate on tightening the disability scheme and on correcting structural
imbalances in the field of competition, in particular, where the Netherlands
has traditionally scored poorly compared with the rest of the OECD.
It notes that the Netherlands is already starting to change its policy on
cartels and price-fixing, and urges swifter introduction of market forces in
the public sector. Deregulation and privatisation should be considered in
utilities, health care and public transport.
