FT  17 NOV 93 / Independents remain at top in A-levels and GCSEs
INDEPENDENT schools re-main firmly at the top of the league tables for GCSE
and A-level performance.
Of the top 200 schools ranked by GCSE, with A-levels used to break any ties,
only 58 come from the state sector.
At A-level, a more important factor in the minds of parents when shopping
for independent schools, the dominance is greater with only 23 state schools
appearing in the top 200, according to the FT - 1,000 survey, which uses
more detailed A-level figures than the government and was published last
month.
Yet both figures represent a big improvement by the state sector and show
that non-fee-paying schools present a more viable alternative than many
realise. But the government's league tables have done little to resolve the
debate over whether independent schools are worth the money. In some ways
they obscure the issue.
The Independent Schools Information Service objects to the way the
government's tables have been drawn up because they take account only of
those pupils taking GCSEs who were 15 at the start of the school year and
not of those who were - as is often the case in the most academic
independent schools - younger.
Most bizarrely affected is St Paul's Girls' School in west London, where
according to ISIS, 87.4 per cent of all GCSEs taken were passed with a grade
A this year, and 99.6 per cent passed at grade C or better.
On A-levels it is the most consistent girls' school in the country over the
past five years, the FT's survey shows.
However, the government's stress on age-groups placed the school 247th, with
94 per cent of its 15-year-olds passing the equivalent of five GCSEs at
grade C or above. The remaining pupils had probably taken their exams
already.
As with the state sector the most successful independent schools are those
which are most selective - big city day schools with large catchment areas -
such as this year's top school, King Edward's in Birmingham. According to
ISIS enrolment at independent girls' day schools increased slightly last
year in spite of the recession. But the number of boarders fell 6 per cent
as parents decided that the schools, with average annual fees of Pounds
9,400, had priced themselves out of the market.
School fees inflation is declining, but still registered an 8 per cent rise
for boarders last year.
Falling applications reduced the degree to which boarding schools could
select, and has therefore made their academic performance look worse.
Boys' schools, in particular, are done no favours by GCSE performance - for
example Repton finished 468th, Rugby 469th and Haileybury 470th, all with 85
per cent gaining five or more passes at grades A to C.
The league tables, flawed though they are, show that the state sector puts
up a better challenge than many think. But parents living in inner-city
areas are still likely to find them strong evidence for looking at the
independent sector.
