FT  30 NOV 93 / International Company News: Deutsche Bank accepts Ferruzzi
debt proposals
Deutsche Bank, one of the main critics of the restructuring plan for Italy's
troubled Ferruzzi group, yesterday broke ranks with other leading foreign
creditors and accepted the proposals.
The decision, ostensibly for 'political' reasons, weakens the front of
non-Italian banks, which formally opposed the restructuring scheme drawn up
last month by Mediobanca, the Milan merchant bank, and leading Italian
creditors.
The plan calls for moratoriums and below market rates on interest payments
on Ferruzzi group borrowings, as well as rescheduling most of its debt.
Ferruzzi Finanziaria (Ferfin), the holding company, had net borrowings of
L22,600bn (Dollars 13.4bn) in June.
Last week, Mediobanca issued an updated plan which went some way to meet
foreign banks' criticisms by removing a number of group companies, to which
foreign banks were most exposed, from the rescheduling proposals.
In a message to other foreign creditors, Credit Suisse said efforts to
prepare an alternative scheme would continue. The other banks involved
include Barclays, Union Bank of Switzerland and Citibank.
Credit Suisse said the group would meet on Wednesday in Zurich and hoped to
be in a position to share its conclusions with other foreign creditors
before Christmas.
Deutsche Bank's defection increases the chances that Mediobanca and Mr Guido
Rossi, Ferfin's chairman, will be able to say banks representing at least 85
per cent of the Ferruzzi group's borrowings have accepted the plan. Board
meetings of Ferfin and Montedison, its main industrial subsidiary, were
scheduled for yesterday evening to assess banks' responses.
Reaching the 85 per cent level means scheduled shareholders' meetings of
Ferfin and Montedison look set to go ahead today and tomorrow. The meetings
have been called to approve steps to recapitalise Ferfin and Montedison.
Shareholders will also be asked to approve legal action against Price
Waterhouse, the auditors of Ferfin and Montedison. The boards of the two
companies say Price Waterhouse failed to detect severe financial
irregularities under their previous management, replaced earlier this year.
