FT  29 JUN 93 / EC commissioner may seek top job at EBRD
MR HENNING Christophersen, the European Community economics commissioner, is
expected to become the first formal candidate to replace Mr Jacques Attali
as president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The EBRD's Danish director, Mr Lars Tybjerg, yesterday told his fellow board
members that Mr Christophersen, a former Danish finance minister,
hadexpressed interest in the position. Mr Tybjerg gave fellow directors
copies of Mr Christophersen's curriculum vitae.
Meanwhile, Mr Attali, who said on Friday he would resign as soon as a
successor was found, yesterday made an emotional farewell to a meeting of
400 EBRD staff.
He did not mention his resignation in the short speech, but urged staff to
share his dream of creating a peaceful Europe in which the bank would
'create jobs and joint ventures for all . . . Maybe this is only a dream',
he said. 'It was mine, it is now yours.'
A quotation from an 'ancient Persian poet' ended the speech: ''An angel at
night whispered to me in the wind and told me there is no such thing as an
angel whispering to you in the wind'', he said. 'It is up to you now to
listen very carefully and you will hear the angel. It exists.'
It also emerged yesterday that Mr Attali's personal assistant, Mr Francois
Olive, who was responsible for all his travel arrangements and was recruited
from the French interior ministry, has become the first member of Mr
Attali's inner circle to resign.
Mr Christophersen is one of a number of possible candidates to replace Mr
Attali. However, Dr Onno Ruding, the former Dutch finance minister whose
candidacy would be supported by several governments, has told colleagues in
Citicorp, where he is a vice-chairman, he is not interested in joining the
EBRD.
The chairman of the bank's governors, Mrs Anne Wibble, the Swedish finance
minister, is likely to press for the appointment of an interim president, to
allow more time for a permanent replacement to be found, according to
Swedish officials.
Such a temporary appointment, also supported by many of the bank's 23
directors, could take place in the next few days. The directors, who
represent the countries and agencies which own the bank, are likely to call
an emergency meeting to discuss the succession.
'Many of us believe the ideal candidate as interim president is Claes de
Neergaard (the Swedish director),' said a director. 'We may formally
recommend to Mrs Wibble that she appoint him.'
Mr de Neergaard's appointment would be resisted by the bank's executives,
many of whom are lobbying for Mr Mario Sarcinelli, head of development
banking, or Mr Ron Freeman, head of merchant banking.
Mrs Wibble plans to discuss the succession issue with her two vice-chairmen,
the finance ministers of Japan and Slovenia, on July 6. She will also
discuss the sensitive issue of severance terms for Mr Attali.
Letter, Page 14
