FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of Venture and Development Capital (6): On the side
of the angels - Private investors can plug a persistent equity gap in small
businesses
that is how one expert describes the fitful courtship by small businesses of
business angels, the private investors sometimes prepared to invest equity
capital in small businesses.
This is a problem, because the wealthy private investors ('angels' is a
generic name borrowed from the Broadway slang for individuals interested in
backing promising show business in the US) could otherwise usefully plug a
persistent equity gap - the one that affects small businesses struggling to
attract smaller sums of capital.
This gap was first identified more than 60 years ago. It exists partly
because venture capitalists are generally not interested in investing less
than Pounds 250,000. They know it is cheaper to invest Pounds 1m as a lump
sum, rather than splitting the money into four different investment
decisions and quadrupling research costs.
Mr Colin Mason, senior lecturer in economic geography at Southampton
University and student of the activities of business angels in the UK, says:
'It is a problem for businesses which have exhausted their sources of
finance but are in too small a league to go to venture capitalists.'
Small wonder that people running small businesses are prone to visions of
wealthy private individuals appearing with wads of cash and common sense, to
perform miracles with their companies. The grander vision is that of hosts
(syndicates) of angels with bigger wads, led by an archangel.
A RECENT study by Mr Mason and his colleague at the Ulster Business School,
Professor Richard Harrison, found that the kind of people who become angels
range from big company managers who have retired with golden handshakes, to
small businessmen who have sold out but are looking around for a second
business to help build up.
Most are well-off but not millionaires. The average income of the 86 angels
surveyed was just under Pounds 50,000. Almost 45 per cent earned between
Pounds 25,000 and Pounds 49,000; 16 per cent earned Pounds 100,000 or more.
Small businesses know that angels are out there. They account for a sizeable
amount of small business investment in the US and their presence is
increasingly felt in the UK.
The trouble is they do not like to advertise. As Mr Mason says: 'They want
anonymity. No one with a spare million quid is going to advertise the fact.
They'd be inundated.'
For most business angels, investing in a small business is a spare time
activity. Researching those investments is time consuming, so most potential
angels rely on friends or informal contacts to find opportunities.
What is needed, says Mr Mason, is 'a lonely hearts dating agency which will
bring small businesses and business angels together.'
In the private sector, this has been tried. It has failed to make money for
the operators. The economics simply do not stack up; the costs of marketing,
research and guidance always outweigh the income from introductions. Mr
Mason says: 'There is a need for somebody to underwrite the costs.'
Awareness of the problem is now widespread. Solutions are being piloted in
both the public and private sector, forming part of various plans to help
small businesses.
The UK department of employment made its move in October 1991, as part of 'a
seven-point plan to help small firms and enterprise.'
Mr Michael Howard, the then employment secretary, announced a programme to
support 'business introductions.'
At the time he described it as 'a measure to tackle the difficulties which
some small firms find in arranging investment capital.' It involved 'a
programme under which local Training and Enterprise Councils and a network
of other organisations will work as 'marriage brokers' bringing together
investors with money and small firms with potential.'
Following a competition, projects were established in Bedfordshire,
Calderdale and Kirklees, Devon and Cornwall, East Lancashire and south and
east Cheshire. Mr Howard added: 'This will encourage the growth in this
country of informal investment, which is widespread and highly successful in
the United States.'
IN the US, angels are eager to fund fast-growing companies. Local lawyers
and accountants act as introduction agents - some estimates suggest that
angels are now the biggest single source of investment capital in the
country. Many belong to private clubs, of which some have offshoot angel
chapters in cities across the US. As in the UK, club members tend to be
former or current executives looking for money-spinning opportunities.
In the UK, Mr Howard's move is consistent with the thrust of current small
business policy, which is to encourage partnerships between large and small
businesses, between business support networks (TECS, Enterprise Agencies,
Chambers of Commerce) and small firms, as well as between academic
institutions and firms.
This follows the trend away from grant funding for small business
development; for example, the government's Loan Guarantee Scheme is under
government review and looks likely to be phased out.
Moreover, following an announcement in the March 1992 Budget, the Business
Expansion Scheme (which provides tax incentives to investors in small
businesses) will be terminated at the end of 1993. This is sure to please Mr
Howard Davies, director-general of Britain's Confederation of British
Industry (CBI), the employers' organisation.
Earlier this year he criticised the BES for acting as a 'middle-class tax
shelter'. As part of a six-point plan for small business finance he called
for a replacement to the BES which would apply only to investment in a new
type of local investment company, through which small business angels could
take stakes in targeted ventures.
This summer National Westminster bank (NatWest) launched a feasibility study
to see if a national database of angels could be set up. The bank is
carrying out a pilot study in the north-west of England and the Thames
valley, examining how much time and money investors would be prepared to
commit to small firms.
A recent survey by staff at the Ulster Business School, who also have their
own six-point plan for spotting angels, found that business angels are
'hands-on investors'.
Angels want to protect their investment, but they are also looking for a
'buzz factor'. This means that a small business can benefit from the
experience and skills of its backer, but it may also have to tolerate a
certain amount of bossing about.
