FT  18 AUG 93 / Letters to the Editor: Coal need not make electricity
expensive
Sir, There was much with which I agreed in your editorial 'In the pit'
(August 16). But your statements that 'coal is a dirty and expensive form of
generating electricity', and that changing the energy market by, for
example, restricting gas-fired stations, closing nuclear plants or halting
imports of French electricity 'would impose higher electricity costs on
British businesses and consumers' cannot go unchallenged.
If new power stations are to be built, coal is at present a more expensive
source of generation than gas. But why do we need new stations now when
there is already surplus capacity? High-efficiency coal-fired power stations
will be forced to operate at greatly reduced output and the consumer is
having to pay a return on unnecessary investment. This may well be one of
the reasons behind the surge in electricity pool prices this summer, which
has so disturbed consumers and Offer, the electricity watchdog.
As pointed out in the Commons trade and industry select committee report in
January, the cost of electricity from existing power stations  - even
allowing for the addition of flue gas desulphurisation when needed - is
cheaper than that from many new gas-fired stations, and will become more so
with the continuing decline in British Coal prices. The stimulus for much
gas-fired generation has been provided by rivalry between regional
electricity companies and generators, rather than by underlying economics.
As to nuclear, it is hard for a coal business struggling for survival to see
it implied that nuclear power, dependent for almost half its income in
England and Wales on a levy on other forms of generation, is somehow driving
out coal on cost grounds.
The attraction of imported electricity depends on the classification of
power imported over the link with France as 'non-leviable'. This means, in
effect, that wholesale purchasers of that power in the UK can afford to pay
more for the power because they are still collecting the levy on their
sales, but do not need to pass it to the French. The select committee
pointed out that 'far from providing cheap electricity, Electricite de
France has provided some of the more expensive baseload supplies'.
That the government decided not to make any fundamental changes in the
electricity market as a result of the coal review is a matter of record.
That to have done so would have led to higher costs to consumers is not.
A D J Horsler,
marketing director,
British Coal,
Hobart House,
Grosvenor Place,
London SW1X 7AE
