FT  06 FEB 93 / Sport: Farmer who thinks he's on a winner - Point-to-Point
BERNARD Heffernan is a punter and horseman of greater than average courage.
This middle-aged Dartmoor farmer has wagered nearly Pounds 20,000 on his
prospects of becoming the champion 1993 point-to-point jockey. Should he
win, Heffernan stands to collect nearly Pounds 750,000.
'I think the bookies should have a kind word said about them,' said
Heffernan as we drank tea at his kitchen table. 'If it wasn't for them, this
whole game wouldn't be on.'
If it was not for the spirit of Heffernan and others like him,
point-to-point would not be enjoying a boom. As the season starts, the
economic clouds over Flat racing and National Hunt seem to have missed
point-to-point. The 1993 fixture list is longer than ever, includes Sunday
racing for the first time, and looks likely to have more runners than ever
before.
In 1992 there were 12,715 runners in point-to-point, compared with a
previous record of 12,549 in 1988. There were 1,407 races last year, the
previous record was 1,293 in 1989. The 202 meetings held in 1992 were the
most for 30 years but, if the weather smiles, there will be 205 this season.
Rural simplicity gives point-to-point its charm. Every horse must have been
subjected regularly to the muddy rough-and-tumble of a local hunt. No
highly-strung thoroughbred darlings need apply. The usual course is over the
land of a sympathetic farmer, although some hunts do use steeplechase
courses. Races average three miles; ferociously long by the standards of the
Flat. Point-to-point is also dangerous and there are many accidents to both
horse and rider.
In the car parks, Range Rovers and filthy farm Land Rovers stand side by
side. Horses and riders mingle with the crowd. Pints of beer and pork pies
are far more in evidence than smart picnics - if only because the weather
often is foul. The only common ground is a love of horses - something not
always found on professional tracks.
Heffernan is aiming for 100 rides on just over 30 race days. A wall of his
sitting room is covered with a chart listing dates, meetings and horses.
Almost all of his rides will be on his own animals. Stabled around the muddy
farmyard are 20 hunters and former racehorses collected as part of this
audacious bid. 'I only rides my own,' he says with a thick Devon burr. 'At
my age, you don't want to risk getting up on other people's rubbish.'
The most famous of the string is Yahoo, runner-up to Desert Orchid in the
heart-stopping 1989 Cheltenham Gold Cup. 'They say he's too old but us old
boys got to stick together,' says Heffernan. 'His job is racing. You
couldn't just turn him out in a field. Getting into point-to-point has given
him a new lease of life.'
That might also be true of the owner. Three years ago, Heffernan had never
raced a horse, although he is a lifelong amateur show-jumper and hunts with
the East Cornwall. Last year, he had his first winner - followed by five
more - and eight seconds, and took the Woodhouse Trophy as point-to-point's
leading owner-rider.
'I don't see myself taking on Scudamore (National Hunt's top jockey) but on
the amateur circuit I'm entitled to my bit of fun,' he asserts. 'I'm a doer.
Can't be bothered with watching. There's so much enthusiasm and friendliness
in point-to-point, it's a fun thing.' Public and participants obviously
agree. Although racing generally is stricken and attendances are falling,
point-to-point expects record crowds.
Some say the big boys, sheltering from the financial problems of National
Hunt, are using the amateur world of point-to-point to keep their hand in
and their horses visible. Alternatively, with the continuing bad prices at
horse sales, perhaps breeders are holding on to animals and giving them a
run or two in point-to-point, hoping that a win might make them attractive
when life returns to the market. But perhaps the open, almost naive,
camaraderie of the 'pointers' is infectious.
After news of Heffernan's bet trickled out, his 'phone scarcely stopped
ringing. Even arch-rival Robert Alner, a Dorset farmer and last year's
champion, called to ask how things were going. Trainer Stan Mellor has
offered Heffernan tuition, but he is not sure if that would be fair.
Alner had 31 winners in 66 rides in 1992 and the bookies have him at 4-1 to
repeat the feat. The odds on Heffernan have closed to 10-1 since he placed
his own bets last summer.
How does he rate his chances? 'The biggest thing is me staying sound,' he
laughs. 'You can get another horse but if you lose the jockey youm
buggered.'
A team of six works on the Heffernan string. The farm has its own gallops
and the horses - bought for an average of Pounds 2,000 each - work out each
morning on the spectacular expanses of Dartmoor outside the front gate.
Heffernan's wife Denise, also a race rider, is putting nearly as much into
this effort as he is.
'I don't consider this a gamble,' Heffernan says, but his Devon accent
vanishes momentarily - perhaps a sign of a leg-pull. 'It's an investment in
our ability to produce a first-class animal. I just hope the whole bloody
thing stays fun. I want the public to come and say, 'Have a go, Joe'. I'm
nothing special.'
