FT  10 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Industry rejects forecast for
Indian jute crop
JUTE MILLERS and traders in India believe the government is being wildly
optimistic in forecasting a 600,000-bale rise in the country's jute crop
during the 1993-94 season.
With the season now in its second month and the market arrival of the new
fibre steadily growing, the agriculture ministry's projection of a crop of
7.6m bales (1.8kg each) has surprised the Indian Jute Mills Association,
which expects the crop to be down on last year's at about 6.5m bales. The
Jute Balers Association, which monitors the crop in all growing areas,
thinks it will be even lower, at 6.3m bales.
The Jute Corporation of India, the government procurement agency, also
thinks the ministry's estimate is too high. Last year the crop turned out to
be 7m bales compared with the ministry's forecast of 7.5m.
Industry experts also disagree with the government over its estimate that
the current season opened with stocks of 2m bales, insisting that the
carry-over from 1992-93 was no more than 1.5m bales.
All the agencies agree that the extensive floods in Assam and north Bengal
have caused little damage to the standing jute crop, but they expect fibre
supply to be tight throughout 1993-94, with the prices rising as the season
progresses.
In view of the short crop, the industry has demanded that the government put
a ban on the export of raw jute in the current season. India resumed the
export of fibre two years ago after a break of nearly a decade.
However, the shippers contend that no purpose will be served by stopping the
export of low-grade fibre.
The government is reported to be planning to encourage the import of
high-quality jute by the mills for the production of exportable jute goods.
According to the Jute Advisory Board, a minimum of 300,000 bales of fibre
will be imported this season.
According to Mr SS Chattopadhyay, India'a jute commissioner, the jute mills
will need 7.8m bales while village demand for raw jute will be about 600,000
bales.
The Indian paper mills have also started using jute as a raw material.
In order to persuade the farmers to grow more jute, the government has
raised the minimum price of the benchmark grade by Rs50 (Pounds 1.06) to
Rs450 a quintal (100lb). But the higher minimum price is unlikely to be
maintained during the peak fibre arrival period of September to November
unless the Jute Corporation is provided with adequate funds to intervene in
the market.
Hardly any purpose will be served if the jute prices go up once the farmers
have sold their stocks at low rates.
