FT  22 MAY 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Child's play for teachers -
Cynthia Hurst meets two women who make educational games
THE THREAT of redundancy turned out to be a blessing in disguise for two
Oxfordshire women, who have turned their experience of helping children with
learning difficulties into a thriving business.
Sue Lucksford and Jasmine Davey started HELP (Help Eliminate Learning
Problems) Educational Games, in the summer of 1991 when both - in their 50s
 -faced possible redundancy. In the event, Lucksford retained her position
as a special needs teacher in Didcot, but Davey lost her job as a special
needs resource technician, and a spare room in her home became the base for
the new enterprise.
HELP has found a ready market for its 13 board and card games. These are
aimed at specific reading and spelling problems, including dyslexia.
'Teachers are snatching them up,' said Davey. She says teachers have less
time to develop their own learning aids, and so are eager to find a
ready-made product.
'The potential to expand is enormous - we haven't touched half the schools
in Britain yet. As far as I know, no one else is doing this sort of thing,
so there was a gap in the market which we filled.' HELP began modestly, with
private savings, some financial backup from the government's Enterprise
Allowance Scheme and free advice from the Heart of England TEC and the
Thames Business Advice Centre. Turnover in the first year was Pounds 20,000,
and has grown to Pounds 3,000-Pounds 4,000 a month. The games are priced at
about Pounds 10 each.
'We've been ploughing all the money back into the business, so we haven't
borrowed at all except to buy an Apple Mac computer,' said Davey. 'I was
doing all the graphics with Letraset before, which took forever, but now I
can do them on the computer, and we also keep a database of customers on
it.'
Ideas for the games, with names like Odd Bods, Black Hole and Secret Sid,
come from Lucksford. They cover an age range from four to adult education,
and include some blank cards for teachers to add their own words.
Once an idea is developed, Davey does the artwork, developing it to the
ready to print stage. Most of the printing is done by a company in
Northamptonshire, which then ships the games nearby for finishing, cutting
and packaging.
They are then returned to Didcot, where Davey, Lucksford and their families
make sure each game box has the proper components and instructions. They are
shipped from the local post office to schools throughout Britain and
Ireland, and as far afield as Pakistan, where a British school has placed an
order.
At the moment, lack of money is the main obstacle to expansion.
'We really can't afford to do a lot of advertising, but we have had quite a
bit of success with educational shows and we have been included in the
catalogue for a purchasing group in Yorkshire,' said Davey. 'We tried mail
shots at first, but that was just too expensive. And we'd like to do
educational shows in London, but the cost of a stand is about Pounds 1,500,
compared with less than Pounds 100 elsewhere.'
She has taken HELP's products to shows, although travelling is difficult
because her disabled 16-year-old son needs constant care at home.
'The schools in Wales were very interested,' she said. 'One school wanted to
know if we could do versions in Welsh, and we'd be happy to try, but some of
the games are based on rhyming words, and what rhymes in English wouldn't
rhyme in Welsh.'
HELP Educational Games, 29 Churchill Close, Didcot, Oxfordshire Tel: 0235
817241
