FT  21 DEC 93 / Delhi set to resolve telecoms policy
The Indian government is preparing to announce early next year the terms
under which private companies can enter the country's under-developed
telecommunications sector.
Mr N Vittal, chairman of the government's telecommunications commission,
said yesterday he hoped ministers would decide on the new policy by the end
of January.
The rules will bring together legal, technical and financial conditions
under which private groups, including foreign companies, would compete with
the monopoly state telecommunications network.
Northern Telecom of Canada and Qualcomm, US West and Media Digital, all of
the US, are among companies which have submitted operating proposals.
Potential bidders also include Indian commercial groups such as
Calcutta-based RP Goenka and Delhi-based YK Modi.
The most advanced project is a Dollars 100m (Pounds 67m) scheme submitted by
US West for the industrial town of Tirapur and its surrounding rural
district in the southern state of Tamil Nadu. The company would install a
wireless-based system temporarily before laying fibre optic cables. The
proposal has been cleared by the government's foreign investment promotion
board but is waiting for approval under the terms of the new rules.
Other schemes include Northern Telecom's offer to operate basic telephone
services in the northern state of Himachal Pradesh, and a plan from Southern
Wireless Communications, a venture supported by Comsat, the international
satellite communi-cations operator, to run telecommunications in the
southern state of Kerala.
Mr Vittal told journalists he hoped to increase the number of telephone
lines in India from 7m to 20m in the next two to three years.
The chairman, who has been criticised by trade unions for his privatisation
plans, said he had given workers assurances that neither their jobs nor
promotion prospects would be harmed. The planned expansion of services would
secure jobs, and workers would be retrained.
Reuter adds: At least 15 Indian soldiers and one attacker were killed
yesterday when suspected separatists of the National Socialist Council of
Nagaland ambushed an army convoy in the northeastern state of Nagaland,
United News of India (UNI) said.
