FT  04 JUN 93 / Management: Breaking the executive mould - Andrew Taylor
examines Eurotunnel's plans for a common corporate culture
Two years ago Peter Randall was a British Rail depot manager at Slade Green
near Dartford, Kent. His experience of France was limited to the occasional
holiday and a French O-level.
Today, aged 33, he commutes weekly from his home near Folkestone in Kent to
Calais in northern France where he is the Eurotunnel manager responsible for
day-to-day maintenance of the company's wagon and locomotive fleet. Next
year, when the tunnel operator finally starts running train services between
Britain and France, he will be responsible for a staff of 160, most of them
French.
Quite apart from its continuing headaches dealing with combative contractors
and nervous banks, one of the big challenges for Eurotunnel at the moment is
to mould Randall and other senior managers into a new breed of cross-Channel
executive. Eurotunnel's workforce is split evenly between British and French
workers with different languages, cultures and lifestyles - but when it
comes to senior jobs the group is anxious not to be overly influenced by a
candidate's background.
Yves-Noel Derenne, Eurotunnel's director of human resources, says: 'The aim
is not to recruit a particular nationality for a particular post, but to get
the right person for the job, whether they be British, French, German or
from some other country. There will be some jobs, however, which we would
expect to be filled by one nationality rather than another. The servicing of
rolling stock (because this is based in France) would naturally fall into
this category. Headquarters for security, on the other hand, will be based
in Britain.'
Not all jobs will divide so evenly. Engine drivers taking the 50km journey
between the British and French terminals will be expected to be bi-lingual
and will be drawn from both countries. Traffic controllers will also need to
be fluent in English and French. The main control tower will be at
Folkestone, but with a back-up in France. Staff working on a rota will
switch regularly between Britain and France.
Even at the top - where national sensitivities are often greatest - the
company has tried to choose the best people for the job. Among the five
senior executive directors there are admittedly two Frenchmen and two
Britons - one of whom, chief executive Sir Alastair Morton, was raised in
South Africa - but Frank Cain, on secondment from engineering group Bechtel
to run the construction side, is American.
Eurotunnel's workforce, small during the construction phase, is growing
rapidly and currently stands at 900, more than double that of a year ago.
Eventually this will rise to 2,650 of which more than 90 per cent will be
drawn from Britain and France. A small number of mostly sales staff will be
based in other European countries.
Alain Bertrand, Eurotunnel's chief executive in charge of transport
operations, says: 'We do not want a competitive culture to develop, Britain
versus France. Unlike other bi-national or multi-national companies, which
have separate management operations in different countries, we supply a
single service irrespective of which country the customer comes from.
'It is important, therefore, that we establish a single management structure
and corporate culture in which safety and customer service are the main
driving force rather than nationalism.'
The ability to provide information to customers is very important: 'All
employees in contact with customers will have the equivalent of at least two
weeks of language training,' says Bertrand.
The aim will be to provide them with the basic phrases to cope with their
job rather than speak fluent English or French. Staff who want to improve
further their language skills or switch from one country to another will be
encouraged.
Language training is more intense for managers or engineers who need to be
able to converse freely in English and French. Some of these are sent to
live with English or French families while they attend intensive language
courses for up to four weeks at a cost of Pounds 1,100 a week including
accommodation.
Language is just one problem: 'There are different laws and cultures
affecting employees in Britain and France,' says Derenne. 'Some
multi-national companies adopt the laws of whichever country they happen to
be operating in. This is not feasible or desirable for us. We have decided
to adopt a common corporate policy based on a combination of British and
French laws, whichever works to the best advantage of employees.
'French companies, for example, are expected to establish works councils,
comprised of workers representatives and management, to discuss problems and
improvements for staff. Eurotunnel has decided to establish a group-wide
works council covering both French and British workers,' says Derenne.
Cultural differences, of course, will not be so easy to reconcile. As
Randall points out: 'Britons like to go out for a drink after work. The
French by comparison like to go home to their families first and may go out
later.'
In other respects, though, it will probably be a question of getting used to
local custom.
Management in France, he says, tends not to advertise posts internally as is
done in many British companies. Instead they will just promote the person
they think most suitable for the job. But the result in most cases is the
same.
Despite these cultural and sometimes procedural differences, Randall says
that most of the problems brought to him are similar to those he faced when
a depot manager at Slade Green.
'Staff want to know how much they will be paid, what holiday entitlement
there is, what are the promotional opportunities and what happens when they
are sick?'
