FT  09 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Rally peters out before trading
closes
A FAVOURABLE report on the domestic economy from the UK Treasury helped the
London stock market rally from early weakness yesterday. But the FT-SE 100
Index was edging lower in the final minutes after a mixed set of company
trading announcements left the market nervous ahead of what promises to be a
test of market confidence today.
Suggestions of a large rights issue in the food manufacturing sector this
morning subdued traders, who were already cautious ahead of today's profits
statements from Glaxo, British Gas and RTZ, as well as the meeting of the
Bundesbank policy committee.
A highly disappointing interim profits report from P &amp; O, the cross-Channel
ferries operator and property group, was received badly. But this was
balanced by better news from Wimpey, the housebuilder, and from Prudential,
the blue chip insurance group.
In early deals, equities gave ground sharply, albeit without suffering any
great selling pressure. The Footsie lost a further 16.5, bringing it down to
3,022.1 and increasing traders' concern over the depth of the shakeout seen
since last week's peak.
However, a rally then set in which gathered pace for a while after the
latest monthly report from the UK Treasury stressed the falls in real
interest rates in the UK, downward pressures on inflation and rising retail
sales.
The early losses in share prices were recovered and the Footsie only just
failed to move into positive territory, helped by firmness in the government
bond market as sterling improved behind the Treasury's report. But later in
the session, a weak opening on Wall Street, down 14 Dow points in London
hours, left UK stocks to drift off again for a final close on the FT-SE 100
of 3,035.4, a loss of 3.2 on the day. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index shed 7.8 to
3,462.4.
Seaq trading volume dipped to 600.3m shares, from 626.2m on Tuesday, when
customer, or retail, business made a good recovery after Wall Street's
closure on Monday, to return a value total of Pounds 1.35bn. This compares
well with the turnover levels seen at the market peak. Non-Footsie shares
were active yesterday, representing about 62 per cent of the Seaq total.
The London market was held back by continued weakness in the pharmaceuticals
sector, which took its lead from a fall in Glaxo ahead of the trading
report. Oil shares, too, reacted to lack of support for crude oil prices.
Domestic consumer and retail sectors tried to respond to the favourable
comments from the UK Treasury but gains were mostly modest and were trimmed
back before the close. The telecommunications sector, shaken up on Tuesday
by Mercury's plans to increase competition in the mobile phones market,
steadied.
Analysts were disinclined to pronounce on the prospects of a cut in rates by
the Bundesbank today, although some claimed that nothing short of a full
point cut in discount rate would have much effect on the London market.
The FT-SE Actuaries UK Indices Committee yesterday approved the following
constituent changes to the FT-SE 100 Index, to take effect on Monday,
September 20. Additions: MEPC, Rolls-Royce, Schroders. Deletions: De La Rue,
Tate &amp; Lyle, Scottish Hydro-Electric.
