FT  14 JUL 93 / Subpoena for Bush in BNL affair
FORMER President George Bush has received a subpoena to testify and provide
documents in the long-running case involving more than Dollars 5bn of Iraqi
loans, made by the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro
(BNL).
Mr Bush has consistently denied any wrongdoing by the government in the BNL
affair. It is not known yet whether he plans to contest the subpoena.
The subpoena, filed by the lawyers of Mr Christopher Drogoul, former BNL
Atlanta manager, calls for the ex-president to appear in September at Mr
Drogoul's trial in Atlanta. It seeks from Mr Bush 37 documents, including
records of conversations with both Mr Giulio Andreotti, former prime
minister of Italy, and Mr Boyden Gray, Mr Bush's White House counsel.
Mr Drogoul, who is accused of masterminding a multi-billion dollar loan
effort that funded Iraq's nuclear and conventional weapons programme, has
changed his plea from guilty to innocent.
Last autumn, as the BNL controversy came to a boil in the closing stages of
the US presidential election campaign, a federal judge in Atlanta said he
suspected a US government cover-up and stated that CIA documents proved that
the Bush administration knew about and interfered with the BNL case.
Mr Robert Simels, Mr Drogoul's defence lawyer, said yesterday the Bush
subpoena was designed to prove that his client was merely a tool in a
broader effort by the US, Italian and British governments to help Iraq's
President Saddam Hussein during his eight-year war against Iran.
'The aim is to compel the former president to appear, and to produce
documents that relate to his knowledge of US foreign policy towards Iraq in
the 1980s, coupled with his efforts to assist Iraqi purchases backed by loan
guarantees from the US government,' Mr Simels said. 'We also want to show Mr
Bush's communications with Prime Minister Andreotti and the Italian
government on this matter.'
Mr Simels said a subpoena had also been issued to Kissinger Associates, the
consultancy headed by Mr Henry Kissinger, former US secretary of state. He
is seeking to quash the subpoena.
