FT  10 SEP 93 / Pounds 3bn fund for breast implant cases planned
WOMEN throughout the world with silicone breast implants may be eligible to
share up to Dollars 4.75bn (Pounds 3bn) in health benefits over a 30-year
period, under a proposal being discussed by both sides in litigation over
such implants.
Implant makers face thousands of lawsuits by women claiming implants cause
diseases of the immune system.
Dow Corning, once the world's biggest makers of silicone breast implants
before it withdrew from the business last year, said discussions had
progressed to a point where a proposal had been developed and was under
review.
The Michigan-based company, a 50-50 joint venture of Dow Chemical and
Corning, said the Dollars 4.75bn would be funded jointly by industry
participants (including manufacturers), raw material suppliers, insurance
carriers, physicians and other providers of health care. Details of how much
each participant would contribute are undecided.
Mr Gary Anderson, Dow Corning executive vice-president, stressed the
preliminary nature of the proposal: 'There are still many steps to go
through and conditions to be met before a settlement can be implemented.' He
described the proposal as 'essentially a 30-year insurance policy for women
with implants, so that they won't have to worry about being protected in the
future.'
After the defendants and trial lawyers have agreed a formula for sharing the
settlement, there are to be public fairness hearings across the US to test
it for fairness to women with implants.
Dow Corning and other manufacturers continue to deny that the implants are
unsafe, although they have been banned from widespread sale in the US.
Bristol-Myers Squibb, another former manufacturer, said it 'denies all
liability and has entered into these discussions to avoid protracted
litigation. It should be noted that scientific research has not established
a link between breast implants and disease.'
Dow Corning has already committed Dollars 10m to research on the safety of
the devices. 'We will probably end up spending Dollars 20m, which will not
be part of the proposed fund,' said Mr Anderson.
Details, Page 28
