FT  08 DEC 93 / End of US coal strike in sight: Tentative agreement to be
put to vote next week
One of the most bitter labour disputes in recent US history appeared to have
been resolved last night as coal industry management and unions announced
that they had tentatively agreed a formula for ending a seven-month-old coal
strike.
The agreement, details of which have not been released, will be put to a
vote among union members on December 14.
If they vote to accept, their decision will end a strike that has involved
17,700 workers across seven coal-producing states and had hit about 10 per
cent of US coal production.
A resolution of the dispute will be particularly welcome to Hanson, the UK
industrial conglomerate which owns Peabody Coal, the biggest US coal company
involved in the dispute. The strike had been costing Peabody about Pounds 1m
a day and was a significant factor in the profits downturn reported by
Hanson last week.
The strike began after a labour contract between the United Mine Workers of
America and the Bituminous Coal Operators Association expired in May. A key
issue in the dispute over the renewal was the coal industry's insistence on
its right to set up non-union subsidiaries.
The union sought assurances that its members would have rights to jobs at
these non-union operations when the mines they were currently working at
were closed. Without that assurance, it said, its memebers would be 'mining
themselves out of a job.'
The closure threat was exacerbated because most of the affected mines
produce high-sulphur coal, a commodity already under pressure because of the
environmental pressures created by the US Clean Air Act.
The coal operators had responded to the union demands by proposing a
complicated formula for awarding some new jobs to union workers and some to
non-union labour.
Mr Richard Trumka, president of the United Mine Workers of America, last
night refused to give details of the agreement before it had been presented
to his members, but said the union had won a contract that guaranteed better
wages and pensions for miners while protecting their health care and working
conditions.
In a statement confirming that the two sides reached a tentative agreement,
the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association said yesterday its member
companies planned to return to normal working conditions as soon as
possible.
