FT  10 JUL 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Three rules for staying in the
saddle
'BUSINESS plan? Waste of paper,' pronounces Athene English with the
confidence that comes with survival.
From her shop in Hay-on-Wye, on the Welsh Borders, Athene makes by hand, and
sells, a range of bags, wallets, saddlery, hunting and shooting items. Raw
materials include traditional English leathers, and 200-year-old Russian
reindeer skins recovered from a shipwreck. Items are costed by adding the
price of the raw material to labour, calculated at Pounds 5 an hour, then
applying a mark-ups of 33 per cent for wholesale buyers and up to 100 per
cent for retail. Off-the-peg retail prices range from Pounds 5.85 for a
reindeer key ring, to Pounds 1,450 for a reindeer attache case.
'The mark-up is reduced the more labour-intensive the item,' said Athene.
She began her working life as a professional horse-rider, became PA to the
managing director of Gucci, then helped run a small wine import business.
Drawing on all three experiences, she set up her own business, The English
Saddlery Company, in 1982. When she started she drew up the three rules that
have carried her through: 'One, I was going to produce the highest possible
quality work. Two, absolutely no credit extended. And three, no bank loans:
if my business didn't pay for itself, I would close it down.'
Athene did a one-year course in saddlery under Tops, a now-discontinued
government training scheme, She bought a set of hand tools for Pounds 250
the last of her TOPS grant. Then she moved to Cirencester - 'because it's a
well-hooved area' - and started trading. Her working capital was just Pounds
500.
Athene's survival in the early days was due largely to her location on
public view in the Cirencester Workshops where craftspeople enjoy subsidised
rents. 'I was paying around Pounds 20 a week,' she said.
Her first order was to make a parrot lead. 'I said yes to all commissions.
The satisfied customers passed the word around. That way, I built up a
strong local customer base.'
In the first year Athene's turnover was Pounds 5,000. Over the six years she
stayed at Cirencester, this rose to Pounds 13,000. Her customers included
international polo players, and a member of the royal family.
In 1989 she moved to Hay-on-Wye, close to where she grew up. She decided to
concentrate on the more commercially viable small leather goods. She changed
the company's name to the English Leather Company to reflect this policy. 'I
realised that I had to take my product to the market, build up a wider
clientele,' she said.
After talking to other leatherworkers, Athene decided to trawl the trade
shows. In 1989, she went to the New York International Gift Show, paying
Pounds 1,500 to exhibit. 'I didn't get a single order. It was a really low
point. I felt I had misjudged the market.'
One month later, a Japanese company which had been at the fair placed a
large order. Others followed. Japan and the US swiftly became big customers.
By the end of 1991, 75 per cent of business was export. Turnover that year
was Pounds 39,000. Recently she has stopped exhibiting. 'It was getting too
expensive, and my customer base was changing. Today, 60 per cent of my goods
are sold into the home market - increasingly by mail order, which now takes
up approximately 20 per cent of the total,' she said.
Turnover has grown steadily. Last year, it reached Pounds 54,000. The
problem today is insufficient manpower. Athene employs a part-time shop
assistant. Twelve months ago she started contracting out some items - about
10 per cent of orders - to three fellow craftsmen.
She has made a decision which will enable her to increase production and
relax a little. 'The Welsh Development Board is giving me a grant / loan
package worth a total of Pounds 6,000,' she explains. 'I'm investing in some
machinery to do routine tasks.' The grant also means she can employ two
administrative assistants, giving her the pleasure of going back to where
she began - simply making things.
The English Leather Company, Mortimer House, Castle Street, Hay-on-Wye,
Herefordshire HR3 5DF. 0497-821205
