FT  04 FEB 93 / The DAF Crisis: Payments agreed by British bankers
BRITISH bankers yesterday travelled in groups to an emergency meeting of
Daf's bank creditors held in Amsterdam.
'It's a question of safety in numbers', said one banker. 'We don't want to
be mugged outside the meeting by angry employees'.
By the middle of yesterday afternoon, they had agreed to provide Daf with Fl
60m (Pounds 22.2m), which they hope will be sufficient to pay wages and meet
the company's other trading expenses for a month.
During that time the receivers of Daf's European businesses will review the
long-term prospects of the company's operations.
Total indebtedness of the company is in excess of Fl 3bn. (Pounds 1.1bn).
However, there is a vast difference in quality between different elements in
the debt.
The loans most at risk are the Fl 900m which banks have lent to the
manufacturing operations. Of this, approximately Fl 800m has been provided
by a consortium of nine banks, led by the Dutch bank, ABN Amro and including
Rabobank of the Netherlands, Generale de Banque of Belgium, Credit Lyonnais
of France and three UK banks; Barclays, Lloyds and National Westminster.
The syndicated loan, in its current form, was signed in June of last year,
and is to a certain extent covered by collateral held on the bank's behalf
by a Dutch trust.
The scale of losses faced by these banks can be gauged by examining the
sacrifices which Daf had been asking them to make, as part of its vain
attempt earlier this week to save itself from receivership.
Under the rescue plan, which Daf formulated together with the management
consultant firm, AD Little, and the accountants, Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte,
the banking syndicate was being asked to provide Fl 50m in a short term
bridging loan. He was being asked for at least a further Fl 100m in further
loans over the coming two or three years and was also being asked to convert
Fl 100m of debt in equity.
Other creditors in the firing line are the investment banking arms of the
Dutch government and the Flemish regional government, which last December
provided loans of Fl 67m and BFr2.2bn (Pounds 44m) respectively.
Under the rescue plan, holders of preference shares and of Fl 150m in bonds
would also have been asked to convert part of what they are owed into
ordinary shares.
However, the bulk of Daf's debt, more than Fl 2bn, is believed to be less at
risk. These are loans made to Daf's finance subsidiaries, which lease Daf's
vehicles to customers.
Daf's ability to pay these loans does not depend directly on the health of
its manufacturing operations. So long as finance company customers, who are
users of Daf vehicles, continue to make lease and instalment credit
payments, then Daf's finance companies should be able to make bank payments.
Part of the finance company bank debts, some Pounds 180m, was securitised
and sold in the form of bonds to institutional investors by UBS Phillips &amp;
Drew, the securities firm, in December.
Standard &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating agency, said yesterday it saw no
reason to consider lowering the top triple-A rating accorded the bonds.
