FT  10 JUL 93 / As They Say in Europe: Budapest-sur-Seine
SUDDENLY, people are talking about their holidays. Suddenly, the thought
struck me that at every destination will be a disappointment.
This idea germinated while watching the recent British television series
Maigret where the eponymous detective pursued malefactors round Paris and,
sometimes, France.
In order to obtain that 1950s' feeling, it was shot in Hungary. The last
time Britons recreated Simenon's hero they wisely ensured all outdoor scenes
took place on foggy winter nights.
Today, however, verisimilitude has to take more sophisticated forms, so on
this occasion we were given a peep of the broad sweep of the Danube, which
masqueraded as the Seine, while the 19th century Gothic parliament will have
been taken for Notre Dame only by the untravelled or the drunk.
In the old days they used west European settings to recreate communist, or
even Nazi-occupied, Europe. I have seen Wandsworth town hall give a passable
performance as the headquarters of the East German communist party and I
think, once, the KGB.
Dundee gained critical acclaim for its role as Moscow in An Englishman
Abroad. Liverpool has starred as Leningrad and, in an inspired piece of
casting Bath, or maybe Cheltenham, took the part of 1939 Warsaw. (Cotswold
and Somerset stone matches that used in Nowy Swiat, the main shopping street
in the Polish capital.)
Now the traffic goes the other way, a process which in fact started long
before the collapse of communism. The Czechs offered a town ruined by
pollution in northern Bohemia as a film set for the second world war, which
saved on demolition costs.
But things are now getting out of hand. French television, I read in Le
Monde's radio and television guide, is making a series about the life of
Karl Marx: 'You descend the tortuous little street, lined with shops  - to
the left a Greengrocer, to the right a Pawnshop . . . We are in the middle
of Soho, in London.'
It turns out that we are in fact in Prague. The French production team chose
the Czech capital because it was cheap. But Prague as London] Could that
series ever be shown in Britain without arousing profound scepticism? Could
Maigret be shown in France?
Nowhere in that country is there to be found that nasty colour I think of as
Habsburg yellow, nor those bright green shutters of the Hungarian
countryside.
Will there now be tourists looking for those curious features in France and
feeling that somehow the French have got it all wrong?
This may be a roundabout way of making the familiar point that today the
fake has more impact than the real. I recall American tourists in Bad
Wimpfen in Baden-Wurttemburg who were disappointed to discover that this
archetypal Hansel-and-Gretel gingerbread town was for real and not the bit
of Disneyland it should have been.
But there is more to it than that. There is the problem of the way public
images can infect the way we see places. Provence has gained a new and
horrid haze for the British because of a television series based on the
celebrated A Year in Provence by Peter Mayle who recounted his experiences
among local 'characters.'
They now doubtless try to supply Mayle-ordered local colour to tourists who
flock there by the thousand.
On the other hand there are the benefits of seeing the familiar through new
eyes. I collect foreign tourism-related articles about Britain.
This started when I saw a photograph in a German paper of a picnic so
idyllic that it must have been the inspiration for some dejeuner-sur-l'herbe
masterpiece. But the caption told me it was Wiltshire, by the Kennet canal.
Thanks to the weekend colour section of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung I
am now reconciled to the Scottish Highlands.
The German gift for black-and-white photography reversed a prejudice based
on a profound distaste for the publicity placed by the Highland and Islands
authority in London underground trains. This portrays a ghastly sun-drenched
livid mountain greenery. The FAZ banished all Mediterranean pretension. A
friend from that part of the world remarked: 'That's the first time I've
seen Eilean Donan castle taken from the right angle.'
The text was corny but interesting, revolving around the song about taking
the the low road and being in Scotland first.
But it linked one Eileen of the Buchanan Highland Hotel near Loch Lomond
with Buchanan County, Missouri, and told a good story of Scottish social
history.
The cover picture of two children and a sheepdog was captioned: 'Right on
the edge of Europe where there are still sea monsters and the unlimited
dreams of children: there lie the Scottish Highlands.' I liked that.
What a pity it is, then, that if German television were now to remake
Schiller's Maria Stuart they would undoubtedly film it in Ukraine.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
