FT  04 OCT 93 / Big changes likely for Lonrho board
LONRHO, the international trading conglomerate, will take a big step towards
becoming a more conventional public company this week by appointing its
first non-executive directors for two decades.
The company's directors received a proposal at the weekend for the
appointment as non-executives of Mr Peter Harper, a director of Hanson, the
Anglo-American conglomerate, and Mr Steven Walls, the chairman of Albert
Fisher, the food processing and distribution group.
They have been recruited by Mr Dieter Bock, who at the beginning of the year
acquired an 18.8 per cent stake in Lonrho and was then appointed joint chief
executive with Mr Tiny Rowland, Lonrho's guiding force for 30 years.
Mr Walls and Mr Harper - whose remuneration will be Pounds 30,000 a year -
are expected to set up Lonrho's first ever audit committee, to review its
financial performance.
Mr Rowland, who has been opposed to non-executives since 1973 when the
so-called 'straight eight' directors, led by Sir Basil Smallpeice, then
deputy chairman, tried unsuccessfully to remove him as chief executive. Mr
Rowland is not expected to try and block this week's appointments because Mr
Bock made it a condition of his investment in Lonrho that non-executives
should be appointed.
In the coming months, Mr Bock is expected to recruit one or two further
non-executives. In the longer term, he is also likely to seek to reduce
significantly the number of full-time executives on the board from the
present 12.
Reductions in the number of executives will also help him cut the costs of
running the company's headquarters in the City of London's Cheapside, which
are more than Pounds 20m a year.
Mr Bock sees the appointments as the first step in his plan to make the
company more transparent to outside investors and persuade investment
institutions to acquire shares in it.
One of Lonrho's biggest shareholders, the Genting Group of Malaysia, the
plantations, gaming and rubber group, has recently approached Lonrho
shareholders trying to sell its 3.9 per cent stake.
