FT  21 OCT 93 / SIB sets out plan to free up Pounds 84bn unit trust industry
PROPOSALS FOR deregulating the Pounds 84bn unit trust industry were put
forward yesterday by the Securities and Investments Board, the chief
regulator for financial services, but the consultation paper does not
resolve the deep divisions in the industry about the future method of
pricing unit trusts.
Instead it says that 'dual pricing' should remain in place for the moment,
albeit in a slightly simplified form, while the debate about moving to a
system of single pricing must continue.
Responses to the consultation paper are due by the end of February next
year, and the SIB hopes to bring forward draft regulations on some aspects
of the changes in 1994.
In dual pricing, potential investors see both an 'offer' price, at which
they could buy units, and a lower 'bid' price at which they could sell. The
difference between the two figures reflects charges and costs.
Many in the industry favour a single pricing system which is easier for
investors to understand and which is commonly used outside the UK.
There are a number of options for single pricing, and no single option has
attracted overwhelming support among fund managers who favour the change.
Other suggestions in the paper include:
Liberalising the charging structures, so as to allow exit fees for all types
of fund, and performance-related fees for geared futures and options funds
only;
Replacing SIB's list of approved securities and derivatives markets for unit
trust purposes with a duty on managers to ensure that the markets, where
they invest, meet certain criteria. The change would allow unit trusts to
invest in a much wider range of emerging markets.
There was disappointment from some in the industry, notably Gartmore fund
managers, the fourth largest fund manager in the UK, that the lack of a
consensus had made it impossible to agree on single-pricing for unit trusts.
But the SIB's proposal that single pricing should be used for the open-ended
investment company (OEIC), which is common in other European Community
member states and which is to be introduced in the UK, will increase the
prospects that there will eventually be a move to single-pricing for unit
trusts as well.
In the meantime, the two systems would run parallel.
The Treasury is to publish a consultation paper by the end of the year about
the introduction of the OEIC in the UK.
Pressure for loosening the regulation of the industry seems to have come
mainly from the ready availability in the UK of offshore funds, which have
greater flexibility.
It is also in tune with the government's current drive towards deregulation.
The draft regulations to be issued by the SIB next year could also
incorporate likely changes to the EC directive on undertakings for
collective investment in transferable securities, which is being revised at
the present time.
