FT  01 OCT 93 / Management: What it takes to be a regulator / A look at the
skills would-be industry watchdogs should have on their CVs
A few months ago Clare Spottiswoode decided it was time she got a proper
job. This 40-year-old mother of four had had enough of juggling five
part-time jobs, and phoned up Saxon Bampfylde, a headhunting firm, to see
what it could do for her.
Her CV showed that she was an ex-Treasury economist and an entrepreneur who
had set up two businesses, one importing cotton and silk gifts, the other in
computer software.
The headhunter, which had just been asked by the government to find a
replacement for the combative Ofgas director-general Sir James McKinnon,
mentioned the job to her. 'Even if I had known the job was on offer, I never
would have applied. But when they told me about it I felt I was well suited.
I have a logical economist's background, and I've been at the sharp end of
business.'
Spottiswoode thought nothing about entering the macho gas businesses; she
survived as one of the first women at Clare College Cambridge, and says she
has been 'in a very male world all through'.
So she applied, and the rest, as they say, is history.
To outsiders, hers might seem an unlikely background for becoming regulator
of the monolithic gas industry. But it is no less likely than the
backgrounds of most of the individuals who regulate Britain's other
utilities.
Sir James, an accountant who was finance director at Imperial Group, also
knew very little about gas and regulation when he started. Equally obscure
were Don Cruickshank's qualifications for regulating the telecoms industry:
he was chief executive of the NHS in Scotland, and before that managing
director of Richard Branson's Virgin Group. Professor Stephen Littlechild
knew a great deal about monopolies when he was hired at Offer - the
electricity regulator - but he lacked much direct experience of the business
world.
There is no degree in regulating, nor any specific training for it. Yet the
job of regulator is one of the most difficult challenges in British
industry. What does it take to make a good one?
According to Sir James, the answer is more straightforward than it is often
cracked up to be. 'A good regulator does what he or she is told. It is as
simple as that. A regulator is given a number of tasks to do, there are
clear sets of rules in the legislation.'
He reckons that the only real requirement is that a regulator should have a
background in business, and must have experienced change.
His own 'basic business training', he says, was vital in helping him
understand the dynamics of competition.
Being able to deal with the media is also vital, he says. 'As regulator you
have no funds to put your message across. Unlike British Gas, I didn't have
Pounds 10m-Pounds 20m to spend on advertising.' Good relations with the
media are a matter of 'telling the truth and saying the same thing to
everyone'.
Sir James also believes that regulators should not take themselves too
seriously. 'If the Sun says you are 'as precious as a Ming Vase' or that you
have great control over the destiny of 18m people, you have to be careful or
you start to believe it. You need to keep your feet right on the ground. I
don't see myself as any different from anyone else.'
According to Saxon Bampfylde, which has been involved in the appointment of
most of the UK regulators over the past four years, the necessary qualities
are more complicated than Sir James makes out. According to the firm's
Douglas Board the most important is real live experience of competitive
markets.
'In all cases we have been looking for a very good player to become
referee,' he says. The problem is that people running big companies may not
fancy the idea of running an organisation with between 20 and 200 people,
especially when the salary is a fraction of what they might get in the
private sector. Sir James says he earns Pounds 73,000, while Cruickshank's
job - which took eight months to fill - was initially advertised at Pounds
90,000.
The second attribute is a powerful intellect. Board argues that regulating a
complex utility presents a larger intellectual challenge than that facing
most chief executives, who spend most of their time motivating and
implementing.
Good communication skills are essential, as well as a fair approach. A
suitable candidate would be prepared for a slightly lonely job; even though
they spend the whole day talking to interested parties, decisions are
generally taken on their own.
Regulators must also be good mangers of their own staff. 'About 50 per cent
of what determines whether the regulator is good is how he or she sets up an
office in terms of staffing, information, use of consultants and so on,'
says Board.
They need to be brave, and prepared to be unpopular. Board says that in
selecting the right person he looks for 'evidence of having done fearless
things, rather than just being able to talk fearlessly'.
They also need to take a long-term view.
Most of the decisions made by regulators will not start having any effect
within their term of office. This means there can be no quick judgments to
be made on which regulators are doing a good job.
Sir James takes away with him the satisfaction of having helped some
consumers get a better deal. Yet he says that this has been by no means the
biggest challenge of his career. Compared with the task of attempting to
turn around the Howard Johnson hotel chain in North America, it was a piece
of cake.
