FT  18 JUN 93 / People: Bowen headhunted for Booker
Jonathan Taylor's move up from chief executive to chairman of Booker,
confirmed yesterday, has allowed the appointment of an outsider to run the
food and agribusiness group. Mr Charles Bowen (right), aged 51, has been
headhunted for the chief executive job from Maple Leaf Foods, the publicly
quoted Canadian subsidiary of Hillsdown Holdings, where he was president and
chief executive officer.
When Mr Bowen found himself in the same study group as Mr Jonathan Taylor at
Harvard in January, he had no idea that he would soon be working for Booker.
But, he says, he came to like and respect Mr Taylor and that weighed with
him when the call from the headhunter came. Serious talks only started last
week and he received the draft contract last Friday. He feels he and Mr
Taylor, who is 57, can complement each other, with Mr Taylor now likely to
ease back to a three-day week while pursuing his other interests. Mr Bowen
says Mr Taylor's strengths are as a broad thinker, running a devolved style
of management, and able to 'provide guidance without interfering'.
For his part, he believes he can 'make sure all the businesses are properly
controlled, are competitive in their markets and return the profits and cash
that they should'. He plans to spend a couple of weeks reading up about the
business, and then go and look at the activities.
Mr Bowen is a genial man but there are occasional flashes of a steely
interior. 'I made a point during the selection process that I may have to
make changes and asked them are they prepared to support me. They all said
yes.' His background is largely in the food industry, with Unilever, General
Foods and Hillsdown. With a degree in economics and statistics he initially
went into marketing, including being product manager for Flora margarine,
but by his mid-30's had moved into general management, running General Foods
Puerto Rico.
He joined Hillsdown in 1988 and ran a number of its businesses, including
Premier Brands and Hillsdown's European operations. He was sent to Canada in
April last year.
Hillsdown appeared rather stunned by his departure, which takes immediate
effect. Mr Brent Ballantyne, a director of MLF and head of its agribusiness
operations, is becoming chief operating officer.
Observer, Page 15
