FT  25 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Confusion over the identity of Fisherking -
Alice Rawsthorn looks at Darty, an institution on the French retail scene
PASCAL, a sales assistant at the Darty store in Les Halles shopping centre
in Paris, beamed when asked about Darty's takeover by a British company.
'It's good news for everyone,' he said. 'We'll represent them in France and
they'll represent us in the UK. It makes sense for us to link up with
Fisherking.'
Pascal is not alone in his confusion over the identity of Darty's new owner.
Kingfisher may be one of the most powerful players in UK retailing but it
was virtually unknown in France until last month's announcement that it had
agreed terms to acquire Darty, the largest chain of electrical retailers in
the country.
Darty itself is equally obscure in the UK. However, Kingfisher has bought a
business which is not only a leadding force in its sector, but an
institution on the French retail scene.
The Darty stores, with their warehouse-style interiors and monochrome signs,
are a familiar sight in city centres and out-of-town shopping complexes all
over France.
Darty has 130 stores throughout the country which command 12 per cent of the
national market for electrical products and nearly 30 per cent of sales in
Paris and Lyon. It also has an almost unassailable reputation for quality
and service among its customers.
To the French, the Darty name has the same cadences of good value and
reasonable prices, as Marks and Spencer or John Lewis to the British. In
other words it has built up a reputation for value-for-money and quality
which would be the envy of most UK electrical chains, including Kingfisher's
Comet. Darty has achieved this through a combination of highly disciplined
management, a carefully co-ordinated public image and strong commitment to
service.
Darty dates back to 1957 when the three Darty brothers - Bernard, Claude and
Nathan - opened their first store. The company expanded rapidly in the
1960s, 1970s and 1980s as the brothers opened new stores to satisfy demand
for the new electronic products - washer-dryers, fridge-freezers, hi-fi
systems, colour televisions and videos - which were flooding on to the
market.
The Darty stores have a similar clean, functional look to those of M&amp;S and
John Lewis, with white walls and pale grey floors. The stores are filled
with row after row of products, all accompanied by neat information panels
and discreet neon signs to identify different departments.
Cleaners prowl around the stores to dust and polish the products. The glitzy
signs and bargain baskets that tend to litter other electrical stores are
conspicuous by their absence. Darty's outlets have a restrained ethos which
could not be more different from the flashy feel of its competitors.
Darty has also invested heavily in service. Its sales staff are sent on
regular training sessions to ensure that they are well-informed about the
merchandise. Darty also offers free delivery and also an after-sales
service. This gives it a distinct competitive advantage over other French
retailers, which are notoriously weak on customer service. Darty made sales
of FFr375m from service alone in the year to August 31, against FFr8.19bn
from its retail operations.
As a result, Darty is one of the handful of French retailers to dominate its
sector. Its size helps to deter potential competitors particularly as it now
operates on such a scale that it would be difficult for other companies to
match its negotiating power with suppliers. It is the only large specialist
electrical chain in France. The rest of the market is fragmented between
hypermarkets, department stores, furniture chains such as Conforama and
thousands of independents.
Darty's reputation among the French public is mirrored in the stock market's
perceptions of the group. Despite the recent slowdown in the household
products market - which trimmed Darty's sales from FFr8.75bn in 1991 to
FFr8.56bn in 1992 and pre-tax profits from FFr1.085bn to FFr1.07bn over the
same period - it is still one of France's most profitable retailers.
Since its management buy-out in 1988, Darty has effectively operated as a
private company with a very low profile in the investment community. Before
the buy-out it traditionally traded at a generous premium with a p/e ratio
of about 20, against an average of 15 for the rest of the retail sector.
'Darty was always a blue chip stock,' said one Paris retail analyst. 'I've
lost contact with the management since the buy-out, but I'm still a loyal
customer. Nothing has changed judging from the feel of the stores. The
quality of the business seems to be as high as ever.'
