FT  27 MAR 93 / Travel: In Buddha's footsteps - James Henderson wanders amid
the ruins of a magnificent history in Sri Lanka's myriad religious and royal
temples
THE ANIMALS of lore and legend have a fond place in a nation: unicorns,
dragons and heraldic hounds, even a bear chained to a staff or a black
charger. Their medieval heritage may be lost, but as symbols they are
immortalised somehow.
In Sri Lanka the feeling is the same, but the animals are different -
elephants, guardian cobras and magical demon monkeys. As we have put working
beasts on to heraldic shields, so in Sri Lanka they are honoured on
moonstones. Instead of the British bulldog, Sri Lanka has lions and tigers.
The Tamils are well known as Tigers, but less widely known is that the
majority of the country, the Singhalese, consider themselves the descendants
of a lion.
These animals roam a riotously fertile tropical land: well-watered and
immensely lush, parts of it seemingly primordial forest. But nature has been
stamped with a human print that goes back thousands of years. Kings with
unpronounceable names built magnificently, and their decaying memorials are
visible everywhere. They glorified themselves with ancient cities and
anchored their prosperity in vast irrigation tanks. As much as 3,000 acres
in size, these vast lakes are an engineering wonder even now.
Many of the sights have a religious significance, for Buddhism has been the
religion of Sri Lanka for more than 2,000 years. Most are ruins now, but
there is still a reverential air about them. You walk barefoot, and place
lotus flowers on the altars. The island is covered with rounded dagobas
(like stupas), the vast white shrines of Buddhism, which stand like massive
bell-jars in the jungle.
On my tour I was guided through the intricacies of the ruins and the names
(first stop Anuradhapura) by Deepthi, a stout Singhal man. Later he
sheepishly confided that Deepthi was in fact a girl's name, meaning
'bright.'
Anuradhapura dates from about 250 BC, and you will see dagobas, moonstones
and statues of Buddha built by kings Dutugemunu and Devanampiya Tissa. The
city is a spiritual centre and once was home to 5,000 monks. Somehow I was
expecting the ancient sights to be surrounded by the teeming humanity of an
eastern city, but in fact they stand in sparse, open land, just silence and
ruins.
It is difficult, mentally, to envisage much human activity, but the
adornments give life to the place. Three hundred elephants stand shoulder to
shoulder around the Ruvanvelisaya dagoba, and among the stone carvings at
the Isurumuniya temple are bas reliefs of elephants playing in a pond.
One of the island's most sacred Buddhist temples is here, built around a
2,000-year-old tree (supposedly grown from a cutting from the tree under
which Buddha attained enlightenment).
Moonstones are semi-circular doorway stones, carved meticulously, depicting
human progression through life - a sort of philosophical doormat. Elephants
link trunks and tails to symbolise birth; horses, lions and bulls chase one
another in old age, sickness and death. Geese, unopened lotus flowers in
their beaks, stride the semi-circle of time, unenlightened.
I found that I kept seeing the same faces as I progressed around the sights
 -a bumptious French trio kept breaking the calm: she, her boyfriend and
brother, I guessed. The two of them were teasing her mercilessly.
Driving through the Sri Lankan jungle, huge deep-red rocks loomed out of the
canopy. Fancifully, Deepthi compared them to reclining horses and lions
waiting to pounce.
Legend has it that one rock, almost a mountain, was brought from Nepal by a
demon monkey. He was sent to collect a medicinal plant, but forgot which
one, so he brought the whole mountainside to be sure.
We came to Sigiriya, the Lion Rock, which stands vast and alone. The name
makes it sound a bit like a stomach complaint, but it is an impressive 600ft
lump of granite, developed 1,500 years ago as a defensive bastion and
penthouse.
At one time it was entirely covered in sky-blue plaster. Only a tiny patch
remains, painted with cloud maidens. Close by a wall, plastered with a mix
of egg 1,000 years ago, is inscribed with 2,000 poems - commissioned
graffiti complementing the beauty of the local girls.
The climb to the top is worth the effort. Through smaller attendant rocks,
the size of three-storey buildings, you climb to a platform, where a curious
iron cage is a refuge point against a swarm of attack wasps that
occasionally puts in an appearance.
The final ascent is made between sculpted lion's paws and into its throat,
and then by way of a rickety iron stairway as steep as the stairs to a
fifth-floor London flat. On the four-acre summit, the throne room, dance
chamber and baths can be traced by their brick foundations. Around me a
strange French version of hide-and-seek was unfolding, with screams and
shouts.
Standing on the summit, snatches of clouds move slowly past you, rolling
gently as they ride the late afternoon wind and occasionally snagging on the
clifftop.
Beneath, amid the jungle, you can trace the outlines of Asia's oldest
pleasure gardens - promenades, lakes and fountains that still work after
1,500 years. The gardens were protected by a 60ft moat of crocodiles and
then a rampart of scorpions.
Two hours away, another large and ruined Sri Lankan city is Pollonoruwa,
royal seat of Parakramabahu and Vijayabahu, which dates from 1,000 AD. Set
on the shore of a massive tank are ruined palaces, lotus-shaped baths,
statues of Buddha and ancient temples defended by sculpted dragons and
cobras with open hoods. At the council chamber, swans were symbolic of
purity.
Wandering through what was once a seven-storey, 1,000-room palace, large
enough for a suite for each of 300 wives, I noticed two figures lurking in
alcoves. A few yards behind me was a French girl, oblivious, about to be
ambushed.
It is forbidden to feed the macague monkeys which roam around Pollonoruwa.
Scientists are trying to isolate something in their diet which seems to stop
them developing cancer. Perhaps, remarked Deepthi absently, as he chased one
away from his car, there is something anti-carcinogenic about rubber
windscreen seals.
In the declining sun we came to the finest statues of Buddha, at Gal Vihara.
He appears in four positions: meditating, preaching, satisfaction and then
dying (about to gain Nirvana). I stared, weary after a long day of
sight-seeing, but it is serene and absorbing. Suddenly the calm was
interrupted by a commotion of mock-hysterical shrieks. The French lads had
run off with her shoes.
Driving south to Kandy we left the jungle and climbed into the hills. Across
the road snakes slithered, heads held high, and squirrels scampered, their
tails involuntarily vertical. On the power cables hung the odd fruit bat,
frazzled after mistaking them for telephone wires. Cattle, which are sacred
to the Hindu Tamils, seem to be immune to trouble. They keep warm on the
tarmac or wander willy-nilly through the traffic.
Kandy is a relatively recent Sri Lankan capital, a stronghold until it was
finally tamed by the British in 1815. The Temple of the Tooth is supposed to
contain a tooth of Buddha and is one of the most sacred places in the
country.
Suddenly, after the mute ruins, here was living Buddhism. Inside I could
hear deafening drumming, wailing pipe music and crowds shuffling by the
altars, leaving vast stacks of lotus leaves. Monks in orange robes walked
by, shaded with palm fronds by their acolytes.
Most Sri Lankan dagobas are solid (one, supposedly, has enough bricks to
build a 3ft wall from London to Edinburgh), but in Kalutara, south of
Colombo, you will find one that is hollow, built over another smaller
shrine.
Inside, it is a vast whispering gallery. Every slap of a bare foot and
quietly-spoken prayer is echoed and re-echoed in a never-ending stream of
shuffling and whispers. Like any great religious building, it is an
awe-inspiring experience. Only when I left did I notice that there were no
French shrieks to break the calm.
Outside I came across the only animal I saw being treated sternly in 10
days: a cow caught helping herself to mouthfuls of lotus flowers at an
unattended stall.
James Henderson flew to Sri Lanka with Air Lanka as a guest of travel
operator Hayes and Jarvis (tel: 081-748-5050). H&amp;J prices for 14 days in Sri
Lanka (seven days staying put, plus seven touring) start at Pounds 599.
