FT  11 NOV 93 / Lagos court hears of top officials in land case
NIGERIAN government ministers and senior army officers have been allocated
prime building sites on land in Lagos acquired through compulsory purchase,
according to evidence filed in the High Court.
The land has been acquired under a retroactive decree issued by the former
military government led by General Ibrahim Babangida. The decree has not so
far been repealed by the military-backed civilian administration which
succeeded Gen Babangida in August.
The evidence has been filed in support of legal challenges to the decree by
a private development company and the Lagos state government. Issued last
July and retroactive to 1975, the decree provides for the compulsory
purchase of land on the city's shoreline.
Lagos State Assembly, which has begun a court action seeking to restrain the
federal government from acting on the decree, told the court last Friday the
names of those who will allegedly benefit.
Defence Minister General Sani Abacha, Foreign Minister Matthew Mbu, Justice
Minister Clement Akpangbo and Information Minister Uche Chukwumerije are
among those named.
Also named is Mr E O Shonekan. A government minister who requested anonymity
said this was the son of Chief Ernest Shonekan, the country's civilian head
of state. The minister was speaking on behalf of Chief Ernest Shonekan, and
responding to questions from the Financial Times.
The minister also said that those allocated the 140 sites would have to pay
N500,000 (Pounds 8,000) per plot, and stressed that the allocation system
did not contravene the law. Responsibility lay with the previous government
led by Gen Babangida, he said. He declined to comment further, saying that
the matter was sub judice.
City estate agents said yesterday that the designated price is substantially
less than the sites' worth on the open market.
The list of recipients reads like a Who's Who of Nigeria's ruling
establishment under Gen Babangida, who stepped down last August after
seizing power in a coup in 1985.
Chief Shonekan, who had been appointed chairman of a transitional council of
ministers in December 1992, was made head of state in August following Gen
Babangida's annulment of last June's presidential elections. A new poll is
set for February.
The list includes Admiral Augustus Aikhomu, a former vice president, and
several former ministers who had served in the transitional council, which
was disbanded in August: Mr Oladele Olashore, former finance minister, Mr
Philip Asiodu, former oil minister, and Mr Oluwole Adeosun, former transport
minister.
Prominent among the military names in the list are the chief of defence
staff Lt Gen Oladipo Diya, head of the army Lt Gen Aliyu Mohammed and former
heads of the army, navy and air force.
Others among the beneficiaries of the land deal are Mr Pascal Bafyau, the
head of the Nigeria Labour Congress, and Mr Iyorchia Ayu, the recently
deposed speaker of the Senate.
The Lagos state high court last week temporarily restrained the federal
government from exercising ownership rights over the land it acquired
compulsorily under the decree.
A separate legal action has been initiated by the Lagoon City Development
Corporation (LCDC), the privately owned company responsible for reclaiming
the disputed land.
LCDC has been negotiating with state and federal authorities for more than a
decade for permission to develop the site.
Earlier this year Mr B. Gemade, housing minister, told the developers that
the federal government was acquiring the land and that they would be
compensated at rates well below the market value. Surveyors estimate that
each plot is worth eight times the value the government is selling the land
for.
LCDC refused to accept the order and took the government to court. In
September at the court hearing the government produced a handwritten decree
which swept aside the rights of individuals and state governments in Nigeria
who own land reclaimed from the sea or within 100 metres of the shoreline.
A spokesman for the company said: 'They dated it the day before we went to
court so they could invalidate our action, although the decree was not
promulgated till September. They also backdated the effect of the decree to
overrule the 1978 legislation which ceded all federal government land to
state governments.'
The decree forces each lessee in Nigeria to renegotiate his lease with the
federal government within 30 days although it was not gazetted until two
months later. Failure to renegotiate risks dispossession and a fine of
N10,000 or a five year prison sentence.
The measure also denies the right of any court in Nigeria to challenge the
decree's legitimacy and overrules property rights set out in Nigeria's
constitution.
