FT  23 JAN 93 / UK-US group aims at German power sector
A UK-US consortium of PowerGen and NRG Energy has won an important first
round in an ambitious attempt to become an important German coal and
electricity producer.
The Treuhand privatisation agency decided yesterday to begin negotiations on
selling east Germany's largest brown coal mining company, Mibrag, to the
consortium.
A rival German energy consortium, led by Rheinbraun and including RWE,
PreussenElektra and Bayernwerk, failed to submit a competitive bid,
according to the Treuhand.
PowerGen's move comes at a politically sensitive time for the UK government,
in the middle of a review on how to reprieve some of British Coal's mines.
However, the privatised generator stressed yesterday it had no plans to
import the coal, which would all be used locally.
PowerGen and NRG Energy are understood to have bid nearly DM1bn (Pounds
412m) to buy Mibrag's extensive open-cast mines in the Leipzig area and
planned several billion D-Marks in investments. Mibrag, which produced 36m
tons of brown coal last year, expects to sign contracts shortly to supply
brown coal to several big power stations planned in Saxony. The company's
workforce is to be slashed by 5,500 to 10,500 by the end of this year.
The UK-US consortium also aims to become the first foreign company to
operate power stations in Germany, breaking the fiercely-protected oligopoly
of domestic producers. German electricity rates are among the highest in
Europe and PowerGen and NRG Energy have held out the prospect of producing
cheaper electricity. Both the Treuhand and the German Cartel Office have
expressed interest in obtaining cheaper rates for German industrial and
household users.
The Rheinbraun consortium is also negotiating with the Treuhand to buy the
Laubag brown coal company in nearby eastern Brandenburg state, but progress
has been slow. The Treuhand hopes to speed the process with its decision to
negotiate exclusively with the Anglo-American consortium on Mibrag.
Mibrag's sale is to be concluded by June the Treuhand said. If PowerGen and
NRG Energy are unable to sustain their offer, new tenders will be invited.
