FT  10 MAY 93 / Pounds 50m to protect NatWest tower
THE COST of protecting the NatWest Tower, Britain's second tallest building,
from the worst effects of a terrorist bomb could be between Pounds 25m and
Pounds 50m, a study by construction specialists says.
Offices would still be seriously damaged if the explosion was large and
close enough. Terrorists in Northern Ireland have exploded bombs up to
3,000kgs, three times the size of the explosion which ripped through the
tower and damaged other buildings in the City of London two weeks ago.
Gardiner &amp; Theobald, chartered surveyors, and Mott MacDonald, consulting
engineers, say that to make large office buildings more bomb-resistant -
including installing toughened glass, strengthening window-frames,
thickening lower exterior walls and strengthening the buildings' frame -
could cost an extra Pounds 50 to Pounds 100 per sq ft.
This would almost double reconstruction costs which, depending on
specifications and scale of the building, could themselves be in excess of
Pounds 100 per sq ft.
The groups - experienced in designing protected buildings, from hardened
submarine pens to embassies - say they are not necessarily advocating that
companies should pay this sort of money for extra protect-ion.
Mr Jim Kay, a Gardiner &amp; Theobald director, said: 'They must decide what
level of protection they need and can afford. They must evaluate the scale
of risk faced by staff and to the smooth running of their business,
including the cost of dislocation if computer systems are destroyed or they
have to find temporary accommodation.'
To help the owners of buildings they have produced a guide showing the cost
of various options. These range from the cheapest - installing a simple
plastic film to protect windows, at Pounds 1 per sq ft - to more expensive
items, such as adding toughened glass, reinforcing walls and strengthening
or removing suspended ceilings.
Some of the most costly damage, other than structural damage, has been
caused by the collapse of false ceilings enclosing expensive and
highly-sensitive communication systems, said Mr Kay.
Many companies already have back-up computers and services in case of
breakdown. Mr Alastair Walker, a director of Advance Mechanics &amp; Engineering
a Mott MacDonald associate, said these should be installed at diagonally
opposite ends of the building or in shock-proof safe havens.
He said information should be passed regularly to back-up computers. The
loss of business records for just one hour could cost City traders tens of
millions of pounds. Water tanks should be strengthened. These, if fractured,
can cause almost as much damage as the original explosion.
Where buildings are most vulnerable lower walls might be reinforced.
Deflectors could then be installed to protect upper floors.
Designers of new buildings might consider terracing upper floors to allow
the effects of an explosion to dissipate as the blast travelled upwards.
Joints between pillars and beams might be strengthened, particularly in
concrete-framed buildings, which are more likely to crack or fracture in a
large explosion.
Mr Kay said: 'In the final analysis, there is no such thing as a bomb-proof
building. The best protection is vigilance to ensure that terrorists cannot
get close enough to cause damage.'
