FT  15 NOV 93 / Nuclear Electric seeks 1995-96 privatisation: State-owned
operator sees improved results
NUCLEAR Electric, the state-owned operator of nuclear power stations in
England and Wales, has told the government it wants to be privatised as soon
as possible.
Although it has left the precise timetable open, it has indicated that
privatisation in 1995-96 would be appropriate because the company expects to
be fully commercial by then. That would also enable the sale to take place
in the life of the present government, which could extend to 1997.
The Gloucester-based company made its proposals as the government prepares
to launch a review of the nuclear power industry, which was promised after
the recently announced coal mine closures.
Some details of NE's plans were disclosed at the weekend at a seminar
organised by the nuclear industry on the prospects for nuclear power in
Britain. The company is expected to report sharply improved operating
results for the first half of the current financial year. They will show
profits of more than Pounds 450m compared with Pounds 661m for the whole of
last year. However, those figures include the Pounds 1.3bn 'nuclear levy'
which NE receives from electricity consumers to help it build up provisions
against its costs in decommissioning reactors.
When NE was incorporated in the late 1980s, it was given responsibility for
the nuclear industry's liabilities such as decommissioning retired power
stations, but no money to pay for them. The government decided to fund the
liabilities by imposing a 10-year levy on household electricity bills.
According to senior executives, NE is basing its case for privatisation on
two main points:
That the company has made big efficiency improvements and is now close to
making a profit without the levy;
That the government's reluctance to finance new nuclear stations means the
industry will have to raise private capital if Britain is to have a
long-term nuclear power industry.
Mr Mark Baker, NE's executive director for corporate planning, said: 'We
believe that the best way of achieving our commercial objectives is to have
the freedom to make our own decisions.'
NE is preparing detailed financial projections for ministers with the help
of Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm it has hired to advise it on
privatisation. The projections are said to show that NE could produce a
dividend stream that would be attractive to private investors.
Analysts at the seminar said the company might be worth up to Pounds 2bn,
but much would depend on how the sale was structured and the extent to which
the government was prepared to underwrite NE's huge liabilities.
The privatisation of NE does not need specific legislation. But if the
government decided to go ahead with what would be a highly controversial
sale, it would probably present a bill to parliament so that the issue could
be fully debated.
Private ambition still open to public question, Page 9
