FT  01 JUN 93 / German plea for calm on arson
MR KLAUS Kinkel, Germany's foreign minister, appealed for calm yesterday as
protests continued over the arson attack that killed five Turks in Solingen,
near Cologne, at the weekend.
Police have arrested a 16-year-old right-wing youth on suspicion of murder
and arson, but said they were continuing their investigations.
The arson attack sparked off a violent protest by 3,000 demonstrators,
mostly Turks, who rampaged through Solingen until early yesterday.
Protesters smashed windows and looted shops. Motorways between Cologne and
Bonn were blocked and 17 demonstrators were arrested.
Skirmishes continued in Solingen late yesterday, as well as in Hamburg and
elsewhere in Germany. About 200 Turkish and German demonstrators blocked a
motorway in Hamburg last night, causing long traffic jams, but there was no
violence.
Reacting to the troubles, President Richard Weizsacker warned that
'Germany's social peace should not be allowed to be jeopardised by one blind
arsonist'.
The killing of three girls and two women is the worst racist attack since
November, when a Turkish woman and two small children were burned to death
in the northern town of Molnn.
The latest attack is likely to bring the German government under renewed
pressure to take firm action against right-wing groups and relax its
stringent citizenship laws.
Mr Alexander von Stahl, the federal prosecutor, said Saturday's attack
suggested 'racist and therefore right-wing terrorist motives.'
Senior officials in Turkey called for greater protection for the 1.8m-strong
Turkish community in Germany.
But Mr Rudolf Seiters, the interior minister, said: 'It's not only up to the
police to be watchful. It is a task for all of society.'
The liberal Free Democratic Party and opposition Social Democratic Party
said the 6.5m foreigners living in Germany would be more secure if they
could have dual citizenship.
But Chancellor Helmut Kohl's ruling Christian Democratic Union, and
particularly the Bavarian-based Christian Social Union, is opposed to
amending citizenship laws that date back to 1913.
