FT  05 JUN 93 / Food and Wine: Worthy clarets on the fringe - Wine / Edmund
Penning-Rowsell tries some lesser-known bottles in Bordeaux
WHICH Bordeaux district has a very different appellation controlee for its
red and dry white wine?
The answer is not immediately obvious because the area is little visited by
wine tourists to the Medoc or St Emilion - or even by the Bordeaux wine
trade. In Britain the wines are all too seldom seen. The appellation
Premieres Cotes de Bordeaux applies to the reds. The dry whites are now
classified as Bordeaux Blanc or Bordeaux Superieur, according to alcoholic
strength. Yet, since 1981 the sweet whites are Premieres Cotes de Bordeaux
Cadillac .
The Premieres Cotes stretch for 60km and 37 communes along the right bank of
the Garonne from just north of Bordeaux to St Maxiant on the outskirts of
Langon, but their width is never more than 5km - usually less - following
the sinuous river upstream. Inland these attractive, often steep 'first
hills' above the river become the Entre-Deux-Mers.
Like most lesser French wine districts the Premieres Cotes had never really
recovered from phylloxera (a lice which destroys vines) and the almost
continuous economic crises up to the second world war. Afterwards it was a
somewhat decayed area, but in the 1950s and early 1960s, it was partly
revitalised by immigrant growers from North Africa. However, in many cases
they lacked sufficient resources to transform neglected vineyards and
restore semi-abandoned chateaux completely.
In the last dozen years a new generation of growers from a variety of
professions - but all fired with the ambition to make wine - saw the
opportunities to buy estates at between FFr150,000 and FFr350,000 per
hectare according to their state, compared with FFr1.5m in St Emilion and
FFr4m in Pomerol. Accessibility to Bordeaux was also an attraction. Estates
that I recently visited included purchases made in the last 12 years by
Belgians, Danes, German and Japanese, as well as Bordelais and those from
other parts of France. The most recent I came upon was made last summer, Ch
Barreyre in Langoiran, acquired by a Bordeaux builder and a doctor who had
left medicine to become a wine grower.
Traditionally, the dominant red grape has been Merlot. The stated average
proportion is 55 per cent, with 25 per cent Cabernet Sauvignon and 15 per
cent Cabernet Franc. There is a little Malbec too, although seldom
replanted. But there are wide variations, and I visited chateaux with up to
70 per cent Cabernet-Sauvignon. However, the preponderance of Merlot and the
terroir means less tannic wines than in districts such as Bourg and Fronsac.
Thus they are usually drinkable after four or five years. The '88s and '89s
are already agreeable, though the more concentrated '90s will need more
time.
There are 450 growers in the area, 250 making mainly red wine, with an
average total production of about 1.2m bottles. White wines, basically
Semillon, with Sauvignon and Muscadelle added account for roughly another
290,000 bottles. In the north the wine is mostly red, but white gradually
becomes dominant south of Cadillac (the walled bastide town built by the
English in the 12th century).
Popularity of the Cadillac moelleux has been growing, following increased
demand for Sauternes and Barsac. Sweet, but not luscious, it is commonly
served in the area as an aperitif - with or without foie gras. If available
in the UK it should not cost more than Pounds 6, and the reds and dry whites
from Pounds 3.50 to Pounds 5.
Increasingly made is Clairet rose, said to have originated in Quinsac, where
in the Place de l'Eglise the Syndicat has its offices and will help visitors
to visit chateaux.
Nowadays 80 per cent of Premieres Cotes wines are sold in bottle, almost all
bypassing the Bordeaux trade and selling direct to private customers,
wholesalers and restaurants, with a surprising proportion exported,
particularly to Belgium, experts at seeking-out good, inexpensive claret.
Germany and Scandinavia also provide good markets, but almost everyone told
me that the British market is very difficult. Tesco has the exclusivity of
Ch Leon, a subsidiary of Ch Carignan, which is bought by Victoria Wine.
Waitrose is selling Ch Haut Rian.
Traditional merchants may buy a certain vintage, via a Bordeaux house, and
then perhaps not replace it immediately. Firms mentioned to me include
Averys of Bristol; Berry Bros &amp; Rudd, London SW1; Justerini &amp; Brooks, London
SW1 and the Wine Society, Stevenage, Hertfordshire. For quality and price
the wines are worth exploring.
