FT  30 APR 93 / Money Markets: Futures follow bunds
EUROMARK futures contracts continued to fall yesterday, reflecting another
sell-off in the German bond market in the wake of this week's repo rate cut,
writes James Blitz.
The cut of 36 basis points in the Bundesbank's repo rate on Wednesday
initially took money market dealers by surprise. But instead of getting
bullish about the prospect for more Bundesbank rate cuts, futures dealers
were struck yesterday by another  1/2 percentage point fall in German
10-year bond prices.
The bund market has been sold off because of fears that inflation will erode
real returns if German monetary policy is eased too quickly.
At the same time, fears of industrial unrest in eastern Germany continued to
raise concern of wage inflation.
The IG Metall trade union announced yesterday that it plans strikes in the
state of Saxony next Monday.
These worries pushed the June Euromark contract down to a close of 92.68
from a previous 92.75. The September contract dropped by 11 basis points on
the day to finish at 93.48.
By contrast, the mood in French money markets was distinctly upbeat
following another reduction in France's official interest rates.
The Bank of France lowered its intervention rate by 25 basis points to 8.25
per cent and its 5 to 10-day lending rate by a similar amount to 9.25 per
cent.
The size of these cuts mirrors the 25 basis-point reduction in the
Bundesbank's discount rate last week. But French cash rates have been
converging fast on German rates in the last two days.
With three-month francs at 7.91 per cent and three-month D-Marks at 7.73 per
cent, France now only carries an 18 basis-point premium over Germany.
This convergence is still not reflected in the June Pibor and Euromark
contracts, where the spread is some 42 basis points, making some futures
dealers think that French futures are cheap.
Conditions in the sterling cash market were very tight following
difficulties removing a Pounds 1.6bn shortage forecast by the Bank of
England.
The overnight lending rate was at 10 per cent at one stage. Three-month
money ended unchanged at 6 1/16 per cent. The June short sterling future
finished 6 basis points down on the day, depressed by a weak pound, at
93.84.
