FT  08 NOV 93 / UK Gilts: Conflicting data to push yields sideways
WITH worries about UK inflation relatively muted over the past few weeks,
gilt investors will be watching for signs from data due later today that
price pressures are picking up.
According to City estimates, data about new credit being taken on by
consumers will indicate higher overall demand, which could push down gilt
prices at the long end of the yield curve.
Figures on how much manufacturers are increasing prices of finished products
at the wholesale level could, however, illustrate a continuation of economic
weakness.
The overall result is likely to push gilt prices sideways, after the
excitement of Friday when yields rose along the curve on the back of the
large sell-off in US Treasury bonds.
Over the week as a whole, yields of gilts maturing in seven years or less
eased on the belief that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will cut bank
base rates, held at 6 per cent since January, around the time of the Budget
on November 30.
While yields of these types of gilts came down by up to 10 basis points,
longer dated instruments saw a yield rise of about 5 basis points, largely
as a result of weaknesses in other important bond markets overseas.
On Friday night, 15-year gilts were yielding about 7 per cent. If
expectations about low UK inflation over the next year are to be believed,
yields of this sort make the instruments good value. This could stimulate
some buying pressure later this week.
City analysts are expecting new consumer credit in September to come out at
about Pounds 225m, a relatively high number which would be the same as the
one for August.
They are pencilling in a figure of 4 per cent for the year- on-year increase
to last month in prices of manufactured goods at the factory gate, after a
4.2 per cent rise in the 12 months to September.
Attention will also focus on figures coming out on Friday on the change in
manufacturing output in September. Economists are looking for a small rise
on the month, which would compensate for an unexpectedly high 0.4 per cent
decline in output in August.
A rise in output of 0.5 per cent or higher for September could trigger some
selling off of gilts. especially at the longer end of the curve.
