FT  29 JUL 93 / Technology: The little engine that could - A machine that
offers power from less fuel
An engine that provides high power on low fuel consumption is the object of
a never-ending quest for the car industry.
Mazda, the Hiroshima-based car maker, claims to have made great strides in
that pursuit with an engine that raises fuel efficiency by 10 to 15 per
cent, compared with conventional engines without losing power.
The new engine is known as the Miller-cycle engine, after Ralph Miller, an
American engineer who came up with the theory in 1947.
According to Mazda, its Miller-cycle engine
will combine the fuel efficiency of a 2,000cc engine with the power of a
3,000cc engine.
The improvement means that each car using a Miller-cycle engine will emit
600kg less carbon dioxide in a year, which, in effect, is equivalent to
planting 100 trees, according to Kouichi Hatamura, manager of the Powertrain
Engineering Promotion Group at Mazda.
Given the growing concern with environmental protection, 'the key to future
competitiveness lies in how much an engine reduces the amount of CO it
emits,' Hatamura believes.
Mazda's faith in the importance of creating an environmentally friendly
engine kept the company's development team working long after others had
given up on putting it to practical use in cars.
In the 1980s, no less than General Motors of the US, and Nissan of Japan,
among others, put a lot of work into developing the Miller-cycle engine.
The problem facing car makers is that increasing the power of a car usually
leads to lower fuel efficiency. Specifically, the power of a car to turn its
wheels, known as torque, increases in proportion to the amount of air and
fuel that is injected into the engine.
The energy that creates torque results from the movement of the piston in
the engine's cylinders that compresses the air and fuel mixture in an upward
stroke. The pressure on that air-fuel mixture causes combustion. Energy is
released in the piston's next movement known as the expansion stroke. The
larger the expansion stroke, the greater the engine's torque.
One way to increase torque is to push more air and fuel into the same amount
of space. The problem is that although it allows high fuel efficiency, it
tends to raise the temperature of the engine and create abnormal combustion,
known as knocking.
Mazda'a Miller-cycle engine overcomes that problem by keeping the intake
valves through which the air and fuel mixture enters the cylinder open for
part of the compression time. This prevents the temperature from rising too
much and thereby avoids knocking.
The intake valve is left open until the piston rises one-fifth from the
bottom and some of the air-fuel mixture flows out of the cylinder at this
time. The valve is then closed for a shortened compression stroke.
However, the shorter compression stroke means that the pressure is reduced.
And when this happens, expansion is reduced as well.
So Mazda had to find a way of keeping the pressure high so as not to reduce
the amount of expansion, which would in turn have reduced the torque.
What it needed was a new type of compressor to do the job.
Working with Ishikawajima- Harima Heavy Industries, the company adapted the
Lysholm compressor - found in some ships and in industrial use - for use in
cars.
With the Lysholm compressor, twice the pressure of conventional compressors
can be applied to the air-fuel mixture when it is pushed into the cylinder.
Since the mixture is already compressed, even with a reduced compression
stroke by the piston, expansion is not reduced.
The compressed air-fuel mixture also contributes to the fuel efficiency of
the engine.
Mazda plans to introduce its new engine in some of its higher-end cars in
about a year. It will be the first time in more than 40 years for the
Miller-cycle engine to be brought to practical use in cars.
