FT  18 AUG 93 / Labour levy would enforce training guidelines
A LABOUR government would impose a levy of up to 1.5 per cent of payroll
costs on companies which failed to comply with training guidelines, Mr
Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, said yesterday.
The levy, intended to help pay for upgrading government training programmes,
compares with earlier plans for a maximum levy of 0.5 per cent on all
companies not spending that amount.
The revised proposal emerged in a paper for Labour's annual conference next
month, in which Mr Brown further distances the party from the
higher-taxation manifesto on which it fought the 1992 general election.
Promising to cut taxes 'if I can', Mr Brown confirmed the Labour
leadership's determination to discard the party's redistributionist image.
'Labour is not against wealth, nor will we seek to penalise it,' he said.
Mr Brown said the revised training proposals were aimed at encouraging
companies to develop their own training programmes, rather than rely on the
government.
'There are a large number of companies which are failing to make the
training investment which is necessary. That is not only harming the country
as a whole, it is harming those companies which are prepared to make the
investment because they are finding that their trained workers are being
poached,' he said.
The revised proposal is based on similar schemes operating in France,
Australia and New Zealand. Labour officials are believed to have concluded
that the amount raised through the original scheme would have been
insufficient to finance a worthwhile training programme.
The proposal was dismissed as a 'distraction' by the Confederation of
British Industry, which said spending on training had been rising since
1989, despite the recession.
'Government regulation of this kind would just lead to a reclassification of
existing activities as companies tried to comply with the rules,' said Mr
Tony Webb, CBI training director. 'What we need is a focus on increasing
training through cultural change, not an artificial scheme requiring a set
level of spending.'
Mr Brown presented the training levy as a key component of Labour's revised
economic strategy, unveiled last month, which focuses on increasing
investment and competition.
Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary to the treasury, said Labour's
policy document was full of 'platitudinous' rubbish. 'It is just silly,
particularly for the Labour party, to go round talking about tax cuts at the
moment,' he said.
Labour's Economic Approach, 1993 conference paper. 150 Walworth Road, London
SE1. (071 701 1234).
