FT  18 SEP 93 / Fashion: The return of an old Italian master - In the 1950s
Brioni epitomised La Dolce Vita. It is still the last word in subdued
classics for men
IT IS ONE of the world's most expensive menswear companies. Its suits are
favoured by top international business executives, film stars and foreign
royals. The precursor of Nino Cerruti and Giorgio Armani by several years,
it pioneered the Italian look. Yet, in the UK, it remains one of fashion's
best-kept secrets, in an industry that is big on hype, it has quietly gone
about the business of tailoring, relying on the exclusive grapevine of its
rich and famous customers as it main marketing vehicle.
On Monday, Beale and Inman, on London's New Bond Street, starts its Brioni
Week, the first promotion of the Brioni brand by a UK retailer for more than
30 years. Around the corner at Savile Row, the grand old tailors who recall
the last promotion may feel an uncomfortable sense of deja vu.
When Brioni launched its collection in the UK in 1959, a newspaper headline
shouted: 'Look out, London] Here comes another Roman invasion'. The
company's mission was to usurp the heavy, bespoke suit with its own
lightweight, ready-to-wear version. The ambassador of Italian style aimed to
revolutionise men's fashion.
The scene of the historic debut was a catwalk show at the Hyde Park Hotel in
Knightsbridge, London, organised by Brioni stockist, the newly-opened (now
deceased) store, Woollands of Knightsbridge. Men's fashion 'parades' and
men's boutiques, not to mention the collection, were considered to be
incredibly risque at the time. The Spectator said the event was 'as brave an
act as holding a whist drive in the Kremlin for the Friends of Capitalism.'
The style commentators of the day marveled at the novel use of colour and
fabric. The range included emerald silk smoking jackets, plus cashmere
coats, lilac striped shirts with matching brocade waistcoats, crimson and
white brushed mohair blazers and even suede trenchcoats.
The latter was, according to the critic in The Spectator, 'all hung about
with tabs and windbreaks and buttoning etceteras; worn with skin tight
trousers, there seemed nevertheless to be some lack of pockets and the model
was actually carrying a handbag.'
While many concluded that the more progressive excesses were unsuited to
British tastes, others applauded the new slimline silhouette and the relaxed
elegance, achieved by the lightest of wools and, most important, the absence
of padding. Jackets had three buttons at the front, two vents at the back,
sloped shoulders and the widest point of the lapels was 2in. Trousers were
17in round the bottom with no turn-ups.
This was a far cry from anything else before: the utilitarian demob suit in
coarse grey wool, with its enormous shoulder pads, oversized chest, high cut
trouser and wide shoe-covering leg was standard. The more advanced Savile
Row tailors such as Bunny Rogers had reinvented the Edwardian look by
producing frock-coat style jackets, narrow 'Guards' trousers and
velvet-collared covert coats, topped by bowler hats. This trend, combined
with the Zoot suit from the US, may have given birth to street style and the
teddy boy phenomenon, but it was too dandy to take off among traditional
bespoke customers.
Meanwhile, Rome was gaining a worldwide reputation for glamour and style
following the hit film La Dolce Vita. Brioni's founders, Nazareno Fonticoli,
the tailor, and Gaetano Savini, the business brain, captured the mood of the
'sweet life', realising that society was more cosmopolitan, men now lived in
climate-controlled homes and offices, drove cars, were slimmer and healthier
and did not want or need heavy, stiff, grey clothing.
Brioni is no longer in the fashion vanguard, preferring to emphasise to
customers that an exquisitely cut, classic suit in the finest cloth is an
investment. Although the bulk of its business is ready-to-wear, it still
adopts bespoke techniques and takes great pride in the craftsmanship of its
tailors.
The company employs 700 workers including 200 tailors and makes 250 suits
each day. Each suit takes 18 hours to make from individual hand-cutting
through hand-stiching and ironing. It also keeps the measurements of 25,000
clients on computer in Rome, allowing customers to order custom-made suits
by telephone and receive them in five weeks without even a fitting.
However, the main attraction is the cloth, much of which is from British
mills Bower &amp; Roebuck and Johnston. Try most suits with an Italian designer
label and you notice how light and smooth they feel. Try on a Brioni suit
and you feel you might as well be wearing silk pyjamas. It is possible to
roll up a Brioni Cashmere overcoat into the size of a rugby ball, stick it
into a suitcase for a few hours. When you unfold it, it will be crease free.
The pursuit of excellence does not come cheap. Off-the-peg suits range from
Pounds 1,100 to Pounds 1,900 and custom-made suits from Pounds 3,500 to
Pounds 4,000. An unlined cashmere overcoat costs Pounds 1,695, a blazer,
Pounds 995, a shirt, Pounds 189, and a silk tie and handkerchief set, Pounds
119.
This level of the market is recession-proof, according to Umberto Angelino,
Brioni's chief executive. Clients past and present include Henry Fonda, John
Wayne, Peter Sellers, Rock Hudson, Richard Burton, King Constantine, the
King of Malaysia, film director Michael Winner, Arab sheikhs and even former
arts minister David Mellor.
Next week at Beale and Inman, the full Brioni collection will be displayed
and the company's master tailor, Checchio Fonticoli, will be at hand to take
measurements for custom-made suits and ready-to-wear adjustments.
Brioni gained a reputation for being a bit nouveau riche during the 1980s.
It tended to be too flexible to outlandish demands from customers. It was
the 'if sir wants a cream silk safari suit, he may have one' syndrome. Now,
Brioni is focusing on its subdued classics, believing that quality can come
in all guises - but it is better when it is tasteful.
