FT  14 SEP 93 / Arts: Breaking the Bank - Theatre
The rise and fall of John Law (1671-1729) convict, international financier
and speculator is perfect matter for a play, serious, funny or both. Eleanor
Zeal's Breaking the Bank by the Empty Space Theatre Company at The
Warehouse, Croydon tells of Law's career, and amounts to a fine idea gone
astray, nearly right, but just, as Law might say, one share short of a
portfolio.
The remarkable Law was a fine gambler whose luck ran out when he killed a
man in a duel in 1694. He broke jail and spent the 1690s learning about
credit systems in Amsterdam and Genoa. His dream was paper currency. He
floated the idea at the Scottish parliament, was turned down, and instead
set up a private bank in Paris. There his ideas gained currency and his
currency gained him a job from the French Regent as comptroller-general of
finance in France. He set up the French equivalent of the South Sea Bubble
by forming the Mississippi trading company in 1719.
How does Breaking the Bank do justice to Law's life and achievements? It
tries, but fails. The best parts of this costume-drama look like cabaret
sketches about money, notes, shares and speculation. There are fugues, sung
by the four actors: 'Keep the money moving' or 'We're going to deal in
futures, in castles in the air.' There are jokes about privatisation, new
taxes on fuel, and references to the European Monetary System, having a
flutter down at the Bourse. But fortunately the wit never plumbs the lost
consonant depths of 'Gentlemen prefer bonds.'
The characters and the action are bitty. The Regent (Philippe of Orleans,
played by Adam Fahey) opens with 'I didn't poison Louis.' Opposite him, Law
(Luke Williams) and his quasi-wife Catherine (Jaquie Bywaters) are an
up-tight Protestant voice in a Xenophobic Catholics system running on divine
credit. Richard Cherry as coachman and bankers makes up the energetic cast,
who bustle round an inventive set of cube boxes. Andrew Holmes' direction
could be smoother, and the play should be shorter.
Law wrote in Money and Trade Considered (1705): 'Wealth depends upon
commerce, and commerce depends upon circulation.' Somehow 'The Circulation
of Nations' does not ring true, but he was 70 years ahead of Adam Smith.
The Warehouse, Croydon (081 6480 4060) until October 3 before national tour
