FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of South Africa - Open for investment (20):
Playground for visitors - Tourism
ONE industry where South Africa seems certain to develop a competitive
advantage is leisure. Even under sanctions and with high levels of violence
and political uncertainty, it is the continent's second largest tourist
industry, accounting for almost 20 per cent of regional tourist income, more
than double Kenya's 9.6 per cent. In 1991, Morocco headed the African league
with 24 per cent of tourist revenue.
Globally, South Africa is a tiny player accounting for less than 0.25 per
cent of the international tourist business. Excluding African visitors,
there were some 560,000 tourist arrivals last year, the bulk of whom (70 per
cent) came from Europe, with the UK as the main market (26 per cent)
followed by Germany (16 per cent) and the US (9 per cent). With a growth
rate of 18,5 per cent in 1992, the Asian market - especially Taiwan (4 per
cent) and Japan (1.5 per cent) - is becoming increasingly important. Growth
accelerated in the first seven months of 1993 with the number of arrivals
increasing 12.7 per cent.
Overseas tourists spend an estimated R4,800 (Dollars 1,750) per visit
(excluding air fares to and from the country) and the industry earned
R2.75bn (Dollars 1bn) in foreign exchange in 1991, making it the fourth
largest foreign currency earner, after manufactures, gold and other
minerals.
Aside from the lifting of sanctions, the main factor making for tourism
growth at a time of global recession has been the liberalisation of the
aviation policies and the expansion of air traffic capacity. In the past
three years, 18 new airlines have started services to South Africa.
A more market-driven aviation policy has resulted in more competitive market
prices and the opening up of the charter market. The number of tour
operators has more than doubled, while government has become more active in
tourism promotion allowing accelerated tax write-offs for the accommodation
industry, a R600m (Dollars 180m) loan programme for Eco-tourism projects and
support schemes for small entrepreneurs.
On the debit side, tourist perceptions of personal safety in South Africa
have deteriorated markedly. In January 1990, some 70 per cent of overseas
visitors rated the safety factor in South Africa good but by January this
year, this rating had fallen below 30 per cent.
The government's target is to more than treble the number of arrivals by
2000 reaching 1.75m visitors earning some R24bn in foreign exchange. With
hotels operating at below 50 per cent of bed-night capacity, there is
considerable scope for expansion without significant new investment in
hotels.
Nevertheless, three leading global players - Hilton, Hyatt and Sheraton -
have expressed interest in opening up in South Africa.
