FT  01 MAY 93 / Private View: The Temple of Health is crumbling
WHEN it rains, the water pours down the wall of his consulting room. 'I have
my umbrella, to make patients laugh,' said Dr. Kosta Manis, laughing
himself. 'Welcome to our Temple of Hygieia. Don't mistake it for the public
convenience, which is right next to it.'
The public lavatory tastefully flanking the mother-and-baby clinic of the
Erith Health Centre, Kent, is a robust brick building. The health centre has
holes in the roof, stains on the ceilings and floors, and scaffolding to
prop up the back wall. 'Remember,' said the doctor, 'you are not in Bosnia
or Nigeria now. You are 12 miles from Southwark Bridge.'
The health centre is not just a place of work for Dr Manis but his private
metaphor for Britain's National Health Service. Both structures, he says,
have been collapsing for the last 20 years.
Dr Manis is a witty man who loves an ironic phrase, the more extravagant the
better. He laughs a great deal because he feels strongly. When really
agitated, he laughs until the tears come.
The fact he is Greek, from Mani in the southern Peloponnese, may account for
his passion. It also explains his individualism, and his contempt for those
who profess to know what's best for the rest - especially the politicians
and administrators of the NHS.
He thinks the collapse of the British health service is no particular
government's fault, but the inevitable result of a wrong assumption at its
founding: that there was a fixed 'pool' of illness to be treated. But better
treatment means longer lives and the old, naturally, consume a
disproportionate amount of health care. Add to this the fact of an ageing
population, the cost of the technology, and a dash of hypochondria, and it
is no wonder the NHS proves to be grossly underfunded.
'Rationing' is a dirty word. These days it goes under the more genteel
American label of 'prioritisation' following the state of Oregon's bold step
in declaring which treatments it was prepared to subsidise and which not.
'Rationing used to be where in the queue the patient stands,' Dr Manis said.
'And the doctor would decide. But now it is not where in the queue you stand
but whether you stand there at all. Because now there are certain conditions
that are too expensive to treat.
'Of course,' he continued. 'the patients have no say in that. And this is
what annoys me more than anything else. They are the ones who pay me, pay my
nurses, pay the managers. But they have absolutely no say in the whole
thing.
'This is the basic fault of the NHS. Why should you have a manager sitting
up in his ivory tower deciding, not how long you wait for a hip replacement
but whether you can have a hip replacement at all, or renal dialysis, or a
heart transplant? He decides what happens to you although it's you that pays
his salary.'
But the patients can't decide, I objected. They would all want everything
tomorrow.
'Correct. Why not?'
Because they can't have it.
'Why not?'
Because you can't supply it, I said, unsure who was interviewing whom.
'Precisely. But you lead very nicely to the point: the patients are not told
the facts. They are not told that within the next 10 years the demands on
the service will be so immense that the Treasury will not be able to cope
with them.' Dr Manis rattled off the familiar statistics. 'To me, or anyone,
even - as Mrs Bottomley would say - to the mentally challenged it's obvious
that private funds will come into the game. Now why do they not have the
guts to stand up and say so? The doctors know it, the patients know it.'
This time Dr Manis supplied his own answer.
'Because they are cowards. You see, I think the British people are like a
kind, benign giant, kept down by those Lilliputian politicians.'
Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, figures a lot in Dr Manis'
conversation: to him she is a sort of crypto-socialist nanny, the token
woman in the cabinet, 'the verbal computer spewing statistics' who has told
fibs about London's health provision and has destroyed the point of her own
government's NHS reforms by failing to abolish the expensive regional tier
of bureaucrats.
'If some politician was honest enough to stand up and say: 'Look here folks,
there's no money in the kitty so you'd better make your own arrangements,'
the British, who are pretty reasonable, talented, industrious people, would
say: 'Right. Forget changing the car every three years, forget the Japanese
computer games and the Dutch lager. Let's look after our health and the
health of our children.' There's plenty of money around. It's all to do with
. . . I can never pronounce it.
Prioritisation?
'That's the one]' Dr Manis chortled.
I thought the doctor was about to suggest that Britain adopt the American
health system. Not at all. It was an insensitive, profit-driven system of
winners and losers, he said.
So which is the right model?
'For me Switzerland is the model. It's absolutely beautiful. It's based on
community and it's a totally ungovernable system with no rules and about
1,000 permutations, with real diversity of offer and choice. The state plays
a part, individuals contribute according to their means and if there is a
gap, charity within the community fills it. Each individual decides what he
wants to do.'
How well he wants to be?
'Yes] You see, what is health to you?'
I suppose it does vary, I admitted. Some people want to be perfect in every
department.
'Right] So health is a sense of well-being as perceived by each individual.
Right? Therefore we cannot have Bottomley telling us about the health of the
nation. It's the health of the individual.
'If a rich man wants a health check every morning, good luck to him if
someone is prepared to take his money and do it.'
That's a waste of resources, I said.
'If he pays for it it isn't'
It's a waste of the doctor's time.
'Who is to say he should or shouldn't? Unless, of course, people emotionally
feel the state is a substitute for parents; if they feel Mrs Bottomley is
their mother and John Major is their dad. Are we to have the mother of the
nation telling us how we should be? We might as well go to China, where if
you've got a bad habit like being a homosexual the state doctor treats you
with electric shocks whether you like it or not.'
Dr Manis enthuses about consumer choice in a mixed health economy, but has
not a single private patient himself. He cannot swallow the idea of taking
money over the counter. Private medicine in Britain was parasitic on the NHS
where it should be complementary. 'Without mincing words, if you're a
consultant physician and you see that your private practice is falling, you
make your NHS queue longer so some will be forced to go private.'
Dr Manis is, I suppose, a libertarian with anarchic tendencies - which is
not to say he is not a first-rate general practitioner who loves his 3,300
patients and is loved in return. After another tirade against the health
secretary I asked him if he was a reactionary. He seemed pleased. 'Now,
you're doing very well. You have to move back to my childhood. I'll tell you
why.'
And he described with some emotion how, as a seven-year-old during the Greek
civil war, he and his family nearly starved to death when the town was
besieged by the communists. 'People were dying around us. You could actually
see the bullets coming through the window.' He laughed unhappily. His
father, he said, was a bank manager and would have been the first to be
murdered had the army not arrived in time. The son has hated authorit-
arianism ever since.
'I come from a country where we don't really believe in authority. Each
Greek is an individual and that's it. I think people should know what's
happening to them. It's up to them to decide. I don't want a politician to
impose private schemes or a social system.'
Dr Manis came to England in his 20s, intending to move on to the US where
many of the family had emigrated. Instead, he became a research fellow,
lecturer and registrar in renal medicine at Charing Cross hospital in
London, worked at the Dreadnought seamen's hospital in Greenwich until it
was closed, and went into general practice. He is married to Jill Cooper,
once England's fourth-ranked woman tennis player, and they have four
children. They live very modestly in bourgeois Bexley.
The doctor took me to see another illustration of his thesis that
bureaucracy is bad for your health. Five years ago, Erith Cottage hospital,
a thriving concern attracting much local charitable support, was declared
too expensive to keep going. There was an outcry. The hospital was reopened
and redecorated - as a suite of offices for health administrators.
Dr Manis was predictably caustic about Sir Keith Joseph, who introduced the
three-tier NHS. 'Hospitals used to be run by three people. Then the great
free marketeer appeared and he totally ruined all that.
'You see, the priests have failed,' he added suddenly.
I asked him to explain.
'Instead of going round politicising, they should remember their vocation.
They should participate, attract their flock and raise money, like the Greek
Orthodox in his village. He knows who is rich and who is poor. 'Do you want
a nice little flat in heaven? If you do, cough up because so-and-so's wife
is going to have twins.' So the rich man takes the peasant woman to hospital
in his limousine.'
As our tour of the constituency ended, the doctor warned that even the
tolerant British could lose patience.
'The politicians keep looking for this vision thing. As if the British
people expect Major and Smith to go into some sort of trance and start
talking metaphysics] Uttering aphorisms from their tripods]
'For heaven's sake, what people want is realism. They want their politicians
to have a grasp of reality, hear what the people want, and do it. Because if
they don't do it, the little man with the moustache will appear and start
building autobahns . . .
As we approached the railway station, he announced: 'I've got it. The NHS is
a large-scale, unethical experiment where not only the guinea-pigs - which
is the patients - were not asked whether they wanted to participate or not,
but even the technicians - which is the doctors and nurses - have not been
consulted. That's it. I got it.'
The doctor laughed, this time with real pleasure.
