FT  17 APR 93 / How To Spend It: Chanel . . . the name to whisper
OF ALL the big brand names Chanel is the one that has attracted the greatest
hoopla. In the late 1980s no fashion groupie went anywhere without her
quilted bag, with its overlapping double C motif, declaring her allegiance
to a special club. No-one was in doubt over the provenance of those
chain-handled handbags, braided jackets, gilt and pearl earrings and -
ultimate accolade of real cult status - an awareness of factories in Hong
Kong, Korea and Taiwan which churned out copies.
But what was there for the chaps? Where were the cult accessories for him?
Nowhere, so far as most of us knew. But lurking quietly on the shelves, all
this time, have been Chanel's own versions of that ubiquitous power symbol -
the motif tie. Every bit as well-made and desirable as other better-known
labels, it has been a strangely well-kept secret. A few women who went to
Chanel to shop for themselves noticed them and bought them. But, when it
came to ties, for a man to think of Chanel was almost unheard of.
All that may change now that word is getting out. Chanel ties are
recognisably in the familiar, traditional mood of the executive power-tie.
Just as other purveyors of neckwear to the board-room set have moved into
motif ties, so Chanel has its own offerings. This summer's motifs take in
old-fashioned toys, drums, racing-cars (sketched above), hot-air balloons,
as well as motifs from traditional English sports such as cricket, tennis
and football. New silk knitted ties (one of which is sketched here) come in
plains and stripes and sport the gold chain to keep them hanging straight
just like the jackets.
There are also several club stripes but no spots. Prices start at Pounds 55
for the silk motif ties and the knitted versions are Pounds 45. There are a
few, luxurious, expensive accessories all with essential Chanel touches -
washbags (sketched below, Pounds 230), wallets, credit-card holders and the
like.
All can be found at Chanel shops at 26 Old Bond Street, London W1 and 31
Sloane Street, London SW3.
