FT  12 FEB 93 / Trials and tribulations: Sir James McKinnon claims his style
of regulation is necessary
Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, the UK gas industry
regulator, says his relationship with British Gas is dominated by 'creative
tension'. Most in the company would recognise the tension, and are unlikely
to regret Sir James's decision to step down from his post in September, a
year earlier than scheduled. But how creative has the UK's most combative
regulator been during his six-year tenure?
The aggressive style of the 63-year-old lorry driver's son from Glasgow has
left the industry and investors on the one hand, and consumers on the other,
divided over this question.
Consumers have benefited from Sir James's tenure. His constant attacks on
the cost of gas have helped bring a 20 per cent reduction in gas prices in
real terms in the six years since privatisation. He has pushed British Gas
to publish standards of service and commit itself to paying compensation if
it fails to meet them. Ofgas has encouraged British Gas to deal more
sympathetically with customers who cannot pay their bills. Partly as a
result, the number of disconnections dropped from 60,000 in 1986 to 16,000
last year.
But Sir James's approach to his role has brought him into conflict with
British Gas, which says he has damaged its business. Investors, too, are
wary of Sir James's motives: 'The City tends to see him as a demon with two
horns and a pitchfork,' said one shareholder.
Sir James's pricing formula limits price rises to 5 percentage points below
the rate of inflation, compared with a limit of 2 percentage points below
inflation set by the government at the time of privatisation. The effect of
the new formula will be apparent in two weeks, when British Gas announces
its results for last year - the first year in which the new, tougher pricing
formula was in place.
Gas industry observers say that the new pricing system will play a big part
in reducing profits to between Pounds 850m and Pounds 900m, compared with
Pounds 1.16bn in 1991. Analysts have already cut their estimates of dividend
growth at the company to little above the expected rate of inflation from
this year to 1997 - when the pricing formula is to be reviewed again.
Sir James argues that the fall in profits is more a result of the effects of
recession on demand and last year's relatively warm weather than of his
pricing regime.
He believes that profit levels could be maintained, even under the new
system, if British Gas improves its efficiency through cutting jobs and
rais-ing produc-tivity.
Investors are also concerned that Sir James's tough regulation of the
company in the UK has forced it to expand overseas. As its UK profit base
comes under pressure from regulators and increasing competition, British Gas
is looking to diversify into oil and gas exploration abroad and in
international gas distribution.
The worry is that this profit flow is riskier than the company's core UK
business. 'Investors are somewhat concerned about diversification into
Global Gas (British Gas's overseas gas distribution arm),' said Mr Nick
Antill, analyst at Hoare Govett, the UK stockbrokers.
But Sir James is not the only regulator to erode the company's core UK
business. It is the Office of Fair Trading, for example, that is forcing
British Gas to surrender 60 per cent of its industrial market to rival
suppliers by 1995. This market, which involves the supply of gas to
businesses, is one of the company's biggest revenue sources.
Sir James's influence on the industrial sector of British Gas's business is
restricted by law. This is because the government expected the deregulation
of the gas market after privatisation would itself encourage competition in
the industry.
But when competition failed to develop - partly because of a shortage of gas
supplies available to British Gas's rivals - it was left to Sir James to
prompt the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the Office of Fair Trading
to seek ways of promoting competition. This resulted in both regulators
imposing various measures on British Gas since privatisation, and leav-ing
Sir James to decide whether they had been effective.
It is a system with which Sir James himself is not happy. He recently
denounced the OFT's demand that British Gas give up most of its industrial
market as 'impossible'.
It is one of the few views he shares with British Gas. 'The problem is that
there is no cohesion between regulators and, with them acting independently,
they could totally screw up the whole financial future of the company,' said
Mr Cedric Brown, British Gas chief executive.
The two main demands made on the company - the reduction of prices and the
surrender of a large part of the industrial market - were one of the
principal reasons behind British Gas's decision to request a review of its
business by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission last August.
The review, which is due to be published in July, should give British Gas
some clear indications of its future course. Mr Brown is hoping it could
prompt a radical rethink in the way the gas industry is regulated.
Even from within the consumer lobby, there is now some desire for change. Mr
Ian Powe, director of the Gas Consumers' Council, believes the ground has
shifted and that, while Sir James's combative approach has reaped
'tremendous benefits', there should now be room for a more constructive
dialogue between British Gas and Ofgas. 'British Gas does understand the
significance of regulation now and it is possible for Ofgas to work more
closely with the company.'
Sir James maintains that his style of regulation is necessary to control
British Gas, and that a difficult relationship is to be expected between a
regulator and a monopolist. But even he may welcome a respite. When
announcing his decision to step down, he said: 'It is a bit like banging
your head against the wall; it's nice when you stop.'
