FT  29 JAN 93 / Financial Times Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (7):
Helping cash over the generation gap - The Experts' Panel, Investment for
Children / Tax is a snare when adults want to pass on a little wealth. The
possible solutions include National Savings, friendly societies, gilts and
collective funds
MOST PARENTS worry about their children's future and want to ensure that
they have a modicum of financial independence once they reach adulthood.
But the Inland Revenue, keen to stamp on a potential area for tax evasion,
does not make it easy for parents to pass money to their offspring.
Accordingly, we asked our panel of financial experts to recommend
investments for children in the light of all the complex tax rules.
According to Charles Pascoe, of accountants Stoy Hayward: 'The tax problem
that every parent comes up against when investing for children is caused by
section 663 of the Taxes Act 1988, relating to parents' settlements on
children.
'These provisions broadly cover the situation where a parent gives an asset
to a child under 18. Any income derived from that asset will continue to be
taxed as if it were owned by the parent (except where the child's income is
less than Pounds 100 in a tax year).
'Two attractive investments are not caught by section 663.
'Issue E of National Savings Children's Bonus Bonds will produce an
excellent tax-free return (in today's falling interest-rate climate) of 7.85
per cent per annum compound after five years. Unfortunately, the maximum
holding for each child is Pounds 1,000.
'The 6th issue of index-linked National Savings Certificates has a maximum
holding of Pounds 5,000. If held for five years, the certificates will grow
in value in line with the Retail Price Index over the period, plus 3.25 per
cent per annum compound. If the recent devaluation of the pound eventually
forces up prices, this could prove an excellent return on maturity.
'The tax rules do not attack capital gains made by a child resulting from a
gift, and therefore parents could attempt to use their child's annual CGT
exemption (currently Pounds 5,800). This could be achieved by purchasing an
asset such as a painting, antiques or shares, where any increase in value is
essentially of a capital nature.
'Finally, it is worth looking out for those savings institutions which
periodically offer above average interest rates specifically for those under
18. These accounts might be good investments in the case of gifts from a
grandparent or as a result of birthday presents of cash from friends and
relations. The income would probably, in such circumstances, be tax-free as
the child could use its personal allowance, and the parent, on behalf of the
child should complete form R85(1990), obtainable from the building society,
in order for the interest to be paid gross.'
David Harris, of accountants Chantrey Vellacott, also highlights the tax
issue, and divides children's investments into those given by parents and
those given by others. For investments given by parents, he suggests:
National Savings Children's Bonds, National Savings certificates, friendly
society baby bonds, and Premium Bonds.
'The Children's Bonds,' he points out, 'can be purchased by anyone aged over
16, on behalf of anyone under 16. The 40th issue of fixed-interest National
Savings certificates offers a guaranteed tax-free return of 5.75 per cent
per annum compound, when held for five years, and the maximum holding is
Pounds 5,000.
'For longer-term investment, friendly society baby bonds can be purchased by
any adult for any child before its 18th birthday. Only one baby bond per
child is permitted and the maximum investment is Pounds 18 per month or
Pounds 200 per annum.
'Most friendly societies have schemes whereby a lump-sum investment, at
outset, can be used to fund the purchase of the baby bond plan throughout
its 10-year term. One should be aware that there are fairly heavy surrender
penalties on these schemes, and it is always best to ensure that they run
their full 10-year term.
'At maturity, the plan can be encashed to provide a tax-free cash lump sum,
or simply left to continue the tax-free growth or provide a regular tax-free
income.
'My personal favourites in the baby bond market are the Family Assurance
Junior Bond and the Homeowners Friendly Society Bond, linked to the Rupert
Bear unit trust, managed by Invesco MIM.'
When those other than parents are giving investments, Mr Harris suggests the
following options: gilts, building society accounts, unit trust savings
schemes and offshore funds.
'Gilts offer a wide choice of maturity dates and coupon yields, and can,
therefore, be selected to fit the circumstances of most junior investors.
'Since most gilts are trading above par value, it may be preferable to
consider a fixed-interest unit trust, and my recommendations would include
Kleinwort Benson's Gilt trust and Whittingdale's Gilt Income trust. These
trusts pay dividends net of basic rate tax, and this tax will have to be
reclaimed from the Inland Revenue.
'Regular unit-trust savings contracts can provide a simple and cheap means
of growing a sizeable lump sum. My personal recommendations would be M &amp; G
and James Capel, thanks to the longer-term investment expertise of the
former and the index-tracking funds of the latter.
John Edwards, a former FT journalist and now consultant at Berry, Birch &amp;
Noble, says:
'For a parent to take advantage of the child's full personal tax allowance
of Pounds 3,445, a simple 'bare' trust is the answer, provided you are
prepared for the money to be locked away until the child is 18 years old.
More complicated trusts can be used to shelter children's investments from
the taxman, but they require legal advice (and expense) to set up properly.
'The special National Savings children's bonus bonds and baby bonds offered
by friendly societies provide tax-free returns and look good on paper.
'One of the cheapest and most effective ways of investing on behalf of a
child is a regular savings scheme with an investment trust company. Charges
are very low, and small amounts each month can become quite a large fund
over the years.
'A unit trust specially designed for children is the Invesco Rupert
Children's fund. Investing solely in UK blue-chip shares, it has quite a
good performance record since being launched in 1988 as a bit of a gimmick.
'Its big attraction, however, is the very low minimum lump sum investment of
Pounds 50 permitted. This makes it suitable for birthday presents or gifts.
Fond grandparents, for example, can give Pounds 250 a person each year
exempt from inheritance tax to as many children as they like. If units in
the Rupert fund are bought through the Homeowners Friendly Society, then the
proceeds can also be tax-free up to the restrictions governing the baby
bond.
Mark Bolland, of financial advisers Chamberlain de Broe, says:
'Because savings for children is long term in nature, simple deposits are
unlikely to be effective. In most cases, parents will be looking for maximum
returns with as high a level of security as possible, but with interest
rates so poor at present, alternatives are needed.
'National Savings offer healthy, secure returns - the Children's Bonus Bonds
(issue E) are ideal. Parents could also buy other issues, such as the 6th
issue index-linked certificates. Those of a gambling bent can buy Premium
Bonds - the prizes can be considerable and the odds (with draws every month)
fair.
'Avoid any off-the-peg regular savings schemes from insurance companies.
There are, of course, tax benefits from friendly society bonds, but the
charges involved can be very high and the effect over the term of the plan
can be dramatic. Some people like the with-profits approach, and it is true
that companies such as the Tunbridge Wells Equitable have very successful
funds.
'With an investment term of 15 to 20 years, investment trusts can provide
very healthy returns - in many respects they are ideal. The charges on a
regular savings plan are very low compared with other savings media.
'A more conservative investor could buy long-dated zero-dividend shares of
split-capital investment trusts, which can be chosen for redemption when the
child is 18 or 19. These can offer high returns with reasonable security.
'Gilts themselves can be highly attractive, given that the return and date
of redemption are known at the outset. However, with interest rates so low,
many suitable gilts are over par, and so the return will be diminished. It
may be worth investors waiting until next year, to see what effect the new
issues have on the market.'
