FT  09 SEP 93 / Clinton's peace corps also help themselves: National service
that pays back in education
ALTRUISM might be back in fashion with America's youth, but the generation
President Bill Clinton is calling upon to serve is very different from the
one that volunteered for President John Kennedy's Peace corps 30 years ago.
Mr Kennedy stirred thousands to give up affluent lifestyles to teach in
Africa, farm in Asia and build trenches in Latin America. In trying to
capture the same idealism, Mr Clinton, who often harks back to the idealism
of 'Camelot', must appeal to good-hearted but hard-headed young people who
want to help others - and themselves.
Mr Clinton's National Service Act, which had already passed the House, was
last night approved by the Senate and is expected to be signed by the
president next week. It would put young people to work on repairing the
environment, teaching, refurbishing houses and performing other community
service in return for a small wage and an education allowance.
'Young people today are very different than they were when I was in my young
20s,' says 50-year-old Mr Eli Segal, who as director of the White House's
Office of National Service has given substance to the plan. 'I think they're
far more practical, far more sophisticated about how things work, far less
confrontational.' It is also a generation that faces what Mr Segal termed an
'educational crisis' as the cost of tuition has soared beyond the reach of
most.
Mr Clinton's plan is aimed at helping young people to serve and cover their
tertiary tuition costs. Participants would provide a year of community
service in exchange for the minimum wage of Dollars 4.25 an hour and an
education allowance.
Congress scaled back the plan, cutting allowances from Dollars 10,000 for
two years of service to Dollars 9,450 and limiting spending on the whole
scheme to Dollars 1.5bn for the first three years. The White House estimates
that about 20,000 students will participate in the first year.
It is a small start for a president who attracted support on the campaign
trail from students and their parents saying that anyone who wanted a
college education ought to be able to afford one. Proponents say the plan
will fulfil another, more important, goal: bringing groups of people from
diverse backgrounds to work together.
Framers of national service hope to attract a more diverse group of
Americans than participated in previous service programmes. Peace Corps
officials concede that, until the 1980s, volunteers were mostly white and
middle- to upper-middle class. In 1982 only about 5 per cent of volunteers
were minorities.
Ms Erin Moran, a 17-year-old from a middle-class area of Baltimore was
stunned by what she was learning while helping refurbish a recreation centre
in a rundown part of her home town.
'I was really naive about what went on in the inner city,' she said.
'Yesterday we met with other teenagers and we were talking about teenage
pregnancy and they saw nothing wrong with it because there was always
welfare and they saw nothing wrong with AIDS because they figured they
wouldn't survive in the city very long anyway.'
Mr Phillip Harris, aged 18, who grew up in one of Baltimore's toughest
neighbourhoods, said it was important for people like Ms Moran to understand
that improvements come gradually.
'We have a person in our group who felt like, 'I'm coming in to help people
and in eight weeks we've got to make them change'. We sat her down and said,
'You can't change people so quickly'. Now she's dealing in reality,' he
said.
After a youth spent selling drugs and carrying weapons - and a month-long
stay at a juvenile detention centre - Mr Harris is realistic about how much
can be done, but he also wants to show youngsters in his neighbourhood that
change is possible.
'By selling drugs and committing a lot of crimes I took a lot away from the
community,' he says. 'A lot of the young people who are selling drugs now
used to look up to me. Now I am trying to reverse things - make them look up
to me in a positive light.'
While Mr Harris wants to help his community, he is also studying for a
business degree at a local community college and the Dollars 1,000 he
receives for his work will help. After finding government programmes did
little to help his family or their neighbours, Mr Harris puts his faith with
the business community because, he says, they seem to understand their
customers better than any bureaucracy.
The loudest critics of national service believe it would cost too much.
Senator Nancy Kassebaum, a Kansas Republican, tried to reduce the cost for
the first three years from Dollars 1.5bn to Dollars 800m and voted against
the measure when the White House rejected her plan. Others in Congress
proposed giving educational benefits only to those in need and making the
money contingent on other scholarship programmes being fully funded.
Leading proponents of the measure such as Representative Dave McCurdy say
the bill is not about education, but about service. 'If you are only
concerned about a college education then this is not the concept,' the
Oklahoma Democrat said. 'The concept is changing the ethic in America from
grants and loans to service.'
Mr Jason Scott, a 24-year-old who started Youth for National Service to
lobby for the plan, said it was up to his generation to heal the nation's
ills.
'The country is getting more diverse, not less diverse and we know that we
are the ones who are going to have to deal with that,' he said. 'We believe
(national service) has the potential to engage a new generation of young
people in service, young people who might not otherwise have the means or
the opportunity to serve their country.'
