FT  29 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Wellcome improves 46% to Pounds 667m -
Special factors rather than strong growth behind profits surge
YESTERDAY'S 11 per cent plunge in the shares of Wellcome, to 712p, came
despite a very strong rise in annual profits, dividends and cash.
However, the increase in earnings per share of 61 per cent was heavily
affected by special factors.
The adoption of the new FRS 3 accounting standard depressed the previous
year's profits by Pounds 47.7m, made up of losses previously counted as
extraordinary.
In addition, the comparison was heavily affected by last year's devaluation
of sterling. In underlying terms, Wellcome said, earnings per share were up
only 9 per cent on sales up 7 per cent.
Reported pre-tax profits for the year were Pounds 667m, up 46 per cent, on
sales of Pounds 2.04bn. In real terms, the pre-tax increase was 9 per cent.
The full year dividend was raised by 33 per cent, while Wellcome's cash
mountain rose 38 per cent to Pounds 567m.
Underlying growth in Wellcome's two most profitable drugs, the herpes
treatment Zovirax and the controversial Aids drug Retrovir, slowed sharply.
Sales of Zovirax, at Pounds 760m, were up 11 per cent in real terms compared
to 24 per cent the year before. Sales of Retrovir, at Pounds 248m, were up
only 3 per cent in underlying terms, compared to a rise of 22 per cent in
the previous year.
In several markets, sales were held back by government efforts to control
healthcare costs. In the US, underlying sales growth was 4 per cent, while
there was a real contraction of 4 per cent in Germany. However, real sales
were up 16 per cent in both France and Italy, and by 11 per cent in Japan.
Group investment in R&amp;D increased by 28 per cent to Pounds 326m. Some 41 per
cent of the total R&amp;D spend was on research into antivirals and other
anti-infectives. Clinical studies on two novel anti-herpes compounds,
Valtrex and Zonavir, continued.
Wellcome said the results to date continue to support its belief that both
compounds may offer clinical advantages over Zovirax.
Also in late phase clinical trial are 51W, a drug used to relax muscles
before and during surgery, and Navelbine, an anti-cancer compound licenced
from Pierre Fabre Medicament for marketing in North America. Wellcome filed
a new drug application for Navelbine in August in the US.
Projects in the earlier stages of clinical trials include 311C, a potential
treatment for acute migraine attacks, RhothRx, which has been licensed from
CytRx to establish its potential as a therapy in the treatment of heart
attacks, and 619C, a potential treatment for conditions including strokes
where the brain is deprived of blood and oxygen.
