FT  19 MAR 93 / West steps up moves to aid Russia
LEADERS of the industrialised countries have moved into a higher gear in
mobilising plans for assistance to Russia.
In Washington yesterday Mr Larry Summers, Treasury undersecretary-designate
for international affairs, told Congress that rebuilding the Russian economy
was a task comparable to the post-war Marshall Plan. He said the G7 nations
would have 'significant support' available to Russia 'in the coming months,'
but he disclosed no details.
He argued that past estimates of the Russian economy were largely inaccurate
because they had focused on the volume of output rather than marketable
value. The focus now, he said, should be on facilitating the sale of
marketable Russian goods at home and overseas.
President Bill Clinton, it was announced, would confer next week with Mr
Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, before his meeting with
President Boris Yeltsin in Vancouver on April 3-4.
Mr Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, is also to give what has been
billed as a 'major' speech on the need for assistance in Chicago next
Monday. It will be designed in part to meet resistance in Congress to any
substantial increase in bilateral US aid.
The administration itself is understood to have under review a series of
measures designed to provide immediate relief to the average Russian and to
demonstrate the extent of US support for Mr Yeltsin.
According to a senior officials quoted in yesterday's Los Angeles Times,
options include emergency shipments of pharmaceutical supplies for Russian
hospitals, more grain and meat shipments, new housing for the Russian
military and proposals to assist the conversion to civilian purposes of
military factories.
Meanwhile the Japanese government is proposing a special meeting of G7
finance and foreign ministers in Tokyo on April 18 to consider a
multilateral Russian aid package. Bowing to western pressure not to delay
such a consideration until the economic summit in the Japanese capital in
early July, Mr Hisashi Owada, the vice foreign minister, is in Washington
conveying the latest Japanese thinking before flying on to Paris.
The April session would take place immediately after the US visit of Mr
Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister. Japanese officials still favour a
variety of short term assistance measures, including food and construction
aid, rather than a more ambitious package under G7 auspices, partly on the
grounds that much of last year's Dollars 24bn package has yet to be
disbursed.
Russian economics minister Mr Andrei Nechayev left for Germany yesterday to
discuss further aid to Moscow, particularly supplies of baby food, milk and
other foodstuffs, Itar-Tass news agency said.
Tass said Mr Nechayev would discuss an extension of credits and the purchase
of industrial goods on favourable terms. He was expected to hold talks with
his counterpart Mr Gunter Rexrodt.
