FT  19 JUN 93 / Sport: Rivals for the throne of the hair - Tennis
NOT UNTIL last Tuesday did we know whether defending champion Andre Agassi,
the No 8 seed this year, would be able to keep his appointment with
tradition by opening Wimbledon's Centre Court programme on Monday.
It was only after he had lost in three sets to the German left-hander
Charlie Steeb in the new grass court tournament in Halle, Germany, that the
23-year-old American could confirm he had no pain from the tendonitis of the
right wrist that had stopped him competing since April 9. When he pulled out
of the French Open last month Agassi said: 'Whatever happens, I am
determined to defend my title at Wimbledon - even if it means having
pain-killing injections.'
Cynics will suggest that Andre's determination to play has more to do with a
racket contract he has just signed than with pride of performance.
Nevertheless, the multi- million dollar deal should considerably relieve any
lingering pain.
More painful is Agassi's draw. The champion may hardly have time to play in
his new racket. His first round opponent is Bernd Karbacher who comes from
the same Iphitos Club in Munich as the 1991 Wimbledon champion, Michael
Stich. He has the same coach, too, New Zealander Mark Lewis.
Karbacher will be no pushover. Two months ago this powerful hitter beat
Boris Becker in Hamburg en route to the semi-finals. at the French Open he
overpowered as good a clay court player as former champion Michael Chang.
Unless the slightly overweight and ponderous Agassi can find his best form,
and with no match play that is unlikely, the fast improving German may end
his brief moment of glory. Andre could find himself returning to Las Vegas
sooner than he thought aboard his new jet. 'The flagship of American
Hairlines' as a pressroom wag christened it.
Becker, seeded four, also has one of the strong young Germans, Marc
Goellner, as his first opponent. When, in Nice last April, qualifier
Goellner, delivered his thunderbolts to win his first Tour title, with
victories over Stefan Edberg and Ivan Lendl, he sent shock waves through the
tennis community. This 22-year-old, Bonn, a genial giant who stands 6 ft 5
in in his socks, is an intimidating figure even when he smiles, which he did
a lot in Nice.
You could see the glint in Goellner's eye at practice this week when he
heard of his draw. Becker, short of match play and still a yard slow at the
Stella Artois last week, was less than thrilled. His response was to visit
David Lloyd's Club near Wimbledon for extra gym training.
All this action takes place in the top half of the draw where Pete Sampras
is the No 1 seed. Sampras is still my idea of the most likely winner in a
year when there is no outstanding favourite. Sampras has a reasonable draw
although he may have to play the Stella finalist Jamie Morgan in the second
round. As we saw at Queen's Club last week, when he saved two match points
in beating Edberg and then held four points to beat Stich before losing, the
quiet Australian with the heavy serve is a natural grass court player, even
though he hardly ever plays on the surface.
Sampras is supposed to meet Agassi in the quarter-finals but I expect to see
either Richard Krajicek (seeded nine) or Marc Rosset emerge to challenge
him. The probable second round meeting between these cannonball servers
should produce enough fireworks to make November 5 seem like a dark night.
If Becker survives Goellner's onslaught, as he should, there will be other
stern tests against Alexander Volkov, who was within two points of beating
Stich in the German's winning year, and Malivai Washington (14). Then, if
the seedings prove accurate, there will be another clash with Stich (6) in
the last eight. This, a repeat of last week's Stella quarter-final and also
the 1991 Wimbledon final, both won by Stich, would be an emotional match for
both. The leadership of the German game is at stake.
The lower half is dominated by Edberg (2), and last year's finalist, Goran
Ivanisevic (5), who should both rise above a plethora of clay courters and
emerge to the semi-finals. In spite of the Croatian's lack of match play due
to a stress fracture of the right foot and achilles problems (everyone, it
seems, is carrying an injury), I believe that he will improve as he starts
to pile up those aces - there were 206 last year] As usual the canny Edberg
has timed his effort well and there is the prospect of impending fatherhood
to inspire him, not to mention the lure of a third title and a prize of
Pounds 305,000 - just about enough to decorate the nursery.
Jim Courier (3) is supposed to be Ivanisevic's opponent in the last eight
but I shall be amazed if he survives to that stage. Drained from his
unavailing fight against Bruguera in the French final, Courier needs a rest.
Jason Stoltenberg, Wayne Ferreira (13), or an improving Swede called Henrik
Holm, whose father was an old opponent of mine, might oblige. What of Ivan
Lendl, the No 7 seed? Sadly, this most professional of athletes, now 33, is
losing his grip and finding it difficult to accept the fact. He might easily
disappear in round two at the hands of Frenchman Arnaud Boetsch who arrives
fresh from a first career win on the grass of Rosmalen in the Netherlands.
If I appear to have ignored the ladies it is only because they are so
predictable. In Paris this year the top eight seeds emerged to the last
eight for the first time since open tennis began in 1968. Barring injury or
illness, I believe the same may happen here. If it does, then the
quarter-finals would look like this: defending champion Steffi Graf (1)
against Jennifer Capriati (7); Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario (3) versus Conchita
Martinez (6); Jana Novotna (8) against Gabriela Sabatini (4); and Mary Joe
Fernandez (5) against Martina Navratilova (2) who, is looking for a tenth
title. I do not believe she will find it. Although we will probably have a
Graf v Navratilova final, I expect to see the German winning for the fifth
time.
Oh, and we should have a nice quiet year, too. There will be no grunting
from Monica Seles - she is absent - and no interruptions from the fierce Mr
Pierce who shouts and fights when his daughter Mary, the No 13 seed, is
playing. Jim, an American with a prison record, has been banned by the
Women's Tennis Council for the rest of the year. Wimbledon will follow suit.
