FT  26 NOV 93 / Elections in Russia: The lucky thirteen ..
RADICAL REFORMERS
Russia's Choice
Led by first deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar
Bloc of pro-government Yeltsin supporters, consisting of several parties and
movements, including Democratic Russia, the Peasants' Party of Russia, the
Association of Privatised and Private Enterpreneurs, and the Party of
Democratic Initiative. Considerably ahead in all polling, at between 20 and
30 per cent of the vote.
SLOWER REFORM
YABLOKO BLOC
Led by Grigory Yavlinsky, young free-market economist.
Without an official name, the bloc has been nicknamed Yabloko (Apple), as a
pun on the acronym of the names of its leaders: Grigory Yavlinsky, Yuri
Boldyrev, scientist, and Vladimir Lukin, former Russian ambassador to the
US. It promises less painful, but more effective market reforms and a real
stake for the regions in the federal state.
MOVEMENT FOR DEMOCRATIC REFORMS
Led by Mayor Anatoly Sobchak of St. Petersburg
This bloc, also led by Gavriil Popov, former mayor of Moscow, is pro-reform,
but stresses political independence from Yeltsin. It is calling for higher
education for all, the protection of low incomes and pensions from
inflation, and a wider distribution of privately owned land.
PARTY OF RUSSIAN UNITY AND ACCORD
Led by Deputy Premier Sergei Shakhrai.
Pushing a strong regional role, it favours a more gradual approach to
economic reform. The bloc includes two deputy prime ministers, Sergei
Shakhrai and Alexander Shokhin, as well as Konstantin Zatulin, the head of
Entrepreneurs for a New Russia.
CENTRIST
Civic Union for Stabilisation, Justice and Progress
Led by Arkady Volsky, industrialist.
Dominated by its core group, the Russian Union of Industrialists and
Entrepreneurs, the bloc favours a more moderate approach to market reform to
protect the interests of big industries. It is calling for tax rises for the
rich, subsidies to be redirected from producers to consumers and incentives
on landowners to use land effectively.
FUTURE OF RUSSIA - NEW NAMES
Led by Vyacheslav Lashchevsky.
Most of the leaders of this youth movement come from the Russian Union of
Youth, itself heir to the Komsomol of Soviet times. It stands for
step-by-step adoption of the market system, higher wages for state
employees, a 'reasonable and equitable' tax system, a cut in the government
apparatus and higher domestic and foreign investment.
DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF RUSSIA
Led by Nikolai Travkin.
The party favours moderate reform, including privatisation of land. It is,
however, emphatic about the need to strengthen Russian statehood, and on the
need for a strong central power. Consistently populist, it is stressing
practical politics in the localities.
AGAINST REFORM
Russian Agrarian Party
Led by Mikhail Lapshin
Conservative, nationalist, and in favour of collective and state farming, it
says it also supports private farmers and private land ownership, with
restrictions. It promises 'renewal of Russia through renewal of the
village', and expects strong support from rural areas in southern Russia.
Its best-known candidate is Alexander Zaveryukha, deputy prime minister
responsible for developing agriculture.
RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY
Led by Gennady Zyuganov.
The party, which favours a command economy and strong social programmes,
still draws strong support from pensioners, peasants, and the poor. It is
urging voters to reject the new Russian constitution on the basis that it
gives Yeltsin far too much power.
LIBERAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY
Led by Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
Flamboyantly nationalist, with right-wing views, Vladimir Zhirinovsky once
promised to reconquer all former Soviet republics and use some of them as
nuclear dumping sites. His party campaigns under the slogan 'I will protect
Russians everywhere'.
ISSUE PARTIES
Women of Russia
Led by Alvetina Fedulova
First of its kind in Russia, the party aims to promote female influence in
politics and defend women's interests. It includes entrepreneurs, women in
the Black Sea Fleet, and Yekaterina Lakova, adviser to Yeltsin on womens'
issues.
KEDR, THE CONSTRUCTIVE ECOLOGICAL MOVEMENT
Led by Anatoliy Panfilov
The movement is calling for serious approaches to the solution of
environmental problems, and draws its strongest support from high-pollution
regions such as Bashkortostan, Voronezh and Yekaterinburg and the Republic
of Mari-El.
DIGNITY AND CHARITY ALLIANCE
Led by co-chairmans, Mikhail Trunov and Vyachelsav Grishin
A party for the 'small boats in a large river, which in the turbulent stream
of today's life, are unable to find a mooring,' according to its leader.
Those include invalids groups, afghan veterans, and cultural figures.
 --------------------------------------------
          NUMBER OF CANDIDATES
 --------------------------------------------
Russia's Choice                         212
Party of Russian Unity and Accord       193
Civic Union                             184
Yabloko bloc                            172
Democratic Party of Russia              167
Liberal Democratic Party                156
Russian Movement of Democratic Reforms  153
Communist Party                         151
Agrarian Party                          145
The Future of Russia - New Names         95
Dignity and Charity Movement             58
Constructive Ecology Movement            44
Women of Russia                          36
 --------------------------------------------
THE VOTE AND THE VOTERS
Some 107m voters will take part in the elections and in the parallel
referendum on the constitution.
The Federal Assembly, or new parliament has two chambers. The Federation
Council, or upper house has 178 seats, two for each of the 89 subjects of
the Russian federation - which includes republics, regions, districts and
the two major cities of Moscow and St Petersburg. At present, three
'subjects' - the republics of Chechnya and Tatarstan and the region of
Chelyabinsk - have failed to put forward sufficient candidates for a contest
for these two seats. The Central Electoral Commission has registered 487
candidates for the upper house.
The State Duma, or lower house, has 450 seats, half of which will be filled
by candidates from the 13 parties running in the elections. Each party must
receive more than 5 per cent  of the vote to gain a share of the seats.
The other half of the Duma's seats are filled by a first-past-the-post
contest in constituencies of about 500,000 electors. There are 1,566
candidates for these seats. are
In all parliamentary elections, at least 25 per cent of the electorate must
turn out for the votes to be valid. The new parliament must meet a month
after its election: the provisional date is January 11, 1994.
The constitutional question is simply: 'Do you agree to the constitution of
the Russian Federation?' Here, the turnout must be at least 50 per cent and
the constitution is approved if a simple majority of these votes yes.
