FT  04 MAR 93 / Thousands flee Serbian advance
AT least 18 people were yesterday reported killed and dozens wounded in
Cerska, the Moslem enclave in eastern Bosnia, as thousands of refugees tried
to flee the Serb advance through the region.
The continued fighting came as the US claimed air-drops of relief supplies
had been a success and said that the operation would continue. Last night
Belgrade air traffic controllers said a fourth air-drop had taken place.
A ham radio operator from Konjevic Polje, about seven miles south of Cerska
which was the target of the third air-drop on Tuesday, yesterday said
villagers had found 18 aid pallets in snow about half a metre deep.
Ms Lyndall Sachs, spokeswoman of the Belgrade office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, said: 'We have reports that Konjevic Polje
is under heavy bombardment by Serbs . . . and on amateur radio we hear they
are coming under tear gas, shells, and small arms fire.'
Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, in a letter to President Bill
Clinton, urged the US to abandon the air-drops because they threatened to
ignite a wider war. A Serb mayor in eastern Bosnia also urged the US to stop
the drops, saying land corridors were safer and more efficient.
However, the US administration is convinced that, in spite of the latest
escalation in hostilities, the air-drops have helped to persuade the Bosnian
Serbs to allow through more and bigger ground relief convoys. Eleven UNHCR
lorries yesterday crossed Serb lines to Gorazde, about 100 miles south of
Cerska, carrying 69 tonnes of food and medical supplies.
In a visit to New York that took on enhanced significance because of the
worsening situation, Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, met Mr
Boutros Boutros Ghali and endorsed the UN secretary-general's views on the
need for the use of force by UN troops to implement any agreement.
Mr Hurd, who also met Lord Owen and Mr Cyrus Vance, the UN and European
Community peace negotiators, emphasised that it would be impossible to
impose a military solution in the absence of a negotiated settlement
endorsed by all the warring parties.
The ideas that were taking shape after last Friday's Nato meeting were still
a long way from 'receiving detailed definition,' he added. .
Meanwhile, in a speech in Antwerp yesterday, Mr Hans van den Broek, EC
commissioner responsible for external relations, raised the prospect of the
EC, the US and Russia using joint military force to bring an end to the
conflict. Military intervention might be necessary to uphold a political
settlement based on the Vance-Owen plan, or to impose a solution from the
outside.
