FT  28 JUN 93 / Attack On Baghdad: US Justice Department faces BNL case
disqualification call
A HIGHLY unusual legal motion will be filed in Atlanta today asking that the
entire US Department of Justice be disqualified from prosecuting the
long-running Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) Iraqi loans case, according to
court documents obtained by the Financial Times.
The 37-page request is being lodged with Judge Earnest Tidwell by lawyers
for Mr Christopher Drogoul, the former BNL manager whose Atlanta branch made
billions of dollars of loans that funded Baghdad's nuclear, chemical and
conventional weapons projects.
In the motion Mr Robert Simels, chief counsel to the former BNL man, calls
for the Justice Department to be disqualified because of alleged suppression
of evidence and conflicts of interest that 'transcend the appearance of
impropriety and evoke a sense of collusion and politically sensitive
prosecution'.
Mr Drogoul, who faces trial in September on charges of defrauding BNL's head
office in Rome over the Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.3bn) of Iraqi loans, is
pleading not guilty on the grounds that both BNL Rome and the US government
knew of the Iraqi loans. He was allowed to change his plea to innocent last
autumn after it emerged that the CIA had withheld key documents which
implicated BNL Rome in the scandal.
Today's motion details a September 15 1989 report by the Pentagon's Defence
Intelligence Agency (DIA) which speculated that 'the BNL mechanism was but a
part of a larger Nato strategy to ensure an Iraqi victory in its war with
Iran'. It also quotes from a January 31 1990 CIA memo which stated that
'managers at BNL headquarters in Rome were involved in the scandal'.
The filing alleges political interference by the Bush administration in the
BNL prosecution and calls for Judge Tidwell to ask Attorney-General Janet
Reno to seek a special prosecutor to take over the case from the Justice
Department.
A key section of the filing is the charge that US prosecutors suppressed
vital evidence provided in January 1991 by Mr Paul Henderson, the former
managing director of Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based machine tools
company at the heart of Lord Justice Scott's arms-to-Iraq inquiry in
Britain.
Mr Henderson, who was selling to Iraq with funds from BNL Atlanta while also
briefing British intelligence services, was granted immunity from
prosecution in the US in 1991. Ms Gale McKenzie, the Atlanta prosecutor who
has handled the BNL case, recently attempted to revoke that immunity.
Today's court filing reveals that Mr Henderson told US prosecutors in
January 1991 that he had learned from Iraqi officials that 'Rome was fully
aware of BNL-Atlanta's dealings with Iraq, had approved of its dealings, and
that they were an extension of a government-to-government agreement between
Italy and Iraq'. If true, this would destroy the Justice Department's case
that Mr Drogoul, acting alone, defrauded the Rome head office.
The court filing discloses that Mr Henderson learned of Rome's involvement
from Mr Safa al-Habobi, an Iraqi official who was chairman of Matrix
Churchill and who was indicted in the BNL Atlanta case.
Bolstering today's request is the disclosure of a separate legal action
filed in April by the Justice Department which is alleged to contradict its
own case against Mr Drogoul because it suggests that BNL Rome might have
been guilty in the Iraqi loans case.
In that motion the Clinton administration argues that the US should suspend
for now any plans to reimburse BNL for Dollars 340m of Iraqi loans in
default.
These were backed by US government loan guarantees from the Commodity Credit
Corporation (CCC), the Department of Agriculture's export credit arm.
The reason cited by the Justice Department for not reimbursing the Italian
state bank is that 'it is evident that there is more than idle speculation
that evidence might evolve in Mr Drogoul's trial further implicating BNL and
raising obvious conflicts'.
Today's motion alleges it is a conflict of interest for the same entity  -
the Department of Justice - to try to prove Rome's ignorance and innocence
in order to convict Mr Drogoul while suspecting Rome's complicity in order
to save Dollars 340m.
The motion being filed today also argues that it was a conflict of interest
for BNL's own lawyers to have been allowed in 1989 to participate in a
criminal interrogation of Mr Drogoul by US Justice Department prosecutors.
The filing states that since BNL was itself a potential target of the US
investigation this defied 'all precepts of legal propriety'.
