FT  29 JUL 93 / When surgery will not prove the whole cure: IBM's radical
cuts and ask - what then?
The axeman cometh. Mr Lou Gerstner, the tough, impatient new chairman of
IBM, this week gave the world its first peep at his plans to restore the
floundering computer giant to health - severe cuts in IBM's size top his
action list.
Less than four months after he took over as chairman, Mr Gerstner announced
on Tuesday that IBM was taking an Dollars 8.9bn (Pounds 6bn) charge - one of
the largest restructuring provisions in US corporate history - to cover
60,000 job cuts and the closure of factories and offices around the world
over the next 18 months.
His rapid action is hardly surprising. In spite of seven years of endless
cost-cutting, IBM is still too fat and cumbersome for its much diminished
role in the computer world. Mr Gerstner comes to the company with a powerful
reputation as a cost-cutter, gained in his previous job as chairman of the
food and tobacco group RJR Nabisco.
As a newcomer to IBM, lacking personal loyalties or deep immersion in its
conservative corporate culture, he can slash away at dead wood rather than
engage in the annual, more limited pruning carried out by his predecessor,
Mr John Akers, whose failure to solve IBM's problems eventually forced him
out.
But while cuts had been expected, the sheer scale of Mr Gerstner's action
has pleasantly surprised Wall Street, which is hailing it as a refreshing
sign of greater realism at the often arrogant company. Mr Gerstner says that
while the cuts are large, he hopes they will be the last.
Yet for all the blood and thunder, this week's action leaves open a much
more important question: can Mr Gerstner create a strategy for IBM which
will restore it to a leading position in the industry, or this just another
painful milestone in the comp-any's long decline? In short, is Mr Gerstner
as good with the fertiliser as he is with the axe?
'Gerstner may be fabulous at cost cutting, and still see IBM collapse over
the next five years or so,' says Mr Charles Ferguson, an industry consultant
and co-author of Computer Wars, a book on IBM and its troubles. 'The tough
part will be deciding what strategies he will pursue to carve out a
profitable niche.'
On this score, his pronouncements this week have sown a degree of disquiet
among some industry analysts. Asked repeatedly by journalists to give an
insight into his strategic thinking, Mr Gerstner replied that he still had
to figure out where IBM would concentrate its resources; that he did not
want his competitors to know his plans; and that his first priority was to
fix the company's 'business economics'.
'The last thing IBM needs right now is a vision,' he said. 'What IBM needs
right now is a series of very tough-minded, market driven, highly effective
strategies that deliver performance in the marketplace and shareholder
value.' His approach reflects IBM's financial distress. The company
announced its third consecutive quarter of operating losses on Tuesday -
Dollars 40m of red ink in the three months to June on revenues of Dollars
15.5bn.
Mr Gerstner's cuts should save the company Dollars 4bn a year when fully
implemented in 1994 and restore it to profitability.
Perhaps it is too much to expect anyone to come up in a mere 16 weeks with
solutions to the immensely complex strategy problems of IBM, which stem from
technology decisions taken a decade or more ago.
IBM, which has long dominated the global market for large mainframe
computers, was slow in the early 1980s to recognise the implications of the
invention of powerful new micro-processor chips. These drastically cut the
cost of computing power and encouraged companies to replace big, central
processing units with networks of smaller desktop machines.
Sales of its flagship mainframe computers are declining rapidly, and while
Mr Gerstner rejects the notion that the 'mainframe is dead', he acknowledges
that profit margins are being eroded by intense competition in a shrinking
market. Yet there are no obvious alternative sources of strong profits
growth. In personal computers, IBM lost ground to smaller, more nimble
rivals in the late 1980s, and while it has made a strong recovery, profit
margins are razor thin.
In workstations, it is engaged in a technology race against Sun
Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and Digital Equipment, which have the
advantage of more focused marketing efforts. In the mid-range computer
segment, IBM's AS/400 is under attack from 'open systems' vendors offering
computers that adhere to industry standards.
One bright spot is IBM's services business, which advises companies on
computing needs and is increasing revenues rapidly, although profits are
less buoyant.
At present, Mr Gerstner's strategic approach seems to be one of letting a
thousand flowers bloom. He says he does not 'believe there is, or ever will
be, a single technology strategy' for IBM's various businesses.
As for the long-contentious question of how IBM should organise its sales
force - by product, industry sector, or showing a single face to the buyer -
Mr Gerstner says there should be room for all, depending on what individual
customers want.
His remarks are peppered with references to customer satisfaction, but many
observers wonder how this can be divorced from the enunciation of a clear
technology strategy for the group.
IBM's customers are already nervous, wondering which product lines Mr
Gerstner may drop and competitors have been quick to take advantage of this
uncertainty.
'Technology is not high on my priority list of things to fix. IBM still has
the best technology in the world,' he says, echoing the self-confident view
expressed by Mr Akers not long before the profits slide began.
But however clever IBM's scientists may be, the company has of late picked
few technological winners and has been slow bringing new products to market.
This has begun to erode the confidence of customers who have traditionally
looked to IBM as a large, reliable source of machines and advice in an
industry changing at bewildering pace.
Mr Gerstner would appear to be treading a fine line: cost-cutting may
restore profits in the short-run, yet if IBM fails to articulate a
technology strategy, it risks further undermining its status as an industry
leader.
It is not yet 'just another computer company' - a purveyor of products which
could have been made by one of a dozen rivals. But it could become so if it
focuses on the problems of the past rather than building a strategy for the
future.
