FT  05 NOV 93 / Personal View: Step in the right direction of renewal
The UK government has just taken an important step towards developing sound
local and regional economic development in England. Its announcement
yesterday of a single regeneration budget, to be administered by integrated
government regional offices, introduces measures that will reinforce the
trend of innovative local initiatives in a number of British cities. It also
heralds the movement towards strategic development in London.
It is legitimate to express concerns about this introduction of increased
local competition for limited funds while there is a need to deal with the
persistent problems of deprivation. There may also be difficulties involved
in using administrative reorganisation to achieve intra-governmental
co-ordination.
However, it is also important to welcome measures that increase the
potential for ambitious and effective long-term local development efforts
that address the substantial economic changes occurring and make more
significant contributions to local and national economic renewal. Equally,
it is crucial that communities make the most creative use of these
opportunities, and further strengthen the framework for local development
that has emerged in recent years.
The City Challenge programme launched by the government in 1991 introduced
several of the features of this framework. There were concerns about the
short-term, fragmented, project-based, crisis-oriented, property-led and
limited nature of earlier urban policies. In response, City Challenge
focused support on longer-term, more strategic, comprehensive and integrated
area development programmes. These were designed by local partnerships and
administered by dedicated local organisations involving public, private and
community sector participation.
The programme has stimulated substantial development planning and activity
in successful and unsuccessful bidding communities alike. And it has
continued to generate innovative approaches to urban development.
The principles and experience of City Challenge are highly relevant to the
future development of regeneration policy. At the same time, the new
regeneration programme provides the opportunity to advance much further. It
enables critical city-wide regeneration issues and the international
competitiveness of cities and regions to be addressed. Development must be a
permanent feature of urban governence, addressing the city and metropolitan
area as a whole and strengthening its regional, national and international
roles. It must promote specific business and development opportunities, and
modernise the city's underlying foundations for economic renewal. This means
promoting human, physical and institutional development.
The single regeneration budget provides the opportunity for joint investment
by government departments in significant customised, flexible, comprehensive
longer-term urban and regional regeneration programmes developed and
administered by local development partnerships. The Urban Regeneration
Agency, private finance initiatives, training and enterprise councils and
one-stop shops provide other tools to be mobilised to provide the property,
infrastructure, labour, business development and financing requirements of
regeneration.
Some recent regeneration initiatives provide examples of what might be
possible under the new integrated approach; the establishment of a
comprehensive urban development agency and programme for Coventry; an
integrated regeneration strategy addressing industrial restructuring in east
Manchester; and city centre redevelopment in Birmingham.
In London, the new programme could lend vital support to the movement to
manage renewal through regeneration programmes for the capital's 'strategic
wedges', such as the Lea Valley.
This initiative should provide opportunities to encourage lateral thinking,
innovation and flexibility in the main functional programmes of government.
The single regeneration budget should serve as a 'test bed' for specific
improve-ments in the linkage of these programmes to broader regeneration
objectives.
The initiative should also seek to strengthen the technology that is
developing for practical and ambitious joint public/private investment in
regeneration projects. Local development partnerships must work with the
government to realise the potential of these new initiatives. The
preparation of sound local regeneration proposals will be an important
vehicle for defining and achieving this potential
The author is a director of Victor Hausner &amp; Associates, an international
development consultancy that has worked with the UK government on urban
policy. Mr Hausner was the US deputy assistant secretary of commerce for
economic development policy and planning under President Jimmy Carter
