FT  23 OCT 93 / Despatches: The Somali warlord who backed the wrong horse -
Leslie Crawford braves Mogadishu's Bermuda Triangle to meet Aideed's rival
NO WEAPONS, I told the three Somalis who had volunteered to drive me across
the no man's land that separates the warring fiefdoms of north and south
Mogadishu.
They were incredulous. How were they to protect me? Hadn't I heard of an
area called the Bermuda Triangle, where people disappeared, never to be seen
again? I repeated my request, this time trying to suppress the nervous edge
that had crept into my voice. Reluctantly, the teenager who had been toying
with an AK-47 rifle gave it to a friend for safekeeping.
We set off. I was curious to discover what Somalis thought and felt on the
other side of the Bermuda Triangle. Since May, the western media had focused
its attention on south Mogadishu, where a rebel militia leader, Gen Mohamed
Farah Aideed, was waging an urban guerrilla war against 14,000 US and UN
troops. In the north, however, Aideed's arch-rival had chosen to co-operate
with the UN forces by handing over an acceptable number of his heavy
weapons. Ali Mahdi had, therefore, been spared the nightly air raids that
had terrorised south Mogadishu as the UN attempted to flush out Aideed and
his militias.
But the tide had turned in Aideed's favour. During a pitched battle in
mid-October, his militias had shot down two US helicopters, killed 18 crack
US troops and captured one of the downed pilots. Pictures of Somalis
dismembering the corpses of US soldiers had shocked television viewers
across America. President Bill Clinton, under pressure to stop the carnage
in Somalia and to secure the release of the US hostage, had sent a special
envoy to negotiate with Aideed.
The situation, therefore, was not looking good for Ali Mahdi. I sought him
out at his headquarters, a solid red-brick building which, a young guard
told me in hushed tones, had once housed the dreaded secret police of the
Siad Barre dictatorship. Aideed been a prisoner there for six years.
Two larger-than-life posters, depicting a handsome, light-skinned man with a
Clarke Gable moustache, proclaimed Ali Mahdi as Somalia's 'interim
president'. On the top floor a cluster of people hovered outside the interim
president's office, and inside, a chubby man sat at the head of a conference
table. I recognised the moustache.
He came straight to the point: 'I hope the international community will not
commit the crime of rewarding Aideed. How can you negotiate with a man who
has killed 70 UN peacekeepers and thousands of Somalis? Aideed has always
broken his agreements. A truce will only buy him time to regroup his
militias.'
He looked like a man whose luck had ran out after gambling on the wrong
horse. He had welcomed the UN military intervention in Somalia, and now
President Clinton was planning to withdraw his troops in six months' time.
He did not hide his alarm: 'If the US pulls out without disarming Aideed,
the war and starvation will start all over again.'
At the Indian Ocean Bar and Beach Club, the new owners did not want to see a
return of the anarchy which had destroyed their city. Yes, they admitted,
they had been bandits in the bad old days. Looting, after all, had been the
only way to survive. But all they wanted now were regular customers and a
quiet life. We ordered soft drinks and surveyed the beach front. Every
mansion with an ocean vista had been blasted by mortar shells or pock-marked
with bullet holes.
Yahia Amir, a lecturer in economics before the civil war, tried to explain.
'The UN has good intentions, but their interference in Somali politics is
disastrous. It is not enough to understand the tradition of different clans;
you also have to know the relationships between different families. Aideed
and Ali Mahdi belong to the same clan, but to rival sub-clans. Alliances can
change overnight. It is even difficult for Somalis to follow.'
It was also difficult for them, the proudest race in the Horn of Africa, to
acknowledge a debt of gratitude to a foreign occupation force. 'We don't
understand UN policy,' said one of my guides. 'They bomb us by night and
feed us by day.'
More than 1,600 orphans were being fed at a nearby orphanage, named 'Restore
Hope' by the US Marines who had captured the bombed-out premises from Somali
militias. They stood in line, dressed in western cast-offs. They attended
school seven days a week.
'We are trying to restore some sense of order to their lives,' Salim
Mohamed, the headmaster, explained. In the crowded classrooms, hundreds of
tiny voices chanted the alphabet in English, numbers in Arabic, or songs in
Somali. The school lacked a roof, and like the rest of Mogadishu, it had no
electricity or running water. But a generator had been installed to pump
water from a well.
Despite its appearance, the school felt like an island of sanity amidst so
much devastation. It reminded me of a different island across the city - the
80 acres of the UN compound cut off from its hostile environs by barbed
wire, sand bags and high walls. Inside, hundreds of UN officials, special
policy advisors and military personnel search for a rationale to their
presence in Somalia. They rarely venture outside the compound; Aideed's
snipers have made it too dangerous.
The compound resembles a vast building site, where 2,000 Somalis labour to
erect offices and dormitories, kitchens and toilets for the foreigners
trapped inside. Unable to rebuild Somalia, the UN is building its
headquarters to create an illusion of purpose and permanence in this strange
land.
Back in north Mogadishu, it was getting late and my guides were growing
restless. We still had to run the gauntlet of the Bermuda Triangle, and it
was best to do so before dusk. The driver also needed his daily fix of chat
 -a bitter, leafy stimulant responsible for the recklessness of gun-toting
militias.
The roads were deserted except for heaps of tyres and rusted masonry that
slowed our dash across no man's land. We all breathed a sigh of relief when
the Pakistani checkpoint came in sight. The soldiers motioned us to stop and
searched the car.
'No weapons,' I said.
