FT  17 JUN 93 / Survey of Poland (7): Ambition's arrow flies east / Profile
of Thomson Polkolor
MR Marek Sabela, the human resources manager of Thomson Polkolor, draws an
arrow eastwards across a map of Poland as he illustrates the ambitions of
his company. 'We are not only here to become a less expensive producer. We
are also here because the market is here, especially to the east,' he says.
His comment reflects the optimism which has developed since the French
electronics and electrical manufacturer acquired majority control of
Polkolor, the bankrupt state-owned producer of tubes for colour televisions.
Much of the French group's efforts, since it paid Dollars 35m for a 51 per
cent stake in Polkolor in August 1991, have been concentrated on a total
overhaul of manufacturing and staff and management practices.
But Thomson's commitment to increase the investment to Dollars 100m is
evidence of the group's longer-term plans. The remaining shares were
acquired by three state-owned banks which had sizeable loans to Polkolor at
the time of its collapse.
The venture is Thomson's only fully integrated television tube manufacturing
operation in Europe, combining glass and electrical components production
with assembly and distribution. Its bigger Italian assembly plant, in
contrast, draws in components from all over Europe.
Production from the plant on the outskirts of Warsaw has allowed Thomson to
narrow its output gap with Philips, the leading European manufacturer.
Nokia, the Finnish group, trails Thomson, while Samsung of South Korea has
increased competition through its venture in Berlin with a former
state-owned group.
When Polish government approval for the deal went through two years ago,
production was running at 600,000 units a year. An industry rule of thumb is
that production must reach 1.2m to achieve a profit break-even.
Mr Stanley Urban, Thomson's chief financial officer, is quoted as saying
that the plant was a 'wreck' at the time of the takeover. By modernising
production and management methods and without altering the product range,
output was raised to an annual rate of 1m within months of the takeover.
This process has continued, and a 13-inch tube has been added to the range.
An annualised production rate of between 1.5m and 1.8m has been targeted for
1993. Output is forecast to grow to 2.4m by the end of next year - and could
reach 3m, depending on the product range mix.
A steep rise in quality standards has been an important factor behind a rise
in productivity. While Polkolor was in its death throes the reject rate was
running at 20 per cent. This has been slashed to 0.8 per cent through
employee training schemes and modernised production techniques.
At present between 65 and 70 per cent of annual production goes to western
Europe, with Thomson the biggest buyer through its domestic appliance arm.
Domestic demand accounts for the rest and about 5 per cent goes to eastern
Europe.
Siting of the plant in Poland, with its comparatively low wage base, gives
Thomson a highly competitive pricing structure in its western European
markets.
Tubes are by far the most costly component, contributing about 30 per cent
to the total price of a television set. The plant is expected to move into
profits by the end of next year, but in the meantime the investment has been
justified by the cost advantages it has provided to its parent.
Mr Sabela believes a 50/50 split between western and eastern Europe is
achieveable, but he is cautious about timing. 'We have no doubt that the
demand is there. The problem for the moment is how places like Russia and
the Ukraine are going to pay,' he says. Thomson Polkolor recently received
from the Ukraine an expression of interest in buying 1m tubes a year.
Central to the re-organisation was a cut in the 4,500 workforce. To achieve
this, 1,000 employees were laid off with a year's salary, while those
retained were given a 37 per cent wage rise. The company forecasts that
3,800 employees will be on the payroll by the end of the year, receiving
salaries 50 per cent above the national average. In addition to salary
rises, Thomson instituted retraining schemes as a means of reviving
good-will and morale.
Mr Sabela, who returned to Poland after working in France for 10 years, says
that there is now an open mindedness and desire to contribute often not
found in western European companies.
'At the start there were big problems,' he says. 'We spent a year just
talking about wages. Now they are coming to me and talking about the job and
this is a big achievement.'
