FT  22 JUL 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Complementing the
mainstream - The growing market for ads aimed at Hispanic and black
audiences
One of the latest and most effective US television advertisements from Avon,
the US cosmetic company, portrays a child gently touching the face of its
mother, associating a new skin-care product with youth, family and purity.
The advertisement was memorable for Avon because it was produced in Spanish,
shown on the two US Spanish-language networks and was culturally tailored to
the child-loving Hispanic audience. Soon after being aired, the product
'Anew' became the number one skin lotion for US Hispanics.
Similar successes in Hispanic marketing can now be found throughout
corporate America, as big companies wake up to the implications of a rapidly
growing Hispanic market of some 24m consumers. Last year Hispanics spent an
estimated Dollars 221bn (Pounds 147bn) - about 5 per cent of the US total.
Coca-Cola, which in common with Avon has a dedicated Hispanic marketing
department, recalls that five years ago it made just five creative Hispanic
television and three radio spots in the year. Now it makes 20 Hispanic
television spots a year, and 10-12 radio ads, and enjoys a commanding lead
in the soft-drinks market for Hispanics.
While companies such as Coca-Cola also target advertising at other
minorities, such as blacks or Asian-Americans, this complements rather than
substitutes mainstream advertising. Such minorities do not have their own
language or television network, making it harder to target them as a group.
Most Hispanics, by contrast, do not fully understand English, prefer when
possible Spanish to mainstream Anglo television, and rarely read
English-language newspapers and magazines. That leaves big companies, keen
to capture Hispanic market share, little choice but to air Spanish-language
ads.
The result has been something of a boom in Spanish-language advertising,
with scores of Hispanic advertising companies setting up in the past decade
to cash in on the growth. In 1991, Hispanic agencies billed Dollars 733.5m,
up from Dollars 350.1m in 1988, according to Hispanic Business, a
California-based magazine.
Riding the crest of the wave are the two Spanish-language networks,
Univision and Telemundo. While over-burdened by debt, their revenues have
increased by an average 20 per cent a year since 1987. Joaquin Blaya, who
moved from chief executive of Univision to head of Telemundo last year,
says: 'For years we could not even get to see companies. Now we are being
called all the time to make presentations.'
The Hispanic marketing is fed not just by large numbers of Hispanics, but by
expected growth over the next decade. By 2000 Hispanic population is likely
be more than 30m, and will be at the point of overtaking blacks as the US's
largest minority. Consumer spending will have risen to Dollars 438bn, about
7 per cent of the then total, according to a study by DRI/McGraw Hill.
Hispanics already account for one out of four new households, according to
Doug Darfield, vice-president at Univision, and are crucial to businesses
hoping to capture new markets, especially in household goods. Since many
have just arrived in the US, they are easily influenced by advertisements,
not having well-established consumer tastes.
Hispanic advertisements that are straight translations of English ones
usually fail to work. Hispanics are younger, more family-orientated and less
knowledgeable about US consumer culture than Anglos. Even when mainstream
Anglo-style advertisements are translated, many Hispanics do not respond to
appropriately and may not even understand them.
US companies have drawn up distinctive campaigns to draw Hispanics to their
products. In Texas Coca-Cola runs advertisements with a well-known Hispanic
singer, Selina, hoping to convince Hispanic customers that Coca-Cola is
'talking to me, is relevant, says who I am', according to Bonnie Garcia, the
head of the Hispanic consumer market department at Coca-Cola.
Often companies have to tailor advertisments to local Hispanic markets,
since Hispanic consumers vary. The wealthy Cuban-American in Miami has
little in common with the poor Mexican-American in southern California, or
the Puerto-Rican in New York. Car advertisements in Miami might thus show a
flashy sports car, but in southern California a pick-up truck.
Occasionally companies send different, even conflicting messages to Anglo
and Hispanic consumers. Lionel Sosa, of Sosa Bromley Aguilar &amp; Associates,
contrasts an Anglo campaign of Western Union, that stresses speed at which
money is delivered ('the fastest way to save money'), with the Hispanic
slogan that stresses the safety ('uniting families for 120 years').
Not all Hispanic ads are so successful. David Flynn from the Hispanic arm of
GSD&amp;M, an agency in San Antonio, Texas, recalls a Hispanic ad for an
insurance company that portrayed an elderly woman in a nursing home, lauding
the benefits of her insurance coverage. Hispanics look after their ageing
parents and grandparents at home.
