FT  27 AUG 93 / UK Company News: US costs knock Pentland to Pounds 6.7m -
Reduced interest receipts add to effect of closing lossmaking operation
LOSSES AND closure costs at its US trade finance business and lower interest
receipts hit Pentland Group in the six months to June 30.
After bearing costs of Pounds 9.5m connected with the US operation, the
consumer brands company was left with reduced pre-tax profits of Pounds
6.7m, against Pounds 19.7m, on an FRS 3 basis.
The share price fell 7p to 106p.
However, the underlying improvement in operating profits from continuing
businesses and associates was 14 per cent and the interim dividend is raised
to 1.16p (1.04p).
This follows a 12p special dividend paid in April from the profit on the
sale of Pentland's 20 per cent stake in Adidas, the sports goods company,
realised last autumn.
Mr Stephen Rubin, chairman, said the results were 'clearly disappointing.'
Finchside, the US trade finance subsidiary which financed imports to the US,
had been hit by bad debts. It lost Pounds 2.2m in 1992, of which Pounds 2m
was in the second half.
Mr Rubin said: 'After careful consideration we have discontinued this
activity as it was not central to our strategy and we were no longer
satisfied with the risk-reward ratio in the business.'
In the half year under review it suffered trading losses of Pounds 2.8m and
made a Pounds 6.7m provision for closure costs.
Mr Frank Farrant, finance director, said the business had been set up more
than three years ago and made profits in the early stages. But US recession
had hit importers, losses escalated and Pentland decided to 'bite the
bullet.'
He said: 'With the benefit of hindsight, we made an error of judgment.'
Group turnover increased 32 per cent to Pounds 198.4m, with acquisitions
chipping in Pounds 28.2m and continuing operations increasing their
contribution by 13 per cent to Pounds 168.1m.
Operating profits from continuing businesses fell by Pounds 1m to Pounds
3.4m. Growth from the Speedo swimwear business was offset by weakness in the
footwear and international trade services divisions.
Mr Farrant said shifts in fashion had turned against trainers, although
Kickers, another of its footwear brands, had fared well.
Acquisitions, notably Woods Wire, a US electrical goods group, and Berghaus,
the UK specialist outdoor clothing company, contributed Pounds 1.6m.
Associate profits, from the 26 per cent stake in Authentic Fitness, the
quoted US distributor for the Speedo swimwear brand in North and Central
America, were Pounds 1.7m (Pounds 1.5m).
Interest receivable fell from Pounds 14m to Pounds 9.5m, largely because of
lower interest rates on its Pounds 252.9m cash pile.
The tax rate rose sharply, because of the US losses, and after the special
dividend there was a transfer from reserves of Pounds 46m (profit Pounds
9.5m).
Earnings per share were 0.41p (3.69p) or 2.27p adjusting for the closure
provisions.
At the year end the group had net cash of Pounds 347.3m, but this had fallen
to Pounds 252.9m by the period end after the Pounds 43.3m cost of the
special dividend and Pounds 42m spent on acquisitions, including two US
footwear companies.
Mr Rubin said the group was seeking 'further suitable acquisitions.'
