FT  04 FEB 93 / Senate report attacks drug company pricing
A SENATE committee claimed yesterday the drug industry had broken its
promise to restrain price increases voluntarily. The Senate ageing committee
cited a report suggesting that eight of the top 31 drug groups had increased
prices at more than three times the inflation rate last year.
The study, whose methodology was challenged by the US Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association, also claimed 19 groups had increased prices at
double the rate of inflation.
Senator David Pryor of Arkansas, a Democrat and the committee's chairman,
said the report showed drug price inflation had been consistently higher
than the general rate of inflation.
He claimed it showed drug companies had failed to fulfil promises that they
would limit price increases. Voluntary price restraints were clearly not
working, he added.
The eight companies mentioned were Merck, Pfizer, Marion Merrell Dow, Du
Pont Merck and Sterling-Winthrop of the US, as well as the American arms of
Glaxo and ICI of the UK and Hoffman-La Roche of Switzerland.
Mr Pryor said a drug costing Dollars 1 in the US would cost 67 cents in
Canada and 60 cents in Europe.
The report claimed Glaxo's US arm had increased prices by 4.4 per cent
during 1992. This was contested by the company which said its overall
increase for the year to June 30 had been 1.8 per cent, well below the 3 per
cent general inflation rate.
Glaxo said the study had failed to consider the issues of volume and
discounts. It was important to look at the units sold of each drug as well
as list prices.
Du Pont Merck claimed its increases had been less than 2.9 per cent on a
weighted average basis. Merck said it had increased prices by 3.1 per cent
and by 2.9 per cent if rebates and discounts were included. That compared
with the report's alleged increase of 5.5 per cent.
Pfizer claimed its increases last year were less than 2 per cent, while ICI
said its drugs price inflation had been 3.6 per cent on a volume-weighted
basis and 2.1 per cent after deducting rebates.
Price gouging by pharmaceutical companies has been a favourite theme of Mr
Pryor's since he took over as chairman of the Senate special committee on
ageing in 1988.
President Bill Clinton's campaign manifesto promises to eliminate tax breaks
for pharmaceutical companies that raise prices more quickly than personal
incomes, and to discourage them from spending more on marketing than on
research and development.
It is unclear, however, how these pledges will be integrated in the overall
reform of the US health-care system.
