FT  20 AUG 93 / Progress claimed in VW 'spying' probe
GERMAN prosecutors investigating allegations of industrial espionage by
senior Volkswagen employees have made progress following up new clues,
according to Mr Thomas Seifert, head of the economic crimes division in the
Darmstadt public prosecutors' office.
His comments yesterday fuelled speculation that the criminal probe is
entering a decisive phase.
Further witnesses have been interrogated, while evidence from 'top-class and
important' witnesses from Volkswagen has yielded nothing to persuade
investigators to call off the probe, Mr Seifert said.
The investigation is believed to have focused in recent days on reports that
11 VW trainees were instructed to punch GM and Opel data into the German
group's computers at the end of March. 'Naturally we are following this
trail,' Mr Seifert said.
Opel asked for the launch of a criminal inquiry in late April, following the
defection from General Motors to VW of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua,
GM's global purchasing director, and several colleagues.
Opel supported its suspicions with affidavits relating to missing secret
data.
Volkswagen claims that no secret information has made its way into the
group's possession, although it admitted earlier this month that 'possible
confidential' material had been destroyed on company property.
Mr Georg Nauth, official spokesman for the investigating team, said
investigations so far had confirmed testimony from Adam Opel, the German
subsidiary of General Motors. This included findings made since an official
statement, made on July 22, linked Mr Lopez and his associates with
confidential data found in a Wiesbaden house.
However, Mr Nauth denied press reports that investigators had established
'without doubt' that the VW trainees had copied Opel secrets into the VW
database.
Mr Nauth refused to name any VW witnesses, although he said Mr Lopez and
three associates under investigation had not been interviewed yet. Mr
Ferdinand Piech, VW group chairman, had not been called 'because he is not a
suspect', he added.
The 'top-class' witnesses referred to by Mr Seifert are known to include Mr
Daniel Goeudevert, a former VW director, and Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of
the group's board of supervisors, who are also not among the suspects.
