FT  21 AUG 93 / Local boy can do no wrong: Basques in the home town of VW's
Jose Lopez think he is a hero whether or not they get a car plant
There are about a million square meters of green, wooded hillside just
outside Amorebieta, on the road between Bilbao and Guernica in Spain,
waiting to be flattened and developed. The homesteaders still living on it
were paid for their property by the provincial government two years ago,
when it was thought McDonnell Douglas might build aircraft wings there.
Nothing happened, but for the past year another dream has enveloped the
people of the town. One of their own, studious little Josein who used to
live by the river, had made good and was going to bring a car factory to
town.
The dream originated in the head of Josein - Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua - while he was advancing through the ranks to the top level of
management at General Motors of the US. In March this year, he took it with
him, allegedly together with caseloads of secret GM plans and documents,
when he fled the US group for Volkswagen.
Mr Lopez had worked for 18 months at GM on a project for a revolutionary
plant, in which cars could be built in a fraction of the time taken in
conventional factories. Claiming disillusionment and dismay when he learnt
the US group favoured eastern Europe for any new capacity, he accepted an
oral pledge from Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, and left for Germany.
Mr Lopez had a hand in preparing the generous terms on which the factory was
to be built by a local consortium and in the leasing deal under which GM,
and later VW, would pay 'rent' according to the number of cars built. The
land was free, and the plant operator would pay no taxes for 12 years.
At one point it seemed as though GM and VW might even fight over the site.
The townsfolk were excited. After all, Josein had flown to Madrid in June to
give a press conference to say it would happen.
Now their champion is in trouble, struggling to survive in a storm of
controversy after a criminal investigation in Germany of alleged industrial
espionage. In Amorebieta they blame GM, which asked for the investigation,
for being a sore loser. But the car plant idea has gone, and now no one
believes it will come. Mr Lopez himself was told recently by Mr Piech that
the German car industry's worst crisis since the war was not the time to be
building new capacity.
By all accounts, young Josein was a quiet, popular boy in the town. His
father worked in a local tool factory and his mother later ran a bar, the
Zuri Beltz (black and white). She still lives above it.
While he was growing up, the Basque Country was brought to its knees by
Franco. He and his friends were careful not to speak their native Basque in
front of strangers.
Nevertheless, Amorebieta grew to become an important metalworking centre.
Its population, just 5,109 in the 1950 census, is now 16,025 'give or take a
dozen', says the clerk at the town hall. The old stone Lopez de Arriortua
home has gone, and the orchard between it and the river has become a car
park and market.
The town, though run by moderate nationalists, is also a significant centre
of support for the Basque separatist terrorist group, Eta. Mr Jon Idigoras,
leader of Herri Batasuna, the political party that supports Eta, drinks
regularly in a local bar. Eta has a different way of looking at the benefits
that business can bring to a town. Its supporters kidnap directors; they are
currently holding one businessman in an effort to raise finance for their
'war' against Madrid. Mr Idigoras says the kidnapping is a private affair
between Eta and the hostage's family.
Even heroes like Mr Lopez step carefully around the extremists of Eta. And
he is a hero. If he was mildly popular as a boy, Josein - whose speech
impediment prompted his nickname of el Tarta from the word for 'to stammer'
 -has now become a legend. Everyone seems to have known him, though the
picture that emerges of him is fuzzy. At a photographic studio, a lady
kindly tore a picture of the house he grew up in from an old album and sold
it to me for Pta500.
'Jose?' asks a group of men in a bar, 'sure we know him.' They say he was a
terrible football player and, although he lived next door to one of the
Basque Country's most famous sportsmen, he never developed much ball sense.
'He was always clumsy, always blinking,' says one. He was apparently never
naughty, and is remembered most for doing his homework and for his enjoyment
of cutting grass with a scythe.
But was Josein just another goody two-shoes or, for a little boy, seriously
obsessed with success? 'I sometimes wonder whether he had a childhood at
all,' says one former friend. 'He never did anything dangerous. We would go
off and steal apples and he would go home and study.'
Superlopez, a fulsome biography just published, says he was reading at two
and was a budding engineer at six. The smartest boy in his class, he spied
on his sister and her suitor (now his brother-in-law), and was ferociously
religious. His close aides today are practising Catholics. He holds to a
rigid diet, never drinks, has never smoked, and had led a sheltered life
before he met his wife at a local hop.
The book, the press coverage, and young Josein's own gift for self-publicity
have worked on the town in subtle ways. People take visiting foreign
correspondents and television cameras in their stride, and the powers of
their hero grow with every telling of his story. No one, for instance,
believes he stole anything from General Motors. 'He would not need to,' says
a man at the bar. 'He carries all he needs to know in his head.'
Perhaps, but will the car plant come?
'No,' cry three impatient people queueing at the town hall as the clerk
answers questions about Mr Lopez for the umpteenth time to a visiting
journalist. 'Not now.'
'I doubt it,' says the man selling copies of the biography at his corner
bookshop.
In a way, it may not matter. Josein could come back here tomorrow and be
taken to its bosom. Locals say he never got too big for his boots so they
would have him back. The Basques would probably make him minister of
industry. He has a nice house on the Guernica road and a boat in Santander.
He has clearly been plotting his way back to Amorebieta ever since he left
in the mid-1960s. There, he can talk in the only language he speaks properly
 -Basque. The car plant was supposed to be his way of coming home.
A guide from the town sweeps a hand over the rolling countryside where the
plant would be built. 'The only people still laughing here are the ones
living on the site,' he says. 'They've already been paid inflated prices and
they're getting to stay on for free.'
It is very beautiful. Even strangers want to stay. The local guide perks up
at the compliment. 'Thank you,' he says. 'It's not so bad. If Josein can't
bring his car factory, we hear they're thinking of building a prison here.'
