FT  08 NOV 93 / Hull port opens floating terminal
THE PORT of Hull and North Sea Ferries will tomorrow open an Pounds 11m
floating terminal in the River Humber for roll-on, roll-off freight that
will save ships from having to lock in and out of Hull's docks.
Two new Pounds 31m ships will use the terminal and travel at 22 knots to cut
the overnight crossing time between Rotterdam and the Humber from 14 to 11
hours.
Truck drivers will be able to reach more customers in Britain or northern
Europe, unload, re-load and still have time to catch the same vessel for
return at 9pm the same evening.
The move is partly a response to the Pounds 9bn Channel Tunnel, due to open
next year, but it also reflects a wider trend.
Ro-ro trade between Ireland, Scotland, northern England, the Midlands and
mainland EC markets in northern Europe appears to be moving increasingly
through the Humber and Rotterdam.
The new terminal, which has taken a year to build, will be for freight and
truck drivers only and will increase the Humber's ro-ro capacity by 1m
tonnes a year.
It has been designed so that capacity can be doubled as demand rises.
Associated British Ports, which owns the port of Hull, also has statutory
powers to build two more similar floating terminals when it wishes.
Mr Henry Johnson, chairman of the Humberside branch of the Road Hauliers'
Association and owner of a local freight company, said: 'If we get an order
to shift something today from northern England and get it to Germany
tomorrow, we can ship it from the Humber and have it in Rotterdam in the
morning. It is then four hours to the Ruhr.
'It is going to be very difficult to beat this sort of short-notice
flexibility using the tunnel because of transshipment logistics, bottlenecks
in Britain and the fact it will not be big enough.'
Rotterdam is a gateway to a European network of roads, railways and inland
waterways and its port is Europe's biggest, handling 290m tonnes of cargo a
year.
Hull, at the end of the M62 motorway, is less than three hours from
Liverpool, Birmingham and Newcastle upon Tyne.
Hull's cargo throughput has grown continuously in spite of the recession. It
reached a 25-year high of 8.7m tonnes last year, a 63 per cent increase
since 1989, and is expected to rise again this year.
The Humber is now Britain's busiest estuary, and 62m tonnes of cargo was
shifted by its four main ports and smaller river wharves last year. A
quarter was unitised freight, with services to Rotterdam growing fastest.
The Channel tunnel is projecting a yearly throughput of 8m tonnes of
unitised freight.
North Sea Ferries - an Anglo-Dutch venture owned jointly by P&amp;O and Royal
Nedlloyd - already operates daily sailings of four large combined
passenger-freight ferries, two each to Rotterdam and Zeebrugge. Two
freight-only ferries provide six other sailings a week, making 20 in all in
each direction.
