FT  30 OCT 93 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Travels with a twerp
Some of our dislikes are rational; others, obviously, are not. Why, I
wondered this week, do I dislike twerpy Mark McCormack with such
resoluteness. What has he done to me? I haven't even met him. I went to his
office once, but McCormack was away travelling. So I was dealt with by an
aide so ridiculously good-looking, charming and articulate that I assumed he
was an android from Planet Zog.
McCormack is rich and successful, but that doesn't irritate me. I am not an
envious person. His company, International Management Group (IMG),
represents a large number of sports and entertainment celebrities, and has
so insinuated itself into the running of sports and cultural events
everywhere - merchandising, licensing, TV programming - that its influence
is all-pervasive. McCormack, I am certain, deserves his success.
The best I can do to justify my dislike of him is to say that I find him one
of the most banal and insensible of all sports commentators (yes, he does
that as well); and that he has just produced one of the worst, most smug,
most gung-ho and self-serving, most risible and stick-in-the-craw volumes of
twerpish twaddle that I have set eyes on in many a long month.
It is called Hit The Ground Running: The Insider's Guide to Executive
Travel, and has just gone on sale at the beguilingly cheeky price of Pounds
15.99. I only hope a copy does not fall into the hands of Kenneth Clarke,
Britain's chancellor of the exchequer.
If it does, I have little doubt that Clarke's brain will snap and that he
will vent his fury in next month's Budget by levying a stupendous rate of
VAT on all books and newspapers. And all because of McCormack.
McCormack is, he tells us, a 'global commuter' for whom a sedentary month
means fewer than 10,000 air miles. 'Last year, I logged over 225,000 miles
on business travel - just as I have for each of the past 30 years,' he
crows. 'I have eaten meals in more than 5,000 restaurants on six continents
and stayed in hundreds of hotels in every major city.'
Here is a bit of nonsense from Page 104. In addition to the valuable papers
that must stay with them in transit, and the materials they need to read or
work with, says McCormack, all smart business travellers should pack a
survival kit in their carry-on luggage.
'This small bag of 'travel insurance' might include: a fresh shirt;
prescription medicines; personal toiletries, including a toothbrush,
deodorant, make-up, razor, comb, hairbrush, shampoo and compact hairdryer;
tissues; aspirin; spare contact lenses or eye-glasses; a change of socks (or
pantihose); a change of underwear.'
And here is another bit of nonsense: 'I think the window seat (on aircraft)
promotes clear thinking. Some business travellers think that if you've seen
one cloud, you've seen 'em all. But, for me, looking out over the clouds can
create a mood of contemplation that channels creative ideas to the
forefront.'
Unfortunately, Hit The Ground Running seems to be selling copies. On
Thursday evening I bumped into Miss Lee, my Thatcherite executive assistant.
Miss Lee is a beauty, legs up to here. She was wearing one of the tightest
microskirts I think I have ever seen, and was on her way to a meeting of the
Blue Fuse Club in a wine bar near Chelsea barracks. In theory, the Blue Fuse
Club devotes itself to Tory fund-raising; in practice, Miss Lee and her
cronies drink cocktails and pick up young soldiers.
'Have to dash,' said Miss Lee, breathlessly, 'but everything's ready for
your next trip, sweetie. I've packed you an on-board survival kit: fresh
shirt, malaria pills, toothbrush, deodorant, make-up, razor, comb,
hairbrush, mini-hairdryer, tissues, aspirin, socks, underwear. I've booked
you a window seat so that you can watch the clouds fly past.
'And I've arranged with the hotel for you to have four telephone lines in
your room - lines, not extensions - so that your calls to and from all six
continents can flow in and out speedily and efficaciously.
'I have further informed the hotel that you will require a king-size bed
with choice of pillows; swivelling reading lamps; bedside table with control
console for lights, TV, radio and drapes; a real desk; an ottoman;
coffee-maker; video message retrieval; teleconferencing capability; fax and
computer modem capability; CNN; and in-room private safe.
'Each night I'll send you a 'headline fax' - highlights of the previous
business day. You are up and running, tiger. Mark H. McCormack would be
proud of you.'
