FT  14 MAY 93 / Andreotti in vote to end immunity
MR GIULIO ANDREOTTI, seven times prime minister of Italy, yesterday voted
with the majority of the Senate to waive his parliamentary immunity to be
questioned by Palermo magistrates for allegedly consorting with the Sicilian
Mafia.
The Senate also adopted new parliamentary procedure, using for the first
time an open rather than a secret vote in a case of waiving immunity.
At the same time the Chamber of Deputies voted overwhelmingly to abolish
parliamentary immunity in cases of corruption and serious crimes.
Palermo magistrates are anxious to establish whether Mr Andreotti acted as a
point of reference for the Mafia in Rome, helping to provide them with
political cover. The allegations have been made by at least three key former
Mafia members  - the so-called pentiti - who are co-operating with Italian
justice under witness protection programmes.
On April 27, a Senate commission agreed that Mr Andreotti, a life senator,
should have his immunity waived. Two weeks ago he himself signalled his wish
that it be so to clear his name more rapidly.
This decision followed the uproar over the chamber of deputies voting to
protect Mr Bettino Craxi, the former Socialist leader, from facing four of
six corruption charges.
When Mr Andreotti was first notified he was under investigation last month,
he claimed Palermo magistrates were conspiring to discredit him and claimed
he could never get a fair hearing.
Before the vote yesterday he conducted a vigorous self-defence for the
fourth time since the issue was first brought before the Senate a month ago.
He dismissed as 'extravagant insinuations' the pentiti testimony.
But Mr Andreotti did not, as on previous occasions, attempt detailed
rebuttals of their evidence. He merely placed before the Senate his record
as a man of state. Rome magistrates said yesterday they had advised Mr Valdo
Spini, Socialist environment minister, that he was under investigation for
alleged abuse of public office over Italy's aid programme to Albania. He is
the first member of Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi's two-week-old government to
fall under suspicion in the country's bribery scandal.
