FT  05 APR 93 / Leading Article: Drugs on trial
THE Concorde team of medical researchers should be congratulated for
carrying their trial of the leading Aids drug AZT through to its unexpected
conclusion, announced on Friday. They had courageously resisted strong
pressure to abandon the study from colleagues, particularly in the US, who
thought wrongly that they already knew that AZT would benefit people
infected with HIV.
As it turned out, the modest benefits found after a year's AZT treatment -
the point at which three smaller US trials were stopped - had disappeared by
the end of the three-year Concorde study. The drug failed to delay the onset
of Aids symptoms.
This is desperately sad for many thousands of HIV-positive people who had
hoped AZT would hold the disease at bay. But it is a powerful vindication of
the patient European approach to clinical trials, as opposed to the American
tendency to rush to premature conclusions on inadequate evidence. In the
long run this study will help people with HIV, by exposing the inadequacies
of AZT and therefore making it easier for researchers to test other drugs.
This is not the first time a large European clinical trial has justified
itself, after initial disapproval from American specialists who thought they
knew the answer.
In the late 1980s US cardiologists attacked Isis-3, an Oxford University
study of 46,000 heart attack victims who received either an expensive new
'clot-buster' drug or a 30-year-old treatment to dissolve blood clots. A
leading US newspaper even ran an editorial entitled 'Human Sacrifice' which
suggested that it would be unethical for doctors to take part in a trial
comparing TPA, a glamorous biotechnology product, with the evidently
inferior old streptokinase. However, the report of the Isis-3 study,
published a year ago, showed that streptokinase saved as many lives as TPA
and caused fewer strokes as a side-effect. This enabled hospitals to cut
drug bills and reduce the number of strokes.
Large-scale clinical trials, in which groups of patients are given different
treatments, can be highly effective in answering the big questions in
medicine. One such question is whether drugs that reduce high levels of
cholesterol in the blood save lives. Since excessive cholesterol is known to
be an important cause of heart attacks, the answer might seem to be yes. But
the existing clinical evidence is ambiguous and Oxford researchers are
planning a Pounds 10m trial, in which 10,000 people take a
cholesterol-lowering drug and 10,000 take placebo (dummy) tablets for five
years. This should either prove that the treatment works or, if not, save
hundreds of millions of pounds a year in unnecessary drug bills.
In the field of Aids research, the understandable impatience of HIV
activists has made it hard for drug companies or government agencies to
organise large enough clinical trials to give worthwhile results. The
Concorde study shows why these attitudes must change.
