FT  15 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Japan's policy for plutonium
re-cycling
Sir, I am responsible for establishing and implementing Japan's plutonium
recycling policy. I refer to the letter titled 'Japanese nuclear policy
increases UK's risk' (November 11), in which Mr W Walker insisted that the
trouble for Japan is a plutonium surplus of more than 20 tonnes by 2000, and
40 tonnes by 2010. I would like to explain Japan's plutonium supply and
demand situation.
According to the August 1991 report of the advisory committee of the Atomic
Energy Commission, Japan will get a cumulative 85 tonnes or so of plutonium
up to 2010. Of course, this does not mean that Japan will have a stock-pile
of such an amount at that time, because we have a concrete plan to use it
up. By 2010 Japan will consume 80-90 tonnes of plutonium in total: 10-20
tonnes for fast breeder reactors R&amp;D, about 10 tonnes for added thermal
reactors R&amp;D; and 50 tonnes for fuel of light water reactors.
Compared with two years ago, the programme of plutonium supply and demand
has slightly changed because the schedule for operation of the Rokkasho
reprocessing plant, as well as start-up of the prototype FBR 'Monju', was
postponed for a few years. Estimates of both supply and demand have
decreased by a few tonnes. However, the prospect that Japan will have no
surplus of plutonium, including that from Thorp, is strictly maintained.
As long as we use nuclear power in electricity supply, plutonium is being
daily produced in the fuel of the existing reactors. At this juncture, we
have two options. First, that we use plutonium recovered from reprocessing
as a technology-oriented energy resource. Second, that we dispose of spent
fuels in which plutonium and uranium are contained. The environmental impact
of high-level radioactive waste separated from plutonium and uranium by
reprocessing will be smaller than that of direct disposal of spent fuel. In
Japan, our policy is to use plutonium as fuel for nuclear reactors, in light
of the above.
We believe that Japan, as a big consumer of energy resources, should develop
plutonium recycling-technology for future generations.
Yasutaka Moriguchi,
director,
nuclear fuel division,
Atomic Energy Bureau,
Science and Technology Agency,
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyodaki,
Tokyo, Japan
