FT  06 APR 93 / World Trade News: Ports in the Channel tunnel storm - The
Humberside and Rotterdam alternative
THE PORTS of Rotterdam in the Netherlands and the Humber in northern England
are to consider a series of joint promotions to cities, industry and
commerce north of London and on the EC mainland.
Each promotes separately at present, stressing the variety of their North
Sea links. The aim of joint marketing would be to boost traffic and trade
between them - in particular unitised freight (mainly containers) carried on
truck or trailer.
The advent of the Channel tunnel seems to have concentrated minds. Both
Rotterdam and Humberside authorities claim the tunnel, which is due to start
operating within 12 months, will have little impact on their operations. But
since it is making shippers think afresh on North Sea trade, this is
prompting the ports to promote themselves.
Rotterdam's Port Promotions Council, which sent more than 30 shippers and
business leaders to Hull for talks last month, is stressing its 'gateway'
role, offering immediate access to Europe's road, rail and inland waterway
network. Rotterdam handles an annual 290m tonnes of cargo, mainly bulk
chemicals or foodstuffs, but up to a fifth is in unitised form.
The Humberside Partnership - a British equivalent joint venture of public
and private sectors - is emphasising Britain's London transportation
bottleneck and the tunnel's comparatively tiny freight capacity of only 8m
tonnes a year at first.
Members of the partnership believe market forces and Britain's motorway
network already point to the Humber as the most natural route to and from
Europe for Scotland, northern England, the Midlands and Ireland. More than
60m tonnes of cargo a year are passing through - up to a quarter of it
unitised - and volumes have grown steadily, despite recession.
Associated British Ports, which owns the main ports of Hull, Immingham,
Grimsby and Goole last month reported its Humber traffic up 4 per cent in
1992 at nearly 50m tonnes.
Mr Stuart Bradley, ABP's chief executive, says the Humber is Britain's
busiest and fastest-growing waterway. The port of Hull in particular has
blossomed since the abolition of the national dock labour scheme in 1989,
which removed restrictive practices from stevedoring.
Hull has been able to increase container operations and re-open Alexandra
Dock, closed in 1982 because of overmanning and inefficiency. In November,
the port will have a new floating stage in the Humber so ships can avoid
locking into docks, thus cutting journey times.
North Sea Ferries, which already runs overnight passenger and freight
services between Hull and Rotterdam, is building two large, advanced
roll-on, roll-off (ro-ro) cargo ships to operate from the new stage on the
250-mile Rotterdam route.
These will sail in each direction at 10pm and arrive at 8am the next day,
enabling a full day's truck driving on each side - enough to service large
cities such as Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool, Newcastle, or Glasgow in
the UK or well into Germany from the Rotterdam side.
Mr Karel de Zeeuw, project manager of Rotterdam Port Promotion Council, says
container, palletised and ro-ro flows between Rotterdam and the UK are
principally to North Sea ports on the east coast of England.
Unless it becomes cheaper or quicker to get to and through the tunnel in
England, he says traffic flows north of London will be unaffected, so
existing shipping routes will not suffer.
The tunnel is expected to affect cargo flows between the UK, France, Italy
and Spain, but Rotterdam sees little of these anyway. Meanwhile, Mr de Zeeuw
intends to promote Rotterdam's direct link into the Rhine-Main-Danube canal
system to counter any effect the tunnel may have on cargo flows to southern
Germany, Switzerland and Austria.
Mr Chris Haskins, chairman of the Hull-based Northern Foods, thinks the
tunnel's main attraction will be to the food industry. He would like to use
it to more than double the market for Northern Foods' Sheffield factory -
which makes a range of products for the UK retailer Marks and Spencer - to
110m people if the problem of the London bottleneck can be overcome.
Otherwise, he fears competitors in northern France may use the tunnel to
attack Northern Foods' markets in southern England, forcing him to consider
setting up in France.
Mr Henry Johnson, of AS Haulage of Hull, is chairman of the Humberside
branch of the Road Hauliers' Association. 'If we get an order to shift
something today from northern England and get it to Germany tomorrow, we can
ship it from the Humber and have it in Rotterdam in the morning. It is then
just four hours to the Ruhr.
'It is going to be very difficult to beat this sort of short-notice
flexibility using the tunnel,' he says.
The Humberside Partnership, formed two years ago, already has a series of
presentations planned for much of Britain north of London to spread the
message.
