FT  16 JUL 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (15): Far East is
favoured as US and UK look pricey - And the consensus is that Europe should
be avoided, except for safe havens like Switzerland / The Professionals
DEEP ECONOMIC troubles in Germany and pallid recovery in the US and Japan
have left our professionals tinkering in the mainstream markets, and putting
increasing faith in 'exotics' - like the markets of south-east Asia, and
even Mexico.
Recent, more confident, interest-rate cuts in Germany may mark a turn for
the better in Europe, but there can be no underestimating the trough that
leading economies such as Germany and France have dug themselves into. As
Howard Beaufort notes: 'Germany is in a dreadful mess. It is a capital goods
producer which has completely lost its competitiveness, whilst still
clinging to a pre-Thatcher style of labour organisation and social welfare.'
He and his fellow professionals will nevertheless be encouraged by belated
interest rate cuts. 'Only with low interest rates can Europe cure
Eurosclerosis, the vicious circle of under-investment, mass unemployment,
growing subsidies and exploding budget deficits,' comments Mr Beaufort.
The consensus appears to be that share prices in the UK and the US are
expensive, or at least fully valued; that the markets of continental Europe
should be avoided, except for 'safe havens' like Switzerland and the
Netherlands; that Japan remains expensive, with yen strength likely to hurt
company profits in the year ahead; and that the fundamental strength of the
markets of east and south-east Asia makes it essential to place a good share
of the portfolio there. Bonds are cautiously backed, but cash can play no
role.
At Baillie Gifford, Douglas McDougall has prospered by holding a quarter of
his portfolio in the markets of south-east Asia over the past half year. He
plans, this quarter, to trim this stake by 2 1/2 per cent to 22 1/2 per cent
 -'only reducing a sector of the portfolio where we are very overweight, and
which has done very well.' The sales are likely in Hong Kong, rather than
Malaysia or Singapore, 'in view of inflationary problems in China.'
The only other change in the portfolio is to boost his holding of long UK
government bonds from 7 1/2 to 10 per cent.
While he sees recovery well on the way in the UK, he feels share prices are
fully valued. In spite of 'grim' circumstances across Europe, he plans to
retain his 15 per cent stake, mainly in France, 'in deference to this
picture of falling interest rates and the still-ample levels of domestic
institutional and individual liquidity.'
Gartmore's Paul Myners is putting his faith in small companies, and is
shifting away from consumer stocks, which are now 'clearly under threat'. He
is shifting over to cyclical and industrial stocks in the principal markets
of the US, the UK and continental Europe. These 'are only just beginning to
rebuild volumes and margins after several years of decline,' he says.
He is maintaining his UK equity holdings, convinced that it is 'too late to
lose faith in UK stocks after recent consolidation', but is selling 5 per
cent out of the 15 per cent held in the US to buy Mexican shares - 'one new
investment idea' in a market that has fallen significantly in the past year,
which is very cheap (with price/earnings ratios as low as 9-times) and which
offers 'significant upside on the 12-month view.'
He feels his normally bearish view of gilts 'becomes harder to justify' as
real returns rise, and he shares with Baillie Gifford and Newton a
preference for UK gilts, and so is swapping a 4 per cent holding in French
bonds for gilts 'to repatriate some of our bond money, on risk grounds.'
At Newton, Howard Beaufort remains frustrated that recovery across Europe is
being held back by Germany's tight money policies, and concerned about
Britain's public sector borrowing needs - a 'colossus' which is not
sustainable: 'In this environment, we will continue to concentrate on a
relatively small universe of stocks able to deliver a reliable and
consistent stream of earnings and dividend increases.'
He nevertheless maintains a fundamental caution over equities at current
price levels: 'When p/e s reach the 20s and above on a global basis, and
equity yields fall below the 3 per cent level, equity investors have
historically caught a very bad cold - even pneumonia]'
The one exception remains east Asia, where 'medium to long term, one must
have a good proportion of one's assets.' In the US, where the economy is
moving ahead 'at a snail's pace', he shares with Paul Myners a preference
for the capital goods sector - 'the place to be on Wall Street'.
As a result of this caution over equities, he is 'taking out plenty of bond
insurance', where he says real yields of 5 per cent are achievable. He has
boosted his bond holdings from 15 per cent of the portfolio to 21 per cent,
purchasing new bonds in Japan and the UK.
Tim Howe, at Singer &amp; Friedlander, has shaved 2 per cent of his US equity
holding, essentially cashing in on the strength of the dollar, and plans
further disposals in the near future. He has added a cautious 1 per cent to
his European equity holdings, on hopes that the markets should gain from the
monetary stimulus that will come from lower interest rates.
He appears more confident about the UK market, which he says is 'comfortably
underpinned', and is planning to apply for many of the new issues likely to
come to the market in coming months. Otherwise, he favours economies 'with
dynamic growth' - that is, the Far East.
As the scope for interest-rate cuts evaporates in the US and the UK, he has
sold his US bonds. Instead, he has bought some peseta bonds: 'Although
further devaluations are quite likely, investors should see a satisfactory
return over the medium term.'
This feature is not a competition but an allocation exercise, to see how
four professional fund managers handle a Pounds 250,000 portfolio on behalf
of a hypothetical client of their choice. The clients are assumed to be
either wealthy individuals or small self-administered pension funds.
The fund managers emphasise that they are investing for the long term (10
years or more) rather than for short-term gain. The exercise started at the
beginning of October 1990. The portfolios given here were drawn up at the
beginning of this month, and will be reviewed at the end of September.
