FT  31 MAR 93 / Survey of Guernsey (10): Small shops and a unique flavour -
The main shopping area is a narrow, cobbled street, a pleasure to stroll in
/ Shopping
ST Peter Port has the most beautiful harbour view in Europe, said Victor
Hugo who lived in Guernsey for 15 years. Just over 100 years later, it has
hardly changed.
Tucked away on the hill just behind the harbour itself is the town's main
shopping area, a narrow, cobbled high street, closed to all but commercial
traffic - and a pleasure to stroll in.
It has a variety of small shops, often run by the families who started them
more than a century ago, one department store, and a smattering of UK high
street names such as Marks and Spencer, Woolworth, Burton, Etam and Dorothy
Perkins. There are, happily, not enough to destroy the town's unique,
attractive French-British flavour, where small is beautiful.
'It would have been nice if we could have kept a more local flavour,' says
Mr Anthony Creasey whose great-grandfather founded Creasey's, the only
department store of any size with a Marks and Spencer franchise operating
within it. 'But being something of a realist, the present development is
almost inevitable. It's up to local traders like ourselves to try and remain
strong and healthy and keep the local flavour going.'
Mr Robert Baker, chairman of the St Peter Port Traders Association, thinks
it is this mix of independents working alongside main retailers that makes
Guernsey unique.
'In the UK, one town is like another,' he said, 'but here the customer has a
very good choice. In fact, we have more retail foot of space per head of
population than most of Europe.'
In summer, the shopping area in St Peter Port is alive with buskers and
flowers, he says, and with the French influence it has a lovely atmosphere.
It is pleasantly compact. Clustered around the high street are the jewellery
and up-market clothes shops of the Pollet and Commercial Arcade; there are
book shops in Smith Street; pubs, picture galleries, boutiques and antique
shops in the Old Quarter; and a magnificent covered Victorian market selling
mainly fruit, vegetables, fish, wine and dairy produce.
What are the best buys? There's no VAT, but this does not mean shop prices
are always 17.5 per cent less than UK mainland prices. With the addition of
freight and other hidden expenses such as telephone charges, goods are not
always as cheap as one thinks they might be.
But there's no doubt there can be savings on specific items: perfume,
especially if it comes from France (Chanel can be found 20 per cent cheaper,
Dior 40 per cent); cosmetics; shoes; jewellery, silver, watches (34 per cent
less at one shop), some photographic equipment, some electronic goods, the
more expensive spirits and liqueurs. A litre bottle of malt whiskey was
priced at Pounds 16.80; Glenfiddich Pounds 21.25; and Remy Martin VSOP
Pounds 31.80. There are price savings of 10-15 per cent on Jaeger and Alexon
clothes.
At Bucktrout's - a company established in 1830 and specialising today in
malts, ports, cognacs, wines and spirits, tobaccos and cigars - loose
tobacco (Black Cherry and Pirates Punch are the favourites) was selling at
Pounds 3.42p for 2 oz, cigarettes at Pounds 1.58 for 20. A box of best
Corona cigars was on sale for Pounds 84.
Many craftsmen sell their work from their premises around the island. Mr
Bruce Russell, a gold and silversmith, gives daily demonstrations of his
work in a 16th century barn and has a large range of hand-made 9 carat and
18 carat gold jewellery.
You can see potters at work at the Moulin Huet Pottery on the south coast,
and potters, glassblowers and engravers, patchworkers and a silversmith at
the Oatlands Craft Centre in St Sampson's.
Other craftsmen from whom you can buy direct include a copper and tin smith,
clockmakers, a woodcarver, a doll's clothes manufacturer and toy makers. At
Le Tricoteur, you can see how the island's most famous product, the
guernsey, is produced.
Because Guernsey is only affiliated to, and not a full member of, the
European Community, visitors need to check Customs regulations on the value
of gifts and quantity of cigarettes, tobacco, perfumes and alcoholic drinks
that can be brought back to the UK without incurring extra duty and taxes.
Perhaps what visitors like most about shopping in Guernsey - apart from the
absence of VAT - is the personal and friendly service they find.
'Shopkeepers take a great interest in what they're selling you,' said
Marguerite Froissard who runs Island Holidays, a Guernsey-based tour company
specialising in Guernsey. 'You can walk in, get things on approval, take
them away and bring them back and change them. It's all done on a very
friendly basis. There are wonderful perfume and make-up shops and we're
lucky because many French perfumes are put on trial here before they go on
general release.'
