FT  26 NOV 93 / Survey of Gloucestershire (6): The head-office factor /
Tracing the financial services' rise
The biggest single influence on the Gloucestershire economy during the 1980s
was the huge rise in jobs in banking, insurance and financial services.
The increase, between 1987 and 1989 alone, was almost 12,000, taking
employment in the county to over 26,000, as indigenous companies expanded
and others relocated, driven away from the London area by high rents, labour
costs and the difficulties of recruitment.
By 1991, the recession had already cost some 2,000 of those jobs as the
industry, as elsewhere in the UK, retrenched. The question is whether the
sector, which is concentrated on Cheltenham and Gloucester, can now
stabilise as a significant, although second-tier, regional centre.
If the community was restricted to a 'back office' function, then
computerisation would mean future employment prospects were poor. In fact,
the county has a good share of head offices, some of which are long
established, and which should be able to continue to attract senior staff.
Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester building society, the UK's sixth largest, has always
been based in the county, as has the much smaller society, Stroud &amp; Swindon,
which has 25 branches. Chelsea building society, with 50 branches, set up
its headquarters 20 years ago at Thirlestaine Hall, a Victorian mansion in
Cheltenham, and extended it in 1987. Endsleigh, the insurance company which
this season started sponsorship of the football league, moved to the town
from London 20 years ago.
Northern Star Insurance, the Italian-owned general insurer, moved from
Croydon to Gloucester 10 years ago and has expanded to over 350 staff
locally. Ecclesiastical Insurance is also based there. Another headquarters
is that of the Canadian-owned Laurentian Financial Group, which moved from
Guildford in 1986 to set up shop at Barnswood, on the city's outskirts.
(Also at Barnswood is one of the main computer centres of Barclays Bank.)
In Cheltenham, there is Royal Bank Leasing and Mercantile &amp; General
Reinsurance, which moved much of its operations there 20 years ago. Although
its headquarters remains in London, it has more staff based in Cheltenham,
nearly 400. There was, however, a reassessment of group staffing levels last
year, which led to about 50 local redundancies.
The most important relocation has been by Eagle Star, the BAT Industries
subsidiary. Last year it joined its life subsidiary in Cheltenham by moving
its head office and general insurance business from London to a new 170,000
sq ft building at Bishop's Cleeve, just outside the town. The group employs
3,000 people locally.
Mr John Bishop, chairman of Eagle Star, which worldwide has Pounds 12bn of
funds under management, says the relocation was initiated by the need to
expand and the difficulties of finding a large enough building in London
(the move was accelerated by IRA bomb damage to its existing City offices.)
Mr Bishop - whose office now overlooks a parkland of sheep - says of any
disadvantages of being out of London: 'There is none at all as far as Eagle
Star is concerned.' He points out that many insurance companies are now
based outside the capital. 'We are a national company that happens to be
based in Cheltenham.'
The company, he says, has been able to improve its efficiency. 'We are able
to operate as an entity, and the whole thing works much better. We have our
costs under control. We are convinced that, in the long term, this was the
right thing to do, with real economies by being here and being able to
operate in the way we do, and which will stand Eagle Star in good stead in
the future.'
Mr Bishop sees no reason why the county should not continue to attract
financial services companies. 'If I were in London looking for somewhere to
come, this region would be high on my list.'
The Eagle Star Life subsidiary moved its own headquarters in 1968 to
Cheltenham, where its 13-storey tower block, now being refurbished, is the
most prominent landmark. The head office has moved this year to a building
with a facade more in keeping with the town's architecture.
'I can think of very few disadvantages to being in Cheltenham, and the
quality of life is very good,' says Mr Ian Owen, Eagle Star Life's managing
director. 'There is good access, good employment, good schools and rents are
cheaper than in London.'
Other than Eagle Star, the last sizeable relocation was that of the Bank of
England's registrars department, which completed a move from the City of
London in 1991. It occupies a Pounds 13m building of nearly 130,000 sq ft in
Gloucester, where it employs 380 people, most of them recruited locally.
The Bank decided, in 1987, to move the department on cost grounds. It needed
a large building at a lower cost than could be found at that time in the
London region, but needed to stay within reach of the City, because of the
physical exchange of paper - its main function is the registration of
gilt-edged securities. It concluded that Gloucester fitted the bill.
One important factor in the future will be how support services develop to
give the local sector more depth and range of employment. One new company is
Marlborough Stirling, in Cheltenham, set up in 1988 to sell tailor-made
software and business solutions for the sector. It has grown rapidly to over
90 staff, and its clients include some of the leading companies within and
outside the county. Mr Huw Evans, its managing director, sees 'enormous
scope' for further growth.
As a regional centre, a limiting factor is the proximity of the larger
financial communities of Bristol and Birmingham, and the big companies tend
to retain London-based auditors, law firms and advertising agencies. KPMG
Peat Marwick, the accountancy firm, closed its Cheltenham office this year,
although Coopers &amp; Lybrand and Grant Thornton keep offices in Gloucester. 'A
local presence is important, because the Gloucester office has its own
expertise,' says Mr Nicholas Houghton-Brown, of Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
Mr Darryl Whitehead, Grant Thornton's managing partner in Gloucester, says:
'Relative to the indigenous work, the indigenous professionals can handle it
very well.' A leading Gloucestershire-based accountancy firm is Hazelwoods.
Even in the present climate, investment has not ceased in the county.
Endsleigh, which employs 350 people on seven sites around Cheltenham, has
just bought a 28-acre site on the outskirts where it plans to consolidate.
'It is a statement of our commitment to Gloucestershire as the future focal
point of the company,' says Mr Stuart Wartalski, of Endsleigh.
