FT  23 AUG 93 / Merrill Lynch plans move into gilts
MERRILL LYNCH, the largest securities house in the US, is to submit a formal
application to the Bank of England to become a gilt-edged marketmaker, or
dealer in UK government bonds.
Merrill was one of several foreign houses to pull out of the gilt market in
the late 1980s in the face of tough competition in an overcrowded market and
is likely to be the first of these to return.
It plans to make its application in the next few weeks. While the Bank
refuses to comment on individual applications, it has indicated it is
willing to grant the status to those houses prepared to make a long term
gilt market commitment.
The two-year rally in the UK government bond market has helped many to
return to profit. Yamaichi International (Europe), the European arm of the
Japanese securities houses, has also applied to operate as a marketmaker and
is expected to obtain permission this autumn. This will bring the total
number of marketmakers to 20.
Merrill has hired Mr Stephen Rumsey, a veteran of the gilts market, to
develop its sterling fixed income business: he joined the company's London
office last week as a managing director in the debt markets business group.
Mr Rumsey, 42, has been involved in the gilt-edged and Eurosterling markets
for the past 21 years. Until recently he was chief executive of BZW's bond
operations; he spent eight years at BZW, initially working in the gilts and
Eurosterling sector, and later heading its fixed income operations.
A spokesman for Merrill Lynch said Mr Rumsey 'would be involved in some
business initiatives in the debt markets area, but it is premature to
announce these in detail'.
However, it is understood that Mr Rumsey will be developing Merrill's
sterling business at a time when the UK government's hefty borrowing
requirement is helping marketmakers to generate record profits. Marketmakers
made post-tax profits of Pounds 65m between them last year, according to the
Bank of England.
Earlier this summer, Merrill hired Mr Ifty Islam, BZW's gilt strategist.
Since Big Bang in October 1986, 12 marketmakers have pulled out, either
because the business was no longer profitable or because they were taken
over by another house.
