FT  11 MAR 93 / Economic Viewpoint: The battle for the 'franc fort'
On Sunday March 21, five days after the British Budget, comes the first
round of the French parliamentary elections, to be followed by a second
round the following Sunday. They are much more important for the economies
of western European countries, including the UK, than anything the
chancellor announces on Tuesday. For they are likely to decide, at least for
the time being, the fate of both the European exchange rate mechanism and
the more ambitious project for European monetary union. By comparison, the
manoeuvrings among British MPs over Maastricht tactics are children's games.
Just as the Franco-German relationship is at the heart of EC politics, it is
also at the heart of EC monetary relations, symbolised by the policy of the
franc fort. This denotes the French government's determination to stay in
the ERM and not to depreciate the franc against the D-Mark. The words are
also a pun on the name of the city of Frankfurt where the Bundesbank is
situated.
If the franc fort policy survives, the nucleus will be there of a future
European union, monetary and perhaps political. On the other hand, take away
France from the present ERM and one is left basically with a German bloc,
which will no longer be able to justify the label European. (Iberia is
hardly likely to remain inside in such circumstances.)
The conservative opposition in France, which is a strong favourite to win
the elections, is also committed to the franc fort. But, obviously, the
prospect of a new cabinet creates extra uncertainty. The foreign exchange
markets will follow closely not only the elections, but even more the
subsequent negotiations to select a right-wing prime minister with whom
President Francois Mitterrand can cohabit, and the new government's
programme.
There are many things going for the franc which sterling did not have at the
time of Black Wednesday, above all the enthusiastic support of the
Bundesbank. While the German central bank never disguised its view that
sterling was overvalued, it is fully committed to the franc/D-Mark rate.
Indeed, judged by most of the so-called fundamentals, the franc should be in
a stronger position than the D-Mark. French inflation is, at 2.1 per cent,
half the German rate. Manufacturing unit labour costs in francs are 10 per
cent below the 1987 level. The French budget deficit is lower than the
German, and the French current account is almost in balance.
Moreover, neither the German government nor the Bundesbank - in contrast to
the position a couple of years ago - has any interest in a further
appreciation of the D-Mark as an anti-inflationary measure. On the contrary,
the German authorities wish to avoid adding to existing recessionary
pressures in the export sector.
The weakness of the ERM defences in 1992 was that speculators had fixed
dates at which to aim - namely the Danish and French referendums. As these
dates drew near, it would have been worth moving out of suspect currencies,
even if there had been only a small chance of a devaluation. For the bet was
essentially one way. On this occasion, there is not so much one fixed day as
a danger period, from about now to the first policy statements of the next
French government.
The main thing going for the French franc is not the technical defences, but
underlying sentiment. Even market participants who expect a franc
depreciation do not anticipate one of more than about 5 per cent, and do not
want to be caught out by a subsequent appreciation or recovery of a floating
franc. Taking a position against the French currency is thus a trickier
proposition than one against sterling, the lira, or the peseta, last autumn.
Nevertheless many English-language market analysts still predict French
devaluation and are ideologically hostile to the franc fort.
The one development that could sink the franc fort would be a loss of faith
in it by the French policymaking elite. Until recently the main intellectual
opposition to the franc fort policy was - as most such movements are in most
countries - an unwillingness to face the costs of getting down inflation.
More recent critics have been more difficult to dismiss along these lines.
For France is undoubtedly experiencing a serious business slowdown, with
industrial production some 3 per cent below the level of a year ago, and
unemployment - on a comparable basis - edging up towards British rates. The
problem is not that of French competitiveness. The appreciation of the franc
against non D-Mark currencies since last September just about offsets a
similar improvement in French competitiveness over the previous four years
due to falling domestic costs.
Alain Madelin, the rather engaging French UDF (centre-right) politician, who
broke ranks with his colleagues to embrace a floating franc, quite sensibly
bases his case mainly on interest rates. It is worth giving him a hearing
rather than trying to quash him with an irritable wave of the hand, as most
French establishment figures do.
There is a twofold problem. Even if nominal rates were the same as in
Germany, real rates would be much higher thanks to France's very success in
overcoming inflation. Second, French market rates now need a 3 percentage
point premium over German rates because of the election uncertainties.
The French establishment has a reply of sorts. The prime rate, which forms
the basis of lending to domestic business, has been held down to 10 per
cent, partly as a result of government pressure, and partly because the
Banque de France undertakes some lending to the banks at below the official
repurchase rate. A more important point is that the greater part of lending
both to business and homebuyers, in both France and Germany, is on a medium
or long-term basis.
The heretics can say that there is a limit to how long French banks can
subsidise business, that short-term rates do matter even if less than in
Britain, and that real long-term rates of more than 5 per cent are too high
for a period of severe recession.
The policy of the orthodox French right is to reduce the cost of the franc
fort policy by moves to boost credibility, such as early independence for
the Banque de France and a fast-track approach to monetary union by the
inner core. The latter idea would, however, come up against the Bundesbank,
which is determined to go no faster than the Maastricht timetable, if only
on the grounds that Germany itself will not be ready any earlier for
monetary union. The Bundesbank is not directly responsible for exchange rate
policy, but is likely to be more effective on European monetary union than
it was on German monetary unification.
The paradox is that, if the franc fort policy had already achieved full
credibility, it would no longer be needed. France would set interest rates
no higher than necessary for domestic price stability and would replace
Germany as the anchor country of the ERM. Unfortunately its record of
stability does not yet extend long enough to do that. An experiment with
slightly lower interest rates than Germany's in 1991 proved very
short-lived.
In the end the speed with which, and extent to which, German interest rates
come down will be the major influence on the cost of the franc fort and the
likelihood of a new French government sticking to it. The Anglo-American
analysts fail to see that the franc fort policy represents a political and
economic achievement which it is worth fighting to preserve.
