FT  23 JUN 93 / Letter: Suchocka government wasted chances
Sir, As a Pole and an economist, I completely disagree with your editorial,
'Poland on a detour' (June 2), which is sympathetic to the toppled
government of Miss Suchocka.
This government's preoccupation has been with pleasing the International
Monetary Fund, by implementing an archaic economic theory dogmatically
allergic to any budget or trade deficit. Yet, economic research in the last
20 years has shown that, in the case of temporary government spending, such
as paying for a transition away from communism, an optimal policy would
include budget deficits. Also, under certain conditions, the precise way the
government is financed (via debt or economically efficient taxes, for
example) is irrelevant.
Furthermore, a country which moves from a low-efficiency to a
high-efficiency state should borrow, not pay back or lend. It should, in
other words, run a current account deficit.
Miss Suchocka's cabinet has also spent its energy on a hand-holding approach
to mass privatisation and introduced new taxes (22 per cent VAT, for
example), tariffs (which are due to increase by 6 percentage points) and so
forth. But the government has failed to recognise the importance of laws to
establish property rights, promotion of competition and growth through the
accumulation of skills. It has also chosen not to be bothered by the 14 per
cent rate of unemployment.
As expected, the efforts of Miss Suchocka to change the European Community
policy towards Poland have produced nothing. Poland's competitive exports
continue to face obstacles and, having adopted EC tariffs as well, Poland
ends up protecting jobs where EC industry is most inefficient, jobs which
sometimes the country does not even have. The cabinet has foregone a more
natural option for a small country: a multilateral approach that would
include free trade areas with a large number of countries, including the US.
With Poland's crime rate going through the roof and the quality of schools
going down the drain, the Suchocka government's incompetence and lack of
vision has wasted another chance for Poland and her teething capitalism.
Kazimierz Stanczak,
assistant professor of economics,
UCLA,
405 Hilgard Ave,
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477
