FT  24 SEP 93 / Reform 'failing' in African states
ECONOMIC reform is failing in sub-Saharan Africa and its crisis will deepen
unless finance ministers at the IMF/World Bank meeting in Washington help
resolve the region's 'crushing' external debt burden, officials of Oxfam,
the international aid agency, warned yesterday.
'After a decade of structural adjustment programmes implemented under the
tutelage of the World Bank and the IMF, Africa remains trapped in a downward
spiral of economic and social decline and poverty is increasing,' the agency
said in London.
'There is now overwhelming evidence that existing adjustment policies have
failed in two ways,' it said. 'They have not created a platform for
sustainable recovery and have not addressed the central challenge, correctly
identified by the World Bank, of alleviating poverty.'
However, the Bank's policies 'suffer from inappropriate design, inadequate
funding and poor implementation', the statement continues. Some of the
sharpest criticism is reserved for the IMF, whose role in Africa should be
reviewed by an international committee reporting to the United Nations,
Oxfam said.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, strongly defended its role in
Africa against Oxfam's charges, while admitting that the situation in Africa
was 'a matter of immense concern'.
But he said there were countries in Africa that were growing - ones that had
followed IMF economic reform programmes that had allowed increased output
and exports. Countries such as Mozambique, Uganda, Ghana and Ethiopia were
all benefiting from IMF-inspired policies.
More could be done, he added. There was scope for greater regional
integration in Africa. Those countries which had not embarked on structural
adjustment programmes must put their macro-economic policies in order.
Mr Camdessus said there was much that industrialised countries could do to
improve the situation. Africa would benefit most from early conclusion of
the Uruguay Round.
Oxfam says the speed at which IMF programmes require governments to reduce
budget deficits is 'totally unrealistic and destructive'. The statement
calls for longer time frames and 'more selective introduction of trade
liberalisation measures.'
Debt servicing takes up a quarter of the region's exports, although only
half of scheduled payments are being met. Arrears currently exceed Dollars
11bn and are building up at an alarming rate.
Oxfam called on the IMF to create a special fund to write off part of
Africa's debt through the sale of gold stocks.
