FT  04 JUN 93 / UK Company News: VSEL's 16% rise boosts shares
SHARES in VSEL Consortium rose 26p to 795p after the Barrow-based builder of
Trident submarines reported a 16 per cent increase in pre-tax profits for
the year to end-March.
Although sales fell by Pounds 78m to Pounds 441.9m profits rose from Pounds
47.9m to Pounds 55.6m pre-tax. Strong cash flow meant interest receivable
rose from Pounds 9.8m to Pounds 13.9m. Cash and cash equivalents improved
from Pounds 201.8m to Pounds 251.1m.
VSEL said its recent successful tender to build a Pounds 170m helicopter
carrier marked a successful return to building surface warships - a key
element in the group's strategy for coping with life after Trident.
The group said it had nothing to fear from a recently-announced National
Audit Office inquiry into why its tender was Pounds 50m lower than a rival
bid from Swan Hunter, the Tyneside yard which went into receivership after
failing to gain the work.
Mr Noel Davies, VSEL's chief executive, said that while his company had
'sharpened its pencil' to produce the final tender, he could only assume
that Swan Hunter believed the government would not let the Tyneside yard
close, and had priced its tender accordingly.
VSEL confirmed that it would close the Cammell Laird yard on Merseyside next
month, with the loss of 600 jobs. The group said the main reason it had
failed to find a buyer for the Birkenhead yard was the inability to have the
yard designated as having access to EC subsidies.
Lord Chalfont, VSEL's chairman, said it was expected that the UK's warship
building industry would contract from about 21,000 employees in five
shipyards in 1990, to about 6,000 in perhaps two or three yards by the
second half of the decade. The group currently employs 7,600 people at
Barrow, a figure which is set to fall to about 5,000.
Lord Chalfont said: 'The board is confident that, in the light of its unique
submarine capabilities, versatile resources and financial strength, coupled
with its renewed participation in the surface shipbuilding market, VSEL will
remain a dominant force in the industry.'
Earnings per share increased by 13 per cent to 93.4p (82.4p). A recommended
final dividend of 20p (17p) gives a total for the year of 29p (25p), an
increase of 16 per cent.
COMMENT
Swan Hunter's loss is VSEL's gain, allowing the Barrow group to bridge
neatly the looming gap between the rundown of the current Trident programme
and the next generation of attack submarines, which should start their
tendering process this year. VSEL has handled the shrinking process
remarkably smoothly and winning the helicopter carrier also improves its
chances of winning orders for more, and larger, surface vessels. Forecast
pre-tax profits of Pounds 60m put the shares on a prospective multiple of 8,
which still looks undemanding - in spite of the rerating it has enjoyed with
other defence stocks. The shares are unlikely to ever trade on a market
average multiple, but the hefty dividend increase ensures they maintain a
yield premium.
