FT  09 NOV 93 / Survey of Business Travel (6): Tunnel will need a good start
 -Charles Batchelor looks at the possible impact of the new way of crossing
the Channel
MUCH OF the interest surrounding the opening of the Channel tunnel has
focused on the competition it will offer to the ferries. Yet the most
dramatic impact of the tunnel could be on business air travel between
London, Paris and Brussels.
If train services which run through the tunnel can emulate the success of
France's high-speed trains on the Paris to Lyons route, they could corner as
much as 80 per cent of passenger journeys.
Initially, two services will be available through the tunnel. Passenger
trains operated by European Passenger Services, trading as Eurostar, will
run from Waterloo to Paris Gare du Nord and Brussels Midi. At the same time,
a shuttle service, known as 'le shuttle', and carrying cars and lorries,
will operate between terminals at Folkestone and Calais.
The shuttle service is due to start next May, beginning with two departures
an hour but rising to four an hour in the peak holiday season in August. The
journey will take one hour from motorway to motorway.
Travel agents do not expect large-scale business use of the shuttle service,
though businessmen who use their cars to carry exhibition materials or
samples are potential users.
European Passenger Services, a British Rail subsidiary, is still testing the
special trains it will run on the London to Paris/Brussels route and will
say only that it expects to start operations next summer.
The journey will take three hours to Paris and 3 hours 15 minutes to
Brussels. Track improvements in France and Belgium should cut the Brussels
times to 2 hours 40 minutes by 1996. The opening of the high-speed link
through Kent and East London in 2001, assuming there are no further delays
to the project, should cut journey times to Paris to 2 hours 30 minutes and
to Brussels to 2 hours 10 minutes.
When the high speed link is opened, the main passenger terminus in London
will move from Waterloo to either St Pancras or Kings Cross.
Passengers who do not want to go as far as Brussels or Paris can make use of
those trains which stop at intermediate stations. These are being built at
Ashford in Kent, Calais and Lille while further stations have been proposed
at Ebbsfleet, near Gravesend, Rainham in Essex and Stratford in East London.
In 1995 passenger services will be extended beyond London with night
services from Plymouth and Glasgow through the tunnel to the Continent.
Daytime services will operate from Manchester and Edinburgh. For travellers
who want to go beyond Paris and Brussels, there are existing rail
connections while high-speed links are being further developed. Further high
speed rail links are planned to come into use in France in 1994-95, skirting
Paris to link with the existing high-speed trains to Lyons and Bordeaux, and
in the Netherlands and Germany in 1988.
More than 40 trains will run in each direction every day and even at
off-peak times there will be at least one train an hour, Eurotunnel says.
There are also plans for overnight services linking London and other cities
in the UK with continental destinations.
'Once people get used to rail travel this could open up the rest of Europe,'
says Mr Paul Allen, chairman of the Guild of Business Travel Agents. 'To my
mind there is no choice when you can jump on a train, sit down at your seat
and get straight on with some work.'
The main advantage the train can offer over air travel begins before
boarding. For many travellers it is far simpler and quicker to travel to a
rail terminal in the centre of town than to an airport on the outskirts.
Flying frequently involves a long journey by taxi or underground to the
airport and a wait to board the aircraft. Take-off and landing delays caused
by congestion at airports can also prolong a flight.
The tunnel rail service will offer regular departures which should make
pre-booking unnecessary at many times of the day, though booking will
probably be necessary at peak times.
The tunnel should also offer a means of travel which is unaffected by the
weather, unlike autumn and winter airline flights which can frequently be
delayed by fog and ice.
For the nervous flyer the tunnel offers an alternative though questionnaires
of whether people would use the tunnel have revealed many travellers do not
welcome the prospect of a long journey in a tunnel. The time actually spent
in the tunnel will vary from 23 to 27 minutes.
Travel agents are generally enthusiastic about the benefits which the
Channel tunnel service will bring for customers. Just as the arrival of
competition in airline routes in Europe has brought down prices, so the
tunnel is expected to exert further pressure, says Ms Vanessa Leak, head of
marketing for Thomas Cook Travel Management.
But there are residual doubts about the delays in building a dedicated high
speed link in the UK and some travellers, disillusioned with the poor
commuter service provided by British Rail on some routes, may need
convincing that rail can be an attractive alternative.
'Our research suggests that the first few months will be crucial,' says Ms
Leak. 'We anticipate strong initial demand because of the novelty value. But
if travellers are in any way disappointed, it will be extremely difficult to
win them back.'
What is not yet clear about tunnel travel is the price of tickets.
Eurotunnel says prices will be announced in January, though it has said that
the shuttle ticket prices will be similar to ferry prices.
European Passenger Services says it will offer a range of prices which will
be competitive with the airlines. It expects to announce its fares structure
in the spring.
For businessmen who prefer to continue travelling by air, the opening of the
tunnel may also bring indirect benefits. Some travel agents are forecasting
that the cross-Channel routes will experience competition similar to that
which has prevailed on the North Atlantic air routes in recent years. These
have led to considerable price reductions and improvements in the quality of
the service offered.
