FT  10 JUN 93 / Brussels proposes HCFC limits
THE European Commission wants to set strict limits on the EC's consumption
of hydrochlorofluorocarbons, which deplete the ozone layer, and end their
use by 2014.
The Commission yesterday proposed tough restrictions on HCFCs, which are
used in the making of foam insulation, and two other ozone-depleting
chemicals - adding to a list of limits and bans headed by
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
But the Commission is not proposing to outlaw EC production of HCFCs, which
could still be exported to developing countries as a substitute for CFCs in
refrigeration and air conditioning systems.
Use of CFCs has affected the ozone layer, which screens out much
ultra-violet radiation, increasing the risk of skin cancer and eye
cataracts.
HCFCs are 20 times less harmful to the ozone layer than CFCs, but the
Commission is still proposing that their use in the EC should be cut to
7,300 tonnes a year from January 1995, and eliminated by 2014. Officials
said yesterday the final date might be brought forward if reliable
production of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), the most benign substitute for
CFCs, could be established earlier.
The plans drew a sharp response from the EC chemicals industry, which
criticised the Commission for overreacting when the question of how to limit
the more dangerous CFCs had not yet been properly resolved.
Mr Ioannis Paleokrassas, the EC environment commissioner, hopes the
proposals will be approved by EC environment ministers on June 28.
He underlined that as in the case of CFCs - the use of which will be
outlawed from January 1995 - the Community was improving on the deadlines
laid down last November in Copenhagen by the Montreal Protocol, the
93-nation pact on the ozone layer.
The Commission also plans to limit the use and production of
hydrobromochlorofluorocarbons (HBFCs) and methyl bromides, used for
firefighting equipment and soil fumigation respectively. HBFCs will be
outlawed by January 1, 1996, while use and production of methyl bromide will
be frozen on January 1, 1995 and cut by 25 per cent a year later.
