FT  16 SEP 93 / International Company News: Generali earmarks cash for
expansion
GENERALI, Italy's biggest insurance company, is considering spending 'more
than L200bn (Dollars 130.2m)' on investments or acquisitions in
'Anglo-Saxon' markets.
The outline of the move, contained in information linked to the prospectus
for the impending rights issue by Generali's Alleanza life subsidiary, gives
no clues as to where or when the money might be spent.
Generali says a study into investments in international pension fund or
reinsurance activities was 'in an advanced stage'. A number of Italian
insurers are believed to be examining the pension fund business in view of
new Italian legislation opening the door to private pension systems.
The leaked information also reveals that parent company premiums rose 14.4
per cent, to L4,618.5bn, in the first half, while premium income at group
subsidiaries soared 28.6 per cent to L8,600bn. The company warned that
official first-half results would not be released until later this month.
The 'Anglo-Saxon' investment is just one of a number of spending plans
earmarked for the L1,000bn cash pile on which Generali is still sitting
after its controversial L1,750bn 1991 rights issue.
Other possible investments include about L200bn for Latin America, between
L70bn and L80bn in east Asia, and up to L15bn in eastern Europe.
Senior executives have invariably played down the prospects of a big
takeover. Instead, they have emphasised that the group's cash pile, shortly
to be swollen by receipts from the complex Alleanza deal, would be ploughed
back into the business, or used for small, sectoral acquisitions.
The prospectus shows some L440bn has gone toward building a 5 per cent stake
in Banco Central Hispano-Americano, Generali's partner in a Spanish joint
venture.
Included in the leaked first-half figures is information that Generali's
overall proportion of claims to total premiums, including reinsurance, had
fallen to about 78 per cent, against 82 per cent last year. The claims ratio
was now around 72 per cent for the group's directly-written Italian
business, and 80 per cent for risks abroad.
