FT  18 MAY 93 / Letter: Argentina active in meeting loan terms
Sir, Your article recounting the pressures on the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank to lend quickly to the former Soviet Union quoted an
unnamed G7 official as questioning how much conditionality there was in the
bank's recent lending to Argentina ('Much ado about lending', May 12).
The answer is, plenty. Since 1990, the Argentine government has undertaken a
major reform programme, and we have made four large adjustment loans to
support it. Compliance so far has been excellent; two of the loans are fully
disbursed. The government negotiated with the bank actions in three key
areas: the downsizing and improvement of a bloated and poorly-paid public
administration; reform of an inflation-prone financial sector; and sale or
closure of grossly inefficient public enterprises.
Some of the actions we jointly agreed on in public administrative reform
were the reduction of the national government workforce by 130,000, far
better pay for the rest, and a virtual ending of tax loopholes. The latter
helped Argentina raise its tax revenue from 13 per cent of gross domestic
product in 1989 to more than 22 per cent last year.
Financial reforms included a new charter for the Central Bank, the closure
of a large industrial bank, and sale of the country's largest savings bank.
The public enterprise reforms have been even more impressive. They include a
new charter for the national oil company permitting its sale to private
owners, privatisation of the national railway system (after reducing its
workforce by 30,000), national telephone company, Buenos Aires electricity
system, national gas complex, a series of major and minor oil fields, the
largest steel mill and petrochemical complex in the country, and sale or
closure of more than 20 enterprises owned by the defence ministry. The
programme, now approaching completion, is one of the most ambitious in the
hemisphere.
Your unnamed G7 official should have known better.
S Shahid Husain,
vice president, Latin America and Caribbean
The World Bank,
Washington, DC 20433,
US
