FT  20 NOV 93 / Clinton wants bigger role for Asia-Pacific grouping
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday called for the Asia-Pacific Economic
Co-operation grouping to evolve into a much closer-knit organisation that
could in years to come play the same role in uniting the Pacific region that
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation played after the second world war in
bringing Europe together.
'We can't imagine now how we could have weathered the cold war without Nato.
In the same way, future generations may look back and say they can't imagine
how the Asia-Pacific region could have thrived in such a spirit of harmony
without Apec,' Mr Clinton told business and community leaders in Seattle,
where he will meet leaders from the Pacific rim countries today.
While Asian members of the 17 country Apec forum have been reluctant to move
towards a more formal relationship, Mr Clinton sketched out areas where the
organisation, until now an informal consultative grouping, could take a more
active role.
These included dispute resolution, the establishment of telecommunications
standards, the promotion of an open skies agreement to liberalise air
traffic, and common work on environmental problems.
Mr Clinton said he would propose the creation of an Asia-Pacific business
round table and an education foundation, and would call for Apec finance
ministers, who have not previously been involved in the organisation, to
meet soon.
Asian members have poured cold water both on the US ideas for expanding Apec
and on the suggestions of a group of 'Eminent Persons' to aim for the
creation of an Asia-Pacific Economic Community.
'China's understanding is that Apec is a forum for economic co-operation in
the Asia-Pacific region. At present there is no idea for turning this
organisation into an Asia-Pacific Economic Community,' Mr Qian Qichen,
China's foreign minister, said yesterday.
Ms Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's minister for international trade and industry,
also criticised efforts to institutionalise Apec.
'We have no objection to the finance ministers meeting, but it shouldn't be
a yearly affair, otherwise we'll get into the same rut of any organisation
which gets over-institutionalised,' she said.
