FT  18 SEP 93 / London Stock Exchange: Nervous close to the trading account
EXPIRY DAY in the derivatives markets brought brief turmoil in share prices
yesterday as the big international securities houses competed to balance
their investment exposures to equities, futures and index options.
The settlement passed off more comfortably than had been feared. Leading
Japanese and US houses appeared to be sellers of stock with a leading Swiss
house active on the other side of the balance.
But apprehension revived as London braced itself for the opening of the new
trading account. The Footsie Index faces a testing time on Monday morning,
when twenty Footsie stocks will trade in ex dividend form and three new
entrants join the 100 stock list.
After falling 12 Footsie points in early trading, the stock market moved
upwards during the futures expiry to show, at the day's best, a gain of 16.5
at 3,020.4. But this largely technical rally melted away as Wall Street,
facing its own Triple Witching Hour, made a slow start, with many leading
shares making a delayed opening, and the Dow Index 17 points off in UK
hours.
The closing reading put the FT-SE Index at 3,005.5, with the day's gain cut
back to only 1.6 points. The Footsie has fallen by nearly 32 points this
week on concerns over inflation and disappointing company trading reports.
Over the two week account which closed last night, the Footsie has shed
51.18 points. But it has fallen 109 points, or 3.5 per cent since the
trading peak of 3,115 reached on August 31.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which gained 4.5 to 3,425.7 yesterday, has lost 1.5
per cent over the trading account.
Against the background of technical factors in both London and New York,
market analysts were loath to draw conclusions from share price movements
yesterday.
Weakness among retail and consumer stocks continued to reflect waning
confidence that UK base rates can be cut in the near term. Reports of US
sellers unsettled oil shares but some leading pharmaceuticals, which have
proved still vulnerable to worries over US healthcare policies, moved
firmer.
Long-dated government bonds turned sharply high towards the close, showing
half point gains following the announcement that the next auction will be on
September 29, with stock details and when-issued trading next Tuesday.
