FT  03 SEP 93 / Belgium raises interest rates to defend franc
THE Belgian central bank yesterday raised its central interest rate from 9.5
to 10.5 per cent and intervened on the currency markets to support the
Belgian franc.
The bank's action followed a week of speculation against the currency, and
backed up statements by Mr Alfons Verplaetse, the bank governor, that
Belgium would not abandon its 'franc fort' policy.
The bank also increased its other interest rates by one percentage point.
The franc closed yesterday at BFr21.49 to the D-Mark, against a close of
BFr21.31 on Wednesday.
The tightening of monetary policy came on the same day that the country's
national statistics institute announced a rise in unemployment from 13.5 per
cent in July to 14.1 per cent in August. The latest figure compares to 12.1
per cent in August 1992. Some analysts believe pressure on the currency
could increase before next month's negotiations between the government,
trade unions and employers.
The talks will try to decide how to improve the waning competitiveness of
Belgian business, without undermining state finances. Analysts believe a
successful growth pact would relieve pressure on the franc, but belligerent
press statements by different participants have fuelled worries about the
outcome, particularly abroad.
Failure to agree a growth pact at next month's talks would badly damage
Belgium's centre-left government, headed by Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene. Attempts to
tinker with the social security system, and to limit index-linked wage
rises, nearly brought down the fragile coalition in March.
The latest burst of currency speculation began last week when 14 influential
Flemish economists urged the authorities to stimulate growth by lowering
interest rates and abandoning the three-year-old link between the franc and
the D-Mark. Belgian government bonds fell sharply as many investors were
surprised by the rise in interest rates, adds Peter John in London.
There was a rush of selling at the start of the dealing session, with
three-year Belgian debt prices down by up two percentage points yesterday.
One London trader said: 'The market just collapsed. There was a complete
lack of confidence.'
The Belgian futures and options exchange experienced record volatility in
its debt markets in high turnover.
