FT  09 FEB 93 / Parliament and Politics: Rising star fighting for the free
market
ONE political winner has emerged from the government's planned review of
public spending before it has started. Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary
to the Treasury, has confirmed his status as the cabinet's fastest-rising
star.
It was he who suggested to colleagues last summer that the appalling state
of government finances called for a fundamental reassessment of the way it
spends Pounds 250bn a year of taxpayers' money.
Most of big spenders were happy to sign up, persuaded that a long-term
review was one of the safer ways to defer the awkward choices facing an
increasingly spendthrift government in the midst of recession. They may come
to regret that judgment.
Mr Portillo had other ideas. Still three months from his 40th birthday he is
the youngest, and technically the most junior minister in the cabinet.
He is also one of its brightest, most hard-working and ideologically
committed members - determined to advance in tandem his political career and
the cause of aggressively free-market Conservatism.
His review may serve both causes. Mr Portillo understands more clearly than
many that the philosophical direction of any government depends crucially on
the level of its spending commitments and the priorities to which they are
aimed. Within a few months he will have a better grasp of the implications
of present spending programmes than anyone else in government.
The chief secretary appreciates also that economic chaos provides one of the
most powerful forces for change in the Conservative party: it is only then
that Tory MPs have to face up to the choice between unpalatable cuts in
public spending and ruinous increases in taxation.
So Mr Portillo used the launch of the review - focusing at first on the
social security, health, education and home office budgets - to re-open the
political debate about the limits of the welfare state.
No one doubts where Mr Portillo stands personally. A conviction politician,
he would like to see a further decisive tilt away from the state and towards
the individual - in education, in social welfare and in health. He would
like further cuts in taxation and closer targeting of welfare benefits. He
is not so naive as to believe the review will transform overnight a timid
government into a radical one. The state pension and child benefit - two
main components of the welfare budget - are protected until the next
election by manifesto commitments.
But Mr Portillo understands that one of the lessons of the 1980s is that if
the climate of opinion is carefully managed in advance the radical can be
translated into the reasonable view. His sights are on the Tory party in 10
years. By then he could be leading it.
A few Tory MPs are already tipping him to replace Mr Norman Lamont in a
summer reshuffle. Such rapid promotion is probably premature. Mr Major may
well be loath to mark him out as heir-apparent. But, as he stressed in the
Commons yesterday, Mr Portillo is looking to the medium term.
