FT  12 OCT 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Selective reading -
Charles Batchelor samples the latest crop of business books
Who has time to read even a fraction of the business books which pour from
the publishers' presses every month? Small business owners are particularly
reluctant to trust the printed word when it comes to seeking advice.
And yet, the well-written manual can provide short-cuts and act as a
valuable source of reference. Recent publications have addressed a number of
important issues, some highly topical, some perennial, including quality,
the single European market, customer care and finance.
If any area of business management could be dismissed as the art of the
blindingly obvious, then customer service would come at the top of the list.
Yet for all the self-evident nature of the need to treat your customers
well, this is the one area where many businesses are particularly inept.
The Golden Rules of Customer Care by Carl Sewell and Paul B. Brown (Business
Books, 175 pages, Pounds 15.99, paperback Pounds 8.99) treats its subject in
an instructive and entertaining fashion. Sewell, who runs a Cadillac
dealership in Texas, calculates that a satisfied customer will spend Dollars
332,000 (Pounds 218,000) over a lifetime on cars and servicing. Once you
realise a sale is not a one-off transaction, then it makes sense to keep
customers happy, says Sewell.
Start by asking your customers what they want. When Sewell surveyed his, he
found they valued convenience above price, so he extended his opening hours
and provided a free car while the customer's was being repaired.
Sewell says he cannot guarantee to be the cheapest repair shop around, but
he makes sure customers feel happy by ensuring that the bill always comes in
under the estimate. This involves making an accurate assessment of the
likely cost and building in a buffer of 10 per cent.
He also takes service as far as offering a free call-out to fix a flat tyre
or replace a broken car key. Very few people abuse this sort of service and
the payback in terms of creating loyal customers is well worth it.
Not that saying please and smiling will ensure that the job is done right
the first time. Only having tight operating and financial controls and
well-chosen, motivated staff can achieve that.
This story is that of a car dealer but his advice could be applied to other
sectors. Sewell even has an answer for the sceptics who ask: does the author
practise what he preaches and if he is so smart, why isn't he rich? He does
and he is.
Guides to the workings of the European Community are plentiful, but the
particular advantage of Into the Single Market by Jon Marks (Middle East
Economic Digest, 80 pages, Pounds 24.95.) is the clarity of its lay-out.
However, the decision not to include an index reduces its value as a quick
reference book.
The Community is developing so rapidly that any guide has only a short
shelf-life. The names, addresses and telephone numbers which make up a
valuable part of this handbook are particularly prone to obsolescence.
But the book gives an admirably complete explanation of the Community's
history, institutions and systems. What are the structural funds, the
cohesion fund and the convergence programmes? Community-speak is larded with
terms bleached of much of their meaning by translators.
One section of this book explains how the EC evolved to its present state,
while another goes into the details of doing business in the EC, coping with
issues such as the harmonisation of standards, taxation and public
procurement.
The author also looks at sectors such as energy and the environment,
agriculture and the financial system.
Not as narrowly focused as its title suggests, The Quality Management Manual
by Jenny Waller, Derek Allen and Andrew Burns (Kogan Page, 206 pages, Pounds
24.95), does explain how to write the manual required by formal quality
systems, but it also provides a general introduction to the subject of
quality.
It also contains a wealth of case histories of how companies are coming to
grips with the question of quality. For some companies introducing quality
assurance revealed quite startling gaps in the management procedures.
The authors make clear that they are not providing an off-the-shelf quality
manual. Quality management systems must be tailored to the needs of the
individual organisation, they warn.
Most companies will use a book of this sort on the road to achieving BS
5750, the British quality assurance standard, and its international
equivalent ISO 9000, but it should also prove of value to companies which do
not want the rigours and expense of formal registration.
A quality manual serves a double purpose, the authors point out. It is both
a symbol of a company's commitment to quality - though one which will be
closely scrutinised by the certification company's assessors - and a
practical reference book for staff. It should not be a dry, technical
document, but be designed to be attractive and easy to use.
The Business of Factoring by David Hawkins (McGraw Hill, 247 pages, Pounds
35) combines a practical guide for managers on how and when to use factoring
and invoice discounting, with a critical review of the state of the
industry.
Factoring provides cash against a company's invoices and can represent a
flexible method of raising finance in situations where the bank manager is
unwilling to grant or increase an overdraft. It has not completely shed a
down-market image acquired in the 1960s, but has grown in popularity in
recent years.
This book provides a jargon-free account of how factoring and invoice
discounting work for the client company. But it should also be read in the
boardrooms of the banks which own most of the big factoring companies.
The banks have tended to regard it as a peripheral activity which competes
with their main business of providing overdraft and loan finance. They have
therefore not developed factoring as aggressively as they could have done,
Hawkins suggests.
This might not matter to anyone but the banks' shareholders. But factoring
could prove a valuable additional source of finance to businesses recovering
from the recession, particularly if the banks are more cautious about
extending loans to small businesses.
