FT  13 OCT 93 / Economic historians win Nobel
THE Nobel prize for economics was yesterday awarded to Robert Fogel of the
University of Chicago and Douglass North of Washington University in St
Louis for pioneering work on the causes of economic and institutional
change.
The Nobel committee's decision to break with tradition and award the prize
for work in economic history, rather than economics proper, reflects the
growing importance economists attach to the role of social institutions in
providing a framework for economic growth.
Professors Fogel and North are widely credited with revolutionising economic
history as an academic discipline by applying rigorous statistical
techniques and theories. The approach is known as 'cliometrics' or 'the new
economic history'.
'It's a tremendous decision,' said Prof Roderick Floud, provost of London
Guildhall University, who has collaborated with Prof Fogel for the past
10-15 years. He said their emphasis on quantitative techniques had
transformed economic history and stimulated greater numeracy in other
branches of history.
Prof North, 72, has cast doubt on many traditional explanations of economic
growth, arguing that factors such as technical change and innovations are
less important than previously claimed. He puts more stress on legal and
social institutions, such as property rights, that create the conditions in
which market economies can flourish.
His work is of particular relevance to former communist countries where the
lack of capitalist institutions is widely seen as one of the main obstacles
to development. Prof North recently advised the Czech Republic on
privatisation. He previously acted as a consultant in Russia, Argentina and
Peru.
'He is adamant that you cannot just leave development to markets,' said Prof
John Nye, a colleague of Prof North at Washington University. 'He is trying
to push back the boundaries of economics by getting economists to focus on
institutions as well as exchange and allocation.'
Prof North has also used the modern economic theory of transactions costs to
throw new light on feudal and medieval economies. He concluded these forms
of economic organisation were efficient given existing institutional
constraints.
Prof Fogel, 67, pioneered the application of rigorous statistical techniques
in economic history, in the process turning conventional wisdom on its head.
Historians, for example, have long argued that the development of railways
played a crucial role in US economic development. Prof Fogel rejected this
claim, arguing that had railways never existed, US gross national product
would have been only 3 per cent lower. He argued that in the absence of
railways substitute forms of transport such as roads and canals would have
played a more important role. This type of 'counterfactual' analysis,
familiar to economists, was new to economic historians.
In a study that provoked bitter criticism, Prof Fogel rejected the
conventional wisdom that American slavery was an inefficient, unprofitable
economic system. His careful statistical analysis indicated that slavery was
economically viable and would have persisted but for political opposition.
He did not, however, attempt to justify slavery, arguing that it was morally
unacceptable.
More recently Prof Fogel has helped to develop a new branch of economic
history that uses biomedical data on human height, weight, food intake and
morbidity as a gauge of changes in economic welfare.
