FT  06 OCT 93 / Greek Elections: Greek socialists plan 'social contract' -
Mr Papandreou's party is confident of victory and seeks a fresh start,
GREECE'S oppositions socialists are so confident of victory in Sunday's
election that they are already discussing the outline of a 'social contract'
with workers and employers. Early in the campaign, Mr Andreas Papandreou,
leader of the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok), held a well-publicised
meeting with members of the Confederation of Greek Industry several days
before his scheduled talks with trade union and agricultural co-operative
leaders.
'There has to be a social partnership. If we're to bring down inflation,
there must be agreement on wages, and not just for a single year. But we
also need a framework for holding prices down,' says Mr Gerasimos Arsenis,
Pasok's economics spokesman. Polls show the socialists maintaining the
three- to five-percentage point lead they held at the start of the campaign.
Even if Pasok's lead over the conservative New Democracy party were to
shrink to one percentage point, as smaller left-wing parties gain support,
Pasok would still win an outright majority because the electoral law heavily
favours the front-running party.
Much has changed since Pasok's first term in office in the 1980s when Mr
Arsenis, then economy minister, was given a mandate to nationalise several
of Greece's biggest private companies through forced capitalisations of debt
owed by state-owned banks.
The result was a prolonged freeze on private sector investment, contributing
to a significant loss of competitiveness in Greek industry just as the
European Community single market approached. This time, Pasok economists
assert, the emphasis would be on promoting development, but not at the
expense of fiscal discipline imposed by the conservatives, which has brought
the government borrowing requirement down from around 17 per cent of gross
domestic product in 1990 to 8.7 per cent last year.
Mr Papandreou has avoided disclosing details of his policy plans beyond
calling for 'a crusade against inflation'. However, he has pledged that a
socialist government would not devalue the drachma, introduce new taxes or
continue the conservatives' privatisation programme.
Privatisation revenues this year were forecast at Dr330bn (Pounds 933m) from
the projected sale of 49 per cent of the state telecoms monopoly, together
with management rights, and of two oil refineries. The socialists say that
public utilities will remain under state control, but they do not rule out
floating some state enterprises on the Athens Stock Exchange.
Pasok's promises raise questions about how the party would cope with a
revenue shortfall this year that the conservatives admit could reach
Dr800bn, equivalent to 6.5 per cent of GDP. The socialists claim that the
shortfall, mainly caused by slower than expected growth in tax receipts,
together with the government's failure to improve collection of tax arrears,
could reach Dr1,000bn by December.
Under the circumstances, a Pasok government would have little margin for
rewarding voters by raising public sector wages, frozen for the past three
years, or increasing pensions. Moreover, the campaign against tax evasion,
estimated to cost the government more than Dr350bn a year in lost revenues,
would have to be stepped up. The socialists' commitment to meeting the
Maastricht targets for economic convergence rule out a return to the
free-spending habits of the 1980s, which helped push the public debt up to
116 per cent of GDP last year.
There is little room for manoeuvre as Greece will be unable to meet this
year's convergence targets.
The growth forecast has already been halved to 1 per cent of GDP, and
inflation for 1993 will remain at about 12 per cent, against a target of
less than 10 per cent.
While there is no official linkage between Maastricht and transfers from EC
structural funds, Mr Papandreou is well aware that if the economy starts
slipping backwards, Greece's partners will call for restrictions on
payments.
