FT  13 MAR 93 / The chancellor's big day: Lamont faces mounting economic and
political pressures as he finalises his Budget decisions
Next Tuesday's Budget is shaping up to be a real cliffhanger. The pressures
on the chancellor have grown, rather than diminished, as his big day has
come closer.
The dilemmas facing Mr Norman Lamont would be sharp enough if the Budget
were just about the economy. But this year's Budget will be a political
occasion of high drama.
After the government's reverses over the Maastricht Bill, Mr John Major will
be looking to the Budget to inject new purpose into his embattled
administration.
Then there is Mr Lamont himself. He has survived against all the odds since
sterling's enforced departure from the European exchange rate mechanism last
September. He desperately needs a successful Budget if he is to fulfil his
personal ambition of staying at No 11 Downing Street.
A month ago, it would probably have been enough for Mr Lamont to present the
Budget as a low-key holding operation that would not upset the prospects for
economic recovery and leave big decisions for the first unified taxing and
spending Budget in November. But there has been a subtle shift in
expectations since then.
As tentative signs of recovery have multiplied, sentiment among City
analysts, Tory members of parliament and within the cabinet has swung
towards a more radical approach to the UK's economic problems. Every new
glimmer of hope about growth has emboldened the supporters of early fiscal
tightening to bring the UK's growing public sector deficits under control
before election deadlines loom.
Throughout, the Treasury has maintained a Sphinx-like silence. Although the
chancellor and other Treasury ministers have been let out of pre-Budget
purdah to comment on economic indicators when they offer hope, or in the
case of Mr Lamont to host an informal gathering of his colleagues from the
Group of Seven leading industrial countries in London, the secrecy
surrounding the Budget has been unusually complete.
This may simply mean that the chancellor has, as is his wont, left decisions
until the very last minute. But it may also reflect the complexity of this
year's Budget judgment.
Rarely can a chancellor have been confronted with such a cacophony of advice
as Mr Lamont in the past 10 weeks.
But the bottom line is that nobody has a clear and persuasive answer as to
whether recovery is safely under way and can be sustained; whether bank base
rates at 6 per cent are at the appropriate level; whether sterling,
following its devaluation of about 15 per cent since September, is correctly
valued or undervalued; how far the UK economy is operating below capacity
and whether, in the event of recovery being maintained, it will run rapidly
into the twin constraints of growing budget and current account balance of
payments deficits.
With so much unclear about the economy, it is not surprising that there is
even more divergence about the measures that Mr Lamont should announce.
Should he heed those who warn that recovery could be aborted by over-hasty
tax increases that would cripple consumer or business confidence? Or,
looking to the medium term, should he acknowledge that some of the Pounds
37bn of public sector deficit forecast for 1992-93 in the government's
Autumn Statement is structural rather than cyclical and needs to be
corrected?
Then again, what instruments should he choose if he takes the path of fiscal
tightening? Will he be tempted to extend the range of value-added tax to
zero-rated or exempt items, such as food, domestic fuel and power or
newspapers and magazines? Or should the chancellor, by tinkering with income
tax allowances, thresholds or mortgage interest relief, take back from those
middle and upper income earners who still have jobs some of the gains they
have made since September through the sharp drop in mortgage rates that has
followed the fall in base rates from 10 to 6 per cent?
If he has been wise, Mr Lamont will have stood back from immediate problems
and pressures and asked himself where he wants to take the British economy
in the medium term. Although current uncertainties might tempt some to
caution, next week's Budget offers a rare chance to complete the process of
rebalancing economic policy started after the ERM crisis and prepare the UK
to compete more successfully over the rest of the 1990s.
The chancellor will have examined the reasons why the recession in Britain
has lasted as long as 10 quarters. If he has listened to the Bank of England
he will have concluded that debt deflation - the corrosive process of
falling asset values undermining enterprise financed on borrowed funds - has
been the main culprit.
Mr Lamont will have asked what lessons he should draw from the near doubling
in recession of the UK current account balance of payments deficit to Pounds
11.9bn last year from Pounds 6.4bn in 1991.
The rise of unemployment above 3m in January and the continuing heavy
shedding of labour by manufacturers in spite of evidence that companies have
withstood this recession in better financial shape than previous recessions
will have coloured his judgment. So will the spread of recession to the UK's
markets in continental Europe just as consumer demand in Britain may be
recovering.
Mr Lamont should regard recent indicators of consumer revival warily. The
recent growth of M0, the narrow money measure comprising mainly notes and
coins in circulation, at above the government's 0 to 4 per cent target
range, and this week's Confederation of British Industry report of further
year-on-year growth of retailers' sales in February suggest recovery is
taking hold.
But is a consumer-led recovery what Britain requires? Most of the nation's
economic problems - the current account deficit, the country's small
industrial base, the heavy indebtedness of families and the continuing toll
of house repossessions - reflect too much consumption in the past.
So while nobody should expect the chancellor to stifle recovery, he will
want his Budget to set the framework for future, more stable growth. That
should mean a Budget for investment, industry and jobs.
If the foregoing analysis is correct, Mr Lamont's first priority will be to
ensure that the present 6 per cent base rates can be maintained for an
extended period. He may even seek scope for a further lowering of rates to
allow the UK's indebted households and companies and battered banks to
rebuild their balance sheets.
But low interest rates have to be earned. That means that the government
must strengthen the credibility of its commitment to low inflation and its
target of keeping underlying inflation in the 1 to 4 per cent target band
announced last year.
Mr Lamont will have to pay particular attention to the mood on financial
markets. So far, domestic and international investors have appeared
relatively untroubled in the face of widespread expectations that the UK's
public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) could reach Pounds 1bn a week
next year.
But markets are fickle. The City is expecting some good news about the
borrowing requirement on Budget Day itself: recent polls of City analysts
suggest they expect the PSBR for 1992-93 will be Pounds 35bn compared with
the Pounds 37bn Autumn Statement forecast.
Most City investment houses expect the chancellor will ease the 'full
funding' rule that at present prevents the government from counting
purchases of gilt-edged stock by banks and building societies as
contributions to financing the budget deficit.
Yet more than financial wheezes will be required if the markets are to give
Mr Lamont their backing. To be sure of the freedom of manoeuvre he needs in
monetary policy, he will have to produce a convincing plan to reduce the
UK's budget deficit.
This suggests Mr Lamont will have to make a downpayment on deficit reduction
next Tuesday. And if he is to fulfil the expectations of parliament and the
nation, he will also have to help the unemployed and hold out hope of job
creation, most probably through helping small businesses.
These goals are difficult to reconcile. But the chancellor has one card  -
low inflation - in his favour.
The UK's present lower than expected inflation rate could encourage the
chancellor to freeze income tax allowances and thresholds, saving some
Pounds 750m; increase by more than inflation some excise duties on tobacco,
petrol and the vehicle excise duty and extend VAT to some goods and services
currently uncovered. Low inflation could give the chancellor the excuse he
needs to cut government spending.
But such a Budget would be a glum affair and unlikely to secure Mr Lamont's
survival. Hence, speculation has grown that he may have something more
spectacular up his sleeve.
With a tax system as complex as Britain's, Mr Lamont has scope to be bold
and pull in revenue without raising the present income tax rates of 20, 25
and 40 per cent.
One option, with mortgage rates low, might be to prune mortgage interest
relief or Miras. Limiting Miras to the 20 per cent tax band would cost
households only Pounds 10 a month and yet be a big step forward to phasing
out a system which distorts the economy. He might also turn the personal
allowance - the amount which everyone can earn before paying tax - into a
tax credit at the basic tax rate of 25 per cent rather than subtract it, as
at present, from gross income in a system that benefits the 40 per cent tax
payer.
Such steps would be painful for Tory voters - and could open the government
to the charge of betraying the spirit, if not the letter, of the 1992
election campaign. But some of the revenue gained could be used to extend
the 20 per cent tax rate beyond its present Pounds 2,000 limit, widen the
tax-free personal allowance, or provide help to first-time home buyers.
In his previous two Budgets, Mr Lamont has proven to be a master of
surprise. In 1991 he increased VAT to pay for a poll tax cut, and in 1992
introduced the 20 per cent tax band. These moves were dictated more by
electoral politics than economic considerations.
This year he could again confound his detractors while placing the UK on a
sounder footing for non-inflationary growth. If he succeeds, he may be
singing in the bath of Number 11 Downing Street for longer than anyone
expects.
