FT  17 AUG 93 / Scotland braves the invasion of the food chains / A look at
the battle between superstores and discounters
WHEN J. Sainsbury opened its first superstore in Edinburgh in June the
results surpassed even its own expectations. Of five stores opened in the UK
that month, Edinburgh was by far the busiest, making it one of Sainsbury's
most successful openings for years.
Food retailers, having slugged it out for market share in English high
streets, are now targeting the Pounds 4bn spent on food every year in
Scotland. As debate rages in the UK food market about increasing saturation
and the threat to profits growth, many chains believe Scotland still offers
big opportunities for expansion.
Sainsbury, the UK's largest food retailer, opened its first Scottish
superstore, a 42,000 sq ft flagship at Darnley in Glasgow, only last year.
It is now working on a site at East Kilbride and is 'almost at the planning
stage' in Ayr.
Planning permission is being sought for a store in Kirkcaldy, Fife and it is
looking at another site 'on the other side of Edinburgh'.
The other big new competitors are the growing breed of hard discounters
which sell a narrow range of products at very low prices. There were hardly
any in Scotland before 1990, when Shoprite, based in the Isle of Man, opened
its first stores. Shoprite now has 50 stores.
Mr David Webster, deputy managing director, believes discounting will be
more successful in Scotland than in the UK as a whole, where it is forecast
to take 15 per cent of the market by 1996.
He expects discounters, including Shoprite and new entrants such as Kwik
Save and Netto, to be operating 350 Scottish stores by 1996 and to grab a 25
per cent share of the food market.
Scotland has long been neglected by some of the biggest grocery chains. Only
Argyll, which has 22 per cent of the market through its Safeway and Presto
stores, Asda with 15 per cent, and the co-operative societies, have a
significant presence.
Wm Low, the Dundee-based chain, has about 15 per cent of the market but
small independent grocers still dominate many areas. There are fears that
many will now be squeezed between the superstores and the discounters.
Sainsbury faces a formidable competitor in Safeway, which admits it will do
'everything possible to retain market share'. As if to drive home the point,
Sir Alistair Grant, Argyll's Scottish chairman, said in a recent speech that
he was pleased to have the chance to talk about four things close to his
heart: 'Food, farming, Safeway and Scotland'.
Safeway has already outbid Sainsbury for two prime sites. One is The Gyle,
less than three miles from Sainsbury's new Edinburgh store, on a main route
into the city from the west. Safeway is thought to have spent Pounds 47m on
acquiring the site and building a 45,000 sq ft flagship due to open this
autumn, alongside a new 72,000 sq ft Marks and Spencer superstore.
The other site is at Anniesland, in Glasgow, where Safeway is said to be
spending Pounds 22m on a 35,000 sq ft store that will open next summer. It
has other stores opening in Stirling and is replacing an older store in
Dumfries.
Sainsbury has also had planning problems. It clashed with Glasgow city
council and Strathclyde regional council over a site at Braehead, on the
south-west bank of the Clyde. Planning permission was granted only after an
appeal to the secretary of state for Scotland. Sainsbury is also reported to
be having planning difficulties with a store at Milngavie, to the north of
the city.
Glasgow city council's preference for high-street developments over
out-of-town superstores might favour the discount sector, where expansion is
forecast to be fastest. Shoprite expects to have 70 stores by the end of
this year, and to open at least 29 next year. It believes it will have 200
stores by 1996, with up to 30 in Edinburgh alone.
Kwik Save announced earlier this year that it planned to open between 180
and 200 stores in Scotland. Mr Terry Atkinson, property director, said it
expected 20 to 25 store openings a year, with the first due before the end
of this year. The company held presentations for 250 property agents in
Glasgow and Edinburgh in May and June and is said to have pinpointed nine
potential sites in Edinburgh.
Netto, the Danish discount retailer, considered launching in Scotland three
years ago when it opened its first stores in the UK.
It went first to northern England, but it will open its first Scottish
stores this year.
Mr John Buitekant, trading controller, said: 'Scotland has a very similar
profile to Denmark in terms of population and area, and in Denmark we have
170 stores.
'Scotland has never had the choice that England has had. Our observations
tell us it should be ripe for limited-line discounting.' But he denied
suggestions that the rapid spread of discounters in Scotland would threaten
small, independent grocers. 'We stock 650 basic, staple-diet products. You
can't get a full shop from a Netto store.'
The presence of a Netto on a high street might increase traffic flow, and
create a spin-off for local businesses, he said.
But some grocers are seen as vulnerable and the collapse of Norco, the
Aberdeen-based co-operative society which went into liquidation in June,
highlighted potential weaknesses in the co-operative movement. Scottish
stores are bracing themselves for the new invasion from the south.
