FT  13 MAR 93 / Smith heaps scorn on Tory 'chaos'
MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, yesterday heaped scorn on Mr John Major,
the prime minister, comparing him to a rabbit caught 'blinking in the glare
as the juggernaut of slump and recession comes bearing down on him'.
He told the Labour party's Scottish conference in Inverness: 'You point out
to him, as kindly as you can, that he should be doing something, but still
he blinks and he bleats that his critics are talking the country down.'
It had been a remarkable week in British politics, Mr Smith said. 'We have
witnessed the chaos at the heart of this government.' The humiliating defeat
on the Maastricht vote was self-inflicted because Mr Major had refused to
accept Labour's amendment on the composition of the European council of the
regions.
Instead Mr Major had been 'anxious to display his tactical skills as a
dazzling political leader' and had taken on the Tory rebels at Harrogate
last weekend. 'On Saturday he blustered that the Tory party must unite or be
defeated. On Monday in the Commons he got his answer in the division lobby.'
Mr Smith delighted his audience by attacking the Scottish National party for
voting with the government on Monday as a result of a 'shady, backstairs
deal' with Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary. 'Even from our flexible
friends in the SNP it was a remarkable display of opportunism,' he said.
This week's discomfiture of the SNP has boosted the morale of the
conference. This is even though it was Labour's first Scottish conference
since the general election defeat, in which the party's share of the vote in
Scotland went down 3 percentage points to 39 per cent and it lost one seat.
Mr Smith ridiculed the government's white paper on the government of
Scotland, which contains plans for greater use of the Scottish grand
committee of Scottish MPs, and more administrative devolution to the
Scottish Office. 'It takes some believing that this timorous tokenism is the
sum total of the government's vision of Scotland,' he said.
Mr Smith was involved in drafting Labour's plans for a Scottish assembly
when he was in government up to 1979 and yesterday emphasised his belief in
devolution. He said yesterday that Labour would settle for nothing less than
a Scottish parliament, which would involve the transfer of legislative and
political power from London.
'I passionately want to see that Scottish parliament established. It is for
me unfinished business.' A Labour government would in its first year carry
through the act to establish a Scottish parliament. It would also set up an
assembly in Wales and regional governments in England.
