FT  05 NOV 93 / DTI men 'tried to stop Matrix trial'
SENIOR OFFICIALS at the Department of Trade and Industry tried to block the
prosecution of three businessmen accused by Customs and Excise of illegally
exporting defence-related goods to Iraq so as to protect intelligence and
ministers, the Scott inquiry heard yesterday.
Mr Alan Barrett, a senior Minister of Defence official, told the inquiry
into British defence exports to Iraq that prosecutions 'may have brought . .
. into the open' the fact that ministers had approved export licence
applications for intelligence reasons.
'The concern was that the whole business might be exposed to the detriment
of the UK's interests,' he said.
Mr Barrett said he could not recall with certainty who tried to ensure that
the trial of the Matrix-Churchill executives 'didn't take place'. However,
he named three senior officials at the DTI - Mr Michael Coolican, Mr Tony
Steadman, and Mr Eric Beston - as the possible sources for his information.
'It is impossible to recall . . . I heard bits and pieces all the time,' Mr
Barrett said.
Documents made available to the inquiry show that information about
intelligence and Matrix-Churchill was shared by a small group of Whitehall
officials, members of the secret services, and customs officials in a
secretive committee called the Restricted Enforcement Unit.
Mr Barrett, who was a member of the unit, said that Customs and Excise had
never approached him for MoD documents as part of their investigation into
Matrix-Churchill, nor had he volunteered them.
Lord Justice Scott said that he intended to question senior customs
officials over what they knew about the involvement of government and
officials in the Matrix-Churchill case and on what grounds they decided to
go ahead with the prosecution.
The former chairman of the customs service, Sir Brian Unwin, who is
president of the European Investment Bank, is among those who have been
asked to give evidence in January.
The hearing continues on Monday.
