FT  04 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Germany insists on farm price
protection
THE GERMAN government yesterday called for the EC to reinstate the
controversial 'switchover' mechanism for converting 'green' money rates into
national currencies, at a conference on the crisis in the agrimonetary
system.
'Switchover' protects farmers in strong currency countries such as Germany
from cuts in prices because of currency fluctuations.
'Neither Germany, nor any other country whose currency is or may come under
pressure of revaluation, will accept any system which results in abrupt
reductions in institutional prices and amounts,' said Mr Erhard Schwinne,
head of currency affairs at the German agricultural ministry, at the
conference, organised by Agra-Europe.
The EC Commission froze 'green' exchange rates on September 9 to shelter
farm trade from the exchange rate upheaval caused by the shake-out in the
European Monetary System in August.
Mr Schwinne said the switchover could be adapted to the current regime of
floating currencies without imposing additional costs on the EC Budget. But
Mr Jean-Marc Gazagnes, who manages agrimonetary affairs at the EC
Commission, said switchover cost Ecu350m a year for each percentage point
revaluation in currency rates.
EC agriculture ministers are due to meet on November 16 to decide on reforms
to the agrimonetary system. Commission proposals advocate a move away from
the 'switchover' mechanism which essentially protects German and Dutch
farmers from price cuts by inflating prices to all farmers in the community.
The commission's proposal for increasing the distance that 'green' rates
must move before they are revalued would cost Ecu75m, Mr Gazagnes said. He
also said its proposals would help farmers by speeding up compensation
payments.
Food industry representatives called on agriculture ministers to find some
way out of the current stand-off. They criticised the commission's decision
to freeze green rates in September.
Ms Joan Noble, a sugar industry consultant, told the conference the
commission's action had been 'arbitrary' and ran counter to the aim of
establishing free trade in the internal market.
