FT  10 JUN 93 / Letter: Strong case for government to help Maxwell victims
Sir, You are right to remind readers that fines imposed on Invesco MIM by
Imro do not reduce the need to review pension fund stewardship and City
regulation generally. Nor do they alleviate the plight of Maxwell's victims
('Maxwell: keeping the issues in sight', June 7).
In the same edition, your report,'Maxwell pensions shortfall cut to less
than Pounds 100m', suggests that substantial progress has been made towards
meeting the shortfall in the Maxwell pension schemes. This view, which
reflects comments that I have heard elsewhere, is misconceived.
The misappropriations from the Common Investment Fund (CIF) were in the
region of Pounds 250m-Pounds 300m. The Mirror Group Pension Scheme's share
of these losses is roughly one half. In addition, more than Pounds 100m was
misappropriated from the Mirror scheme's own funds outside the CIF. Thus,
the Mirror scheme alone has lost more than Pounds 200m. The other Maxwell
schemes taken together have also lost sums approaching Pounds 200m.
One aspect of the more optimistic assessments that I have seen is that they
include a suggestion that it is not necessary to recover all the missing
funds since the Maxwell schemes used to have actuarial surpluses. However,
this ignores the fact that, in the end, benefits will have to be secured
either (a) by the purchase of annuities and deferred annuities from a life
office, or (b) by running down the schemes over the lifetime of their
members and therefore pursuing a restrictive policy of investment in fixed
interest securities that as nearly as possible match the scheme's
crystallised liabilities.
In both cases, the funds required to secure the benefits will be greater
than the provision normally appropriate in a healthy, on-going scheme, and
so the former surpluses will be needed to meet the additional cost. It is
nowadays common for a scheme to have an actuarial surplus in relation to its
on-going funding target but to be in deficit on winding up.
The liquidators of Bishopsgate Investment Management (responsible for the
CIF) and the trustees of the Maxwell pension schemes have traced most of the
missing funds, but finding out where they went is not the same as getting
them back. So far, the only significant asset recovery has been the return
of some 25m Teva shares to the CIF by National Westminster Bank a year ago,
which is taken into account in the above figures.
So far support from the government's Pounds 2.5m 'drip feed' and now from
Sir John Cuckney's Pounds 6.25m Maxwell Pensioners Trust has ensured that
Maxwell pensioners have generally continued to receive their pensions in
full, but this support will run out in about three years. Unless there have
been very substantial asset recoveries by then, thousands of current
pensioners will be in danger of suffering a reduction in their benefits and
thousands of prospective pensioners could lose their benefits altogether.
Employees and former employees of MGN are not counted among these victims,
since MGN has undertaken almost entirely to refinance their benefits over a
period of up to 14 years. This commitment resulted in a provision in MGN's
accounts of roughly Pounds 200m.
Thus MGN shareholders are also Maxwell victims. Of course, the actual cost
to MGN will depend on the level of asset recoveries achieved by the pension
schemes.
The Mirror scheme trustees are pursuing legal actions for the return of
Pounds 88m, and for unliquidated damages for losses generally, against
Invesco MIM, Capel Cure Myers, Lehman Bros, Bank of America and Credit
Suisse. So far, these are the only legal proceedings issued against
financial institutions or professional advisers either by Maxwell scheme
trustees or by the BIM liquidators. Many other possible claims are still
being examined and there is in prospect a welter of litigation on a massive
scale.
I therefore welcome your call on the regulators to use all powers available
to them to encourage or impose a global settlement, and would much prefer to
obtain redress for the Maxwell victims in this way than by litigation - so
long as the amounts are realistic.
Finally, with a total shortfall in excess of Pounds 400m, it seems unlikely
that a global settlement or maximum recovery through litigation will fully
compensate the Maxwell victims. In view of the failure of law and regulation
to which you refer, and which is being put right for the future, there is an
overwhelming case for government to underwrite the Maxwell pension schemes.
Colin Cornwall,
chairman,
MGN Pension Trustees,
10 Snow Hill,
London,
EC1A 2AL
