FT  14 MAY 93 / Peace is imposed on a still troubled Punjab: With it comes
the first stirrings of economic revival
A YEAR ago Mr Madan Singh Bharara, the owner of a bicycle factory in India's
troubled north-western state of Punjab, could run only one shift a day. His
workers would travel to work only by daylight for fear of being attacked by
the Sikh insurgents who had terrorised the Punjab for nearly a decade.
But last summer, Mr Bharara was able to start a second shift. And this
winter a third. 'People are not frightened any more. Even migrant workers
are coming back from other states.'
Peace is returning to the Punjab. In the first four and a half months of
this year 38 died in terrorist attacks, compared with 1,518 last year and
2,591 in 1991. And with peace are coming the first stirrings of a economic
revival.
But many Punjabis are still wary because terrorism has been suppressed only
by one of the toughest police campaigns seen in India. There are doubts
whether such an enforced peace can last unless the central government also
tries to settle the grievances which first drove the militants to arms. As a
Sikh senior official of the Punjab state government says: 'Sikh frustrations
are still there.'
Sikhs dominate the Punjab, a fertile and wealthy state where they account
for 70 per cent of the population, but are a small minority in the country
as a whole. Sikhs often do well, especially in the army and the civil
service, but still believe their state gets less than its fair share of the
national pie.
Sikh frustrations led to a growing separatist movement which Mrs Indira
Gandhi's government attempted to suppress in 1984 with Operation Bluestar -
the storming of the Golden Temple in Amritsar, the Sikhs' holiest shrine.
Outraged Sikhs reacted by giving support to militant groups demanding an
independent Sikh state of Khalistan.
As late as 1991, it seemed that there was little the central government
could do to turn back the tide, especially as the militants were getting aid
from inside Pakistan. While the security forces managed to keep a grip on
the cities, terrorists had the run of large swathes of countryside.
But everything changed in late 1991 with the advent as police chief of Mr K
P S Gill, himself a Sikh and one steeped in the Sikhs' traditional love of
battle. He relished the opportunity to fight for control of his home state,
pitting, as he once said, one group of Sikh warriors (the police) against
another (the militants).
Mr Gill turned conventional wisdom on its head by withdrawing the army from
frontline positions and replacing it with the police. He also armed his men
with semi-automatic weapons and trained them to shoot terrorists.
Mr Gill exploited a growing revulsion with the insurgents among ordinary
Sikhs who grew weary of indisciplined militants indulging in indiscriminate
murder, rape and robbery.
Meanwhile, leaders of the Akali, the Sikh political organisation, badly
misjudged their hand in February 1992 when they urged a boycott of state
elections. They claimed success when only 20 per cent of voters turned out.
But it was a pyrrhic victory since the new non-Akali government backed Mr
Gill to the hilt.
Mr Gill, who has earned national note as the hard man of the Punjab, roundly
declares that the Punjab is now the safest state in India since the
suppression of terrorism has brought with it a marked decline in general
crime.
Sikh political leaders say safety has come at a high price. 'If we have
peace, it is the peace of the grave,' says Mr Gurtej Singh, a militant
activist with close knowledge of the armed groups.
Mr Ajit Singh Bains, a former high court judge and chairman of a human
rights watchdog committee, says: 'Kidnapping by the police, rapes and
extra-judicial executions are the order of the day. The Golden Temple is
still surrounded by the security forces.'
Mr Gill raises his eyes at the mention of police excesses. 'Ah, the human
rights question,' he says disdainfully. He says that individual police
officers have been punished and even prosecuted for using excessive force,
but there is no question of any general breakdown in police discipline.
'Order has been maintained.'
Most Punjabis are less interested in Mr Gill's methods than in his results.
In Chandigarh, in nearby villages and in Ludhiana, the state's industrial
centre, the overwhelming feeling is of relief that terrorism seems beaten.
Mr Hakem Singh, an Akali member and a municipal councillor in Ludhiana,
says: 'People used to have sympathy for the militants and they were also
afraid. Now they are glad the threat has almost gone.'
A key issue is jobs in the Punjab, especially for educated youths who no
longer want to stay on their parents' farms and who might be tempted to
become militants.
Agricultural output in the Punjab kept growing steadily throughout the
1980s. But industrial growth fell from 10 per cent a year in the late 1970s
to below 5 per cent. Now Mr A S Chattha, the state's chief secretary,
expects a strong recovery. He accepts that it will be time before
industrialists make large investments in the Punjab, but there is great
scope for smaller projects, including engineering workshops and foundries,
hosiery mills and battery farms.
Even when terrorism was at its height, the above-average skills of Punjabi
workers tempted Fujitsu, the Japanese electronics group, into establishing a
modest joint venture factory to produce telecommunications equipment.
Pepsico, the US food and drinks conglomerate, built a food processing plant.
In his bicycle factory, Mr Bharara says that until three months ago, his
foreign customers refused to see him in the Punjab; meetings were held in
Bombay. Now they have started visiting Ludhiana.
