FT  08 FEB 93 / Survey of Iran (7): Maintaining Iran's integrity - Mr Akbar
Torkan, minister of defence, talks to Roger Matthews and discusses the role
of the armed forces, conscription and weapons procurement / Interview
On the organisation of the armed forces:
The spiritual leader oversees all the armed forces including the army, the
Revolutionary Guards Corps and the police. The army and the revolutionary
guards each control their own forces.
The army has the responsibility for maintaining Iran's territorial
integrity. The revolutionary guards corps has both a cultural and a military
mission. Its main role is to safeguard the achievements of the Islamic
revolution but it will, of course, assist the army if required. The
revolutionary guards oversee the baseej, the volunteer force. The purpose of
the baseej is to provide military training and organisation for all
civilians so if there is a need to take up arms they will be ready to do so.
Strengths of the armed forces:
The number serving in the army now is 200,000. That does not take into
account those who have been drafted into the army.
The numbers of the revolutionary guards depends on how many are
participating through the baseej. Our late Imam Khomeini said we had to
provide military training for everybody. Every Moslem should be ready to
defend his country. Because of this we can maintain a relatively low number
of experts in the army. These are men who can operate state-of-the-art, very
sophisticated equipment. But when it is time to defend the revolution each
and every person would take up arms. It is a religious duty which falls upon
everyone.
On reducing the size of the army:
To maintain a great army in terms of numbers you must have a very prosperous
economy. We are in the middle of reconstructing our country. So we have to
find a way of remaining strong while limiting spending. The solution to that
is the baseej. As a result, the number of people with full-time army careers
can be cut, but we will retain personnel with high technical ability.
The future for conscription:
It has to undergo certain changes. We began the process three years ago.
Those people who will be drafted this year were born in 1971. In that year,
1.3m people were born in Iran. From that number there are 600,000 young men
available to be drafted. If we were to take this number of people into the
army it would mean that over two years we would have to cope with 1.2m men.
The capacity of our bases and garrisons is not sufficient. Neither do we
have the money to feed those people. Therefore a large number are set aside
for other services.
For example, we have a service called GI-teacher, there is another linked to
health care and a third involved with literacy. Soldiers who have a diploma
of education would be set aside for teaching. Others go to help with the
reconstruction work in villages.
All have to undergo 45 days of military schooling before being sent off.
Military expenditure:
I would very much like the Dollars 2bn a year talked about in the west. But
I do not get that. This year we have Dollars 750m in actual dollars and
rather less than the equivalent of Dollars 1bn in rials. We would like to
receive more.
The build-up of arms in the region:
In the past three or four years, most conflicts in the world have come to an
end. The great wars have concluded, such as in Cambodia and between Iran and
Iraq. But countries which produce armaments need a market for them. Some of
the countries around the Persian Gulf are very rich. So the arms producers
have to think of ways to get those petrodollars. Accordingly, they produce
some phantom threat to try to scare those countries. They force them to sign
very big arms deals. This does not make us feel threatened.
Around us we do not see any country which would be a threat. We have the
best of relations with Pakistan. Afghanistan is a poor country which for the
next 20 years will have to spend whatever money it has on reconstruction. We
have very good relations with Turkey and equally the Turks do not feel we
are a threat to them. Iraq is a country which is trying to avoid being
dismembered. The countries to the south of us are very small and weak and
need us to help defend them. So no-one is threatening us. Our priority is to
rebuild the country.
US forces in the Gulf:
The Americans would not attack us militarily. People living in glass houses
do not throw stones. The US does not have any reason to attack us. They come
to the region to get as much Arab money as they can. And even if the
Americans did want to attack us they would not do so in a classic military
movement. Can our air force, for example, take on the Americans, or our navy
take on the American navy? If we put all of our country's budget into such a
war we would have just burned our money. The way to go about dealing with
such a threat requires a different solution entirely.
Iraq, the no-fly zones and US intentions:
Even if Iraq is cut into three parts it does not necessarily threaten our
interests. Of course, we are very much against the disintegration of Iraq.
But I do not subscribe to the view that the Americans are looking for
trouble and want to attack us. Right now the Americans have many problems
throughout the world and have to deal with them first.
With Mr Clinton taking power I think that America will scale back its
adventurism abroad and will start work on its own country. Clinton, for
instance, has announced that he is reducing the number of navy fleets from
12 to 10. And the number of US troops with the Nato forces will be reduced
to 75,000.
The US budget for military purposes is Dollars 250bn. Its economy at the
moment cannot sustain such a budget. The Americans have to deal with these
problems first. It is not logical for a country which is reducing its
military bases around the world, and wants to reduce its military budget, to
attack us. At the same time we do not want to enter a war with the Americans
either.
Iran's military shopping list:
The first priority is spare parts, the second priority is spare parts, and
the third priority is spare parts. Our equipment is mostly American; F-4,
F-5, F-14 fighter jets. Our transport aircraft are also American; C-130s,
Boeing 707s and 747s. We have a very good fleet: 14 707s, 12 747s and 53
C-130s. This should be enough to see us through the next 20 years. The only
problem for us is to provide spare parts in order to keep them flying.
For example, we have 72 F-14s. This is the best air superiority that money
can buy. In the next 20 years nothing will be its competitor. Therefore we
should only be thinking about buying spare parts to maintain our present
fleet. For closer support, we have F-5 fighters and for deep strikes F-4
fighters. This is a very good configuration. We still have 750 helicopters.
I personally think that we still have the third largest fleet in the world.
Unfortunately, because our fleet is mainly made up of American products,
providing spares is very difficult. Of course, we also have some Soviet-made
armaments, but very few.
Cheap Soviet equipment:
We have bought some tanks from the Russians, but the days of tank warfare
are numbered. Iraq, in its conflict with the US, showed that tanks are not
much use any more. Since the advent of attack helicopters, tanks are
becoming useless. But anyway we have bought a number.
We have also bought F-7 fighters from China which compare to the MiG-21. The
main reason for buying those Chinese fighters is to fulfil the number of
flight hours that our pilots must have. Missile purchases:
Scud B missiles cost Dollars 2.5m each so it is a very large investment and
the outcome of any war would not be decided by such weapons. But our
technological capability is such that if we require similar missiles then we
can manufacture them ourselves.
Submarines and their impact on the strategic balance:
The price tag mentioned in the western media recently of Dollars 250m for a
submarine is not correct. Before the revolution, a German company sold us
six submarines. The Americans sold us two. But they did not deliver. We have
bought our Russian submarines at a substantially lower price than was
mentioned. All we are doing is to fill the gaps in our military plan. A
complete system is made up of different components. Most of the other
components had been bought before the revolution. Submarines were the one
component that was missing, and we are now buying them.
The development of military industries:
Only a very few countries, such as America, Russia, China and France can
produce all their requirements. The rest produce only a fraction. It might
be possible for us to build tanks, submarines, missiles, aircraft and such
like. But self-sufficiency is relative. We think of self-sufficiency in
terms of those items which we use a lot, especially the sort of equipment we
employed most during the war. And in any economic venture the finished price
is very important.
For instance, if we followed a programme of self-sufficiency and decided to
produce something locally it might cost Dollars 5,000 whereas we might be
able to buy the same thing abroad for Dollars 1,000. This would not make
economic sense.
The aircraft flown to Iran during the Gulf war:
We have handed back the civilian aircraft, including the Kuwaiti aircraft.
Unfortunately, the Kuwaitis did not even pay us the maintenance and parking
expenses for their aircraft, but we thought that if we kept those aircraft
parked in Tehran much longer it would not reflect well on us
internationally. Of course, a number of Iraqi fighter jets also intruded on
Iranian airspace.
The civilian aircraft asked permission first which is why we handed them
back. But we still have not decided whether to hand over the fighter jets.
We have to wait for the UN sanctions committee to see what they have to say.
I am sure they will do something about the expenses incurred in having those
Iraqi planes in Iran and will take appropriate measures.
Because the fighter jets are of a make which we do not have in our air
force, our ground personnel have been unable to keep them flight ready. None
of those fighters can fly any more. An aircraft is like a living being. You
cannot just leave it in the desert and then push the starter button when you
want to fly.
