FT  28 OCT 93 / Survey of International Capital Markets (4): Bookbuilding
reduces the guesswork - International Equity Markets
INVESTMENT bankers are tackling Europe's forthcoming privatisations with the
precision of a military campaign to get the best possible price for the
state assets and to ensure a good reception with investors.
The weapon which is increasingly being used to strike the right balance
between these two objectives is a process called 'bookbuilding', which, like
most financial techniques, has been adopted from the United States.
Broadly speaking, bookbuilding involves collecting investors' bids for the
shares thus helping to establish the most appropriate selling price.
By matching the demand for and the supply of the shares on offer, bankers
hope to avoid excessive volatility in the shares when they start trading in
the secondary market.
'Bookbuilding is the best way to set the price of an offering with the
complete knowledge of what investors are prepared to pay, rather than just
guessing,' says one investment banker who has been involved in recent
issues.
Another benefit of bookbuilding is that it meets a growing demand among
companies to know who their shareholders are. 'Many companies are now
seeking long-term investors of a high quality,' says one banker.
Bookbuilding provides this so-called 'investor transparency' because banks
participating in an equity offering using this structure need to disclose
the identity of their clients to the global co-ordinator to be allocated the
shares.
Apart from reducing errors such as multiple applications or inflated orders,
bookbuilding enables the global co-ordinator to sell the shares directly to
the investors rather than to traders or speculators.
This framework has been used for decades in the US and is gaining in
popularity with issuers of equity in Europe. The use of bookbuilding in the
well-publicised sales of Wellcome Trust's stake in Wellcome plc, the
pharmaceuticals company, and the British government's remaining stake in
British Telecommunications (BT3) has served to raise its profile in the UK.
The Spanish government chose the bookbuilding process this year when it sold
off its stake in Repsol. The French and Italian governments are also said to
be in favour of this framework for their forthcoming privatisation
programmes.
The French government had its first experience of bookbuilding in February
when it partially privatised Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals and
pharmaceuticals group.
However, the politics of privatisation can often conflict with the
bookbuilding process's aim of achieving the best possible price for the
shares on offer. In the past, governments have tended to underprice the
sales of state-owned companies to win favour with the public and guarantee
success.
For example, the Spanish government gave domestic retail investors
preferential treatment in the partial privatisation of Argentaria, the
banking corporation. The offering was oversubscribed and the shares rose 11
per cent on their first day of trading on the Madrid Stock Exchange.
By contrast, the Spanish government was not so generous in its sale of a
further tranche in Repsol since that offering was aimed at international
investors.
By using the bookbuilding process, which reportedly indicated demand for
nearly double the amount of shares on offer, Repsol was able to waive a
discount on the new shares and set a current market price for them.
Consequently, the shares rose by only a small amount when they started
trading in the secondary market.
Recent international equity offerings in Europe have also used another US
technique called the 'green shoe', which, according to market lore, took its
name from the first US company to use it back in the 1930s.
This mechanism allows the bank arranging the deal to increase or reduce the
size of the offering retrospectively to stabilise the price of the shares in
the days following the placement.
This is achieved by allocating a proportion of shares - the green shoe  - in
addition to the main offering which the bank can buy back, on behalf of the
issuer, if the shares fall in the days after the placing. The green shoe can
often represent between 10 and 15 per cent of the whole deal.
Issuers are known to put considerable pressure on the bank leading the
offering to exercise the green shoe - that is, allocate the extra shares -
so that they get the full amount from the deal.
Bankers say that while the benefits of bookbuilding and the green shoe have
been recognised in Europe, many companies will not be able to use them when
they raise equity finance because of the existence of pre-emption rights in
many European countries.
As a result, the use of these methods is likely to be confined to
privatisations, initial public offerings and the sale of one shareholder's
stake in another company.
Shareholders jealously guard their pre-emption rights, which oblige
companies wanting to issue new shares to raise cash to offer these new
shares first to the existing shareholders at a discount to the market price.
In Germany, fewer companies are able to raise cash through bonds which are
convertible into shares because of growing shareholder opposition to what
they see as an infringement of their pre-emption rights.
Some bankers say that pre-emption rights increase the cost of equity finance
because the new shares will virtually always be offered at a discount to the
current market price. The company performing the rights issue also has to
pay for underwriting and sub-underwriting fees, which some bankers say would
not be needed to the same extent if bookbuilding were used instead.
The past year has also seen a wider use of the 'bought deal' for disposing
of large chunks of shares in one transaction rather than selling them
piecemeal into the stock market.
This technique, which has been in use for many years in various forms,
involves a company selling its equity stake in another company to a bank
which then places the shares with its clients. Bankers say this method is
effective if it entails placing no more than 20 per cent of a company.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
TOP 20 BOOKRUNNERS (RANKED BY AMOUNT ON A PROPORTIONAL CREDIT BASIS)*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Group                  Amount (USDollars m)       No of issues
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Merrill Lynch                      3,230.18                 43
Goldman Sachs                      2,962.08                 40
CS First Boston                    2,409.18                 20
Morgan Stanley                     2,308.95                 21
S G Warburg                        1,832.21                  8
Lehman Bros                        1,415.29                 35
J P Morgan                         1,064.84                  4
Salomon Bros                         785.23                 20
BZW                                  577.41                  4
Paribas CapMkts                      460.14                  2
Bear Stearns                         398.94                  6
Lazard Bros                          361.95                  4
Indosuez                             243.50                  2
NatWest CapMkts                      223.50                  2
Unibank                              213.35                  2
Investment AB Carnegie               197.57                  1
Smith Barney Shearson                196.26                 10
Baring Bros                          188.60                  4
Kleinwort Benson                     182.50                  3
DLJ                                  175.52                  6
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
* First nine months of 1993
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: IFR Securities Data
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
