FT  05 MAY 93 / Scott inquiry told that arms guidelines 'trickled out'
SECRECY which may have governed Whitehall policy-making in the 1980s was
raised yesterday on the first day of public hearings in the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry.
The inquiry was announced by the government in November in the midst of
public controversy over an alleged secret policy.
In a forceful exchange, Lord Justice Scott, who is heading the inquiry,
asked a former senior foreign office official whether he thought it right
that official guidelines governing defence-related sales to Iraq and Iran
should have been kept from parliament for nearly a year.
Lord Justice Scott asked Mr Stephen Day, a former head of the foreign
office's Middle East desk: 'Looking at the map more broadly would you not
say that the British public and parliament were entitled to know about these
important matters . . . to know about the guidelines?'
Mr Day denied that he had personally received any instructions that policy
should be kept secret. But he confirmed that a decision had been taken by
ministers in November 1984 that new guidelines governing exports to Iran and
Iraq should only be allowed to 'trickle out' to parliament to minimise any
disruption they might have on trade with Iraq and relations generally with
the Arab world.
The guidelines, which restricted the export of defence equipment that might
significantly enhance or exacerbate the Iran-Iraq war, were drawn up after
the foreign office expressed concern about the amount of defence-related UK
material finding its way to the Gulf.
However, the inquiry heard that a recommendation by Sir Richard Luce, then
foreign office minister of state, that the new guidelines should be
announced 'robustly and positively' to the House of Commons and in briefings
to the media was never adopted.
Instead the guidelines were announced in stages in response to parliamentary
questions between April and October 1985.
Earlier, Sir Richard said his department had found it increasingly difficult
to defend an unannounced policy in the early 1980s that only 'non-lethal
equipment' could be sold to Iran and Iraq.
His view was that the guidelines needed to be made more restrictive as they
were open to abuse. 'We found this a grey area . . . different ministers
could form different opinions about what was lethal and what was not
lethal,' he said.
Without being drawn on any specific examples, Sir Richard said that if
policy differences were not resolved between departments, it was the then
prime-minister, Mrs Thatcher, who took the final decision.
Previously-classified Whitehall documents released during the the trial last
year of three former directors of Matrix-Churchill, the machine tool
company, showed that British ministers agreed in 1989 to withhold from
parliament revised rules banning the sale of defence-related equipment to
Iraq.
