FT  05 JUN 93 / Belgrade tense after Milosevic cracks down
MR Vuk Draskovic, Serbia's most prominent opposition leader, was due to
appear yesterday evening before an investigating magistrate, three days
after his arrest while leading an anti-government demonstration.
Mr Draskovic was suffering so badly from the beating he received from riot
police on Tuesday that authorities might be forced to bring charges against
him at his bedside in a prison hospital, his lawyers said.
Mr Draskovic has been accused of inciting his supporters, gathered outside
parliament, to storm the building. However, members of his party, the
Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO), deny the accusation, saying he was inside
the building at the time, protesting at the beating of an SPO deputy by a
ultranationalist member of parliament.
The hearing for Mr Draskovic was set to cap a dramatic week in which Serbian
President Slobodan Milosevic reasserted his grip on power with an unashamed
display of authoritarianism.
The mood in Belgrade was apprehensive yesterday as new police checkpoints
were set up on roads around the city. For the first time since Mr Milosevic
came to power in 1988, the police were an openly intimidating presence.
The dismissal earlier this week of Mr Dobrica Cosic, president of the rump
Yugoslavia, was followed by unprecedented police violence in breaking up the
demonstration outside parliament, and a move to ban Mr Draskovic's party.
Mr Milosevic renewed his alliance with the radical nationalists, which had
appeared under strain recently, in order to force out Mr Cosic in a
no-confidence vote. Afterwards, Mr Vojislav Seselj, head of the Serbian
Radical Party described the Serbian president as 'a real patriot'.
Mr Milosevic is clearly determined to crack down heavily on any attempt by
the opposition to exploit rising popular discontent.
Police reinforcements have been brought in from as far away as Kosovo in the
past three days, diplomatic sources said.
Mr Milosevic has strengthened the Serbian police force by 20,000 men in the
past year, equipping special units with armoured vehicles and helicopters as
well as rocket launchers and other weaponry.
A year of UN economic sanctions has made life in Serbia increasingly
uncomfortable, especially in Belgrade where the effects of large-scale
lay-offs, soaring prices and periodic shortages are most keenly felt.
The opposition has grown weaker since a series of demonstrations last year,
led by the flamboyant Mr Draskovic, demanding an end to the war in Bosnia,
forced Mr Milosevic to call an early election.
