FT  28 JUL 93 / International Equities: Return of Indian companies wins
investor plaudits
INDIA has already won the sobriquet of 'jewel' in the emerging markets
portfolio, as the international investor community has followed the Indian
government's economic liberalisation programme with interest.
Two Indian companies have turned to the international capital market with
equity or equity-linked offerings recently, breaking a dry spell of several
months. Market specialists attribute the absence of Indian international
equity offerings since December to several factors: primarily on the
widespread disappointment over earlier international equity issues, as well
as concern over the political situation, and in particular the religious
riots which left hundreds dead.
Investor response to the latest offerings appears positive. Hindalco
Industries, an aluminium producer, launched a successful Dollars 72m issue
of Global Depositary Receipts (GDRs), with each GDR representing one equity
share and one half warrant. It marks the first time that an Indian company
has done a US dollar warrant deal, and the combined GDR-warrant unit was
trading at an equivalent premium of 16.3 per cent to the launch price
yesterday.
Meanwhile, Essar Gujarat, the Indian iron company, is launching the first
Indian Eurodollar convertible bond, and hopes to raise Dollars 60m with a
five-year convertible issue which will be priced next week. The indicated
coupon is 5.5 to 6 per cent, and there is a three-year put option at par so
that if the share price does not pick up investors get their money back.
Some international investors said they liked the downside protection offered
by a convertible bond structure. Those who participated in last year's
international equity offerings by Indian companies - Reliance Industries and
Grasim - were disappointed to see the share price of those two companies
languish after the international offering.
If these two deals are seen to be well-managed and successful, investment
bankers claim it should go some way to restoring investor confidence in the
Indian market.
Investor interest has been stimulated in the last couple of years by the
government's economic restructuring and liberalisation programme.
'It's a huge economy, the economic fundamentals are improving, and there are
some large well-managed companies; furthermore, the stock market is
well-developed, and it's not like China where everything is controlled,'
said one fund manager.
Against the relatively rosy economic picture, international investors point
out that price-earnings ratios of around 20 do not compare favourably with
other Asian markets. 'Multiples of around 20 mean it is very expensive, but
there are still some attractive companies,' said one emerging markets fund
manager.
Of more concern is the political background and religious violence. '(Prime
minister) Rao has gone faster than most people thought he would, but not as
fast as they would have liked,' said one fund manager. His main concern is
that the economic reforms could slow down once the implications of
privatisation and tougher international competition are more fully
appreciated.
'The religious violence does make investors nervous,' says one fund manager,
'Most people are trying to forget about massacres and are looking at the
economy instead.'
The occasional closure of the stock market - whether as a result of violence
or financial skulduggery - is also an irritation in the view of
international investors, though most admit that, compared with other Third
World or developing countries, India's stock market is 'relatively
well-developed'.
