FT  15 MAR 93 / Arts: Radiant Ravel - Music
Except in the most ingenious and tactful productions L'Enfant et les
Sortileges, the 'fantaisie lyrique' Ravel wrote with Colette, is rarely as
enchanting on stage as it can be in concert. Colette's little moral fable
animates such a variety of things - chairs and crockery, birds and beasts,
wallpaper and the fire on the hearth - that the stagecraft may detract from
the radiant tenderness of the score.
On Friday, Simon Rattle and his City of Birmingham Symphony brought it off
charmingly in the Festival Hall. Elise Ross sang an appealing Child, neither
too winsome nor too fretful, though 'Toi, le coeur de la rose' can never be
simple enough (and wasn't here). Lillian Watson made a gracious Princess,
though in quite unintelligible French; and was it her choice or Rattle's to
take the Fire's music so slowly? No sparks there; the Ashes who swallow her
up were more effective, with a good chamber choir from the Welsh College of
Music and Drama.
The rest of the personnel, doubling and tripling roles as required, were
first-rate. In even more roles than that, Christine Cairns was delightful,
starting with reproachful Maman; the duet of her Chinese Cup and Peter
Hall's Wedgwood Teapot was both magical and funny. Mary King and David
Wilson-Johnson yowled the X-rated Cats with high relish (and uncommon
accuracy, too).
The other sub-principals, Lynda Russell and David Thomas, were no less in
the spirit of the thing, and Rattle - once past a rushed opening (the
winding oboes were too sprightly to suggest the right static torpor) - lit
up many pages of the score: a tripping beat in the shepherds' music, a
haunted garden-vista with night birds (the muttering animals a touch too
loud, though), an elegant dragonfly ballet.
This fetching performance deserved a fuller house. Perhaps the first half of
this 'Toward the Millenium' programme failed to entice: middle-period Frank
Bridge, and his 14-year-old pupil Benjamin Britten. Bridge's Enter Spring is
bright and well-made, very much of its period, and thoroughly English in its
gait and manner despite all its Debussyisms. Somehow it has never seemed to
take a firm hold on concert-goers' imaginations: too sturdily made, perhaps.
As for Britten's Four French Songs, delicately limned here by Lynda Russell,
they are precocious and eclectic, but too jerry-built to be satisfying
rather than 'interesting'. It does the composer no service to pretend that
they belong to the real Britten canon - they are curiosities, not grown-up
concert fare.
Festival Hall, London
