FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of Northern Ireland (4): Expertise on call around the
world - Agriculture enjoys a clean and green image second to none
THE face of agriculture, Northern Ireland's largest industry, is changing.
Gone are the times when a trip to market was little more than an outing to a
provincial town 20 miles away. Today the world is smaller: produce from the
province's farms and factories is sold in far flung places.
And greater interest is being taken in what the industry has to offer, not
only in the way of foodstuffs, but also in livestock on the land. For
example, buyers from as far away as Korea have made no fewer than four
visits to Northern Ireland in search of pedigree pig breeding lines. On
their most recent trip, last month, they picked up 120 high quality boars,
bringing the number ofanimals they have bought in the province to a total of
500.
It was an outbreak of Blue Ear disease among the mainland pig population in
Britain that first focused Korean attention on Northern Ireland pig farms.
Like many visitors before them, the Koreans have discovered that Northern
Ireland has an enviable animal health record.
Because it is part of a small island, Northern Ireland's 'clean and green'
image is second to none. This has been reinforced over the past couple of
years, since the introduction, by the Northern Ireland Livestock Marketing
Commission, of a Farm Quality Assured Scheme for beef and lamb. To date the
scheme has attracted some 3,251 farmers who between them account for 69 per
cent of the annual beef slaughterings in Northern Ireland.
Beef from the province is now marketed in Holland under the Greenfields
label, through the Albert Heijn supermarket chain which dictates that
supplies are from Quality Assured farms.
A party of six Northern Ireland representatives of meat companies, on a
mission to find niche markets, flew to Brussels two months ago, taking with
them local beef and lamb for a special dinner. As a result of their trip
they have identified significant sales outlets for both products; they
intend to increase sales orders to Belgium.
With the prospect of a steep decline in the level of EC Intervention buying,
an increase in marketing missions from Northern Ireland is to be expected.
Three years ago, some 40 per cent of all slaughterings in Northern Ireland
were sold into Intervention, and the fact that this facility could drop to
about 10 per cent in two to three years is a sobering thought for those who
market meat.
On a more cheerful note, Northern Ireland farmers have been offered an
opportunity to supply two important continental supermarket groups with bull
beef. Mr Brendan McGahan, chief executive of the Livestock Marketing
Commission, says: 'The Edah group, which specifies young bulls, is presently
beingsupplied by Dutch and French farmers. It sees supplies from its own
country becoming scarcer as stocking rates, fertiliser use restrictions and
quota considerations begin to reduce stock numbers on their supply farms.'
For years, dairy farmers throughout Great Britain and Northern Ireland have
used their own milk marketing boards. Now that is coming to an end.
Something of a 'milk war' has developed in the province between Nestle, the
international giant, which has a factory at Omagh in Co Tyrone; Strathroy
Milk Marketing, which is based nearby; Pritchitt Foods of Newtownards; Dale
Farm, which is part of the Northern Foods operation; and Leckpatrick
Dairies, which is now owned by Cork-based Golden Vale.
All have one thing in common: they want to link up with the province's dairy
farmers - there are more than 6,000 - in direct purchase contracts.
As it dies, the Milk Marketing Board (MMB) is asking producers to help form
a voluntary co-operative - but the future of Dromona Quality Foods, the
MMB's marketing arm, is a bone of contention. The MMB wants to retain it,
under the umbrella of the new co-operative; the Northern Ireland Dairy
Trades Federation and several processors want a divorce between the MMB and
Dromona. The Office of Fair Trading's opinion is that 'the continued
retention of Dromona Quality Foods within the new co-operative would be
unwelcome in competition'.
Dairy farmers can speak no ill of Dromona Quality Foods - its profitability
brought them a handout of Pounds 1.8m in July this year. Furthermore,
Dromona has just announced a 26 per cent increase in its annual profit, to
Pounds 3.4m, having enjoyed its best-ever trading performance - its turnover
increased by Pounds 10m to Pounds 78m despite the MMB paying 16 per cent
more for milk supplies. Mr Jim Noble, Dromona's managing director, says:
'The past year was one of challenge and opportunity in the dairy market both
at home and internationally.'
Expanded sales to Great Britain and Europe, coupled with aggressive
marketing on the international scene through Halib Foods International, has
contributed to the success. Halib, the wholly-owned, exporting subsidiary of
Dromona Quality Foods, has just clinched orders worth Pounds 1.6m to supply
milk powder to three important new overseas outlets in, respectively, El
Salvador, Bangladesh and a Central African state. It is hoped that this
could develop into long term business worth Pounds 6.5m a year.
Looking at Northern Ireland's farms during the past year, the most recent
government statistics show gross output rising by 9 per cent to Pounds 935m
in 1992, while expenditure rose by 3 per cent to Pounds 513m. Total income
from farming in the province - a land area about the size of Yorkshire -
rose by 24 per cent to Pounds 224m. The Department of Agriculture says that
in real terms, after allowing for inflation, this represents a rise of 20
per cent to a level well above the 1980s average.
Provisional estimates of gross annual capital investment in agriculture
indicate little change from the relatively low level of investment in 1991.
At Pounds 103m, total investment was less than 1 per cent above the level of
the previous year. While investment in plant, machinery and vehicles fell by
7 per cent to Pounds 45m, investment in buildings and works rose by 7 per
cent to Pounds 58m, almost all the increase taking place under the
Agricultural Development Operational Programme.
The beef breeding herd increased by 4 per cent, to 264,000 cows, during the
past year; but numbers of dairy cows fell by 2 per cent, to 269,000. A
slower rate of expansion in the sheep flock continued in 1992, with a 2 per
cent increase in both the breeding flock and total sheep numbers. (But at
2.6m there are still more sheep than people in Northern Ireland.)
Cattle account for 33 per cent, sheep for 8.9 per cent of Northern Ireland's
total receipts. The dairy sector at 26.3 per cent, the poultry and eggs
sector at 10.6 per cent and the efforts of pigs producers, with 9.1 per
cent, make up much of the remainder. Horticulture, at 4 per cent,
contributes more than crops, which produce only 3.4 per cent of farming
receipts; other small items make up 4.7 per cent.
Ulster farmers will say that things on the land are just as difficult as
they ever were . . . but they will continue to make a living from it. In the
wider context, Northern Ireland expertise in food and farming is widely used
around the world, especially in the Middle East, where the Masstock
Organisation has been 'greening the desert' for more than a decade.
Now the spotlight falls on Russia. Researchers from the faculty of
agriculture and food science at Queen's University, Belfast, are
spearheading an EC-funded project aimed at improving the efficiency of the
supply of fresh produce and dairy products in Russia. The Queen's team is
part of a consortium which has won funding of Pounds 650,000 under the
Community's Tacis programme - Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of
Independent States and Georgia - to lead an investigation co-ordinated by
Northern Ireland Public Sector Enterprises Ltd.
The consortium will carry out a study of the milk, fruit and vegetable
sectors and establish a food control programme in the Serpukhov district and
Pushchino municipality, part of the Moscow region, about 100 kilometres
south of the capital. The project is seeking to help with the privatisation
of Russian farms and food distribution organisations.
