FT  03 NOV 93 / Abu Dhabi to face new BCCI demand
LIQUIDATORS to the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International are
planning to move swiftly to negotiate a higher contribution for creditors
from the government of Abu Dhabi, the majority shareholder in the bank.
They plan to push for payments higher than the originally negotiated Dollars
1.7bn (Pounds 1.1bn) in an effort to prevent complex litigation which could
take many years and leave hundreds of thousands of creditors with little
prospect of compensation.
It also emerged yesterday that the liquidators have negotiated a tax refund
from the Inland Revenue in the UK of about Pounds 20m overpaid by the bank.
The claim, which relates to incorrectly stated figures and tax deducted at
source over several years as well as interest, was paid out in the last few
weeks.
The liquidators' latest action follows the surprise decision by the
Luxembourg courts last week to uphold an appeal by three creditors against
the agreement between the liquidators and the government of Abu Dhabi.
In preliminary meetings this week the liquidators have tentatively decided
not to appeal against the ruling. Neither do they favour the prospect of
suing Abu Dhabi in the search for funds for creditors to BCCI, which was
closed in July 1991.
The strategy has been developed in advance of a full meeting today and
Thursday of the liquidators to the bank's principal companies in England,
the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg.
Mr Brian Smouha, Mr Georges Baden and Mr Julien Rodin, the three liquidators
to the main BCCI holding company in Luxembourg, in any case face
difficulties in making an appeal because they are officials appointed by the
courts.
They are awaiting written judgment from last week's appeal, but seem to have
ruled out a possible option from Judge Raul Gretsch to re-submit their
proposals in a modified form.
The Abu Dhabi government said its position remained unaltered and it had no
plans to increase its offer agreed with liquidators in February last year.
This would have provided a contribution of at least Dollars 1.7bn to
creditors in exchange for them waiving rights to sue, and would have allowed
a payout of 15p in the pound next year.
Abu Dhabi has an estimated Dollars 2.2bn in preferential claims deposited
with BCCI, and it could potentially counter-sue the bank to recover the
money, which would wipe out any returns to other creditors.
