FT  02 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Light in arbitration's obscure corners
 -A H Hermann examines the Steyn committee's draft bill
English arbitration law, probably the best system in the world, is far from
perfect. But it is made worse than it need be by the unjustified assumption
of most arbitrators and lawyers that they are bound to follow the
adversarial and predominantly oral procedures developed in the English civil
courts.
This shortcoming, together with other orthodoxies which drive arbitration
away from London to friendlier and cheaper shores, has been tackled in a
draft arbitration bill, drawn up by the Departmental Advisory Committee on
Arbitration, chaired by Sir Johan Steyn, the Appeal Court judge.
If adopted, it would improve English arbitration law and make it more
understandable. With those objectives in mind the committee entrusted the
drafting of the bill to a privately financed group (although it was revised
by a parliamentary draftsman) and instructed it to follow the structure of
Uncitral's Model Law of Arbitration, now followed by the legislation of 16
states.
Many of the substantive provisions of the bill would make English
arbitration law more acceptable internationally. For example, recent
decisions by the Court of Appeal have reversed the orthodox view that
disputes as to whether a contract was invalid from its beginning always fell
outside the arbitration clause. The Appeal Court decisions confirm that the
arbitration clause is separable and survives an invalid contract. To make
sure that this useful advance is not overturned by the House of Lords, the
committee has included a separability clause in the bill.
But the committee was not so daring when it came to the question of the
arbitrator's power to decide that he has jurisdiction to hear a case.
The arbitrator's decision can always be appealed to a court. That is as it
should be. However, the process is greatly abused by parties who wait to see
whether the result of the arbitration is to their liking before launching an
appeal.
A decision, at the end of a long arbitration procedure, that an arbitrator
did not have jurisdiction makes the resolution of a dispute unnecessarily
expensive. For this reason the Uncitral Model Law requires that any appeal
against the arbitrator's exercise of jurisdiction must be made at the
beginning. The committee, however, shrank from following the Model Law on
this.
Explaining this and other aspects of the draft bill at the Freshfields
arbitration lecture recently, Sir Johan, agreeing with a recent Law
Commission report, said he did not see why arbitrators should be obliged to
follow the courts' technical rules of evidence.
This was particularly true in relation to the labelling of technical and
production records as 'hearsay' evidence. Appellants without a proper issue
of law on which to base an appeal often argued that such records were
'hearsay' and not admissible evidence, and that lack of evidence was an
issue of law on which they could base an appeal.
The bill would avoid all this by providing that 'the tribunal shall
determine all procedural matters including the admissibility, relevance,
materiality and weight of any evidence'.
This provision of the bill also ought to do away with the widely held
assumption of English arbitrators and lawyers that they are bound to adopt
the purely adversarial and predominantly oral procedures peculiar to common
law jurisdictions but unknown in half the industrialised world.
Sir Johan said he could see no justification for such an assumption, either
in statutory law or in precedent. If adopted, the bill would make the
English arbitration procedure both faster and cheaper.
The committee did not, however, adopt any recommendation on the crucial
difference between the English and most other arbitration systems which
allow awards to be made according to a perception of fairness or on the
basis of internationally recognised principles of law. The orthodox English
view is that arbitration clauses allowing the arbitrator to go by his
conscience rather than by the law - clauses commonplace in civil law
countries - are invalid in England.
Sir Johan appears to sympathise with the Model Law where it provides that,
if parties agree, the arbitrator may decide according to what appears to him
to be right and fair.
The Court of Appeal moved in this direction and towards the recognition of
the lex mercatoria - the free floating 'international law of merchants' -
when it held in the 1987 Deutsche Schachtbau case that it was not against
public policy to enforce in England a Swiss arbitration award applying
'internationally accepted principles of law governing contractual relations'
 -lex mercatoria for short.
If this is not against public policy in the case of a foreign award, why
should it be against public policy in the case of an English award? To adopt
the Model Law approach would bring English arbitration closer to the
conciliation procedures favoured not only in civil law countries but also in
the Far East and particularly in China, with its fast-growing economy
reaching out for more intensive international trade. The Steyn committee has
not dared go this far - yet.
The author is D J Freeman senior research fellow in international trade law
at the Queen Mary and Westfield College, University of London
