FT  19 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC turns down German farm
currency demand
GERMANY WAS last night told by the European Commission that its demands for
full compensation to its farmers for rises in the D-Mark would not be met,
at the same time as Brussels warned Bonn that its defiance of European
Community limits on the amount of cereals land that can be sown in eastern
Germany was illegal.
EC agriculture ministers failed to agree on changes in the complex
agri-monetary system that adjusts 'green' currencies to keep farm prices
roughly aligned. As a result, the nearly six-week-old freezing of the green
currency grid will remain in place for another month.
Germany wants a full restoration of the 'switchover' system whereby each
realignment of EC currencies pushes up every member state's farm prices to
follow the movement of the strongest currencies - invariably the D-Mark and
the Dutch guilder.
Prior to the August 2 decision to float all European exchange rate mechanism
currencies with 15 per cent fluctuation bands, 'switchover' - a device
designed to protect German farmers from the adverse effects on their incomes
of rises in the value of the D-Mark - required a formal realignment of the
ERM, which is now very unlikely.
After August 2, the community initially started adjusting national farm
prices every three trading days, revaluing the 'green' French franc, for
instance, at the expense of German and Dutch farmers. Under severe German
pressure, the commission froze all further changes six weeks ago, and last
week it came out with plans to widen the margins outside which green rate
revaluations are triggered.
Although Germany finds this solution unacceptable, Mr Rene Steichen, EC
agriculture commissioner, yesterday told the Bonn government that 'the
thrust of this proposal will not change'. Only Germany, with lukewarm
support from the Netherlands, resisted the Brussels plan.
After the month-long extension of the freeze, Brussels says it will
reinstate the three-day adjustment system if there is no agreement on its
plan, thereby putting pressure on Bonn to come to terms.
The Bonn-Brussels row over eastern Germany exceeding by nearly 10 per cent
the area of cereals land it is entitled to plant was simmering without
coming to the boil yesterday evening.
Mr Jochen Borchert, the German agriculture minister, said on Friday that
Bonn would not abide by the commission compromise to phase in the automatic
penalties for this overshoot.
Mr Steichen told him 'it is not acceptable to encourage the flouting of
community law' and warned Germany that the commission would take legal
action if it persisted in its 'extreme reaction'.
Germany insists that Brussels miscalculated the total arable area in the
eastern Lander. Under last year's reform of the EC's common agricultural
policy all member states are required to take about 15 per cent of their
previously planted land out of production to curb oversupply.
