FT  08 SEP 93 / Survey of Mobile Communications (12): Only the elite can
afford such prices - Mark Newman looks at developments in eastern Europe
CENTRAL AND eastern Europe were going to do it differently. Instead of
digging up roads and laying down cables, many experts in the
telecommunications industry said the new democracies would be better off
using wireless communications systems to vitalise their crumbling
telecommunications infrastructures.
But things have not quite worked out as the experts hoped. Mobile telephone
networks have been built in almost every capital city over the last two to
three years, but services are expensive even by western standards and
affordable only by an elite band of foreign businessmen and government
officials.
Meanwhile, there has been little improvement in the quality or availability
of local network services. The only exception is eastern Germany, where
Deutsche Telekom is investing DM70bn on installing a new telecommunications
infrastructure. It has used modified versions of existing cellular telephone
networks to provide services to businesses in a number of towns and cities,
but this is only an interim measure before cables are laid.
There are 11 cellular telephone networks in operation today across central
and eastern Europe, providing service to approximately 60,000 subscribers in
markets with populations totalling 115m. In all of these countries the
networks are operated by joint ventures between the local telephone network
operator - which retains a majority interest - and one or more foreign
telephone companies.
US West, the US regional telephone company, partners PTTs in five markets -
Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Moscow and St Petersburg. Estonia and
Latvia have both chosen Telecom Finland and Swedish Telecom as their joint
venture partners, while Lithuania operates a joint venture with Tele Danmark
and Millicom International Cellular, a Luxembourg-based company. In Poland,
France Telecom and US telephone company Ameritech are the foreign partners,
while in Romania, Telefonica of Spain has a joint venture with Rom Telecom.
Ukraine Mobile Communications, which opened its network on July 1, has three
foreign partners - Deutsche Telekom, PTT Telecom Netherlands and Tele
Danmark.
The first subscribers to cellular telephone services in eastern Europe used
them almost exclusively as a substitute for the fixed network. In many
countries, people have to wait years for a telephone line to be installed.
Even then, it is hard to get an international line. A cellular telephone
line can be switched on in less than a day, and access to the international
network is never a problem.
Usage levels are two to three times higher than in western Europe at around
250 minutes a month. A large part of this is made up of international calls.
Subscriber levels fluctuate widely. Westel, the joint venture between US
West and the Hungarian Telecommunications Company, is the most successful of
the 11 operators. It had 32,000 subscribers by the middle of this year, four
times as many as any other system.
Mr Mark Bell, an executive director for operations at US West Spectrum
Enterprises, says that 'initially people bought cellular telephones as a
substitute for the fixed network, but they tend to hold on even after the
basic telephone service has improved.' Subscriber growth in Hungary is
higher than in most western European countries.
Other US West joint ventures in eastern Europe have been less successful.
Delta Telecom, its St Petersburg venture, has only 1,130 subscribers. Moscow
Cellular Communications has 3,960 subscribers, and the Eurotel Prague and
Bratislava companies in the Czech Republic and Slovakia have a total of
9,100 customers.
The high price of the services in these countries has contributed to the
slow take-up. A survey by the FT newsletter Mobile Communications last year
demonstrated that the average cost of buying and using a cellular telephone
for a year (assuming that a subscriber makes 250 minutes of calls a month
evenly divided between local and international calls) was Dollars 7,500.
It is the high upfront cost of subscribing that produces the major barrier
to a purchase. The average cost of buying a transportable telephone and
connecting to the cellular network was Dollars 2,020 in 1992, according to
the survey.
But the high prices will come under pressure with the launch of competing
networks. Russia has already awarded 12 regional cellular telephone licences
for systems using the European digital GSM standard. Hungary has shortlisted
five bidders for two GSM licences. Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and
Poland all plan licensing procedures for GSM network operators.
There has been some frustration in a number of central and east European
countries about the high price of mobile communications services. When the
Hungarian government drew up a licensing process for two GSM licences, it
originally intended to favour those bidders who planned to set tariffs at
the lowest level.
But it changed its mind last month and the adjudication process will now
favour the consortia which offer the highest bids for the two licences. A
group comprising BT, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom has already offered
Dollars 48m for the licence. With a second round of bidding still to come,
the two licences could generate close to Dollars 100m for the Hungarian
Treasury.
The Hungarian situation illustrates the dilemma that countries in the region
face when deciding telecommunications policy. Delivering high-quality
telecommunications services to businesses and residential customers is
clearly a priority, but when the opportunity arises to replenish depleted
state coffers by selling the right to offer services to foreign telephone
companies, the temptation to take the money invariably proves the decisive
factor.
The writer is editor, Financial Times Mobile Communications
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
East Europe: ownership structure of cellular telephone operators
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Country         Company           Ownership (%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Czechoslavakia  Eurotel           US West 24.5, Bell Atlantic 24.5,
                                  Ministry of Posts and
                                  Telecommunications 51
Estonia         Eesti             Estelecom (Estonian PTT) 51, Swedish
                Mobiltelefon      Telecom 24.5 Telecom Finland 24.5
Hungary         WesTel            US West 49, Hungarian Telephone Co 51
Latvia          Latvian Mobile    Swedish Telecom 24.5, Telecom
                Telephone Co      Finland 24.5, Latvian State Radio and
                                  Televison Centre 23, VEF
                                  (electronics manufacturer) 23,
                                  Latvian Telecommunications Centre 5
Lithuania       Comliet           Millicom International Cellular 29,
                                  Telecom Denmark 20, Lithuanian
                                  Telecom 41, Antena UAB 10
Poland          Polska Telefonai  Ameritech 24.5, France Telecom 24.5,
                Komorkowa         Polish PTT 51
Romania         Telemobil         Rom Telecom and Rom Radicom 51,
                                  Telefonica 49
Russia
 St Petersburg  Delta Telecom     US West 40, St Petersburg telephone
                                  authorities 60
 Moscow         Moscow            US West 22, Millicom International
                Cellular          20, Ministry of Posts and
                                  Telecommunications 50, Eye
                                  Microsurgery Science and Technology
                                  Complex of Moscow 8
Ukraine         Ukraine Mobile    Deutsche Telekom 16.3, Tele
                                  Denmark 16.3, PTT Communications
                                  Telecom Netherlands 16.3,
                                  Ukraine PTT 51
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
All operators use the NMT-450 system
Source: Financial Times Mobile Communications
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
