FT  23 JUL 93 / Major ready to defy Commons on social chapter: Prime
minister calls emergency cabinet meeting before crucial vote
MR JOHN MAJOR last night staked his administration's future on ratification
of the Maastricht treaty with an unequivocal warning that he was ready to
defy the House of Commons if it voted for the social chapter.
In a stormy, angry debate as MPs prepared for last night's crucial votes on
whether Britain should accept the treaty's social provisions, Mr Major said
nothing would deflect him from ratification of the treaty. But with the
outcome still on a knife-edge, the prime minister was forced to summon an
emergency cabinet meeting to discuss the options in the event of a defeat.
Accusing his opponents of cynicism and political opportunism, the prime
minister said that failure to ratify Maastricht would destroy British
influence within the European Community.
Conservative party managers last night were still struggling to secure
endorsement of Britain's social chapter opt-out with a combination of
blatant arm-twisting, backstairs bargaining and passionate pleading.
But with the Ulster Unionists still wavering, no one was confident of a
government victory. There was speculation that the cabinet was considering
offering them a series of concessions, including the creation of a Commons
committee with the right to look at security in the province.
Mr Major sought to step up the pressure on Tory opponents of the treaty with
an impassioned plea for loyalty and unity at a packed meeting of the
backbench 1922 committee only hours before MPs were due to vote.
He warned that imposition of the social chapter would risk aborting the
economic recovery now underway, driving out British businesses and jobs to
overseas competitors and undermining the flow of overseas investment in the
UK.
The prime minister told the Tory rebels that whatever the outcome they would
fail in their attempts to wreck the entire treaty.
Dismissing suggestions that he might be forced to embrace the social
chapter, he said the enactment earlier this week of the European Communities
(Amendment) bill had provided the authority for ratification of the original
treaty. He added: 'Rarely in recent history has parliament shown its will so
effectively. Today's debate is an attempt to frustrate that will.'
His comments - signalling his readiness to defy the alliance of opposition
parties and Tory Eurosceptics ranged against him - provoked outrage and
warnings of a constitutional crisis from opposition leaders.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, accused Mr Major of threatening to ride
roughshod over the will of parliament, warning that the social chapter
opt-out would turn Britain into the 'sweatshop of Europe'.
But Mr Major said that yesterday's debate had no relevance to the
ratification process: 'Parliament is no longer debating the Maastricht
treaty. The bill is now an act. In due course the treaty will be ratified'.
Emphasising that Britain could not renege on its commitments, he told MPs:
'If we wilfully throw away our capacity to defend our interests and promote
our policies in that (European) market, I believe this country will pay a
dear price for that folly in the years to come.'
Major urges Tory rebels to think again, Page 7
