FT  19 MAY 93 / Business and the Environment: Hot air fuels the energy
debate - Gasification of wood could be a clean, abundant and renewable power
source
For the past decade, pressurised biomass gasification has been trumpeted at
energy workshops and environmental conferences around the world as a clean,
renewable power source with realistic commercial potential.
Its proponents emphasise not only the abundant fuel source and the low-level
emissions released from burning the gas from wood heated at high
temperatures, but also the lack of any net increase in greenhouse gases -
provided trees are planted at the same rate they are felled.
Just how promising the future of the pressurised biomass gasificatian is,
will become clearer in coming months when the world's most advanced pilot
power stations are fired up in Scandinavia - joint ventures between leading
utility companies in Sweden and Finland.
The technological hurdle that scientists have faced over the years with
pressurised biomass gasification is at the turbine stage. Producing the gas
from wood is not a problem, but finding a turbine that does not foul when
fired from that gas is.
That is because the gas emitted from wood heated to temperatures of 900`C
contains various tar compounds, alkaline metals and dust. Both projects -
one, a demonstration plant, in southern Sweden and the other, a test rig, in
Finland - are equipped with a filtering technology designed to solve the
fouling problem. With a so-called 'hot gas cleaning' method, the gases are
cooled to 400`C, when the vapour alkalines such as sodium and potassium and
other compounds can be filtered out. The clean gas is then fed into
conventional gas turbines.
The two facilities will use each company's hot-gas filtering technology
which has been developed independently. The projects also differ in scope
and size. The larger of the two plants - in Varnamo, Sweden - is running
now. But diesel fuel is firing the turbine. The hot-gas filtering will be
put into use shortly and, in the autumn, the gas turbine will produce
electricity.
The Swedish plant, run jointly by Sydkraft and Ahlstrom, also uses combined
cycle technology where hot emission gases are recovered to heat water for
conventional steam turbines. The same plant will also use recovered heat to
fire a hot-water district heating system. The total output will be 15MW.
The other plant - in Tampere, Finland - is a retrofitted coal gasification
research project. Run by Vattenfall of Sweden and Tampella Power of Finland,
it will eventually produce 15MW. However, the initial stage, started in
early March, will test only the gas cleaning system. Eventually the gas will
be channelled into a gas turbine that will also be part of a combined cycle
system.
The joint venture between Vattenfall and Tampella is a more modest programme
than originally planned. A 40MW station to be built in Sweden was shelved
for financial reasons.
The joint-venture companies have each invested more than Dollars 40m (Pounds
26.6m) in the programme. Some of the money has come from the Swedish
government, which faces a long-term energy dilemma due to parliamentary
decisions to phase out nuclear power (50 per cent of its current power
source) by 2010, halt hydro expansion and cap carbon dioxide emissions.
Gasification technology is not new. It was developed more than 50 years ago.
Today there are ambitious, large-scale coal gasification pilot projects
under way in both the US and Europe.
But gasification of wood has three big advantages over coal: No sulphur
emissions, no hazardous waste ash and no increase in carbon-dioxide
emissions.
However, because coal is so cheap and has a higher heating value, it is
currently less expensive to import for gasification than to collect and
transport the large volumes of wood needed in biomass energy. 'That is where
a carbon tax must come into play,' says Nils Lindman, a biomass researcher
for Vattenfall.
'To make it economically viable, the true environmental cost of the other
fuels must be charged.' Sweden and Finland have carbon taxes but this is
just one reason why biomass gasification has been pioneered in Scandinavia.
Besides pursuing an environmentally sound energy policy, Sweden and Finland
have large expanses of forest.
Another potential environmental benefit of biomass concerns nitrogen oxide
emissions, which contribute to acid rain and are the by-product of burning
fossil fuels. Biomass gasification produces nitrogen oxide but again there
is a net decrease.
'A third of the timber cut down for paper and pulp production is left behind
and that scrap wood decays and causes nitrogen run-off,' says Lindman. 'By
collecting that scrap wood and burning it, the extraction (of nitrogen) is
much higher than the nitrogen burden caused by flue gas emissions.
'There is also the benefit of ash waste from biomass,' Lindman adds. 'This
can be used as fertilizer - unlike the waste from coal gasification which
must for the most part be landfilled as a hazardous waste.' This nitrogen
factor is especially important in Sweden where a new nitrous oxide emission
tax was put into effect in 1992.
The success or failure of these biomass gasification plants will have
worldwide implications. The Varnamo plant in Sweden will participate in a
Dollars 30m Global Environment Facility programme with plans to build a
large-scale biomass gasification plant in Brazil. The GEF is a joint project
between the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme to help third-world nations implement
environmentally sound development programmes.
'We feel that biomass gasification is one of the few renewable energy
sources that could be economically competitive with conventional methods,'
says Phil Elliot, a project co-ordinator with Shell Oil, which is acting as
a co-ordinator in the GEF programme.
'The Varnamo plant faces some hurdles because it is a complicated
engineering process but I do think they will be able to work out the
problems.'
