FT  30 JUL 93 / Probe launched into perjury claims in VW-Opel battle
GERMAN prosecutors have started investigating suspicions that Volkswagen
director Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and others may have committed
perjury, and speculation grew yesterday that he could soon be charged in
connection with allegations of industrial espionage.
Hamburg state prosecutors confirmed the opening of an investigation
following suggestions that they should examine discrepancies between
testimony and affidavits presented in evidence at a recent civil hearing.
The hearing related to the continuing clash between VW and Adam Opel, the
General Motors German subsidiary. Mr Hans Wilhelm Gab, vice-president of GM
Europe, said yesterday he felt that prosecutors had enough evidence for
criminal charges.
'The public prosecutors' office, following thorough examination and
investigation, confirms that (Opel's) suspicions are justified. According to
its own statements, the office has made 'decisive' progress,' he said.
Meanwhile, the federal government was asked to mediate in the battle, and a
senior official in the Bonn economics ministry urged the state of Lower
Saxony to sell its 19.7 per cent stake in VW.
Mr Reinhard Gohner, state secretary, criticised Mr Gerhard Schroder, prime
minister of Lower Saxony, for defending VW managers, and said it was
inappropriate for politicians to be involved. The spying row was damaging
the image of German industry and could be fatal if it was not resolved soon,
he said.
Mr Klaus Bregger, head of the influential MIT association, which represents
medium-sized companies, appealed to Mr Gunter Rexrodt, federal economics
minister, to act as a mediator. He reminded the minister that every sixth
job in Germany depended on the motor industry.
Concern over the case soared yesterday following claims this week from Mr
Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, that he was at war with GM, and indirect
allegations that incriminating evidence against Mr Lopez and his colleagues
had been planted.
Mr Gab rejected as 'grotesque' Mr Piech's charges that Opel, an 'American'
company, was seeking to destroy VW. Opel ensured employment for 400,000
people in Germany, he said.
He said Mr Piech, an Austrian, who did not carry a German passport, was
mobilising national sentiments in his host country in a manner that
'burdened' German industry as a whole. The VW chairman's attitude reflected
a 'psychosis-like bunker mentality', Mr Gab added.
The suggestion of a perjury probe came from lawyers of Adam Opel.
GM rebuts allegations, Page 2
'Turf warfare', Page 16
Home turnround revives GM, Page 21
