FT  17 MAR 93 / Germany warns on Romanian asylum-seekers
GERMANY'S Interior Ministry yesterday said Romanians were beginning to
renounce their citizenship to avoid repatriation once measures aimed at
tightening the country's asylum laws were approved by parliament next month.
But the ministry warned Romania that it would be required to take back
stateless citizens under international law, which states that people should
be accepted by their last country of citizenship.
The announcement has fuelled fears that the country may be inundated with
tens of thousands of would-be asylum seekers before the new measures are
introduced.
The proposed constitutional amendments, among other things, will allow
authorities on the borders to return to a third, 'safe country' through
which they entered Germany, refugees who cannot prove they are fleeing
persecution.
More than 38,000 asylum-seekers arrived in Germany last month, and 20 per
cent in the first two months of this year more than the same period in 1992.
More than 7,800 came from Romania in January alone.
Meanwhile ministers from central and eastern European countries meeting in
Prague yesterday failed to agree on a framework for a multilateral solution
to deal with the expected flow of refugees likely to result from the
tightening of the asylum law changes.
Ministers and deputy ministers from Austria, the Czech republic, Hungary,
Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia agreed instead to speed bilateral agreements
with individual states from which immigrants come.
A final communique said ministers would intensify their efforts to establish
standardised agreements on the return of refugees.
The countries represented at the meeting are nevertheless expected to agree
to measures to strengthen their borders against the flow of thousands of
would-be immigrants making their way westward in search of a better life.
Czech officials sought to put a brave face on disappointing results for a
conference which it was hoped would help soothe German concern at lax border
controls in central and eastern Europe and lay the ground for a broader
solution to deal with the thousands of immigrants who might be expelled from
Germany.
The Bonn government, whose decision to tighten its asylum laws followed a
wave of violent anti-immigrant protests, was not invited to the meeting. But
officials said the meeting did not aim to confront Germany but to find ways
to improve co-operation on resolving the issue.
Several hundred thousand immigrants, many of whom travelled through Poland
and the Czech republic, may be forced to leave Germany once the new asylum
laws are enforced. Prague and Warsaw want to ensure immigrants are not
dumped on their doorstep.
