FT  29 OCT 93 / Leading Article: Chunnel link
THE PLANNED high-speed rail link between London and the Channel tunnel could
be a showpiece for the UK government's initiative of attracting private
capital to public infrastructure projects. It provides an opportunity both
to harness the private sector's skills in project management and to remove
at least part of a Pounds 2.6bn-Pounds 3bn project from the public sector's
balance sheet.
But to achieve these benefits, the Treasury will need to abandon its purist
line that all the risk of such projects should be borne by private
investors. Sticking to this line could delay or even kill off the project,
as Union Railways, the British Rail subsidiary set up to develop the link,
will tell ministers later today.
The essential point is that the private sector is not well suited to bear
the political and regulatory risks associated with the early stages of large
infrastructure projects. Before construction on the Chunnel link can
proceed, planning consents must be won, public inquiries conducted,
legislation passed and safety standards determined. At each stage, there is
a danger that the project will be delayed and extra costs imposed.
This particular project does not start with a happy history as far as
private companies are concerned. Several construction groups have already
spent money making proposals, only to have them rejected largely for
political reasons. There is also the overhang from the main Channel tunnel
project, whose financial attraction has been reduced by a tightening of
safety regulations and the delay in building road and rail links.
It is doubtful whether private funds could be attracted at this stage and,
even if they could, a high risk premium would be required. Far better,
therefore, for the public sector to put up the Pounds 200m needed for the
project's next phase, tiding it over until political and regulatory
uncertainty is largely out of the way. After that, it should be easier to
find a further Pounds 2.5bn-plus from private investors. The remaining risks
 -concerning construction costs, operating expenses and customer demand -
are the type the private sector is best at managing.
Given the current budgetary pressures, it is reasonable to ask why the
Chunnel link should have priority over other worthwhile projects that are
now stalled. Part of the answer is that the link is already badly delayed.
Constructing it is important not only to maximise the economic benefits of
the Channel tunnel but also to ease congestion for commuter traffic in the
south-east.
But the most compelling reason for priming the pump is that a success with
Union Railways would give a boost to the government's private funding
initiative. It could open the door for private capital to flow into roads,
railways and prisons. That, more than almost anything else, would ease the
pressure on government finances.
