FT  07 MAY 93 / Survey of Turkey (8): Construction 'megaprojects' under way
 -Turkey has the engineers and the contracting companies. But does it have
the funds?
Mr Suleyman Demirel, the prime minister, used to refer to the constraining
effects of Turkey's infrastructure as 'a giant in pygmy's clothing.'
Now his rhetoric is of Dollars 135bn of 'mega projects', which will change
the country.
Promoted abroad and at home among finance sources and contractors, these
include:
The Southeastern Anatolian Projects (GAP). Launched in the mid-1980s, this
huge project is harnessing the Tigris and Euphrates to irrigate 1.7m
hectares of land - half the size of Belgium - and build 18 hydro-electric
stations.
The heart of the project is the Dollars 2.3bn Ataturk Dam which, when
completed, will be the world's ninth largest dam.
Syria and Iraq object to Turkey's use of the rivers. Their objections means
international funding has been held back. The project is due to be finished
in 2005, at a total cost of Dollars 32bn.
Rail. A 430km Dollars 4bn high-speed train connection between Ankara and the
Asian side of the Istanbul, with a Dollars 4bn rail tunnel under the
Bosporus, connecting the European and Middle Eastern rail nets.
The government has said that agreement with contractors should be reached by
October 27 this year. These are part of what Turkey calls a Peace Train from
Paris to Jerusalem via Turkey.
Raising their sights higher, Turkey talks of a Silk Railway following the
old Silk Route from London to China, passing through Turkey and the Turkic
Republics.
Motorways. This year Turkey plans to bring into service a further 448km of
motorway, extending the road grid to 1,250km and virtually completing the
link from the trans-European motorway to Ankara.
It has an additional 347km under construction, and is planning a bridge by
Gallipoli across the Dardanelles.
Electric Energy. Government plans allow for a 69 per cent increase in
electricity capacity by the year 2000. This is to be achieved by completing
13 generating plants currently under construction and starting 14 others,
including a 1,000MW nuclear plant. However, the World Bank is worried about
the high debt of the Turkish Electricity Authority (TEK).
The Bank argues that Turkey runs more generating capacity than it needs.
Water and Sewerage. Projects worth Dollars 2.7bn in Istanbul alone,
including the world's largest biological sewage treatment plant and the
150-mile diversion of a river. Also, a Dollars 3bn Aegean-Mediterranean
coastal infrastructure programme.
Other projects on this 'mega list' include work on nine airports; a Dollars
750m world trade centre for Istanbul; four ports, including a deep-water
port at Yumurtalik near Adana, and a container port to serve Istanbul at
Tekirdag, on the Marmara; underground and light rail systems in Istanbul,
Ankara and Izmir; hydro-cracking units at the main refineries; and an
Olympic stadium for Istanbul.
Turkey now has the engineers and contracting companies capable of handling
many of these. But does it have the funds?
This year, the government will find and spend Dollars 12bn, according to Dr
Ilhan Kesici, under-secretary of the State Planning Organisation. He argues
that a combination of central government funding, foreign finance, and
franchise-based schemes will see Turkey through. However, Turkey has been
notoriously slow in completing negotiations on the Build Operate-Transfer
schemes on which it is partly pinning its hopes.
The World Bank is among those who take a more cautious view, being prepared
to support many of the projects but arguing for a slower phasing.
Indeed, as so often, the shortage of funds means that, for all its 'mega'
hopes, Turkey may have to live with some of its old clothing longer than it
wants to.
