FT  08 SEP 93 / Obituary: Sir David Brown - pioneer of engineers
SIR DAVID BROWN, the industrialist, lover of fast cars and one of the great
characters of 20th-century British engineering, has died in Monaco aged 89.
As chairman of the David Brown Corporation, Sir David forged a family-owned
engineering empire that spanned gears, machine tools, castings and other
products.
To the general public, Sir David was a motor-racing fanatic whose company
once owned Aston Martin, the maker of luxury cars.
His achievements were many and various. His David Brown Tractors company,
founded in 1935, was the first to make an all-British tractor in England. In
1959 he was inaugurated as Chief Flying Sun of the Iroquois Tribe of the
Mohawk Nation - an unusual accolade for a British businessman, it resulted
from his links with Canada.
Sir David was once described as 'at once energetic, forceful, ruthless, shy,
withdrawn, gregarious, shrewd, suggestible'.
He shared with Mr Joe Bamford, founder of the JCB construction equipment
group, an intense enthusiasm for mechanical matters, and a deep desire to
keep control of his company in family hands.
Sir David had become managing director of the family business, then called
David Brown and Sons, in 1932, 11 years after joining as an apprentice. His
heyday was the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s, when his control of the company was
absolute. By the time he sold David Brown Corporation in 1990, he had lacked
any day-to-day involvement for some 20 years.
Sir David's great strength was his technical savvy. He was quick to spot how
a new technology could lead to an edge in the marketplace, and would always
move promptly to exploit new opportunities.
As a businessman his weakness, perhaps, was that he was never driven by a
strong impulse to create profits. His involvement with Aston Martin from
1947 to 1972 encapsulates this approach - he once admitted that he never
made any money from the carmaker but he had a good time.
The original David Brown gear manufacturer, founded at Huddersfield in 1860,
is now thriving under new owners as the David Brown Group. Aston Martin and
some of Sir David's other businesses have long since been sold - although
this year Aston Martin revived the DB designation, the initials of its
former owner, for the first time in 20 years.
