FT  21 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Malaysia urged to boost Gatt role
MALAYSIA's rapid economic growth over the past two decades owes much to
expansion of its international trade, making it a major beneficiary of the
liberal world trade regime, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade says
in a report published yesterday
Malaysia, which has a population of just 18m, has transformed itself from a
commodity producer to an important manufacturing centre. Exports and imports
each now account for almost 80 per cent of GDP from under 50 per cent in the
1960s, and Malaysia has become the 16th largest trader in Gatt.
In the light of Malaysia's increased weight in international trade, 'it
would be proper for Malaysia to consider fuller integration into the Gatt
system and to assume more responsibility in it', the report says.
It notes, among other things, that Malaysia has 'bound' (agreed not to
raise) only 1 per cent of tariff lines in Gatt, and has joined only one of
Gatt's nine voluntary codes of trade practice. While tariffs average only
about 15 per cent, certain 'strategic' sectors such as car production are
protected by high tariff and non-tariff barriers.
In general, however, Gatt members who discussed the secretariat's report
this week were full of praise for Malaysia's achievement. Real GDP growth
has averaged about 6 per cent in the 1980s and just under 9 per cent in the
early 1990s. Per capita incomes have risen by nearly 7 per cent a year to
Dollars 3,100 (Pounds 2,067) in 1992, putting the country well on the path
to its stated objective of developed country status by the year 2020.
Foreign investment has played a big part in these developments. Since 1967,
the report notes, 60 per cent of manufacturing investment has been based on
foreign capital, largely directed to export production. The share of
manufactures in total exports has risen from about 22 per cent in 1980 to 69
per cent in 1992.
Malaysia has become the world's largest exporter of room air conditioners
and ranks among the top three exporters of semiconductors. Electronics,
textiles and rubber-based products account for over 70 per cent of
manufactured exports.
In commodities, Malaysia accounts for about one half of world timber
exports, is the world's biggest producer of palm oil and has significant
sales of crude petroleum, rubber and tin.
The report also draws attention to the fact that, in recent years, there has
been a shift in Malaysia's trade policies towards closer integration within
the Association of South-East Nations, comprising Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand and Singapore.
The Asean Preferential Trading Agreement, signed in 1977, provides for
preferential margins of between 25 and 50 per cent on imports originating in
members states. At the beginning of 1992, Asean members agreed on a Common
Effective Preferential Tariff Scheme with the aim of achieving an Asean free
trade area within 15 years from the beginning of this year.
