FT  26 OCT 93 / Business and the Law: Pop stars' rights safeguarded -
European Law
Community rules prohibiting discrimination on grounds of nationality apply
to intellectual property rights, according to a judgment last week from the
European Court of Justice in two cases involving British pop singers Phil
Collins and Cliff Richard.
The cases, which were heard together, were both referred from German courts
on the issue of the compatibility of certain provisions of German copyright
law with European Community law. The domestic provisions in question gave
protection against unlicensed distribution of the work, including
performances, of any German artist. The protection of performance work was
guaranteed irrespective of the place of the performance. However, protection
of performance work for non-German artists was limited to those performances
on German territory.
Mr Collins's case concerned the recording without his consent of a concert
in the US in 1983. Mr Collins sought to have the distribution of the
'bootleg' record in Germany stopped.
Mr Richard's case related to the sale in Germany of some of his work
performed in the UK between 1958 and 1959. The German exclusive distributor
brought an action in Germany against the defendant company, which allegedly
had distributed records containing some of the relevant performance work in
breach of the former's exclusive rights.
In both cases, the question of the compatibility of the German legislation
with EC law arose, and was referred to the European Court of Justice.
The Court first dealt with the issue of whether the provisions of the Rome
Treaty prohibiting discrimination on grounds of nationality applied to
copyright and neighbouring rights. It found that copyright included economic
rights, notably the right to exploit commercially the marketing of the
protected work, particularly in the form of licences granted in return for
the payment of royalties. The exploitation of a copyright therefore could
constitute both a source of remuneration for the owner and a form of
marketing control.
It followed that, as with other industrial or commercial property rights,
copyright was capable of affecting the flow of goods and services as well as
competition within the Community. It was for this reason that the Court had
previously held that such rights, although determined by national
provisions, were nonetheless bound by the Rome Treaty provisions. Given
this, copyright and neighbouring rights were thus bound by, inter alia, the
prohibition against discrimination on grounds of nationality contained in
the Rome Treaty.
The Court then dealt with the issue of whether provisions such as those
contained in German law were contrary to the Rome Treaty provisions on
non-discrimination. The argument raised by the defending parties was that
discrimination between German and non-German artists was justified by the
differences which existed between the national law of member states, and by
the fact that not all states had adhered to the 1961 Rome convention which
protected the rights of performing artists.
The Court reiterated that the Rome Treaty provisions on non-discrimination
were not concerned with those disparities in treatment or distortions that
arose from divergences between the laws of member states, so long as these
differences affected all persons subject to them in accordance with
objective criteria and without regard to nationality. This was not the case
here.
The Rome Treaty provisions required that persons in a situation governed by
EC law should be placed on an equal footing with nationals of the member
state in question. The principle of non-discrimination therefore precluded a
state from making the grant of a right subject to the condition of being a
national of that state.
The Court finally held that the Rome Treaty provisions on non-discrimination
were of direct effect and could thus be invoked before the national courts
in cases such as these.
Joined cases C-92/92 and C-326/92: Phil Collins v Imtrat Handelsgesellschaft
mbH; Patricia lm- und export Verwaltungsgesellschaft mbH v EMI Electrola
GmbH, ECJ FC October 20 1993
