FT  22 DEC 93 / Business and the Environment: Ripples stir the green breeze
 -Blight on the countryside or important renewable energy source? / A look
at wind farms
Sir Bernard Ingham, Lady Thatcher's former press officer at Number 10, has
found a new role in retirement: as opponent of the growing fashion for wind
farms. These 'bog-brushes', he says, are 'creating a blight on the British
countryside for next to nothing'.
Earlier this month, Sir Bernard attended the first national meeting of
Country Guardians, a group which he helped to set up to co-ordinate local
opposition to wind farms. He says reports from local chairmen revealed 'an
advancing rash of wind farms right across the country, an horrendous picture
of visual intrusion in areas of outstanding natural beauty'.
Country Guardians aims to increase public awareness about the 'danger' of
this form of renewable energy. It wants to stop 'brainwashed' local
authorities giving developers the go-ahead and the government from providing
this 'sop to the greens', says Sir Bernard, who is a public relations
adviser to the nuclear power industry.
He claims to see the first signs of success. Last month, a Welsh Office
inspector rejected an appeal for a wind farm on Anglesey. That decision,
made partly on the grounds of visual impact, is the first rejection of an
appeal by a government office.
John Gummer, the environment secretary, has so far overturned four decisions
taken by local planning authorities against wind farms. Another six are on
appeal. Policy planning guidelines (PPG) produced by the Department of the
Environment, assert a presumption in favour of wind farm developments. PPG
22 is the tool with which local planning authorities are being
'brainwashed', according to Sir Bernard. But the DoE has no plans to update
the guidelines, issued in February this year.
The development of wind farms received a big boost last July when Tim Eggar,
energy minister, announced the third in the government's series of Non
Fossil Fuel Obligation (NFFO) Renewables Orders which provide subsidies for
renewable energy forms. The first two in 1990 and 1991, allowed for 58 wind
farms. But where these provided subsidies for eight years, the third extends
them to 20 years.
The NFFOs support the government's aim of achieving 1,500MW of renewable
electricity generating capacity by 2000, and of reducing carbon dioxide
emissions in line with last year's Earth Summit commitments.
Although support is given to the industry on the understanding that prices
will come down as technology is developed, the advantages for developers are
substantial. The November deadline for applications for the third NFFO order
attracted what the Non Fossil Fuel Purchasing Agency chief executive, David
Walton, calls a 'great deal of interest'. Almost three times as many
projects applied for funding than under the previous NFFO order.
However, Sir Bernard and his colleagues may be able to draw comfort from the
fact that some environmental groups are also beginning to express qualms
about the pace of developments. At the end of November, the Campaign for the
Protection of Rural Wales, alarmed at an escalating number of applications
for wind farms on Welsh hillsides, called for a moratorium on all future
schemes until 'wind power generation is proven to be cost-effective'. In
future, it will oppose all wind farms in Wales.
Friends of the Earth, a firm supporter of wind energy in principle, has
criticised developers for their lack of sensitivity to local people's
feelings. The group is to issue guidelines before the end of the year
highlighting the importance of early consultation.
Signs that this opposition has penetrated government circles came when Eggar
opened Britain's largest wind farm at Cold Northcott, Cornwall, last month.
He used the occasion to 'clarify' the government's position on targets.
'The government does not have a specific target for wind energy, and its
success will depend on developers finding sites acceptable to the public and
to planning authorities,' he said. 'NFFO does not override the planning
process and government is concerned as much about the local environment as
the global one. The planning guidance in PPG 22 requires planners to balance
the government's policies for renewables with those of the countryside.'
A DTI strategy document on renewable energy was due to be published before
the end of this year, though it has now been delayed. It will be the first
such document since the influential report of the government's Renewable
Energy Advisory Group last year. A DTI spokesman said the document would not
represent any dramatic shift in policy. 'We don't need to radically change
our policy because of opposition because we have always said that the
go-ahead for developments is dependent on the relevant planning permission,'
he said.
A substantial test of government policy is a proposed wind farm at Humble
Hill in Tyneside, 13 kms from the historically important Hadrian's Wall. The
scheme will involve up to 267 turbines with a capacity of 80MW, above the
50MW threshold which requires specific approval from the DTI.
Michael Jefferson, director of the British Energy Association, the trade
group for the UK energy industry, is urging a more cautious approach by
developers. In a speech to the British Wind Energy Association's annual
conference in October, he said: 'My underlying worry is that if accelerated
development of wind energy is to be maintained, and in a manner consistent
with broad environmental principles, then the industry and the nation cannot
afford to have two or three apples which threaten the larger crop.
'There is a risk that a few unwise schemes may provoke a backlash and
undermine the pace of sounder developments.' He singled out Humble Hill as a
project that was unacceptable in terms of visual intrusion and other
interference.
But developers disagree that wind farm applications are being rushed
through. The Humble Hill developers, Trigen (a consortium of EcoGen Ltd, Sea
West of the US and Tomen of Japan), held a month-long exhibition and various
local meetings to raise public awareness in the area.
