FT  01 DEC 93 / Budget 93: Private finance given key role - Transport
The government yesterday announced that motorway tolling would be introduced
once the electronic technology was ready.
In the meantime, the Department of Transport plans to promote new-style
contracts to allow private contractors to design, build, finance and operate
roads.
The promoters of private sector roads will receive 'shadow toll' payments
from the government in relation to the level of traffic which uses the new
or improved roads.
The department of transport expects to award the first contracts in about 18
months.
Yesterday's Budget also marked a modest shift in the balance of transport
spending away from roads and towards rail and underground.
If the government succeeds in attracting private finance for new large
infrastructure projects, then public transport should benefit even further.
Spending on British Rail and London Underground will be maintained at higher
levels than in the 1980s but there will be a modest reduction in the
provision for the road programme, the chancellor announced.
The average cost of road contracts has fallen by 25 per cent since 1989 so
programmes can be carried out at less cost, he said.
The reduction in the cost of investment programmes has accounted for most of
the fall in the Department of Transports spending estimates from Pounds 18bn
in the three years to 1995 to Pounds 17bn in the three years to 1996.
The capital investment programme nevertheless still includes Pounds 8bn of
planned spending on roads, Pounds 3bn for London Transport and Pounds 3bn
for rail, including Pounds 1.8bn earmarked for Railtrack, which will own and
operate track and signalling.
That means that 40 per cent of transport spending goes to buses, rail and
underground although they account for only 14 per cent of passenger
journeys, the department said.
According to the department's three-year projections, spending on the
national roads network will now fall from Pounds 2.09bn in this financial
year to Pounds 1.96bn in 1995-96.
Spending on rail will fall from Pounds 1.5bn to Pounds 975m while London
Transport will rise from Pounds 722m to Pounds 930m. London Transport will
be allowed to keep the proceeds of the sale of London Buses.
The three main public-private sector projects to be announced yesterday were
for the modernisation of the West coast mainline with the help of between
Pounds 400m-Pounds 600m of private sector funds, the building of a Pounds
200m air traffic control centre in Scotland, and a Pounds 150m extension of
the Docklands Light Railway to Lewisham.
Two further public/private sector initiatives which were announced are for
British Rail and Railtrack to be allowed to retain and to invest half of the
proceeds of rail privatisation, up to a maximum of Pounds 200m. The
government will also seek further private finace for the Civil Aviation
Authority's investment programme.
