FT  30 JUN 93 / Letter: British Gas - monopoly and costs at issue
Sir, Your editorial, 'Abolishing the gas monopoly' (June 29), raises some
very important issues relating to the public interest. Although the theory
of your argument is plausible, a number of the practicalities have not been
properly addressed.
First, a competitive framework would, as the article rightly concludes, lead
to the phasing-out of subsidies to about 12m households with lower levels of
consumption. But can it really be in the wider public interest for these
people, mostly less well-off, to face increases in their gas bills of up to
94 per cent? Who else would pay? The shareholder or the government
(taxpayer)? The present system works efficiently with high levels of
customer satisfaction on value for money and quality of service. Prices have
come down by 20 to 25 per cent since privatisation, in contrast with the
electricity industry where competition has yet to develop and prices have
gone up - hardly an appropriate comparison.
Our company is neither afraid of competition nor protected from it. On the
contrary competitors are now operating in 53 per cent of the firm industrial
market, and 13 per cent of the tariff market above 2,500 therms. We have
published proposals that will also ensure competition in the interruptible
market. There are two further practical hurdles. Accurate metering is
essential for developing a competitive market, for without adequate daily
measurement and the means of using that information, there would be
significant extra costs leading to massive consumer discontent.
Huge strides have already been made in producing a technically advanced
ultrasonic meter. Field tests are already taking place, but full development
is some years away. Again who will pay? But the most critical issue you have
overlooked is the safety of gas supply. What distinguishes gas from
electricity is that when it fails it is dangerous. That is the main reason
why no other country has competition in gas supply to domestic households.
This is the single issue on which there must be no compromise.
C H Brown,
chief executive,
British Gas,
152 Grosvenor Road,
London SW1
