FT  13 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Smith faces union deadlock over
party reform - The problems facing the Labour leader's agenda for change
AN APPARENT concession by Labour leader John Smith in his confrontation with
the trade unions yesterday alarmed some of Labour's 'moderniser' MPs as it
became clear that the party leader's battle has entered a complex period of
manoeuvre.
Mr Smith has remained firm on his call for 'one member, one vote' in the
selection of Labour parliamentary candidates. But his weekend promise that
individual trade union members who pay the political levy would continue to
vote in leadership elections led to fears that Mr Smith would be seen as
having given ground. 'It is a tactical blunder,' said one MP.
But the clash is not a matter of black versus white. Nor is Mr Smith's
predicament as deep as it might seem - even though a decisive majority of
trade unionists are now ranged against his proposals.
For a start, the reforms on which the Labour conference will vote on are not
yet clear. Mr Smith's idea of a register of Labour-supporting trade union
members as part of a electoral college for leadership elections have not yet
been detailed.
The party's trade union links committee meets tomorrow and will agree a
report for presenting to Labour's ruling National Executive Committee on
Monday. There, Mr Smith will probably win a small majority for plans which
will be submitted to the conference in September.
The thinking among Mr Smith's aides is that once proposed reforms are
documented, the leadership will be in a better position to sell its line.
Moreover, there is a belief within Mr Smith's camp that some of his
opponents are potential waverers on the selection of parliamentary
candidates. Aides believe the conference delegations from three out of the
big six unions affiliated to Labour - Nupe, the public service union, Usdaw,
the shopworkers' union and MSF, the white collar union - could be persuaded
to shift position to one-member-one-vote (OMOV). That might be enough to
swing the vote in the Labour leader's favour.
Another possibility, backed by some members of Labour's shadow cabinet, is a
fudge between a 'register' of supporters in the unions, backed in principle
by Nupe and the GMB, and Mr Smith's insistance on trade union members paying
something extra, above the political levy, to become full Labour party
members. Levy-paying trade unionists could become full members by, say,
paying a nominal sum of 50p and promising to support the aims of the Labour
party.
Perhaps more likely is that division among the trade unions opposed to OMOV
for parliamentary selections will result in the conference ending in
impasse. Mrs Margaret Beckett, Labour's deputy leader, yesterday said there
were about 25 different options being floated for reforms. It might be that
none of the motions will be passed.
The chances of a stalemate are quite strong. A motion backing the status quo
from the TGWU or one of the small left-wing unions will almost certainly
fall because the GMB general union and Nupe will both reject it. But their
own variations of reform - a register of Labour supporters among levy payers
from Nupe and a reform of the local electoral college from the GMB - will
also probably be defeated by a combination of status quo camp and Smith
supporters.
The NEC, which narrowly favours OMOV, would then be in a strong position to
present a resolution which supports Mr Smith. The less attractive option for
the Smith camp is that supporters of the status quo shift their support to
the register idea rather than accept OMOV.
