FT  13 APR 93 / Japan to announce Dollars 1.2bn aid package for Russia:
Miyazawa wants G7 ministers' meeting in Tokyo tomorrow to discuss the yen's
rapid appreciation
JAPAN will help Russia dispose of nuclear waste as part of a bilateral aid
package worth about Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 795m) to be announced at
tomorrow's meeting of foreign and finance ministers from the Group of Seven
leading industrialised nations.
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister, who will announce the package, also
suggested yesterday that the visiting ministers, in Tokyo for a two-day
meeting, should discuss the rapid appreciation of the yen, which closed
yesterday in Tokyo at a record Y112.95 to the dollar.
However, the US has supported a stronger yen in the hope of reducing Japan's
trade surplus, and is unlikely to agree to international intervention to
stabilise the Japanese currency.
The yen's appreciation has gathered pace in recent days, prompting
complaints from export industries.
Japan's assistance package is likely to comprise a Dollars 1bn trade
insurance programme and around Dollars 200m in humanitarian aid and
technological assistance, particularly to the Russian nuclear industry.
The already tense relationship between Moscow and Tokyo was further soured
by reports last month that the Russian navy routinely dumped nuclear waste
in the Sea of Japan. There has been no evidence of contamination in Japanese
waters, but Mr Miyazawa and other senior ministers were outraged by the
dumping.
Japan intends to propose to other G7 members that assistance to Russia be
specifically linked to the continued rule of President Boris Yeltsin, whose
authority will be tested at a referendum on April 25. Officials in Tokyo say
international aid is intended to encourage democracy and it should be made
clear to Moscow that the defeat of Mr Yeltsin would compromise that process.
While Japan will announce its own bilateral package, Japanese officials say
they will support a move within the Group of Seven to draw attention away
from huge figures for multilateral assistance, much of which has yet to be
delivered, and which creates pressure for ever larger packages.
US officials in Washington were last week urging Japan, as host to the
summit, to increase its aid to Russia.
The bulk of the money available to help Russia in its economic reforms is
likely to come from the International Monetary Fund and other multinational
financial institutions.
It is expected that the G7 meeting will ratify total multilateral assistance
of around Dollars 36bn, including already negotiated debt relief, new
credits from the IMF, and some carry-over from a Dollars 24bn package
announced last year.
So far, however, Russia has been unable to meet the IMF's strict conditions
for setting up a traditional standby financing arrangement, and discussions
have been under way on how to provide funds with looser conditionality.
A US official said, however, that he did not expect conditionality to be
weakened, merely 'streamlined'.
In agreeing to provide bilateral assistance, Japan wants Russia to be 'more
friendly', and to show a medium-term willingness to discuss the return of
the disputed Kurile islands, occupied by Soviet troops at the end of the war
in 1945. Japan will not formally raise the issue at the G7 meeting, but will
discuss it in separate talks with Russian officials. In Moscow yesterday,
Itar-Tass news agency was quoting a local official in the islands as ruling
out a settlement for the next 50 to 100 years.
Japanese Foreign Ministry officials are still angry at Mr Yeltsin's abrupt
decision to cancel a visit last year, but welcomed reports last night that
he might come to Tokyo before the G7 summit in July. Tokyo has complained
that he is less willing to receive Japanese visitors than senior officials
from other industrialised countries.
At the same time, Japan, as chair of the G7 this year, does not want to be
accused of having blocked assistance to Russia and is keen to draw attention
to its own contributions.
The Dollars 1.2bn in aid will be in addition to Dollars 2.4bn in already
announced trade insurance and medical assistance, about a third of which has
been disbursed.
