FT  24 SEP 93 / Palestinians train as keepers of law and order
EACH MORNING young unemployed Palestinians gather outside the
Jordanian-based Palestine Liberation Army (PLA) headquarters in Amman hoping
to join the ranks of policemen who will be charged with keeping the peace in
the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho.
High up on the desert hills outside Amman their successful compatriots are
already being trained in riot control, anti-terrorist measures, forensic
science and crime investigation at Jordan's Police Academy. Twenty of them
yesterday carried out a mock crowd control exercise armed with shields,
helmets and batons. Dressed in dark blue uniforms, with the PLA insignia of
an eagle wrapped in the Palestinian flag stitched to their berets, they
stripped down their M-16 rifles and explained what their role in a
Palestinian entity might be.
'We will be there to follow the duties of any policeman - to protect our
people from everyone and everything,' says Captain Faisal Mahmoud Mustapha
who hails from Nablus on the West Bank. 'We want to protect both Jews and
Palestinians,' he adds.
Captain Mustapha along with another 400 policemen began their training this
month and expect to be deployed in Jericho by October.
A superior from the PLA, Brigadier Mohammad Qudsyeh, brushes off suggestions
that the police force may be pitted against extremist Palestinian groups
trying to wreck Mr Yassir Arafat's peace accord. 'I'm astonished that you
think we will start killing. We will quell our opponents through dialogue,'
he argues.
Soldiers from the estimated 12,000 strong PLA which is scattered throughout
the Arab world are due to be moved to training camps in Jordan and Egypt by
the end of the year before deployment to Gaza and Jericho. Until recently,
they were taught to use rifles against the 'Zionist entity' but most will
now be retrained as peacekeeping policemen.
Meanwhile a recruitment drive has begun in the occupied territories with
newspaper advertisements inviting both male and female applicants aged
between 18 and 35 to apply for the Palestinian force. Mr Faisal Husseini,
who heads the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks, says
the police force will eventually number 30,000.
