FT  12 JUN 93 / Future is far from secure for born-again truckmakers
AS RECEIVERS and management buy-out teams celebrate the rescue of the former
Leyland Daf truck and van operations, serious obstacles remain to the
long-term viability of the ventures:
The new companies are being launched into a business environment that
remains hostile.
During the long weeks of receivership, rivals have been trying to bite
heavily into Daf's market share and undermine its dealer networks.
The van and truck operations will not control the lucrative spare parts
business, and will derive only royalty income from parts.
The new ventures will need to generate substantial funds to finance new
product development.
The deep recession that brought the Daf group to its knees may be starting
to lift in the UK, but conditions are deteriorating rapidly in continental
Europe, where Leyland Daf must sell a significant part of its light truck
output.
In the UK new commercial vehicle registrations in the first five months of
this year were still 4.5 per cent below those for the corresponding period
last year and 50.6 per cent below the 1989 peak.
The medium and heavy van market, in which Leyland Daf Vans is competing, is
where demand is weakest.
The truck market is showing some signs of life, but from a very low base.
UK truck sales (above 3.5 tonnes gross vehicle weight) last year were 55 per
cent below the peak sales of 69,234 achieved in 1989. Overall West European
truck sales fell by 25 per cent in the first quarter this year.
The heavy cost of developing new products helped bring down the old Daf
group and it could well prove eventually to be the Achilles heel of the new
ventures. Pulled together out of the wreckage of the old Daf group, they
will probably still need to find strategic partners to survive in the long
term.
Leyland Daf Vans in Birmingham has lost access to Daf's continental dealer
network, and so has had to base its hopes for survival on the UK market
alone.
It is concentrating efforts chiefly on sales of basic, low-cost utility
panel vans to large fleet customers such as the Post Office.
It has also been forced to drop out of a project to develop a new generation
van in a joint venture with Renault, the huge cost of which helped bring
about Daf's collapse.
The MBO will be forced to rely instead on further development of the present
vans, which were originally launched 20 years ago as the Sherpa van by the
then British Leyland.
But the new ventures do have some advantages. They have been relieved of old
debt burdens, and the heavy costs of restructuring and rationalisation have
disappeared through the receivership. The truck plant workforce has agreed
to a pay freeze until the end of 1994 and to a package of far-reaching
reforms in working practices in support of the rescue deal.
Mr John Gilchrist, leader of the successful Leyland truck plant MBO team,
claimed the Leyland plant had a lower cost per vehicle than any of its
rivals.
The Leyland plant is pinning its hopes for survival on being 'a dedicated
contract manufacturer' of commercial vehicles. It is aiming to manufacture
its own designed vehicles and it will seek also to assemble other makes
under contract.
Much may depend on whether it can win repeat business from the Ministry of
Defence for military vehicles to help to even out the wild fluctuations in
demand in civilian markets.
Military work has been an important factor in helping it through the
receivership. Now it has only 300 of a 1,500 order for heavy ammunition
carrying trucks left to complete by spring next year along with 2,000 of a
5,500 order for general service British Army trucks to be completed by
spring 1995.
The remnants of the Daf group may have a future, but it is far from a secure
one.
