FT  21 DEC 93 / Good news of world's health
The progress made in eradicating common childhood diseases across the world
is one of the greatest untold 'good news' stories this year, the United
Nations Children's Fund said yesterday in its annual State of the World's
Children report.
The report, which will be unveiled by US President Bill Clinton today, says
that concerted international effort has raised the level of basic child
immunisation coverage to almost 80 per cent across the world, up from 5 per
cent 25 years ago.
But in spite of the deliberately upbeat message, which comes after a year in
which UN agencies have faced growing criticism of their effectiveness and
management, the report insists that some Dollars 25bn (Pounds 16.7bn) a year
will be needed to tackle the broader problems of child poverty.
The area of greatest progress has been against childhood diseases. In spite
of a fall in immunisation levels this year, the report stresses that:
the number of children dying from measles has been cut from 2.5m a year in
the early 1980s to 1m this year;
the number crippled by polio has fallen to 140,000 a year, from 500,000 in
1980;
deaths from diarrhoeal diseases has fallen by more than a million, to below
3m;
family planning schemes have contributed to a cut in the average number of
births, down to 3.7 per woman from 6 per woman one generation ago.
On the gloomier side, though, children have now become one of the chief
victims of war, not only in high-profile regions such as Bosnia, but also in
lesser known wars in Africa - in the last decade alone 1.5m children have
been killed in armed conflicts, with a further 4m maimed or injured, Unicef
estimates.
One million children have become victims of Aids, which is now overtaking
measles as the main killer of children in several African countries.
Meanwhile, the spiral of poverty, population growth and environmental
degradation is threatening most of the Third World, the report says, with
Africa still sliding backwards into poverty.
Unicef denies the decision to focus on positive progress represented any
deliberate attempt to deflect criticism, and points out that, unlike that of
other UN agencies, Unicef's Dollars 938m budget does not come directly from
the UN but from donor governments - a situation many aid workers believe
leaves Unicef more sensitive and accountable than many other UN agencies.
But coming after a year of fierce debate about the role of multinational aid
groups and their relationship with the state and non-governmental sector,
Unicef has faced criticism of its own level of bureaucracy and the
sustainability of some of its programmes.
Save the Children fund, a non-governmental organisation whose director
recently called for a re-evaluation of the mandate of UN agencies, yesterday
said it welcomed Unicef's attempt to counter negative media images of the
Third World.
But it pointed out that since most progress against childhood diseases had
been achieved through outside funding, fears remain about the sustainability
of these projects. Although the World Bank calculates that Dollars 12 a head
is needed each year in developing countries to achieve basic health care,
most countries are only spending around Dollars 1.50 a head, leaving them
dangerously dependent on the plans of outside aid agencies, Save the
Children said.
