FT  13 MAR 93 / Arts: Russian soul bared - Poetry in Performance
'WE ARE AGAINST the McDonaldsisation of life] We are against the
international conspiracy of vulgarity against human subtleties' thundered
the Thunderer himself Yegveny Yevtushenko, poet of all the Russias, who flew
into London this week for an unexpected two-date tour which began in the
cramped surroundings of Waterstone's, Charing Cross Road.
There is no-one else quite like Yevtushenko in the world of poetry. His
demeanour is that of a man accustomed to being feted the world over - the
Hollywood-like aura of his personality; the extravagance of his charm; the
peackockish nature of his dress, which included a tremendous woollen scarf
as red as the Red Flag itself (though made by Burberrys); the dramatic
exuberance of his verbal delivery.
Yevtushenko is the populist demagogue of poetry, a filler of football stadia
in his native land; the poet whose books move off the shelves faster than
bread. All his life he played a dangerous, venturesome game with the Soviet
authorities, sniping at the heels of the tsars of communism. He never
emigrated; he preferred to fight the system from within and, like Neruda in
Chile, he became an Untouchable: too popular to be made away with; the
licenced beast; the conscience-solver; the token of liberalisation who was
rewarded with his dachas and permissions to travel when and wherever. But
was he puppet or puppeteer?
Now in his sixtieth year, he seems as irrepressible as ever, ranting and
charming by turns; punching his fist into the air, kissing the hand of his
English publisher - the very personification of the virtues and style of Old
Mother Russia, whose travails he continues to lament in his poetry. The fact
is, of course, that the two are indistinguishable. And no, it is not mere
vanity when he says, as he did this week, 'For me, the most important thing
is to express myself. My main fear is the experience of this life could just
be gone - dissolved in the abyss of oblivion'. The fact is that he must
survive in order to speak for Russia's soul. Russia needs him. But he has
learned a thing or two by surviving so long. 'Yes, I am praying,' he told
us. 'I'm working for the future of Russia - but all prophets are false. I
was an MP for three and a half years, then I happily left this field. In the
beginning politicians are innocent liars - they are forced to lie by us. I
am a poetician, not a politician.'
Some of the audience thought that delightful piece of wordplay too fine a
distinction - but when he went on to read 'Between the City of Yes and the
City of No' in the original Russian, dancing and prancing on his toes,
crossing his arms like a pair of flourished sabres, writhing his body like a
snake, and turning up the volume of his voice to an almighty growl, it was
quickly conquered.
India is the second-largest publisher of English-language books in the
world, but its literature remains largely unknown in the west. To lighten
our darkness somewhat, the Arts Council is currently touring a quartet of
Indian writers, which include the poets Nissim Ezekiel and Meena Alexander.
The elderly Nissim Ezekiel, a spry, fragile figure in shabby grey flannels
and blue plimsolls, is a poet of quick, darting, sardonic humour, who enjoys
working in many different forms and, being a successful playwright too,
projecting different personalities through his poems. One of a sequence of
'very Indian poems in Indian English' entitled 'Soap' dramatised an argument
between a customer who had bought a defective bar of soap and a bristly,
pugnacious shopkeeper. As Ezekiel explained to us, he is a poet who roams
the streets of Bombay listening out for those quirkish turns of phrase and
strange dislocations of language that give it spice and humour.
Meena Alexander, on the other hand, a poet who now lives in Manhattan and
spent much of her early life shuttling between the Sudan and Kerala, was a
more troubling figure altogether. Her poems often concern themselves with
terrible acts of violence - racist incidents, murder, rape, beatings - but
they were delivered to the accompaniment of such winning gestures, and with
such a high gloss of charm, that we quite forgot ourselves in them.
