FT  20 NOV 93 / Major's risky crusade: The UK prime minister's Ulster
initiative
One of the more cruel truths of Northern Ireland is that politics has long
favoured the status quo. No matter how vicious the violence, post-war
governments on both sides of the Irish Sea have never been threatened by a
failure to restore peace.
Instead politicians in London have been mesmerised by the dangers of
undercutting the Protestant, unionist majority. Irish leaders have looked
over their shoulder at the nationalist aspirations of the Republic. In
Belfast, the constitutional parties - Protestant and Roman Catholic - have
felt safer with the status quo than with the risks of a new political
settlement.
Mr John Major this week declared it was time to end that depressing
paralysis. After weeks of intensive contacts between London and Dublin he
put Northern Ireland at the top of his personal agenda.
He is ready to table his own comprehensive proposals for devolved government
in Ulster and a re-definition of the relationships between Britain and the
Republic, and between north and south.
He made explicit the offer of a place in negotiations for Sinn Fein if the
IRA called a permanent halt to their terrorist campaign. He said he was
aiming for peace as well as a political settlement. He warned the hard-line
Democratic Unionist Party of the Rev Ian Paisley it could not exercise a
veto.
Senior British officials said that all sides would have to make
uncomfortable compromises. Mr Major, jolted by the terrorist atrocities
which began with last month's IRA bombing of Belfast's Protestant Shankill
Road, was ready to do so. He is confident of his own skills as a conciliator
and negotiator. He is spending more time on Northern Ireland than on any
other subject.
Not everyone thinks it is a wise decision. The high-profile approach is
described variously in Whitehall as naive and dangerous, as well as
courageous. His advisers say he knows it is a high-risk strategy. Old Ulster
hands regard that as a understatement.
Mr Major sees the rewards as well as the risks. An end to the killing after
25 bloody years would be the ultimate prize. But even a political deal which
fell short of that would do much to restore his authority.
A discernible mood for peace on both sides of the Irish border, however,
cannot of itself untie the knot which has wrecked past initiatives. Nor will
it erase centuries of mistrust. Mr Major must find the elusive formula which
reassures the unionist majority they retain a veto over constitutional
change and recognises the nationalist aspirations of the Republic and the
Catholic minority in Ulster.
So at the kernel of any agreement there must be a willingness on Dublin's
part to modify its constitutional claim to sovereignty, and a recognition by
unionists that the Republic has a legitimate interest in the way the north
is governed.
None of this is new. Some of these realities are incorporated into the 1985
Anglo-Irish agreement. Mr Garret Fitzgerald, the then Irish prime minister,
offered in 1984 to submit to a referendum the offending articles 2 and 3 of
the Irish constitution. Lady Thatcher did not believe he could deliver and
the idea was abandoned.
Mr Major believes the mood has changed. He trusts Mr Albert Reynolds, his
Irish counterpart. British officials say the two have a rapport.
But as a leak of Dublin's draft proposals for a settlement revealed, the
price it is demanding for renunciation of the South's territorial claim is
still too high for Unionists. Though the words 'joint sovereignty' never
appear, the idea suffuses the document.
That runs straight into the unionists' determination to preserve the
province's present status. Here the pivotal figure is Mr James Molyneaux,
the 73-year-old leader of the Ulster Unionists. Mr Major is ready to accept
that Mr Paisley's DUP may boycott talks. But the prime minister cannot get
anywhere without the support of the nine Ulster Unionist MPs.
Much has been made of the deal struck by the prime minister and Mr Molyneaux
to secure the ratification of the Maastricht treaty in the summer. But the
foundations of Mr Molyneaux's authority runs much deeper. Mr Major, a
self-declared unionist, cannot agree anything without the consent of the
Protestant majority. Mr Molyneaux' veto is cast-iron.
So far he has kept his counsel on Mr Major's initiatives. But some suspect
he expects the process to founder. Mr Major might then have to accept
unionists' agenda for integrating the province more fully into the UK.
Mr John Hume of the mainly Catholic SDLP has a different sort of veto. His
joint initiative with Mr Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein was rejected in both
Dublin and London. But to the discomfort of Mr Major, Mr Reynolds has taken
on board the idea that peace is an essential ingredient of any political
settlement. No Irish government can disown the SDLP
Then there is Sinn Fein. British intelligence reports suggest Mr Adams may
be serious about extricating the IRA from violence. But there is no
certainty and many risks.
There is unease on the Tory backbenches about 'concessions' to terrorists.
One minister warned that, if Mr Major leans too far towards Sinn Fein, the
resultant split in the Tory party would make Maastricht seem a 'tea party'.
In the past few weeks London and Dublin have cleared some of the historical
debris strewn across the path to peace. But for all his determination Mr
Major has no idea yet whether he has set off along another cul de sac.
