FT  08 OCT 93 / Technology: The science of shopping - Electronic gadgetry
can now track customer flows in and out of stores
For European retailers, the ability to attract customers and persuade them
to buy is often regarded as an art. In the US, on the other hand, retailing
is increasingly becoming a science.
What is the optimum ratio of sales staff to customers? How does pricing
affect sales? Does a particular advertisement bring more people into the
store?
These are topics which US retailers can now accurately measure, using the
latest monitoring equipment combined with sophisticated point-of-sale tills.
'Intuitively, we believed that all these things affected our business, but
we couldn't prove it,' says Phil Johnson, executive vice-president of human
resources at Macy's department store, and formerly with Saks Fifth Avenue.
At Saks, Johnson installed the ShopperTrak system from Datatec to count the
number of shoppers entering and leaving the store.
At its simplest level, the system was used to calculate peak traffic flows
and, combined with information from the point of sale (Pos) equipment, peak
'conversion' rates - how many customers were persuaded to buy.
Simple as it sounds, such data were difficult to obtain using traditional
manual counting methods - such as employees using 'clickers' to count
customers as they entered the store.
'It is one of the simplest things in retailing - knowing how many people
come into a store. But we've not had that information,' says Johnson.
'Eyeball' measuring, he believes, can be wrong by a factor of two or three.
'If you're running an ad, then it can produce very different traffic flows,
so data collected on a different day may no longer be accurate,' Johnson
explains. 'The lesson is that traffic is so hard to observe. But we talk
about it daily.'
ShopperTrak can give customer numbers every hour or for periods as short as
15 minutes. 'You can evaluate what you really get from a promotion,'
concludes Johnson.
The ability to garner such information lay behind the decision of Pier 1
Imports, the furnishing and household goods chain, to install ShopperTrak
when the US retail industry went into recession in spring 1990. 'Primarily,
we wanted to measure the effect of advertising,' says Jim Tener, senior
vice-president of operations.
The company soon realised it needed different information and that
ShopperTrak could help provide it. 'Preliminary results indicated alarming
evidence that, in addition to advertising, we needed to focus on more
fundamental issues dealing with store operations, namely improving our
emphasis on customer service and selling to the customer.'
The system helps the store managers decide on strategic issues such as price
reductions, how best to display items or whether demonstrating the use of
utensils increases sales.
The effectiveness of these is calculated by measuring a base line and then
assessing how that changes if a new factor is introduced. For Pier 1, this
included changing the ratio of staff to customers and altering the times
when staff cleaned or stacked shelves.
In one store in Toms River, New Jersey, the company experimented with
changing the staff-to-customer ratios from a high salesperson presence of
5:1 to a low of 9:1. It decided the optimum ratio was 7:1 - above that
conversion rates did not increase.
The company also wanted to evaluate how effective staff training was in
increasing the conversion rate, explains Tener. Although the concept of
sales training was devised by the managers themselves, ShopperTrak enabled
the company to measure the effects of the training.
Using such techniques at the Toms River test site, Pier 1 managed to
increase the conversion rate from 24.6 - just under one-quarter of shoppers
made a purchase - to 28.1 per cent, which equated to a 14.2 per cent
increase in turnover.
'The exciting thing to me is that we know exactly why it went up,' Tener
points out. 'We can measure cause and effect.' Pier 1 plans to do more
testing in its stores. Eighty of them already have the system installed and
by the end of February 1994, between 150 and 160 of Pier 1's 615 stores will
have ShopperTrak.
The financial payback is easy for Tener to calculate, as each of the stores,
with an average area of 9,000 square feet, has a single entrance. With the
systems costing Dollars 4,000 (Pounds 2,600) a time, Tener believes each
system will pay for itself in less than a year.
At Macy's, the calculations are not so simple. It would be too expensive for
the store to install equipment round every entrance to individual
departments, and so conversion rates can only be measured throughout the
store, not on a department-by-department basis.
At Selfridges in London, however, one tracking system has been installed
over an escalator, which could result in a floor-by-floor count. In one
discount store in the US, says Chris Carey, president of Datatec, systems
have been installed to enable the shop managers to count customers as they
enter each aisle.
Nevertheless, Johnson saw positive results at Saks even when treating each
store as a discrete unit. 'Sales had a positive change simply by telling
staff what the conversion rate was, how to improve it, and how it was
improving. We got a 2 to 3 per cent change in conversion rate for nothing.'
Tener also noticed changes in attitude at Pier 1. 'Our people developed a
competitive environment. One shift tried to outdo another.'
Johnson believes that in the future such systems could lead to changes in
the way staff and stores are assessed. 'Right now we measure everything on
sales,' he reports. But high-selling stores may have low conversion rates.
The data from ShopperTrak should enable managers to analyse which stores
need to produce higher conversion rates and which need to work on attracting
more customers into the store.
Carey believes the equipment can bring further advantages such as an
appraisal system of managers' performance. To do that, the accuracy of the
system is critical, says Johnson. 'You're trying to get the people in the
store to think in a completely different way, and you can only do that if
they have confidence in the data.'
The Datatec system uses vertical infra-red beams on a bar attached to the
ceiling. Unlike horizontal beams, they are out of the reach of children, who
often take pleasure in waving their arms in front of the beams to notch up
the numbers.
Because the infra-red beam bounces back once it is broken by the person
entering, the system can calculate the height of the object and eliminate
from its count anything or anyone under four feet tall - children, prams or
shopping trolleys.
ShopperTrak's software can calculate the number of 'buying units' entering
the store - a family, say - rather than just individuals. And it can combine
its data with that from IBM Pos systems to calculate conversion rates.
The latest software from Datatec has been designed for do-it-yourself stores
or supermarkets and enables floor managers to predict when they will need to
open another check-out lane.
The calculation is based on the number of customers entering and the average
time it takes them to complete their shopping. The system is already in use
in the US and is on trial at one UK supermarket.
In Europe, Carey sees the differing shopping habits as a challenge. In the
UK, for example, conversion rates are much lower than in the US - in the
high teens rather than the mid-20s, says Carey. But so is the ratio of staff
to customers.
While Pier 1 calculated that 7:1 was the optimum ratio in its stores, in the
UK there are 30 or even 40 customers on average for just one shop assistant.
'In the US, somewhere along the line customers have demanded service,' says
Carey. 'In the UK it's not even started.'
