FT  04 FEB 93 / Swift passage likely for family leave bill: Clinton set for
first legislative victory
THE FAMILY leave bill in the US yesterday began what looked like a rapid
passage through both houses of Congress as Republican attempts to modify and
amend it failed to muster sufficient votes.
The bill, twice vetoed by former President George Bush, would require
companies with more than 50 employees to provide up to 12 weeks' unpaid
leave for family exigencies, such as illness of a relative and childbirth.
In the morning, the Senate rejected by 67 votes to 33 - wider than the 57:43
Democratic majority - the alternative Republican proposal to institute tax
credits to companies to cover the cost of family leave. Later it voted down
a series of Republican amendments. The House was to take up the measure and
Mr Richard Gephardt, Democratic leader, predicted easy passage.
Senate Republicans also decided yesterday morning to force a vote on the
controversial question of retaining the ban on homosexuals in the military,
a move designed to pre-empt President Bill Clinton's order for a six-month
review of the issue.
But they did not decide whether to add such a proposal to the family leave
bill or to offer it as a stand-alone amendment. In any case, they conceded
that they probably did not have the votes to pass such a measure. Senator
Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat and an opponent of gays in the military, said
flatly he would not support the Republican move.
Passage of the bill would provide President Clinton with his first
legislative victory, though it would hardly be a momentous one and would
serve as no guide to the far tougher battles to come on economic and social
policy.
The White House also confirmed yesterday that Mr Clinton was considering
lifting the ban on the government hiring the air-traffic controllers who
went on strike in 1981. President Ronald Reagan's breaking of that strike
was an early landmark of his first term.
Mr Clinton's press secretary also confirmed what had been the case since
Monday, that the regular daily briefings would no longer be televised live,
with the exception of special occasions. The practice was unpopular with
many White House correspondents and did not always show the media or the
chief spokesman, Mr George Stephanopoulos, in the most favourable light.
Last, and also predictably, the Senate intelligence committee yesterday
unanimously approved the nomination of Mr James Woolsey to be the next head
of the Central Intelligence Agency.
A full Senate vote is expected today.
