FT  30 MAR 93 / Survey of the Republic of Slovenia (9): Jewel at the hub of
change - Profile of Gorenje
IF YOU have ever eaten dinner in a Slovene home, chances are it was cooked
on a Gorenje stove while the local Riesling came out of a Gorenje
refrigerator.
From its ultra-modern main factory at Velenje, close to the Italian,
Austrian and Hungarian borders, Gorenje has long dominated the domestic
market.
But the 2m Slovenes account for only 5 per cent of the company's total
sales. Gorenje is Slovenia's exporter par excellence, sending 95 per cent of
its output to 70 countries. It sells 60 per cent of appliances under
Gorenje's own brand names, and the remainder under foreign labels, including
General Electric, Bosch, Siemens and Electrolux.
Mr Franjo Bobinac, marketing director, says Gorenje's success stems from its
emphasis on tight quality control and product development. 'The directors of
each division - refrigerators, cookers and washing machines - are
responsible for product quality and development,' he says.
'This year we will produce 23 new appliances - from fridges to stoves.
Gorenje must constantly develop in order to remain one of Europe's top eight
producers.'
But Mr Bobinac admits 1992 was a difficult year. Profits were under severe
pressure, totalling about 1 per cent of the turnover of DM990m, he says.
Like so many Slovene businessmen, he blames the government for failing to
stimulate exports, the bedrock of the Slovene economy.
'Gorenje needs additional export incentives from the government and interest
rates should be lowered to compensate for the strong tolar,' he says.
Mr Bobinac says Gorenje is undergoing changes which will help to streamline
the company and reduce costs. About 1,000 workers have been sent away in the
past three years. Like other exporters, he argues that the average monthly
wage of DM600 is far too high to keep his exports competitive.
In an attempt to cut costs and prices, Gorenje plans to change the
distribution network in major European markets, such as Germany, France and
Austria. 'We will make more direct sales,' says Mr Bobinac.
The break-up of Yugoslavia hit Gorenje - not just in terms of losing
markets. When Slovenia declared independence in 1991, the Yugoslav
republics, especially Serbia, accounted for 30 per cent of all sales.
Although Mr Bobinac says Gorenje had formed its export orientation long
before the disintegration of the Yugoslav federation, the loss of the
Serbian market, the biggest republic in former Yugoslavia, has hurt
especially hard. 'Belgrade alone has almost 2m inhabitants - the size of all
of Slovenia,' he points out.
In addition to losing its captive markets, the disintegration of the federal
state meant that Gorenje lost control of its factories, service outlets and
stores in the other republics. Gorenje now has DM50m in outstanding claims
against Serbia for the seizure of nearly 20 service centres.
Gorenje's production network extended to war-torn Bosnia-Hercegovina. The
ongoing Serb siege of Bihac, in north-west Bosnia, has forced it to stop
producing 24-inch refrigerators at Bihac and relocate production to the main
plant in Slovenia. The company does not even know what has happened to the
plant at Tuzla, cut off by both Serb and Croat forces.
Company managers agree that Gorenje's survival hinges on its ability to
generate future export-led growth. 'We are boosting exports to the Middle
East and South America. Sales to Iran, Mexico and Chile are growing
significantly,' Mr Bobinac says.
Gorenje is on the privatisation schedule. But that is likely to occur in a
form which will insure continuing Slovene control of what most Slovenes
regards as a 'national jewel'. Economists believe that most of the shares
will end up with specially-created mutual funds as part of the mass
privatisation programme. Others will be sold or distributed directly to
Gorenje managers and workers, leaving only a minority to be sold on the open
market.
Though foreigners have made inquiries about investing in Gorenje, Mr Bobinac
doubts the government will allow them to buy out Slovenia's main export
companies. 'Gorenje is the only European brand name in Slovenia. I believe
we are too important to become a foreign company.'
