FT  12 JAN 93 / Arts: Veronese's 'Marriage at Cana' restored
Paolo Caliari, called Veronese after the city of his birth, died in his
house at Venice in 1588, at the age of 60. High on the wall in the modest
back-street near S. Samuele, is an equally modest inscription: 'Paolo
Veronese', it runs, 'Sovereign Painter of Venice, Triumphant and Immortal
Master through the changing centuries . . .' Quite an epitaph in the city of
Carpaccio, Bellini and Giorgione - with Canaletto and Tiepolo to come - for
one who was but the junior of Tintoretto, who outlived him, and above all of
Titian, by some 40 years his senior who had died only ten years before.
So were the Venetians right about him all the time, and we so wrong? For
while his work has always been inescapable, in the great churches and
palazzi of Venice and all the major museums of the world, it has long been
more respected than truly celebrated, a phenomenon before which to stand
more in awe at his facility and scale than in astonishment and delight at
its proper qualities.
He is far from being alone in this respect, for sadly this modern age tends
to distrust, and so discount, the conspicuous demonstration of skill. How
flashy, decorative or self-indulgent, we say, and what a pity it is that
such an obvious talent does not take itself more seriously. The pure
hedonistic thrill of enjoying consummate mastery has long been lost on us,
and the loss is ours.
To stand now before the vast 'The Marriage at Cana', that Veronese painted
in 1563 for the refectory of Palladio's rebuilt S. Giorgio Maggiore, is to
acknowledge the gratuitous foolishness of the mistake. Some 6.7m high and
10m across, it is an astonishing object, carried through with, to us, an
unimaginably easy grace, amplitude and confidence. Veronese was 35 when he
did it, the first in a sequence of similarly vast banquet scenes ended, some
ten years later, with 'The Last Supper' for SS. Giovanni e Paolo, and with
Veronese himself hauled before the Inquisition to answer for his blasphemous
realism. That work, now in the Accademia at Venice, he judiciously retitled
'The Feast at the House of Levi', which got him off the hook.
'The Marriage at Cana' has enjoyed a chequered history - appropriated by
Bonaparte at the fall of the Venetian Republic in 1797; rolled up and
shipped back to Paris, unpicked at the seams and split in two. Restored at
intervals ever since, it was packed off to Brest for safety during the war
of 1870 and nearly lost in a railway siding en route; left alone in the
Louvre from 1914 until 1918; sent off again in 1939, first to Chambord, on
to Montauban, then back to the Louvre in 1942. Now, after definitive
restoration that has kept it hidden since 1989, it is on view once more in
the Louvre's Salle des Etats, where it has hung since 1951.
Where once it suffered the turned backs of tourists crowding around the
'Mona Lisa', which has been removed elsewhere, it now rightly commands
something like the grand public space for which it was intended. On either
side hang other works of Veronese, and of his followers, along with related
works and documentary displays. But the great spectacle is supplied en face
by the full scale analytical X-ray photograph that, mounted, fills the far
end of the gallery.
Here, in an oddly expressionistic chiaroscuro, is revealed the technical and
practical history of the painting, the cuts and seams, the nails and struts
of the canvas and its supporting frame, the paint-loss and the repairs, and
all overlaid by the painting's vestigial architecture and the ghostly,
complex choreography of its figures. It is here, with the tell-tale traces
of what they call the pentimenti and repentirs, the underpainting and
changes-of-mind, that the art historians get so excited. Look, they say, a
viol has been shifted an inch or two, a head turned or dropped, an arm
raised, a leg swung nearer the vertical.
But it is hardly news that a work of art should change in the process of its
execution, that the amplification of a design should lead to modifications
of scale or visual emphasis, that the artist's first ideas of composition or
gesture should not be quite the best. Art was never a simple matter of the
original concept, fixed in an instant and forever.
For an artist, the astonishment and excitement felt before this
extraordinary work rest rather on the converse discovery that the changes
are so few and minor, matters of the merest adjustment and refinement.
Veronese would seem indeed to have got it more or less right first time. And
we return to the painting as it is, more alive than ever to what has been
done on the actual surface of the canvas - the marks made, the lightness of
touch and open vigour of the drawing - that together bring alive to us
across the centuries this vast, complex, ideal scene.
The music plays, the servants pass up and down, the hounds strain and fret
as they always did. Is the colour brighter than before, the brocades richer,
the cheeks of the guests more red, Christ's fixed outward gaze a little
warmer in its intensity? Perhaps it is. Something is always lost to a
restoration, to little obvious gain, save only that the work should survive
the longer. It is an old and unresolveable argument - a removal of a layer
of dirt or discoloured varnish here, the subtlest of glazes there. The
restorer's art was never precise, for all its present carapace of scientific
means and method.
'The Marriage at Cana' remains still a work of wonder and the greatest
beauty. 'What, they lived once thus at Venice where the merchants were the
kings,/ Where St Mark's is, where the Doges used to wed the sea with rings?'
'Les Noces de Cana de Veronese: A work and its restoration'. The Louvre,
Paris, until March 29: sponsored by ICI France
