FT  01 OCT 93 / International Company News: Injecting life into an old
jalopy - Martin Dickson charts racing hero Roger Penske's successes at
engine-maker Detroit Diesel
ROGER Penske, 56, is best-known to Americans for his youthful exploits as a
racing driver and his more recent success as owner of the prize-winning
racing car team which bears his name.
However, the flotation, expected next week, of a company he has nursed back
to health, testifies to his other impressive track record - as an
entrepreneur.
It also provides an object lesson in how a business smothered by a large,
slow-moving corporate parent can gain a new lease of life under more nimble
management.
The company is Detroit Diesel, which makes diesel engines primarily for the
heavy-duty truck market, but also for buses, power generation and the
mining, construction and boat industries.
It is selling 4.75m shares - 3.8m in the US and 950,000 internationally - in
an initial public offering at up to Dollars 18 a share. This will raise
around Dollars 80m and value the group at some Dollars 400m. The proceeds
will be used to reduce debt and expenses, and buy a business.
Formerly known as Detroit Diesel Allison, the company was a subsidiary of
General Motors, the largest US car manufacturer, until 1988, when Mr
Penske's private business empire acquired an 80 per cent controlling stake.
GM, which retained the remaining 20 per cent, was anxious to get out of the
business partly because of Allison's poor financial performance and partly
because it wanted to focus its energies on turning round its troubled North
American car operations.
Mr Penske, whose business acumen has won him seats on the boards of American
Express and Philip Morris, and whose interests include large car dealerships
and one of America's biggest truck leasing businesses, gambled correctly
that Allison's woes masked great potential.
Its share of the North American on-highway heavy-duty truck engine market
has jumped from just 4 per cent in 1988 to 26 per cent last year, with
revenues up 63 per cent, to Dollars 1.37bn from Dollars 842m
The net income figures are much less impressive, rising from Dollars 8.5m to
Dollars 10.5m over the same period, and 1992 was flattered by a first-half
Dollars 4.3m one-time gain. Still, the company has bounced back from losses
of Dollars 2.9m and Dollars 5.2m in the recessionary years of 1990 and 1991,
and the first half of this year saw net income up from an underlying Dollars
1.2m to Dollars 8.9m.
This turnround is largely a tale of two engines. In the 1980s, under GM's
ownership, the company floundered because of the poor reputation of its 92
Series heavy-duty engine, which was introduced in the late 1970s and
initially captured a large share of the truck market. However, the
hastily-designed 92s turned out to have poor fuel consumption. Sales
nose-dived and so did Allison's reputation.
The recent revival is due largely to the company's Series 60 engine, which
was the first in the industry to incorporate the sophisticated electronic
systems used in cars to improve fuel economy and cut pollution. GM deserves
much of the credit for this, since the engine was developed under its
ownership.
However, Mr Penske has continued to invest heavily in R&amp;D, which absorbs 4
per cent of net revenues and employs 11 per cent of the workforce.
Detroit is putting a great deal of effort into developing engines using
alternative fuel sources, such as natural gas, to comply with increasingly
strict US emission control standards.
It also has a partnership with Mercedes-Benz, the German vehicle and engine
manufacturer, to develop diesel engines and components.
Daimler-Benz, Mercedes' parent, is demonstrating its faith in Detroit by
using the flotation to take a 13 per cent stake in the business, through
debenture conversions and stock purchases. It also has the right to take its
stake up to 20 per cent through additional share-buying over the next 12
months. The offering will cut Mr Penske's stake to around 52 per cent and
GM's to 13 per cent.
Mr Penske's greatest contributions to the business have almost certainly
been his motivation of the management and workforce - which remains
essentially the same as in the GM days - and his flair for marketing the
company's new products to an initially-sceptical truck industry.
He keeps in close contact with the workforce and has good relations with
union leaders. At the same time, however, he has managed to cut costs and
crack down on absenteeism.
He makes rapid decisions - using lessons picked up in the racing pits during
quick-fire vehicle repairs - in stark contrast to GM's cumbersome
bureaucracy. And while GM has failed to keep in close touch with car buyers,
Mr Penske is an apostle of customer satisfaction and a relentless salesman,
drawing unashamedly on the glamorous image of his racing team.
Yet despite the turnround, Detroit Diesel cannot afford complacency. For one
thing, it has to improve its profitability to get a better return on sales.
The slowly improving US economy, boosting demand for engines, could help
here.
And it still faces extremely strong competition from its two chief North
American rivals, Caterpillar and Cummins Engine. Both have been introducing
technologically-advanced new engine models. Mr Penske may have rescued
Detroit from a permanent pit stop, but his race is far from over.
 ------------------------
   DETROIT DIESEL
 Sales of on-highway
    truck engines
 ------------------------
1988             9,700
1989            14,161
1990            18,901
1991            28,677
1992            38,083
 ------------------------
