FT  26 APR 93 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Portugal (8):
AutoEuropa proves a magnet / A look at the progress of investment from
overseas
DISCUSSION of foreign investment in Portugal over the past few years has
inevitably focused on the massive Ford-Volkswagen project, known as
AutoEuropa.
The largest foreign investment ever made in the country, AutoEuropa draws
attention not only because of its scale: a Es450bn project creating 5,000
jobs directly and another 10,000 indirectly. It is also proving a magnet for
other investments.
In a typical development, a 16-strong Spanish delegation seeking joint
ventures with Portuguese companies to supply the AutoEuropa project recently
visited the country. Other suppliers are moving in from Germany and other
European countries.
In addition, Portuguese companies are upgrading their quality standards to
meet the rigorous standards of Ford-Volkswagen in a process that is pulling
domestic industry into the 21st century faster than any series of government
programmes.
But AutoEuropa is not the beginning and end of the foreign investment story
in Portugal. Other projects have been attracted by the conditions that led
Ford-Volkswagen to select Portugal from hundreds of possible sites.
These advantages, according to Mr Miguel Athayde Marques, president of ICEP,
the body that promotes investment, trade and tourism in Portugal; include:
low overall costs;
low wage costs;
productivity to equal the best in Europe when workers are allied to modern
managements;
attractive EC-backed incentives;
rapidly improving communication and other infrastructures;
political stability;
the workforce with the best strike record in Europe; and
pleasant living conditions.
Another major investment in Portugal has recently been made by Pepsico Foods
International, which is to invest Es13bn (Dollars 90m) in setting up a
snack-food factory and an Iberian distribution network centred at Carregado,
some 50km north of Lisbon.
The project should be fully operational by 2002 and the first stage of
production will start shortly. Turnover, when cruising speed is reached in
1996, is expected to total some Es21bn, approximately 70 per cent of which
will be from the export market.
The construction of the new factory will lead to the creation of over 1,000
jobs directly as well as a further 600 indirectly. Pepsico officials say
that aim of the project is to integrate its operations in the Iberian
peninsula and that the site in Carregado offers several advantages over
other possible choices in both France and Spain.
The potential of the Portuguese market, where about 30 per cent of total
output will be sold, weighed heavily in Pepsico's decision as did the
development of transport networks and economic arguments that outweighed
Portugal's disadvantages of being further away from the principal demand
centres and the fact that the country has a less developed agricultural
sector and less up-to-date distribution facilities.
'This is an integrated project from farmer to consumer,' says Mr Cesar
Bardaji, president and general manager of Pepsico Inc in Portugal. 'Our role
starts on the farm, where we provide all the seed-potato technology that the
farmer requires - irrigation, cultivation techniques and even storage
requirements.'
'At the outset we considered the possibilities of France, Spain and
Portugal. The reason we decided on Portugal, in the end, was market
conditions: it's a market that's growing considerably and has great
potential.
'Also, we knew that the local authorities were greatly interested in the
investment and were prepared to grant assistance,' he says. 'One of the
factors that exerted the greatest influence on the Portuguese government was
the fact that the project provided a high level of employment and that it
was an integrated agro-industrial concern.'
The interest of the Portuguese government translated into sizeable EC-funded
investment grants that for contractual projects like the Pepsico enterprise
can reach 50 per cent or more of the total investment.
In a recent move to make contractual investment projects more accessible,
the government has halved the minimum qualifying investment for the
contractual regime from Es10bn to Es5bn. It is hoped that this will also
enable some larger domestic companies to qualify.
Neste, the Finnish group, also recently reached agreement with the
Portuguese government on a Es17bn project to make full use of the
comparative advantages of the Sines Petrochemical complex, less than 100km
south of Lisbon, where Neste already runs a petrochemical plant.
The contract envisages setting up a Methyl Ter Butyl Ether plant with a
production capacity of 45,000 tons a year. MTBE is a compound that replaces
lead in petrol, reducing pollution.
The project also includes increasing the production capacity of Neste's
high-density polyethylene plant from 80,000 to 120,000 tons a year and
enlarging and developing its polypropylene plant from 70,000 to 80,000 tons
a year. The highly capital-intensive project will create only about 40 jobs.
These major contractual investments get into the headlines. But it is small
and medium-sized investments and joint ventures that make up the bulk of
foreign investment in Portugal.
Even though both the Ford-Volkswagen project and the Pepsico investment were
authorised in 1991 - Neste was the only contractual investment made in 1992
 -and despite the international recession, direct foreign investment in
Portugal last fell only to Dollars 4.3bn from Dollars 5.5bn the previous
year.
 --------------------------
Portugal: Direct Foreign
Investment (in Dollars bn)
 --------------------------
1986   0.164
1987   0.437
1988   0.959
1989   2.219
1990   3.363
1991   5.527
1992   4.375
 --------------------------
