FT  21 APR 93 / The Queen's Awards for Technological Achievement 1993:
Mapping by computers - NextBase
THE multi-million pound software company which began life in a suburban
garage is both the biggest cliche in the computer world and the stuff of
Hollywood movies. Fortunately for the four friends who set up NextBase, it
is still the stuff which wins awards.
Established in late 1987 with funds of just Pounds 32,000, NextBase
specialises in mapping software, which can be used for planning routes or
analysing geographical areas. The original idea for the software came from
Mr Simon Anthony, now marketing director, who perceived a market for a
consumer mapping product.
'The only available maps in computer form were very, very expensive,'
explains Mr Anthony. 'But these sort of maps are most useful when you are
travelling around in your car, so you can't spend Pounds 5,000 to Pounds
10,000 on them.'
Once the concept was defined the software was written by fellow founder Mr
Mark Atherton in a 'rather untidy bedroom in Esher'.
The company's first official premises were in a converted linoleum factory
in Staines. In 1991, NextBase moved into offices in Ashford, Middlesex.
Today the company sells a Pounds 50-Pounds 60 consumer mapping package for
the travellers with an IBM personal computer at home. At the other end of
the scale NextBase sells sophisticated analytical maps for businesses which
want to plan mailshots, television advertising campaigns or where to put
their next retail store. More than 900 of The Times Top 100 companies use
NextBase products, as well as 20,000 smaller companies.
For these more sophisticated systems NextBase sees its software as a 'front
end' to extract information from existing databases. 'What many people don't
realise is that most databases already actually have addresses, which could
be postcodes or postal addresses,' points out Mr Anthony.
Data compression is used to minimise the space needed to store the map
information and mathematical techniques are used to store data on roads and
coastlines.
Moving on from the UK, NextBase also now sells mapping software for France,
Germany and Italy and has a pan-European package. Its software, all written
in the UK, has also proven a hit in the US. Mr Anthony believes NextBase is
unique in being the only British software company to have a product - a
computerised map of the US - in America's top 10 selling PC products.
NextBase set up a joint venture called Automap in the US to market its
products, and this approach has been central to the company's success.
The royalties NextBase accrues from its US sales account for 10 per cent of
its annual revenues of some Pounds 4m. Over the past two years revenues have
increased by more than 55 per cent and 85 per cent respectively, and have
been achieved without the need to raise extra capital.
Building on this success, the company's next products will be detailed
street maps of London and 100 US cities.
The need for a continued influx of new blood has not been lost on the four
original founders of the company. At 35 years old, Mr Anthony acknowledges
he is now one of the oldest people in the NextBase team of 25. The average
age of staff in the company is just 25.
