FT  18 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Shake-up plan for education
department
A RADICAL review of the Department for Education was launched by Mr John
Patten, the education secretary, yesterday, after claims that civil servants
had obstructed the government's reforms.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the consultant, has been called in after a competitive
tender to make a thorough review of the department's role and organisation,
particularly its personnel. It must report by the end of October.
The move follows a long period of ministerial distrust of the department.
There is unease in Conservative ranks that the national curriculum may have
been deliberately sabotaged by civil servants in the department.
The review may lead to a drastic slimming down of the department's staff,
and the new-model department is likely to concentrate on 'setting clear
targets, strategy and quality assurance'.
Mr Patten said: 'The past five years have seen enormous changes in the
structure of education in this country, not least in the establishment of
new bodies with responsibilities for different parts of the system.'
The Office for Standards in Education (Ofsted) took over responsibility for
inspecting schools from Her Majesty's Inspectorate at the start of the year
and is administered independently of the department.
Quangos already established include the Student Loans Company and the
Further and Higher Education Funding Councils.
In September the Schools Curriculum and Assessment Authority will take over
the national curriculum and its tests.
The education bill before parliament would set up a Funding Agency for
Schools to distribute funds to schools that have opted out of local
education authority control - a job nowdone in the department.
The agency would also handle planning in areas where 75 per cent of schools
have opted out.
The teachers' unions were angered by the review. Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general
secretary of the National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women
Teachers, decribed the it as 'most disturbing'.
He added: 'It's a further politicisation of education. Mr Patten is shooting
the messenger.'
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, said the review showed 'a
failure to take responsibility'.
She said successive ministers had interfered with the work of the curriculum
council and added: 'I don't think civil servants have sabotaged these
reforms. Successive ministers have had a self-destruct button because they
thought they had a monopoly on wisdom and failed to listen to any other
viewpoints.'
