FT  25 MAY 93 / International Company News: Microsoft NT deliveries near
US INVESTORS and financial analysts are expected to react positively to
Microsoft Corporation's announcement yesterday that it would ship its
long-awaited new Windows NT personal computer operating system within the
next 60 days.
Microsoft is conservatively estimating it will sell 1m copies of the product
in the first year.
It is aware that many of the world's corporate users of mid-range and
high-end computer systems are likely to be cautious about the first
significant new operating system in almost 10 years.
Microsoft has sold 25m copies of its PC-based Windows operating environment
and sales are steady at about 1m copies per month.
NT costs Dollars 295 to customers who already own Windows. The standard
price is Dollars 495 and an advanced version for corporate computing will
sell at Dollars 1,495 in the first six months.
Mr John Dodge, executive editor of the US trade magazine PC Week, says
Microsoft must know that some analysts on Wall Street have over-ambitious
expectations for the product.
He points out that NT is unlike earlier versions of Windows in that it is
designed primarily for use with the more expensive 'file server' systems -
large computers shared by many users.
It is designed for users who need substantial computing power and for
'enterprise-wide' applications developed by large corporations.
Windows NT is also distinctive in that it has been developed to run on
microchips from the US electronics companies Intel, MIPS and Digital
Equipment - all of which is likely to introduce greater competition into the
high end of the computer hardware market.
Microsoft believes NT will appeal to corporate customers, and paraded a
number of users from corporate test sites at the press conference announcing
the product.
One of these was the UK's National Westminster Bank, which is using an
NT-based workflow system to redesign completely how work is assigned
throughout its credit card, telesales and loan applications systems.
