FT  16 SEP 93 / Diversion of Jordan arms to Iraq 'ignored'
THE BRITISH government ignored intelligence warnings that Jordan was being
used to divert arms to Iraq in the 1980s because of a very 'confident
relationship' with the Jordanians, a senior foreign office official said
yesterday.
Mr Rob Young, former head of the Foreign Office's Middle East department,
told the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry: 'Our relationship with Jordan was a
very special one - close and confident. We exchanged a lot of information.
There was no expectation that they would play dirty with us.'
The relationship was so close that it led Whitehall to try to suppress
publicity after the arrest of four businessmen suspected of selling arms to
Iraq via Jordan in summer 1990, the inquiry heard.
The disclosure raises further questions about the conduct of government
ministers who signed public interest immunity certificates preventing
information about Whitehall policy emerging during the subsequent trial of
the businessmen, executives of Ordtec, a military engineering firm.
During the trial, which mirrored the later one of Matrix Churchill
executives, defence lawyers argued that their clients had traded with the
full knowledge of government. The men are currently appealing against their
convictions.
The conduct of Whitehall officials in supervising government guidelines
restricting defence exports to Iraq was questioned yesterday by Lord Justice
Scott. 'It looks as if something has gone wrong with the system,' he said.
Mr Young spoke of a 'very difficult Whitehall tactical battle' in which
Foreign Office officials fought unsuccessfully against pressure from the
Ministry of Defence and the Department of Trade and Industry to relax the
restrictions on trade with Iraq.
The official, who is now minister at the British embassy in Paris, also said
that UK companies did not give as much importance as the judge to the text
of parliamentary questions and answers.
'Exporters go to the DTI and the MoD and say 'Hey chaps, I've got this
application for an export licence. What's the chance of success? What's the
form?',' Mr Young said.
