FT  05 AUG 93 / President at mercy of his own party: Policy ambitions of the
White House hang by a thread
IT is the biggest budget deficit reduction package in the history of the US.
Better than that, it is the biggest budget deficit reduction ever, anywhere
in the world. With such extravagant claims, members of the Clinton
administration and senior Democrats have launched their last-ditch campaign
to win congressional approval for the president's amended budget proposals.
Rejection could seriously undermine the authority of the White House for the
next three and a half years. Not that anyone around President Bill Clinton
is talking of defeat, despite the closeness of the votes expected in both
the House of Representatives and the Senate in the next two days.
What is promised instead is a change in national direction, a new momentum
and an end to the gridlock which for the past 12 years has seen president
and Congress locked in almost perpetual conflict.
'There are only two choices,' Mr Clinton told the country in a nationwide
television address on Tuesday night. 'Our plan, or no plan'. However, the
plan to which the president was referring is not quite the same as the one
he offered nearly six months ago.
Last February the president was also promising an economic stimulus through
a Dollars 30bn two-year spending plan, only to see it killed by a Republican
filibuster. He wanted to impose a wide-ranging energy tax that would have
raised some Dollars 71.5bn over five years, only to see that emerge from
Congress as a modest 4.3 cents a gallon increase in the tax on petrol. This
will achieve little more than one-third of the original target.
But what remains is enough for Mr Clinton to claim that he is within Dollars
4bn of the Dollars 500bn he set himself to cut from the expected budget
deficit over the next five years, and enough for the Republicans in Congress
to vote en masse against the compromise package which emerged from the
conference committee on Tuesday.
Senator Bob Dole, leader of the Republican minority in the Senate, described
the package as 'the largest tax increase in the history of the world'.
Little touches Americans more fundamentally than the threat of higher tax
and the thrust of the Democrats' campaign is to demonstrate that the
administration's direct tax proposals affect only a small proportion of the
population. 'At least 80 per cent of of the new tax burden will fall on
those making more than Dollars 200,000 a year and very little on other
Americans,' said Mr Clinton.
Those primarily affected are individuals with a gross income of Dollars
140,000 a year and couples jointly earning more than Dollars 180,000. For
them the top tax rate goes up from 31 to 36 per cent, with a top marginal
rate of 39.6 per cent for those with taxable incomes above Dollars 250,000.
'For working families making less than Dollars 180,000 a year there will be
no income tax increase,' he said.
Mr Clinton's message is directed primarily at fellow Democrats because it is
within the president's own party that the battle will be lost or won. When
the budget bill originally passed the House of Representatives, it did so
with a six-vote majority, 219-213. But in the Senate the vote was tied 49-49
and only the casting vote of Vice-President Al Gore allowed it to progress.
Six Democrat senators voted against and since then one more has announced
his intention of voting against.
On the perhaps optimistic assumption that there will be no more defectors in
the Senate, it means that at least one more Yes vote is required to see Mr
Clinton safely home in the scheduled vote tomorrow.
That may have been achieved last night when Senator Dennis DeConcini of
Arizona said he would now back the legislation, apparently persuaded by
compromises struck during the conference stage of the bill.
Mr DeConcini, well known for his last-minute bargaining, had admitted that
sentiment in his home state was generally against the Clinton package,
although he is a strong advocate of measures to reduce the deficit.
He had claimed that he wanted to be sure that all the new tax revenue went
towards achieving that aim - something Mr Clinton's pledge to establish a
special trust fund for the purpose may answer.
The senator had also said he was worried about higher petrol prices and the
effect, especially on older people, of the increase in the taxable portion
of social security benefits.
Ultimately, the decision of Democrat waverers will rest on their perception
of what the public, particularly the middle classes, believes the Clinton
package will achieve: whether it provides what the president promised - an
economic stimulus, tax fairness and a reduction in the deficit; or whether
it has been reduced primarily to a tax-raising budget which, as the
Republicans claim, hits the middle classes hardest and will kill jobs, not
create them.
But, as the president told the nation, it is the only plan on offer and the
basis for everything else he wants to achieve, such as improved healthcare,
welfare reform, and the modernisation of government. If his own party votes
him down, the damage would be immense.
