FT  11 DEC 93 / Motoring: What will the Chunnel offer? - Stuart Marshall
casts a sceptical English eye on the benefits of undersea travel
Like millions of people living in the south-east of England - and
particularly in my own county of Kent - I have never been a Channel Tunnel
enthusiast. This is not because the high-speed rail link, should it ever be
built, would go anywhere near my home. Put my feelings down to being an
old-fashioned reactionary. I liked Britain being a proper island and I have
always seen the Channel crossing by ferry as pleasure, not penance.
I doubt I was alone in hoping that if I ignored the Chunnel, it just might
go away. But new bridges began appearing across the M20 as it neared
Folkestone, while a forest of gantries and overhead wires went up behind
high concrete retaining walls. Work trains could sometimes be glimpsed.
When the first advertisements appeared for the Chunnel car ferry, which
starts running next May, I thought it was time I had a look. It was a
revelation. What has been built, unseen by M20 users, is something as big as
an airport terminal. But instead of acres of runways, there is a marshalling
yard and rail tracks running into a tunnel.
The operating company, Eurotunnel, says people still have many
misconceptions. Many think they will be able to drive their cars through to
France; and while most do realise it is rail only, some believe their cars
will go on flat trucks, as on car-carrier trains, while they ride in
passenger carriages.
Wrong again. You stay with your car in a windowless van. You can walk around
it if you wish, but the only place to visit is the lavatory in every third
interconnected coach.
When, in five months, the tunnel starts competing with the car ferries, this
is what will happen. Motorists will leave the M20 by the Eurotunnel slip
road, pause at a toll booth to pay for their passage, and then have a
choice. Those in a hurry can pass through Customs and drive straight on to
the train. Others can go to the terminal building for refreshments and
duty-frees.
Tickets can be bought from travel agents in advance but there are no
reservations; all-comers get in line for the next train. At peak times,
there will be one every 15 minutes; but if you just miss one at, say, 2am,
you could have to wait an hour or so.
Platform to platform, the under-Channel train will take 35 minutes.
Eurotunnel says that, during the day, a motorist should be able to drive out
of the French terminal at Sangatte, near Calais, and on to the A26 autoroute
within one hour of coming off the M20.
There will be separate ferry trains for cars and commercial vehicles. Main
line passenger and freight trains will also use the tunnel but, apart from
sharing the tracks, have nothing whatever to do with the car ferry trains.
Fares have not been fixed but, to compete, they must be about the same as
those on the ships. Every safety and security precaution known to man has
been taken. Using Eurotunnel should be rather less risky than riding in a
clapped-out London Underground train.
Will it kill off the Dover-Calais ferries? Of course not, although it will
take a chunk of the available (and constantly growing) business of
transporting cars and lorries to and from mainland Europe. If the tunnel's
freight trains reduce the number of juggernaut lorries now pounding our
motorways to pieces, every motorist will cheer.
I have two reservations about Eurotunnel (which, beyond any argument, is a
wonder of 20th century civil engineering of which Britain and France can be
proud). While I do not exactly relish the thought of an underground - and,
even more so, undersea - journey of more than 30 miles (50 km), I shall
certainly try it. But the idea fills many people with such undiluted horror
that they say there is no way they will ever make the trip.
A more logical objection is that the time saving could be an illusion. The
train might take 35 minutes, platform to platform, against the ferry's 75
minutes, dock to dock. But you can eat, stretch your legs and shop during
the sea crossing. A family driving from, say, Birmingham to Paris would have
to stop for a meal before or after the tunnel crossing - so what has
happened to the time saving?
Many cross-Channel travellers, very sensibly, use the ferry as a mobile
motorway service area. So, with an eye on the Chunnel's opening, P &amp; 0 and
Stena Sealink have upgraded their fleets. The ships are now more like cruise
liners than ferries in size and facilities. They are so stable that even a
gale does not disturb their equilibrium - or, more important, that of their
passengers. For an extra Pounds 5 on each leg, P &amp; O club class is a truly
civilised way of crossing the Channel.
When heading west to Normandy and Brittany, I like using the longer routes
such as Newhaven to Dieppe; Portsmouth or Southampton to Le Havre, Cherbourg
or St Malo. Longer crossings are not always reflected in higher fares; a
four-hour Newhaven-Dieppe voyage can be cheaper than Dover-Calais.
Although the ships on these routes are not as large as the short-haul
super-ferries, their facilities are comparable, if on a smaller scale. My
wife and I have passed less comfortable nights in hotels than we did
recently between Portsmouth and St Malo on Brittany Ferries' 23,000-ton
Bretagne. It has every facility to make the eight-hour crossing pleasant;
even a hairdressing salon.
In Britain, Suzuki is synonymous with small four-wheel drives, and its Swift
front-wheel drive hatchback gets overlooked. It deserves better. I thought
the Swift GLX 1.3 automatic five-door, which I used as a runabout recently,
would suit many buyers whose motoring is mainly in town and who rate ease of
control above all else. The four-cylinder, multi-valve engine and
three-speed automatic gearbox are well matched. Power steering is
finger-light; central locking and a tilt-adjustable steering wheel are
standard; and the high-roofed body is agreeably roomy, with good all-round
vision. The ride can be bouncy on bad roads, and luggage has to be lifted
over a high sill. But, but at Pounds 9,125, the two-pedal Swift is cheaper
than any power-steered rival.
