FT  23 OCT 93 / Fashion: The Brits are back - but they're broke - Avril
Groom finds a shortage of finance but no lack of wild and witty talent at
the spring shows
LONDON FASHION is a tale of the unexpected. The best of its shows for spring
1994 last weekend was not about clothes but about hats, the first catwalk
presentation of young Philip Treacy's impossibly balanced, light-as-air, net
and feather explosions.
Even Valentino, favourite couturier of Hollywood stars, shoehorned himself
in among the students and hangers-on for the hour-late show in a small,
crowded venue. The Roman designer uses Treacy's creations in his shows.
Also doing London for the first time in years was Ellin Saltzman, top buyer
for New York's chic Bergdorf Goodman store. And erstwhile super-shopper
Ivana Trump turned up for Tomasz Starzewski, darling of the ladies who lunch
and the nearest British equivalent to Valentino.
The international interest proved that the buzz is back - that, in spite of
the gloom six months ago when the Department of Industry withdrew its
backing for the London shows, Britain's cottage industry designers are again
hot news. This is due primarily to a rash of bright new names sending out
original, cleverly-made and wearable collections.
The makings of the revival were there last season when the British Fashion
Council backed a group of first-time exhibitors who attracted buyers like
bees round a honey-pot while better-known names had a quiet time.
Not that huge financial rewards resulted. None could afford a show this time
but to the rescue came Harvey Nichols department store, in association with
American Express, and new the Covent Garden fashion venue, Space NK, which
put work from the best new designers, plus a selection of this year's top
fashion graduates from across Europe, on the catwalk. The flow of talent
showed that London is again the place for buyers to seek out new ideas, and
silenced any argument that, as Paris is so near and communications
continually improving, another Northern European fashion capital is not
needed.
The young 'green shoots' argue that it is. Some were nominated for the New
Generation section of this year's Lloyds Bank British Fashion Awards - and
one, Abe Hamilton, won it - but they are all small-scale and not ready for
the expensive shows in Paris. Even the new Designer of the Year - John Rocha
 -is hardly a household name, even though he has had his company on and off
for 10 years.
All last time's debutantes are still in business, although it has been
tough. They do not talk of turnover because they do not yet have one.
Several live in their studios and started by signing on to unemployment
benefit to become eligible for a Pounds 50 per week enterprise allowance.
They are learning the tricks, like negotiating the best minnow's deal with
big-fish international retailers, and the disappointments - an enthusiastic
call from a swanky American store does not necessarily equal an order. They
would like, but cannot afford, someone else to take on the business
headaches and they all worry about the balance between commercial expedience
and creative satisfaction.
No one doubts their talent but commercially some are learning the hard way.
Abe Hamilton, who financed his first collection in 1990 with gardening and
cleaning jobs, found drawing up a strong contract for customers, with
discounts to quick payers, was the only way to keep his cash flow going.
Ex-Royal Marine Paul Frith and double-act Sonnentag Mulligan, showing their
second collections, still find getting paid and keeping their bankers happy
a juggling act.
Some fly by the seat of their pants. Vivienne Westwood's ex-assistant
Nicholas Knightly took orders on his much-praised second collection but then
withdrew from a possible manufacturing deal, 'to concentrate creatively on
one-off specials and a small resort collection', too late to get most of it
made elsewhere. Whether he can afford the luxury of that decision remains to
be seen.
Whatever the problems, no green shoot has any intention of compromising
either the quirky individuality which so appeals to foreign buyers or the
quality of their work, though, as Selina Blow - whose jackets, made by
traditional men's tailors, can take three days to complete - puts it: 'In
order to survive, one day we may have to forget the romance and get real.'
A few manage to keep the romance and hit the big-time. Every designer wants
to show in Paris and those two fashion iconoclasts, John Galliano and
Vivienne Westwood, are ready for the world stage and an all-action
supermodel show. Their spring shows last week were the talk of Paris for
their blend of wild theatricality, historical references and translatable
ideas shot through with a defiantly British streak. For Galliano this meant
an affectionate evocation of aristocratic novelettish heroines and for
Westwood a glimpse of London cafe life in the Naughty Nineties.
In spite of such talent, neither has found wealth. Self-financed Westwood
has three London shops and her designs appear in big stores across Europe
and the US, but after 20 years her business is only now reaching a stable
footing. Galliano is still dependent on backers' whims and from the
prodigious beauty of his collection probably only the fragile,
lingerie-style bias-cut dresses and Biba-esque tailoring are commercially
viable.
None of this deters the next generation. New graduates, hungry for
experience in production and marketing, want to work for established
companies and then start a business.
Of the four British graduates in the Harvey Nichols show, Miranda Tsui has a
job abroad with MaxMara, Sonja Nuttall has joined a business already started
by her partner. Talented menswear designer Tim Voegele is still sifting
offers and Lucy Templeman - named Graduate of the Year - has discovered the
hard facts of British fashion by taking a job with Zygo, a label now up for
sale. The benefit which graduates gain from British companies is more often
in experience or exposure rather than financial reward. Student placements,
sponsorship for shows or promotions in stores are useful but investment in
real jobs is lacking.
'Investors in the UK take a very short term view of the fashion industry,'
says John Wilson, chief executive of the British Fashion Council. 'There is
clearly great talent, but it needs professional management to raise finance
and organise production. Until investors develop confidence in our
designers, resources will remain limited.'
Meanwhile, in Dusseldorf, DM2.5m (Pounds 1.01m) including state funds, has
been found for the Creativ Haus, a centre where, at very low rates,
designers can rent a workshop with high-tech equipment, get advice on
business and sell their designs. It is intended as an international
enterprise and the Royal College of Art plans to recommend it to former
students. British designers would love to see a similar initiative, but any
such thing seems very far away.
