FT  16 JUL 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (24): Enjoy full tax
relief as you save to top up your retirement income - But remember that you
will not be able to get your hands on these additional investments until you
stop work. So a Pep or a Tessa could be an alternative / AVCs
ONLY ONE employee in 10 currently manages to build up a full company
pension, and as the trend towards more flexible career patterns and early
retirement continues, top-up provision is increasingly important.
Before looking at top-up arrangements it is essential to understand how your
company pension is calculated, and where a shortfall might arise.
Under a typical 'final salary' scheme, your pension builds at the rate of
1/60th of final salary for each year of service, up to a maximum of 40/60ths
or two-thirds of final salary. (Higher earners may be subject to a cap on
the maximum pension they can take into account for pension purposes.)
Pension gaps arise for various reasons. Many employees do not expect to work
a full 40 years, or they may be in a less generous scheme - for example, one
that builds up at a rate of 1/80th of final salary for each year of service.
Some employees receive a significant chunk of earnings as bonuses or
overtime, which may not be taken into consideration for the main scheme
contributions.
Women often end up with gaps in provision, usually due to career breaks to
raise a family, after which they tend to spend a further period in
part-time, non-pensionable employment. Job-changers who transfer their
pensions also suffer a shortfall, often finding that the 10 'years' they had
built up in the former scheme are worth only five 'years' in the new one.
This is due partly to the higher salary to which the new pension relates,
but also to the low assumptions used in the transfer-value calculation.
Finally, employees hoping to retire early must provide for the shortfall,
since in most cases they can expect a reduced pension if they leave before
the company scheme's normal pension age.
Once you have identified a gap, it is time to look at top up arrangements.
There are two main pension options: additional voluntary contributions
(AVCs), which form part of the main company scheme; and free-standing AVCs
(FSAVCs) which are sold independently on an individual basis by the life
offices and several unit trust groups.
AVCs and FSAVCs are the most tax-efficient method of boosting your company
pension, because they attract full tax relief on contributions. The fund
also enjoys tax-free growth, and, for those who started an AVC before 1987,
it may be possible to take part or all of the fund as tax-free cash.
But it is important to remember that you will not be able to get your hands
on these investments until you retire. If you want a more flexible
investment, you might consider a tax-exempt special savings account (Tessa)
or personal equity plan (Pep), both of which offer more limited tax
advantages but do not lock your money away until retirement.
AVCs and FSAVCs can only be taken out by employees who are members of an
occupational pension scheme. The self-employed and those in non-pensionable
employment can invest in personal pensions.
Employees can contribute up to 15 per cent of salary to their main pension
and AVC scheme combined. Since most schemes require a contribution of about
5 per cent, this leaves plenty of scope for topping up. Employers cannot
contribute to your AVC.
Life offices dominate the market for both company AVCs and FSAVCs. However,
as a general rule of thumb, the company AVC scheme is likely to prove
simpler to operate and offer better value. This is because the employer
handles all the administration and usually covers some, if not all, of the
charges made by the provider.
Moreover, tax relief is awarded immediately at the individual's highest
rate, whereas, under an FSAVC, basic-rate relief is awarded at source but
higher-rate relief must be claimed through the individual's end-of-year tax
return.
Most company AVCs are run on a money-purchase basis - that is, your
contributions build up in a fund which is used to buy an annuity. Some
companies - particularly those in the public sector - provide 'added years'
to the main company pension.
Since April 1987, there have been no minimum requirements on the length of
time you have to contribute to an AVC scheme and, since 1989, any excess
contributions above your maximum permitted pension have been refunded less a
tax charge.
In the past, AVCs could be taken as tax-free cash, provided this did not
exceed the Inland Revenue maximum. However, where contributions started
after April 6, 1987, this option ceased to apply, and the AVC fund must be
used to purchase an annuity.
Free-standing AVCs were introduced in October 1987, and offer most of the
features of a company AVC scheme but with several important differences. In
particular, since the contract is between the employee and the provider, the
individual has to bear all the provider's charges. However, provided
contributions do not exceed Pounds 2,400 per annum, the employer does not
need to know you are paying FSAVCs - a feature that might be attractive if
you are discreetly funding for early retirement and don't want your boss to
know.
But undoubtedly the most attractive aspect of FSAVCs is investment choice.
Most company schemes offer just one or two AVC investment options - usually
a building society deposit fund and a with-profits fund. Yet there are about
100 providers of FSAVCs, offering a range of about 250 funds in total.
If you decide to opt for an FSAVC, do make sure the policy is flexible. For
example, you may need to reduce or stop contributions for a while if money
gets tight, so it is important to check there are no hidden penalties on
changes to contribution frequency or amount.
Finally, always ask what will happen to the policy if you leave your job and
become self-employed or go to a company where there is no employer sponsored
scheme. A good contract will allow you to switch to a personal pension plan
without charge.
