FT  10 JUL 93 / Fashion: Victory to the cavaliers of style - The women's
fashion press divides into two sects
THE FEMALE fashion press can be divided into two sects: the timid puritans
and the flamboyant catholics. While the puritans, the larger sect, favour
austere, androgynous, all-black dress, giving the appearance of low-church
parsons, it is the catholics who keep the business going and restore our
delight in personal decoration.
The rarer brethren dress up not only for their own amusement but also for
those around them. Whim, humour, invention and surprise are their
commandments. At British Vogue, fashion director Lucinda Chambers'
historicism and the foppishness of features associate Issey Delves Broughton
have inspired many designers. The ethnic eclecticism of the freelance
stylist Debbie Mason, hyacinth-and-peridot check tweeds of Hamish Bowles
(American Vogue), the Fellini-esque costumes of Anna Piaggi (Italian Vogue)
and the Van Dyck jabots and Restoration jewels of Suzy Menkes (International
Herald Tribune), display their role as the catholic high priests.
When I joined Vogue in the early 1980s the editor, Beatrix Miller - a
catholic in Calvinist clothing - encouraged a spontaneity and imagination in
dress. The rarest bird in her aviary was Grace Coddington, a 1960s model
turned stylist.
Every few months she would shed her plumage and arise phoenix-like with a
new image. One month she was a Left Bank ingenue, with cropped hair, Breton
T-shirt, cigarette pants and ballet pumps, the next her hair seemed to have
grown rapidly and she was a pilgrim on an American prairie or an Elizabethan
heroine framed in white lace.
'Bea' loved her cavaliers; be it Jane Ormsby-Gore who ransacked her
ancestors' dressing-up trunks for a floor-length, Dick Turpin cape and a
mammoth 'drugs dealer' felt hat whose feathers tickled the corridor walls,
or Delves Broughton with her velvet, diamante-buttoned frock coat, laddered
fishnets and dizzily high silk-satin mules.
During my first week there I learned that at Vogue there is an outfit for
every occasion. Walking into the loo one day I found a gaggle of assistants
crowded round a cubicle and went over to investigate. Coddington had eaten a
bad oyster. One of her assistants protested: 'She can't get sick in her
Calvins - go and get her Levis.' At Vogue there is even an outfit for
getting sick in]
Busy men (Lord Snowdon and Sy Newhouse, the chairman of Conde Nast) would
pop into Vogue House just to see what Chambers was wearing. Would it be her
Gandhi-esque dhotis made from muslin wrapped round her lower torso and worn
with one of her 1940s blouses, Tuscan straw clogs and huge straw hat
decorated with fresh flowers, or a 19th century peasant smock over gold
leather, Glam-Rock jeans?
I remember dismounting from my bicycle one summer morning, dressed in a
white Victorian camisole, bloomers and ballet shoes - quite normal, I
thought, until I heard one of the doormen mutter: 'In my day if I got my
girl down to that I knew I was in business]'
You realised terminal 'fashionitis' had set in when you heard yourself
saying at dinner parties: 'But everyone has a pair of beige, peg-topped
Armani trousers, don't they?' Once a fashion girl starts talking like a
caption it is time for rehabilitation.
For the fashion press the trick is to devise a look and stick to it no
matter what delight or folly is served up as the latest thing, thereby
avoiding bankruptcy and sartorial schizophrenia. Few manage to walk this
tightrope without succumbing to a 'buzz' haircut (shaved up the back of the
neck), platforms or Japanese deconstructionism.
One who managed it was the minimalist Sophie Hicks, now an architect. At 17
she started wearing men's clothes, initially Death in Venice sailor suits,
and to this day she still wears bespoke Savile Row suits, to show-off her
short boyish hair and scrubbed complexion.
One of the interesting conversions of late has been that of Menkes to almost
papal stature within the catholic ranks. The enlightenment came when she
moved from London to Paris. She discarded her London vestments  - sober,
unmemorable - in favour of dress that recalls the confidence of the Farnese
papal dynasty, the colour verve of the Fauvists and the trinket collecting
of an African chieftain laden with talismanic tribal necklaces and
bracelets. She embodies high fashion luxury and decoration and sports the
insignia of the trade's chief catholics: permanent sunglasses, laptop
computer, and her idiosyncratic signature a bouffant coiffure in the shape
of a cottage loaf.
These limousine-sheltered creatures are, on the whole, the exceptions. Many
rank-and-file fashion journalists dress in a dreary and undecorative,
sexless manner. And yet these are the women who pontificate from their pages
on how our wardrobes should look. Why? Timidity born of knowledge, I would
guess. Rather than make a sartorial mistake, they play safe, avoiding
colour, pattern and frill. They defensively argue that black is modern,
classless, slimming and cheap and, being constantly on the road, they can
travel light, for everything matches.
Their shibboleths are leggings, tailored trousers or leather jeans, leather
biker's jackets (which Sir Hardy Amies refers to sniffily as 'anoraks'),
John Smedley polo necks, white shirts and a quilted leather Chanel handbag
rucksack or purse, all in colour-shy black.
They also favour sanitised and risibly expensive street-culture accessories
 -baseball caps, biker's boots, bumbags slung over non-existent bellies -
borrowed by 'witty Karl' (of Chanel) from clubland. Even the middle-aged are
sometimes lured into such youth gear. And yet, this puritan sect is at pains
to avoid looking feminine lest they be admonished for arousal.
The occasional deviations into decoration remind one of the black magpie's
attraction to gaudy geegaws: swags of cheap gilt chains, pinchbeck snaffles
and confidence-boosting logos. Weighed down with such fool's gold they
conjure up images of provincial mayors parading their decorations of office
or, worse, a gilt chain gang of slaves to the mode.
