FT  21 JUN 93 / Clash looming with US over procurement policy
TENSION has risen between the US and Japan over government procurement which
could damage sensitive negotiations this week in Tokyo on a tariff reduction
package for the Uruguay Round.
After years of complaints about Japan's closed bidding system on
construction services and two agreements which have produced little
progress, the US formally brought a trade complaint on April 30. It has 60
days to negotiate a solution to eliminate the 'discriminatory practice' or
announce sanctions.
US law gives the president the right to postpone retaliation if it would
harm US interest to act. But it is not certain that President Clinton would
invoke that provision.
Both he and Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, have talked of
the need to enforce trade agreements. Few disputes have dragged on as long
as construction services with as little to show for American patience.
If Tokyo continues to fail to respond to US demands for a negotiating
framework with quantifiable measures, Washington may want to fire a warning
shot.
US and Japanese negotiators this week had another attempt at negotiating a
deal on construction services. Washington submitted a four point package
which included:
Expanded coverage of the current Major Project Arrangement accord.
An end to Japan's use of the 'designated bidder system' for public works
procurement and replacement by an open bidding system.
Enhanced anti-monopoly enforcement to discourage bid-rigging.
Establishment of a system for measuring progress.
According to a US trade official, the package was rejected, and the Japanese
offered to negotiate on another US proposal, which they had earlier turned
down.
For several years the Japanese have said American engineering and
architectural companies must form joint ventures with Japanese partners in
order to understand the particular demands of the Japanese construction and
design market.
The number of projects on which US companies and their partners can bid has
increased, but the process has produced few contracts.
American companies won less than Dollars 200m of bids last year. US trade
officials argue that Japanese construction companies are not competitive in
the international market. The US held a 45.4 per cent share of this market
in 1991, compared with a 7.2 per cent share for Japan.
