FT  04 JUN 93 / Supergun probe to contact Chilean arms man
THE SCOTT inquiry, investigating claims that the government colluded in the
sale of weapons to Iraq in breach of its own guidelines, said yesterday that
it would write to Mr Carlos Cardoen, the Chilean arms manufacturer, to see
if he has relevant evidence.
In an interview on BBC TV's Newsnight earlier this week Mr Cardoen said he
would be willing to give evidence to the Scott inquiry but was worried about
travelling outside Chile in case he was kidnapped by the US authorities.
The Scott inquiry team feels it may get everything it needs from Mr Cardoen
by letter and is unlikely to wish to visit him in Chile.
Mr Cardoen was involved in the sale of weapons to Iraq during the Iran-Iraq
war and his company worked closely with Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based
machine tools company at the centre of Britain's arms to Iraq scandal.
The Scott inquiry was set up in response to the uproar caused by the
collapse of the Matrix Churchill trial. Charges of illegal exports against
three executives were dropped when it emerged that the intelligence services
had been briefed about their activities and that they had received
encouragement for the exports from Mr Alan Clark, then trade minister.
The US justice department has filed arms export charges against Mr Cardoen
and Teledyne, a California defence contractor. The indictment concerns the
alleged illegal export from the US to Chile between 1982 and 1989 of
zirconium, a metal made by Teledyne. The metal was allegedly used by Mr
Cardoen to make about 24,000 cluster bombs that were then sold to Iraq.
Mr Cardoen has said that the Washington authorities knew about and granted
approval for his arms exports to Iraq as part of a bias towards Iraq during
the 1980s. His assertions that he regularly briefed CIA officials contradict
previous statements by the Bush administration. Two years ago a joint
investigation by the Financial Times and ABC TV found that Mr Cardoen had
indeed had relationships with US intelligence officials.
The Scott inquiry said anything Mr Cardoen may be able to contribute about
the role of British government officials is likely to be relevant to
questions later in the public hearings. The hearings began last month and
are scheduled to continue at least until September.
