FT  07 JUN 93 / Monday Interview: Artful wooer gets his way: Ferdinand
Piech, chairman of the Volkswagen management board, speaks to Kevin Done
Ferdinand Piech has learnt how to smile for much of the time, but under
pressure his piercing blue eyes turn icy cold. The unblinking stare
intimidates.
His technique for ending discussion of items that do not please is
singularly effective. The chairman of the Volkswagen management board makes
his point, turns on the stare and falls silent. The pause can be
interminable.
On the subject, for example, of his new effective number two, Jose Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, who faces allegations of industrial espionage from
former employer General Motors, he says: 'We have said quite clearly that
allegations that come from the state prosecutor are to be dealt with, in
accordance with German law, before the courts and not, not through the mass
media. Those are the rules of the game in Germany. So, a statement from Mr
Lopez, a statement from me. And not one word more. Ja?'
Until the discussion moves on to more acceptable terrain, he waits. Piech
has a reputation for not giving up, for getting exactly what he wants.
Running Audi, the Volkswagen group's executive car division, for four years
was not enough for him. He wanted to become chief executive of the group,
Europe's biggest carmaker, which includes Seat and Skoda alongside VW and
Audi. For a long time, the Vienna-born Piech, an automotive engineer and a
scion of the Porsche family, was seen as only an outside candidate to
succeed the urbane and worldly Carl Hahn, who had led VW for a decade.
But in January it was Piech who took over, his reputation for ruthless
restructuring preferred to the engaging philosophising of Daniel Goeudevert,
currently VW deputy chairman.
Piech wanted Lopez, General Motors' global head of purchasing, at his side.
He hoped Lopez, the man who acquired an almost legendary reputation for
cutting GM's purchasing costs, would help him push through a revolution in
the sclerotic Volkswagen bureaucracy.
GM tried desperately to hold on to the services of the mercurial Basque, but
Piech was not to be denied.
Lopez resigned from GM. Then he re-signed for GM, apparently brought back
into the fold by an offer from Jack Smith, GM chief executive, to take
control of the entire North American operations of the world's biggest
vehicle maker.
Lopez prepared a statement explaining why he was staying at GM. It began:
'Why did I change my mind? I changed because of the GM people. When I saw
the reaction of the people, I said it cannot be. I cannot leave.' It ended:
'I am very happy to be here, today, at General Motors, the company I love.'
The statement was never delivered. A couple of hours before the scheduled GM
press conference, Lopez was on his way to Wolfsburg, VW's headquarters.
As Piech tells it, the move had been planned for several months. The first
meeting took place before Christmas and it was a meeting of minds.
'I did not woo him. He got in touch with me. We got to know each other and
established that we think alike. For Lopez and me it is not a question of
money. It's about maintaining Europe as a centre for manufacturing industry,
to defend it and to make it number one in the world again.
'For that you need a combination of skills, someone that comes out of the
production discipline - that is him - and someone who comes from engineering
and development and its capacity for making quantum leaps - and that's me.'
He adds: 'We are very different. With this combination we are in the
position to make quantum leaps both in the development of new products and
in cutting costs. This team only exists in one place in the world. And it
had to be two engineers.'
Piech's determination to bring Lopez to VW proved irresistible, but at a
cost. Volkswagen has been pitched into a storm of retaliatory legal action
from General Motors, which is diverting VW top management's attention from
the central issue of rescuing their company from its uncomfortable postion
as probably the highest-cost volume carmaker in Europe.
In the final quarter of last year the VW group suffered a loss of DM563m
(Pounds 229m). In the first quarter of this year it followed up with a loss
of DM1.25bn. As the former head of the Audi division, who crucially did not
have a position on the VW group executive management board, Piech blames the
company's fall into loss firmly on the old management, mentioning the onset
of recession only in passing.
'The VW group's current difficulties can only be blamed in small part on the
weakness of new car sales - and the same is true for other German
manufacturers. The real cause is much more the structural problems of the
entire sector, which are now being openly exposed by the recession.
'We have to accept that in the eight years of booming sales we did not do
our homework. As soon as sales fall, we are in the red. Our task for the
coming years is to come to grips with this structural transformation.'
He has started by cutting a large part of the old VW management, including
the former finance and production directors. The former head of research and
development has been demoted to the divisional board for the VW brand; the
former human resources director is now responsible for Asia-Pacific. Many
other senior managers just below the executive board have been replaced.
The restructuring measures announced so far include job cuts, fierce pruning
of capital investments, and pressure put on components suppliers to cut
costs and prices. More economical production methods are being introduced,
more parts are to be made common across model ranges. The VW group does not
need 12 different designs of cigarette lighters, he says.
Piech has to move faster and more rigorously than his rivals, because VW has
embarked late on restructuring. He says VW must rationalise all of its
operations, from raw material purchases to final sales to the customer.
'In eight years of boom we concentrated on expansion and we did not prepare
for bad times. We should break even with our plants working at 70 per cent
or less of capacity. We came into this crisis with a break-even level of
around 100 per cent of capacity.
'From 1989 our sales volumes grew every year and our profits shrank every
year. We introduced continuous improvement, or kaizen as the Japanese call
it, but not with great urgency. The Japanese have been doing it for 15
years. If we do it at the same pace, we will never catch up. With our
western culture and western thinking we must make quantum leaps in
continuous improvement.'
Piech says that Volkswagen still needs 30-32 hours to build a Golf at its
giant Wolfsburg works in Germany; the best Japanese companies take 12 hours
to build a car. Within the VW group, however, it has some plants, such as
its Polo small car production facility at Pamplona in Spain, that are
reaching Japanese efficiency levels.
'Before me, the big plants worked like independent companies . . . If we had
a quality problem at one plant, the other did not know how the problem was
solved.'
Since January VW has taken 'drastic measures', but he accepts that it will
take five to six years before VW has reached the target of a 70 per cent
break-even level.
Even the French, the most effective European carmakers, have had a 20 per
cent cost advantage over Volkswagen, says Piech, and the best Japanese have
a 25-30 per cent lead.
He insists that the competitive gap within Europe can be closed in two to
three years, however, and he looks to the transformation of the Swiss watch
industry for a model to show that the west can also match the Japanese.
'This gives me confidence that with European creativity - it does not just
have to be European - with western creativity we are absolutely in the
position to face the Japanese and to win.'
PERSONAL FILE
1937  Born vienna 1962  Graduated in engineering from Swiss Technical
University, Zurich 1963  Joined Porsche in engine testing 1971  Porsche
technical director 1972  Joined Audi NSU Auto Union, becoming engineering
director in 1975 1988  Audi chief executive 1992  Appointed to Volkswagen
group management board 1993  Chairman of VW group management board
