FT  01 MAR 93 / Japanese Bonds: Yields tumble on sharp rise in yen
BOND yields in Japan fell to their the lowest level since July 1987 last
week as the market took its cue from a surge in the value of the yen.
The yield on the 10-year benchmark bond No 145 closed on Friday at 3.865 per
cent, a fall of 22.5 basis points on the week. Although profit-taking before
the March financial year-end is expected to dampen the rally in the
near-term, most investors expect a further decline in yields.
In spite of denials by the government of a concerted effort to raise the yen
to reduce the country's surging trade surplus, calls from top US officials
added weight to speculation that an agreement would be reached to bolster
the currency.
The yen's sharp rise heightened fears that a fall in competitiveness of the
country's exporters would delay economic recovery. Moreover, the yen's
strength would lower imported inflationary pressure, setting the stage for a
further official discount rate cut.
Last week's spate of corporate restructuring announcements added to hopes
for lower interest rates. Nissan Motor said it would close its vehicle plant
near Tokyo by early 1995 and reduce its workforce by 5,000 to 48,000 by
1996.
Matsushita Electric Industrial, the world's largest consumer electronics
company, posted a 63 per cent fall in pre-tax profits for the nine months to
December, while Nippon Telegraph and Telephone said it would reduce its
workforce of more than 200,000 by 30,000 over the next three years and cut
its 1,300 retail outlets by a third.
The unexpected announcement by NTT, strongly backed by the government, to
cut staff by encouraging early retirement of middle-aged workers, unnerved
many Japanese office workers. Economists said further corporate
restructuring announcements could hurt consumer confidence, further hitting
consumption.
Investors have rushed to the bond market since the official discount rate
cut early last month, and February's market turnover leaped by 40.6 per cent
compared with January's total to Y39,344bn.
The rally has resulted from the lack of alternative investments. The Tokyo
stock market has floundered around the 17,000 level and is not likely to
recover shortly. Demand from corporations for loans is still low as capital
investment is slow, and short term interest rates have plunged, with
three-month certificates of deposit yielding around 3.25 per cent.
While demand for bonds remains high, the market may be suffering from a lack
of liquidity, as an increasing number of bondholders are becoming reluctant
to sell due to the lack of other attractive investments. 'There's no need to
take profits because one would only plough them back into the bond market,'
says Mr Marshall Gittler, bond analyst at Merrill Lynch in Tokyo.
Bond yields could have more room to fall, if inflation is taken into
account. With inflation at around 1 per cent, the JGB 145 currently offers a
real (inflation-adjusted) yield of just under 3 per cent. Since 1989, the
real yield has averaged 3.3 per cent, ranging between 3.97 per cent and 2.63
per cent. With inflation expected to fall further, the yield could still
have more room to fall.
Meanwhile, economists predict another cut in the discount rate, currently
2.5 per cent. Mr Takashi Oshio, economist at Morgan Guaranty Trust in Tokyo,
believes the Bank of Japan will lower the discount rate around June.
The bond market may face a temporary lull as investors take profits and
adjust positions ahead of the March financial year-end. However, bond yields
could see further easing on a slow economic recovery, sluggish corporate
profits and a continuing consumer slump. The yield on the benchmark bond is
expected to fall to 3.3 per cent during the third quarter of this year.
