FT  12 JAN 93 / Miti expects recovery to be delayed
MR Noboru Hatakeyama, vice-minister at the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry (Miti), said yesterday the Japanese economy would begin to
recover in the autumn at the earliest as official figures showed that deep
cuts in industrial investment are continuing unabated.
Machine tool orders last November were 29.8 per cent down on the same month
in 1991, with orders from the automobile industry down 43.8 per cent,
according to the Machine Tool Builders' Association.
Orders for general industrial machinery last November were 39.4 per cent
below the same month in 1991, with exports down 84 per cent, according to
the Society of Industrial Machinery Manufacturers.
Mr Hatakeyama said Japanese industry had divided into three groups in the
past five months: industries such as cars, semiconductors and home
appliances in which shipments were down by about 10 per cent; video
recorders, computers and air conditioners where shipments were 20 per cent
down; and those such as machine tools where the falls had reached about 40
per cent.
He disclosed that, over the past four months, 75 industries had applied for
government subsidies to help them cover the cost of retraining or
transferring laid-off workers at about 80,000 factories.
This is still well short of the level of subsidies reached during the
downturn in the mid-1980s caused by the appreciation of the yen, when 161
industries were given employment subsidies.
Mr Hatakeyama would not be drawn on whether the economy would need an
additional fiscal stimulus to recover. However, he noted that the recently
agreed budget for 1993, which provides for a meagre 0.2 per cent increase in
overall public spending, was far less stimulatory than the original budget
for 1992 combined with the Y10,700bn (Pounds 57bn) emergency package
announced last August.
Private sector economists believe it is almost certain there will be another
supplementary budget later this year as well as measures to front-load
public spending by bringing forward commitments from the second half of the
year.
Mr Gaishi Hiraiwa, chairman of the powerful Keidanren, the Federation of
Economic Organisations, stepped up employer pressure on the government to
take further measures by calling for another emergency package, combining
tax and interest rate cuts, if the economy fails to revive by the end of
March.
