FT  27 MAR 93 / Markets: Learn to live with recovery - London Markets
THE STOCK market is coming to terms with Life After Recession. The immediate
consequences of an end to the economic downturn - the likely survival of
previously threatened companies, the coming upturn in the earnings of
cyclical industries, a healthier performance by smaller businesses - have
already been reflected in share prices, leading to markedly different
performances by different types of company, as the chart shows.
That was the easy part, reinforced this week by the CBI's report that
manufacturing industry's order books have recovered to their best levels
since mid-1990.
Puzzling out what happens next requires more thought, and also offers more
scope for differences of opinion. The bumpy ride of stock prices over the
past couple of weeks, with quite large intra-day movements of prices on
relatively low volumes, indicates the degree of uncertainty. This week, for
example, the FT-SE 100 index closed down 47.2 points at 2852.9.
Of the factors at work, two are worth examining in more detail, since
together they exercise considerable influence over the outlook.
The first of these factors is the poor state of government finances. The
market has seen this coming ever since the pre-election autumn statement in
1991, when the government's expenditure was clearly set on a higher course
than its likely revenues warranted.
Still, knowing about the chickens is one thing; watching them arriving home
to roost is quite another. The Budget offered the first clucks from the
hen-house, in the form of rises in the tax burden on oil companies and
corporate pension funds.
As a sector, oil company shares dropped sharply, relative to the market as a
whole, in the days immediately after the Budget. They have since recovered
their lost ground and closed on Friday a fraction higher than the level
before the Budget.
This performance owes something to the fact that BP, the sector's
second-biggest stock, is likely to be a big gainer from the new Petroleum
Revenue Tax regime. It probably owes rather more to the belief that the PRT
measures may be susceptible to last-minute lobbying, to lessen their impact
on the worst-affected companies.
But one man's lessened burden is another's broken back: if oil companies are
not to pay a higher tax rate, someone else will have to, assuming unchanged
government spending. Oil shares have recovered but others have slid away as
the market has come to terms with the thought that closing the deficit will
eat away at consumers' disposable income in the years ahead.
The most obvious potential casualties of any tightening of consumers' grip
on their wallets are retailing shares. These have in any case done poorly in
the first quarter of the year, against the trend that has seen cyclical
stocks do much better than the average. Since the Budget, stores have
dropped just over 2 per cent; other consumer sectors have also done poorly.
The spectre of a steadily rising tax burden for consumers is likely to haunt
these shares for some time to come.
The second factor that investors have had to weigh up, the likely growth
rate for corporate dividends, has been given fresh topicality by the Budget
tax changes. All this week, companies have been rushing to save money for
those shareholders who stand to lose from the change to dividend tax
credits, pension funds and individuals who pay income tax at the 40 per cent
rate.
PowerGen and Boots brought forward the announcement of their end of year
dividends by two months to beat the April 5 introduction of the changes.
Reed, Reuters Holdings, Capital Radio and Laird announced 'second interim
dividends' - in effect, final dividends declared early. Others will follow
over the next ten days.
This excitement is a once-off event; a more lingering question will be the
extent to which companies choose to increase their dividends to offset the
impact on those shareholders affected by the tax change. So far, Unilever
and SmithKline Beecham have been the only blue-chips to promise such an
increase.
In both cases, dividend policy is governed by the need for equal treatment
of shareholders on both sides of these dual-nationality operations; they
cannot therefore be counted as setting a precedent.
The announcement this week by BAT and RTZ of tax-efficient scrip dividends,
examined in more detail elsewhere on this page, is another example of the
thought that is going into the issue of payments to shareholders. The market
will be looking closely for signs of how companies intend to cope with the
competing pressures on their dividend policies: whether to resume the growth
in payouts once earnings recover, in part to compensate shareholders for the
tax changes, or to strengthen balance sheets.
This is where the two factors start to come together, because the balance
between gilts and equities, on some calculations, is already a fine one: UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew estimates that the dividend tax changes have removed almost
all the likely extra return that equities offered over conventional gilts.
Equities have not been helped, in this calculus, by the upward drift in gilt
yields: the yield on the ten-year benchmark issue rose from 7.61 per cent to
7.76 per cent over the week. The market has been dropping back since the
Bank of England's announcement on Tuesday of the details of next week's gilt
auction, to take place on March 31. Dealers, expecting a Pounds 2 1/2 bn
auction, were taken by surprise at the promise of Pounds 3bn of a new
20-year benchmark issue, 8 per cent Treasury stock due 2013.
This is a vivid illustration of the way that the government, like the
corporate sector, must cope with the effects of binge-borrowing. Companies
(and consumers) ran up their debt in the late 1980s; the public sector is
doing so now. With companies' scope to raise dividends more restricted than
investors would like, the government's present surge of borrowing will keep
investors guessing about the relative attractions of the securities each
side has to offer.
