FT  13 JAN 93 / Management: Women workers go for gold in assault on male
bastion - A look at new recruits in Chile's mines
Maria Rodriguez likes mending trucks. Giant trucks, the size of three-storey
buildings, which shift tonnes of rock from Chuquicamata, the world's biggest
copper mine in Chile's Atacama desert.
Eva Ramos would love to drive one of these mechanised monsters. She thinks
it would be little different from driving her fork-lift truck; it would only
be a question of getting used to the size.
Eva is also responsible for the tools at Chuquicamata's maintenance
workshops. She doesn't mind the girlie posters on the walls. Wolf-whistles,
she says, have become part of the background noise.
Eva, Maria and a growing number of women miners, mechanics, engineers and
geologists form part of the army of shock troops that are storming this most
macho of male bastions - the mining industry. Born and bred in the desert,
they are as tough as their husbands and fathers who know no other occupation
than mining.
Some of the women miners at Chuquicamata are widows who took over their
husbands' jobs after fatal accidents at the mine. And although women are
outnumbered by more than 10-to-one at the 9,000-strong mining camp, they say
sexual harassment is not a problem. It is a cause of instant dismissal at
Chuquicamata.
Sexual barriers are crumbling as a foreign investment boom in Chilean copper
and gold mines creates a shortage of skilled labour. It was only in October
last year that women were first allowed to enter El Teniente, the biggest
underground copper mine in the world, because of a centuries-old
superstition that women brought bad luck and pit accidents.
At La Escondida, a Dollars 900m (Pounds 592m) copper operation inaugurated
by RTZ and BHP of Australia two years ago, women have moved from secretarial
jobs to operating computer controls in the production plant. La Escondida
also employs women crane drivers, engineers, technicians and metallurgical
specialists. They work the same shifts as their male colleagues and share
dormitories at the mining camp while their families remain in Antofagasta.
The company operates an equal opportunities policy and encourages women to
acquire new skills through their training programmes. Although Chilean women
are breaking new professional ground, they have not yet shattered the 'glass
ceiling' that keeps them subordinate to men.
The state copper company Codelco, which operates Chuquicamata and three
other mines, has 25,000 employees but not a single female executive. Only a
smattering of women occupy managerial posts.
Even multinationals must bow to the machismo that pervades Chilean society.
One Canadian mining executive says: 'I have not been able to hire qualified
women to senior positions because Chilean men would refuse to work under
them.'
As for Chilean executives, the idea of promoting women to top posts does not
even occur to them. Partly as a result, the female 'brain drain' from Chile
has been considerable.
The first woman mining engineer graduated from the University of Chile 40
years ago but her successors have been forced to venture as far as Zaire and
Canada to further their careers. The women at Chuquicamata are determined to
change this state of affairs. They formed a Corporation of Women Copper
Workers two years ago and with 500 members it is the biggest womens'
organisation in Chile.
At the beginning, says Angelica Guinez, their president, the corporation was
regarded with suspicion by management and unions alike. 'They thought 500
women together spelled trouble.'
While none of the women at Chuquicamata describe themselves as feminists,
they nevertheless feel the need to fight for visibility, respect and equal
opportunities. 'It is a daily struggle to prove your worth,' says Gladys
Romero, a fork-lift truck driver at the maintenance workshops. 'It took me
about a year to convince my boss that I was up to the job. The men here
don't like women invading their territory.'
After mending Codelco's giant trucks for 13 years, Maria Rodriguez would
like to be promoted to the foreman's job. She believes male prejudice is
holding her back. 'As a woman,' she says, 'you are watched like a hawk. I
cannot afford to slip up. If I take time off to take a sick child to
hospital, it will be held against me at work. But if a man doesn't turn up
because he has a hangover, the only thing he gets is commiseration.'
The Corporation of Women Copper Miners is particularly proud of the fact
that their organisation has broken the rigid management-worker divide that
governs labour relations at the desert mining camp. Their members include
truck drivers and secretaries, nurses, mechanics, teachers and metallurgical
engineers.
They have organised conferences on labour psychology, legal rights for women
and assertiveness training courses. Last year they managed to elect the
first female representative on to one of Codelco's unions. Management has
also recently begun inviting them to discuss policy decisions.
But the real breakthrough, they say, will come when male colleagues cease to
regard them as too 'fragile' or 'emotional' for certain jobs. Looking over
Chuquicamata's huge crater during the noon blast, Elena Alcayaga says:
'What's so dangerous about handling a few dynamite sticks? I'd love to do
that.'
