FT  10 DEC 93 / Arts: 'Poppea' in concert - Opera
This month Londoners find themselves tempted by an extraordinarily rich
spread of concert opera: Berlioz's Troyens at the Barbican, Tchaikovsky's
Iolanta at the Albert Hall, and now, for two performances only, Monteverdi's
Incoronazione di Poppea at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
Opera-in-concert proves sometimes a disappointment, when score-bound singers
in evening dress seem to do no more than stand and deliver, so that the full
range of the medium seems crudely narrowed. But when heights of expressive
intensity are reached such as those revealed on Wednesday, the form seems to
realise a musico-dramatic ideal - pristine, intimate, all-of-a-piece -
seldom even adumbrated in the opera house.
But then, opera-in-concert is hardly an apt generic categorisation of this
particular event. In common with the splendid evenings of Mozart opera -
Idomeneo, Tito, recently Figaro - masterminded by John Eliot Gardiner and
his Monteverdi Choir and English Baroque Soloists in the same hall,
Gardiner's Poppea struck an exact balance between 'staging' (employing here
carefully chimed entrances and exits, platform movement, an elegantly spare
use of chairs) and concert-hall concentration on the music.
In Peter Holman's specially prepared edition (a careful new scrutinising of
available sources) a sparing group of instruments has been prescribed:
strings, continuo keyboards and lutes, two harps, none of the wind-and-brass
sonic aggrandisement that marked Nikolaus Harnoncourt's bloated burlesquing
of Poppea at this year's Salzburg Festival. The double-headed layout of
accompanying forces provided a natural arena for the activity of voices and,
when necessary, bodies; Gardiner, seated on the right, did not so much
conduct as, with an occasional flexing hand, shape and direct the flow of
notes and words.
For this reason, and because the cast was chosen for its ability to focus
pure vocal sound on the 'organic' delivery of the text, it all amounted to a
Poppea faster-moving, more nakedly affecting than any I have previously
encountered. It was still not ideal: I live in hope of one day hearing an
entirely Italian-speaking Monteverdi cast turn the notion of recitar
cantando from studied imitation to full-coloured authenticity. Here that was
most spontaneously demonstrated by the Italian Seneca (the noble Francesco
Ellero d'Artegna), Cupid (the delightful Marinella Pennicchi) and Nurse (the
countertenor Roberto Balconi), and the part-Italian Englishman Mark Tucker
in minor roles.
But the beauty, clarity and prime forcefulness achieved by Sylvia McNair,
exquisitely cool in the title role, Michael Chance (Otho), Anne Sofie von
Otter (Octavia) and Bernarda Fink (who made Arnalta's lullaby the opera's
still centre) were not at all far off the 'real thing'. Dana Hanchard,
handsome of presence, a cultivated musician, proved a shade too clouded of
timbre for a convincing soprano-pitch Nero. Catherine Bott's warm, spirited
account of Drusilla was sometimes intonationally peccable.
Those and other, minor cavils aside, this was an awesome, chastening
occasion. What a terrifying opera Poppea is - musically ravishing,
many-sided, lightning-direct, dramatically pitiless in its survey of human
affections and human ambitions. DG Archiv is recording the show 'live': for
those unable to squeeze into the QEH, either on Wednesday or this coming
Saturday. This will afford some small consolation.
Sponsored by PPP and BSIS
