FT  08 JUN 93 / Bid to buy out Midlands airport
MANAGEMENT and employees yesterday submitted a bid to buy East Midlands
International Airport at Castle Donington, Leicestershire.
There are now four bidders for the airport, whose future ownership has been
in doubt since Derbyshire County Council signalled it would dispose of its
44 per cent stake in early 1991.
KPMG Peat Marwick, accountants, whose Nottingham office is handling the
sale, refused to namethe other bidders. But Regional Airports has publicly
disclosed its interest and it is thought that Lockheed, the US group, and
National Express, the UK coach company, may have made bids.
The value of the airport is not clear. Land surplus to future operational
requirements has been transferred to a separate company and is not included
in the sale. But when the Derbyshire County Council first indicated it would
sell its stake, the value placed on it was up to Pounds 15m.
The other equity owners are Nottinghamshire County Council, with 33 per
cent, and Nottingham City Council and Leicestershire County Council with 11
per cent each.
Once Derbyshire had indicated its desire to sell, a series of consultants'
reports was commissioned by the owners, leading to a formal decision to
place the airport on the market. The deadline for bids was yesterday. Mr
Chris Gilliatt of Peat Marwick said he had told the bidders a decision would
be made on the successful offer by the end of the month.
The local authorities' decision to sell the airport reflects an assessment
that investment will soon be needed to cope with the expected increase in
passenger traffic, and a realisation that duty-free shopping may decline as
a contribution to revenue as European Community economies become more
closely integrated.
The airport's capacity is 2m passengers a year. In the year to last March it
handled 1.26m people, an increase of 9 per cent over 1991-92. Although the
airport is the base of British Midland Airways, the greater part of its
passenger traffic comes from charter operations.
