FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (11):
Powerful economic assets protected - Why the terms on drug patents have been
lengthened
GOVERNMENTS have not lengthened patent protection for computers, for fuel
injection systems, or for components for aircraft undercarriages. So why
have the United States, Japan and the European Community all given just such
special treatment specifically to pharmaceuticals in recent years?
Self-interest, is the short answer. Governments were persuaded that
competitive capability was at stake, and did not want to throw away powerful
economic assets that were capable of bringing important foreign trade
earnings.
The US set the pace in the early 1980s, when its government accepted
national drug firms' arguments that tougher drug testing requirements - and
consequently longer lead times to launch - were eating into patent term and
damaging industrial prospects. Pre-launch development had risen from three
to four in the 1960s to around 10 years - thereby eroding as much as half
the product's patent life.
Cutting the lead times was not a serious option in an increasingly
safety-conscious sector: so in 1984, the government extended the length of
US patent term for pharmaceuticals - secure in the knowledge that US
companies, which held the lion's share of the US market, would be the
principal beneficiaries.
When a similar logic convinced the Japanese authorities to extend drug
patent life in Japan in 1988, the European industry was left with serious
double trouble: not only were patents in Europe still being eroded by long
lead times, but the Japanese and US moves had left European firms at what
they claimed was a systematic disadvantage in competition with their main
international rivals.
In consequence, from the beginning of this year a new legal instrument has
come into force in the EC, designed specifically to provide additional
intellectual property protection for pharmaceutical innovation. The
Supplementary Protection Certificate (SPC), as it is known, will give up to
five years' further market exclusiveness to medicines, in partial
compensation for patent life lost while they were in pre-launch development.
As many as 50 new medicines a year could qualify for a total protection of
15 years from first launch. And European firms - who hold the largest share
of European sales - will benefit most.
The pharmaceutical industry has produced a barrage of arguments why it is a
special case. It contends that few areas of industry-funded research are so
expensive (with an average new medicine costing ECU200m (Dollars 242m) to
develop). It says that few areas of innovation are as easy to copy as
medicines, and therefore so vulnerable to post-patent competition from
generics. Or it argues that product life cycles are shorter in many other
research-based industries, and in such areas longer patents are therefore
less important.
But the real clincher - and the argument that provokes no scepticism in
other industrial sectors - is that few areas of innovation run into lengthy
post-patent controls before marketing. For many non-pharmaceutical
innovations, product launch comes only months after patent grant - leaving
more than 15 years of effective patent term. By contrast, as the EC's new
SPC regulation expresses it, the lengthy development time for new medicines
'makes the period of effective patent protection under the patent
insufficient to cover the investment put in to the research'.
There is some independent evidence to support the claims that drugs need
patents more than most other products. According to the UK Patent Office, as
few as 10 per cent of all patents are still being renewed in the final year
of their life, and the average patent - across all sectors - is maintained
for only 11 years; by then it is usually abandoned, because the product has
failed, or been overtaken.
Drug firms, on the other hand, maintain that a new medicine is usually only
getting into its stride in the eleventh year of its patent life. One of the
few disinterested cross-sectoral comparative studies of the subject has also
concluded that 'in the patent field, probably only the research- based
pharmaceutical industry is totally dependent on patents'.
In any event, enlightened self-interest has convinced the member states that
they had to act - not because research would be stifled without patent term
reform, but because it could be stifled in Europe. The focus of the EC
measure is clear: medicines which take a long time to research 'will not
continue to be developed in the Community and in Europe unless they are
covered by favourable rules that provide for sufficient protection for
research'; there is a 'risk of research centres situated in the member
states relocating to countries that already offer greater protection'.
The perceived risk is not a breakdown in the development of new drugs, but a
shift in innovation away from one region and towards another. The success of
the research-based pharmaceutical industry in arguing its case on patent
protection probably contains a moral for it as it combats increasing attacks
on its pricing in the US, Japan, and Europe.
But patent term restoration does not please everyone. Generic manufacturers,
who won useful trade-offs in the US legislation, are angry that they get
nothing from the EC SPC. European consumer associations complain that
patients will be worse off, because there are no competition measures to
counter-balance longer monopolies. The Spanish government - which, like many
of its national drug companies, never supported drug patents strongly - has
launched a European Court action against the regulation. Even for the
R&amp;D-based industry, there are concerns over the new EC law: the strength of
the SPC has yet to be tested in any court of law; and the mechanisms for
granting SPCs are proving problematic (many of the applications submitted
for an SPC since the beginning of this year have been rejected as
inadequate).
Nonetheless, some other industrial sectors are showing interest in emulating
the drug industry's achievements. In Europe, the chemical industry
federation, CEFIC, has declared its readiness to back any sectoral request
for patent term extension to compensate for time lost in pre-launch
administrative procedures.
First into the fray are the pesticides manufacturers: the 'SPC task force'
of the European Crop Protection Association expects an EC proposal 'in
mid-1993' for an agro-chemical SPC.
The future may not be only a question of other industries catching up with
pharmaceuticals, however. Within the pharmaceutical sector itself, although
there is more or less a level playing field on drug patent length across the
three principal drug-producing regions of the world since the start of 1993,
there are already signs of moves to make some regions more equal than
others.
In a just-published wish-list for better economic treatment for its members,
the European drug industry federation, EFPIA, concludes a catalogue of
demands with a mysterious cry which it at present declines to explain: 'A
Community-wide mechanism is needed to restore the normal 20-year period of
patent protection for innovative products,' it says. Is the drug world on
the brink of a new round of patent term extension leapfrogging?
