FT  12 OCT 93 / Leading Article: Chunnel lessons
WHEN THE Channel tunnel officially opens next May, the project will be
nearly a year late and its cost of Pounds 8.8bn almost double the original
estimate. The construction has been dogged by disputes between Eurotunnel,
the operator, and TML, the contractor. Eurotunnel shareholders will also
have been asked twice to stump up extra cash. The impression of financial
disorder in what was billed as a flagship of free enterprise is such that
some observers are asking whether it would not have been better to leave the
project to the public sector.
Such a conclusion would be wrong. First, it is not clear that Eurotunnel has
been such a bad investment. Much will depend on how much traffic it carries,
but the initial shareholders show a modest if unexciting gain on their
investment at yesterday's closing price of 488p. Second, it is almost
certain that the public sector would have done worse in keeping costs under
control. It is hard to believe that Department of Transport civil servants
would have harried the contractors with the same vigour as Sir Alastair
Morton, Eurotunnel's abrasive chief executive.
However, lessons can be learnt from the Eurotunnel experience. Doing so is
also necessary, given the UK government's intention of attracting private
finance for a range of traditionally public sector investments such as
roads, railways, prisons and hospitals.
One lesson is that it is worth the government taking a bit more time and
spending a bit more money defining projects up-front. With the Channel
tunnel, failure to do so meant the operating franchise was awarded to a
group of construction companies. When they floated Eurotunnel off, it was
already saddled with construction contracts with the original promoters - a
structure which has been blamed for many of the subsequent disputes. It
would have been better to have started with an operator capable of
negotiating its own contracts. But to achieve that, the government would
probably have had to prime the pump.
Another lesson is that it may not be efficient to transfer all the risk of
infrastructure projects to the private sector, particularly where the
government itself is the source of uncertainty. In Eurotunnel's case, the UK
government's sluggishness in building more rail and road links to the tunnel
and a tightening of safety regulations have all reduced the project's
financial attraction. If the government indemnified private contractors for
such political and regulatory risks, it would have an incentive to keep them
to the minimum.
