FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (8): Shares ignore
hesitant Bundesbank - Star performers in the first quarter were Europe
(excluding the UK), the Pacific region, and South Africa, where the return
in sterling terms was more than 20 per cent / Equities
MOST EQUITY markets ignored any forebodings associated with the Ides of
March, and chose that month to reach their highest points for the first
quarter of the year.
Of the 24 national markets that make up the FT-Actuaries World Index, 23
(the exception was Sweden) showed a positive total return for sterling-based
investors. Eighteen had their high in March. Norway, with a return of 14.2
per cent, hit its high on Ides day itself, March 15.
During the quarter, Europe (excluding the UK), the Pacific region and South
Africa were the star performers. The return, in sterling terms, in the local
South African market was more than 20 per cent, partly because the JSE Gold
Index rose by some 50 per cent, but also because of a recovery in the rand.
Tokyo ended the quarter with a return of more than 19 per cent for sterling
holders, the pay-off being only marginally less for US dollar investors. But
a caveat is needed. The Nikkei average crossed the 19,000 mark on March 29,
more than 12 per cent higher on the quarter, yet at just about the same
level as in March last year.
Those who invested in Tokyo in the heady days of late 1992 are still nursing
sizeable losses, but short-term holders are laughing and may be considering
taking profits. A few optimists are hoping for more heady days, and trading
in early April was encouraging.
In Europe, most fund managers also had happy days, although some leading
houses only went overweight (against the FT world index) as the quarter
progressed. The investment theory now is that the US was first into
recession and is first coming out, with lower interest rates driving up Wall
Street. Europe, on the other hand, was last into recession, and share prices
have started to anticipate falling interest rates, despite a hesitant
Bundesbank.
Europe as a whole has produced disappointing results for investors over the
past three years, but many fund managers think its time has come, despite
continued weak economic data. France and Germany had, respectively, a total
sterling return in the first quarter of almost 14 and 12 per cent.
Belgium, ignoring a minor government crisis, did even better at 16.7 per
cent; while Norway, the Netherlands and Spain were all around 14 per cent
higher in sterling terms. Ireland, which finally followed sterling down with
a 10 per cent currency devaluation, but stayed inside the ERM, returned more
than 20 per cent.
Italy, on the other hand, struggled with its equity and currency levels,
burdened by an avalanche of scandals that seemingly touched all political
parties and most of the country's major state companies. In FT index terms,
the market returned just over 2 per cent to sterling-based investors, but an
impressive 10 per cent (in the circumstances) in local terms. Sweden had
half that for local investors, but a negative return for dollar and sterling
holders.
Investors on Wall Street didn't do too well in the quarter, the sterling
total return being under 5 per cent and almost a point less in dollar terms.
Many analysts think that much of the anticipated good US economic news is
already in equity prices, and that the market looks fully valued for the
immediate future. Canada yielded over 8 per cent.
The quarter's return in the UK market was thin, at 3.2 per cent, although,
on balance, shares in medium-sized British companies did better than the
average of the FT-SE 100 index, and a lot of selective stock-picking is now
under way. In the larger UK stocks, the scope for significant dividend
increases seems poor.
