FT  10 NOV 93 / Survey of Mexico (4): Putting the bite on business - A look
at the obstacles faced by companies in Mexico
WHEN AN Iranian-born Briton claimed in February that he had been asked for a
bribe to secure a Mexican air traffic control contract, he unleashed a storm
of controversy. Mr Kaveh Moussavi, who said he was asked for a bribe while
acting as agent for IBM, was condemned by the Mexican government and
ministers as soon as his allegations appeared in the Financial Times.
While it is clear that Mr Moussavi informed IBM at the time of an encounter
with three Mexican officials seeking a bribe in Mexico City's Nikko Hotel
last November, his allegations have not been proved. On the other hand, Mr
Moussavi says they have received only perfunctory investigation by the
Mexican government. Certainly, Mr Moussavi was condemned by government
ministers as a liar before an investigation could have been carried out.
The controversy raised a number of important questions over the extent to
which corruption and the country's judicial system - widely said to be
inefficient, corrupt and arbitrary in its decision-making - are obstacles to
doing business in Mexico. As such, the Moussavi affair has become one of the
issues that opponents of the North American Free Trade Agreement have used
to attack the treaty.
In reality, US multinationals such as IBM are usually sufficiently
well-connected politically to achieve redress for any real or imagined
wrongs. Mr Moussavi - who has since reached an 'accommodation' with IBM not
to criticise the company - has himself pointed out: 'If this is the trouble
the government can give to a Dollars 72bn corporation, God help the smaller
companies.'
If these issues are problems for foreign companies - and if Nafta is passed,
corporationsfrom the US and Canada will at least have a right to redress
through the treaty's disputes procedures - they are potentially devastating
for smaller Mexican companies. While deregulation of the economy at a
federal level has reduced some of the obstacles to these enterprises, they
are still often faced with obstructive and corrupt officialdom at lower
levels. Even newly-privatised industry is often unhelpful: the traditional
bribe - known as the 'mordida' or bite - is still often necessary to ensure
timely repairs of telephone lines, for example.
There are groups within the Mexican government who agree that the judicial
system and the consequent lack of ability to enforce contracts is a serious
weakness of the Mexican economy: the reform of the legal system is
considered by the finance minister and presidential candidate, Mr Pedro
Aspe, among others, as a reform priority for the next administration.
Indeed, the travails of small- and medium-sized companies are of more than
peripheral importance to the Mexican economy. Mr Rafael Rangel, of the
Monterrey Institute for Technical and Higher Studies, estimates such
enterprises are responsible for 80 per cent of Mexico's industrial
production.
These companies are also, he says, poorly equipped to deal with the
technological and management challenges posed by the opening of the Mexican
economy. It is a theme echoed by Mr Luis Rubio, of the Centre of
Investigation for Development in Mexico City. 'There is still an enormous
abyss between those companies that have understood what's going on and those
that have no idea how to adjust to it. They have a lack of access to good
information. There are perhaps 120,000 to 130,000 companies in the country,
many of which are going to die needlessly. That doesn't mean they should be
subsidised; just that they they should be allowed access to information.'
These and other issues coalesce into what is the main problem facing most
Mexican companies: high interest rates and a lack of access to credit. The
government has transformed Nacional Financiera, the state development bank,
from a source of government funding to a provider of credit to the private
sector. But loans remain expensive - with real interest rates well into
double digits - and scarce. Only big companies with access to international
capital markets cancircumvent the problem.
It is clear that the privatisation of 18 banks has not been enough to secure
competition in the provision of bank loans. However, the government is
taking further steps to inject more competition into the banking system:
cutting withholding tax on interest payments to banks abroad and trying to
establish a market in mortgage securities. Here again, the lengthy and
uncertain legal procedures required for lenders to gain access to collateral
in Mexico may inhibit such developments.
It is not only in banking where questions of competition arise. The
administration has left the state electricity monopoly untouched, and
electricity prices are high. Where it has privatised, the government has
been skilful at extracting the best price possible for state companies
industries but at a cost, some say, of concentrating economic power into
relatively few hands. This increases the importance - for small businesses,
distributors and consumers - of ensuring effective redress for the abuse of
monopoly power.
The law aimed at ensuring competition is probably one of the most advanced
in the world, encapsulating the distinction now made by economists between
size per se - the old definition of monopoly - and monopolistic behaviour.
Mr Santiago Levy, president of the new Federal Competition Commission and
the man who framed the law, says: 'The link between performance and
structure is more elaborate than has been generally understood. You can't
infer that more concentration is necessarily bad. What is important is the
behaviour of businesses, not so much the size of the firms. What the law is
looking for is efficiency and competitive markets; in other words that
prices are as close as possible to costs.'
The law distinguishes between what is illegal per se - such as bid rigging -
and issues for which a 'rule of reason' should apply. These latter issues
would include, for example, restrictive agreements between producers and
distributors. In investigating these, the commission must first define what
the relevant market is - for example, cotton shirts, shirts or clothing. It
must then decide that the company complained of has substantial power in
this market, which will involve a close investigation of the market
structure.
Mr Levy reckons more competition in some sectors - including communications,
transport and financial services - would be beneficial. 'Particularly in
non-tradeable sectors, we think a more vigorous competition policy could be
useful.'
Along with the central bank, now being made independent, the competition
commission is one of two new government institutions that will transcend the
presidency. Commissioners will sit for 10 years - although in the first
place their terms will be staggered to ensure one of the five is rotated
every two years.
Still, the incorporation of best practice in the law is noguarantee that it
will be followed. Mr Levy knows that to gain credibility his organisation
will have to show its teeth. That will mean not only issuing effective
judgments against the government's enemies and those with little political
influence, but also against those with huge influence in the corridors of
power.
