FT  28 MAY 93 / Survey of UK Relocation (15): An honest answer to overcome
fears - Profile of Northern Ireland
RESIGNED FOR years to being regarded as just a coloured pin on the map of
world trouble spots found in most TV newsrooms, economic planners in
Northern Ireland are encouraged that the province is finally attracting
attention for more benign reasons.
The Industrial Development Board, the government body charged with the task
of promoting inward investment to the province, says that in 1992 it had one
of its most successful years since it was established 10 years ago. It is
estimated that some 1,900 new jobs will result from projects signed up in
the past year, five times the number in 1991.
Most notable among the new project announcements are Seagate Technology from
California, which is establishing its first plant outside the US at
Londonderry, with a Dollars 65m investment to manufacture wafers for
computer hard disc drives, and Texmaco, an Indonesian textile firm, which is
to invest Pounds 95m in two plants to manufacture new high-tech polyester
fibres and fabrics for the European market. Together they will provide some
1,400 jobs when operating at full capacity.
Mr Frank Hewitt, the deputy executive director of the IDB, expressed
characteristic Belfast caution in assessing the significance of the upturn.
'Several of the projects have been under discussion for a while, and are a
result of investment decisions which were probably delayed because of the
recession. We will not necessarily have as good a year this year,' he said.
Nonetheless, he said, 'Seagate was a tough and hard-fought project, and we
are pleased to have won it against the competition'.
Attracting companies to invest in Northern Ireland is a particularly
difficult task. 'Not only do we have a perceived peripherality problem with
the sea crossing, which regions, such as Wales and Scotland do not have, but
we also have the security situation and the negative image created by it'
said Mr Hewitt.
His approach is 'to be totally honest about it all and put it into context.
We cannot attract companies here under false pretences as we want to build a
long-term relationship with them. That requires both sides being honest with
each other'.
The peripherality issue was not a big problem for Mr Marimutu Sinivasan, the
president of Texmaco. He said: 'Although we will be supplying the European
market, we have found that transporting our product from Northern Ireland is
absolutely no barrier to having our operation here, a fact borne out by the
other Northern Ireland companies we have talked to who are also selling into
Europe'.
The frequency and reliability of ferry sailings to Stranraer from Belfast
and Larne, and the lack of traffic congestion in the province are factors
cited by many freight forwarders from the Republic preferring to ship out of
the north rather than Dublin 100 miles further south.
AVX, a leading manu- facturer of ceramic capacitors used in computers and
telecommunications, set up its European distribution centre at Larne in
1991, which the company says was chosen because of the province's advanced
telecommunications network.
This allows orders from across Europe to be placed electronically and to be
delivered within 48 hours.
On the issue of political violence, Mr Hewitt points to the security
statistics which show Northern Ireland to have one of the lowest crime rates
in Europe 'even including the terrorist attacks'.
If overcoming these obstacles were not enough, however, the IDB itself has
recently drawn fire from behind its own lines. In a report published by the
Northern Ireland Accounting Office last February, the IDB was criticised for
allowing the level of government contributions to overall project costs to
creep up from 21 per cent in 1990/91 to 27 per cent currently. It said that
greater attention needed to be paid to the issue of job displacement from
elsewhere in the UK and in the IDB's 'value-added' assessment of IDB-funded
projects.
Mr Hewitt admits that he faces some conflicting objectives - namely to win
the inward investment for Northern Ireland, but in doing so to keep the cost
to the taxpayer at a minimum.
Do the criticisms mean that the IDB will be tougher in assessing projects in
the future?
Mr Hewitt insisted that the IDB already carries out a very rigorous
appraisal process but said that in allocating its Pounds 157m budget this
year, 'we are aware we must give value to the taxpayer as well as meet our
other objective which is to promote job creation'.
An important job creator over the past four years, has been the boom in
back-office services moving to Northern Ireland, attracted by lower wage and
property costs than in inner-city areas such as London, and top-class
telecommunications.
Although the driving force for this has lost momentum with the recession, Mr
Terence Killen, the IDB section head responsible for promoting such
back-office relocations, said: 'Firms should take a longer-term view.
Property and wage cost differentials are likely to widen again as the
economy recovers. Staff turnover is also much lower here and as investment
in people rather than machinery or plant is a feature of the services
support industry, this can be very important'.
One of the biggest such projects announced to date is that by the new Child
Support Agency which is to establish a new centre at Belfast, employing 750
people, and from which it will service all of the east of England.
