FT  22 JAN 93 / Leading Article: Bosnia's future
THE BOSNIAN Serbs' acceptance of the constitutional framework for a future
state of Bosnia-Hercegovina hardly justifies premature jubilation. The
statements by Bosnian Serb leaders clearly indicate that the endorsement by
their parliament of the first stage of the peace plan is no more than
skin-deep. They have not abandoned their goal of a separate Serb state, at
least in the long term, in spite of the draft constitution's provision for a
unified, if largely decentralised Bosnian state.
Yet the decision by the Serb assembly was nonetheless a success for the
peace process, conducted with great commitment by Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord
Owen. Since the beginning of the year, the mediators have brought round the
same table the leaders of the three warring factions - Serbs, Moslems and
Croats - who had previously refused to meet face-to-face. Their
participation in direct talks suggests that proponents of a diplomatic
solution are gaining some ground.
That is an important development at a time when the negotiators are about to
embark on the hardest part of the peace plan - the controversial map of the
future state's provincial boundaries. This map has been condemned, not least
by the Bosnian Moslems, for underwriting the military gains made by the
Serbs and condoning, in territorial terms, their policy of 'ethnic
cleansing'. Those criticisms, however, are at least partially based on a
misreading of the facts.
Under the plan, the Serbs, who currently occupy some 70 per cent of the
total territory of Bosnia, compared with about 60 per cent before the
conflict, will be allocated no more than 45 per cent in the future. That
represents a greater Serb roll-back than is generally realised. It provides
the basis for a genuine compromise which the Moslems would be well-advised
to consider seriously.
Mr Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's president, will continue to have a vital
influence on the peace negotiations, as he did in putting pressure on Mr
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, to accept the constitutional
framework.
There are, of course, good reasons for doubting the sincerity of Mr
Milosevic, a passionate advocate of a greater Serbia. It would be
unrealistic to believe that he has given up the political objectives which
he proclaimed so loudly only a short time ago.
However, economic self-interest may temporarily prove to be a more powerful
motive for Mr Milosevic than political idealism. The pursuit of a costly war
and international sanctions are increasingly undermining Serbia's economy
and the standard of living of its people. That, more than anything else, is
what has driven him to his currently constructive role in the negotiating
process.
