FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of Venture and Development Capital (4): Start-up
prospects remain uncertain - The switch to later-stage investments
MOST UK venture capitalists have lost money helping businesses to get
started and backing them in the early stages. Neither the 'portfolio'
approach, scattering money across a broad spread of new businesses in the
hope that some will succeed, nor more selective investments have paid off.
The result has been that in both the UK and continental Europe the venture
capital industry has progressively withdrawn from backing start-ups and
switched to later-stage investments. Backing new businesses is no less
time-consuming than backing established ones but the risks are much greater
and the time taken to generate profits much longer.
Nor has it proved possible to finance the odd start-up deal among an
otherwise later-stage portfolio. Dealing with start-ups is so different from
providing large amounts of development capital or funding management
buy-outs that many venture capital groups have abandoned early-stage deals
altogether.
In the UK, early-stage investments accounted for 17 per cent of deals by
number and seven per cent by value in 1992. In Europe as a whole, the
picture was similar: early-stage investments were 15 per cent of deals by
number and six per cent by value.
In Britain, companies such as JMI and Oxford Seedcorn Ventures, specialists
at the early stage end of investing, pulled out while even 3i, the largest
supporter of early-stage investments, has also sharply reduced its activity.
In the late 1980s, 3i was regularly backing more than 250 start-ups a year,
peaking at just over 300 in 1990. These numbers have since been reduced
sharply and in 1992 it backed only 58 'management start-ups.' They accounted
for just Pounds 15m out of total new investments of Pounds 310m although
start-up investments are almost invariably smaller than later stage deals.
'It is often a problem to find other people willing to back a start-up,'
says John Platt, a 3i director. 'It took us 18 months to put one deal
together.'
The nature of start-ups which win venture backing has also changed over the
years. Enthusiastic inventors with a good idea have fallen out of favour and
start-ups tend to be led by experienced managers.
'We don't back 'black box' start-ups,' says Mr James Nelson, managing
director of Foreign &amp; Colonial Ventures. 'Generally we wouldn't back someone
with a product which was not selling. We would support managers with a good
idea and some acquisitions already identified.'
There have been several deals in the hotels and pubs sector where
experienced managers have obtained venture backing for the purchase of
properties from the large hotel chains or brewers. Such transactions have
more of the flavour of acquisition finance than start-ups as envisaged in
the early days of venture capital.
Start-up has also come to mean the extension of a formula, successful in one
country, into another country.
In one recent deal Apax Partners backed a 'start-up,' Xpedite Systems, a
York-based company providing sophisticated fax systems, with Pounds 3m. But
while Xpedite was a new company in the UK the British deal followed an
Dollars 8m dollar investment in Xpedite's US 'sister' company by Apax's US
office.
The picture for the more traditional start-up is not unrelievedly gloomy
however. In the technology field start-ups continue to be financed by
specialist funds. 'We back start-ups in the environmental area and will do
early-stage deals in the health care sector,' says Mr John Walker, senior
partner of Trinity Capital Partners. 'But you have to have a portfolio mix
which keeps your investors happy.'
A notable exception to the venture sector's inexorable move upscale has been
the cluster of seed capital funds managed by Lucius Cary, publisher of
Venture Capital Report, a monthly newsletter which attempts to match
investors with entrepreneurs seeking finance.
Mr Cary, a dogged supporter of the start-up sector, is raising his fifth
fund, Seed Investments IV, with a target size of Pounds 2m. This would be
his largest fund yet - the largest previously was Pounds 650,000. Two
pension funds have already promised to provide Pounds 1m towards the total.
The previous three Seed Investments funds were backed by Apax Partners. But
Mr Cary said they would not be contributing to the latest fund because of
the problem of incorporating very small investments into their larger scale
activities in mainstream venture capital.
The fifth fund will be large enough to allow follow up investments of up to
Pounds 200,000 if the initial Pounds 50,000 investment shows the business
has a future. Mr Cary says his previous funds have been successful because
he has concentrated on a specific type of investment.
He backs innovative entrepreneurs who have an idea or product involving
technology. Typically the first stage of investment will finance the
development of a prototype. The business must be based within easy reach of
Seed Investments' offices in Henley on Thames.
In the view of many venture capitalists, early-stage financings require a
degree of government support to become worthwhile. Attempts to persuade the
British government to put money directly into meeting the overheads of
early-stage funds have proved unsuccessful however.
The European Commission has shown itself more willing to put public money
into backing this sector. Over the past four years the commission has
sponsored the creation of 23 seed capital funds in Europe. These funds, with
18 established funds which have also joined the project, make up the
European Seed Capital Fund Network.
At the beginning of 1993 the network calculated that it had helped to create
126 businesses and more than 1,200 jobs. The 41 funds involved had a total
of Ecu265m under management.
The commission estimates that even if 30 per cent of the funds advanced have
to be written off, the costs in terms of creating businesses and jobs will
have been worthwhile.
More recently, a review of the network carried out for the commission found
that unless more money was provided the seed funds would run out of cash
before their investments started to produce a return. Many of the funds were
too small to be viable in the longer term, the report concluded.
Prospects for the start-up sector remain uncertain. Early, exaggerated
expectations of the venture capital industry's ability to finance them have
been abandoned. Bank loans and the entrepreneur's own savings seems set to
remain the main sources of finance.
