FT  26 NOV 93 / World Trade News: S Africa mission marks change in US stance
Mr Ron Brown, the US commerce secretary, arrives in South Africa tomorrow
for a visit which signals the opening of a more constructive era in economic
relations between the two countries.
His trip comes only days after President Bill Clinton signed the South
Africa Democratic Transition Support Act, formally bringing to an end the
era of federal US sanctions aimed at ending apartheid.
Although Mr Brown's visit will probably have limited practical impact in the
short term, it conveys a powerful symbolic message. Mr Princeton Lyman, US
ambassador in South Africa, comments: 'It signifies a very basic change from
a negative to a positive relationship with South Africa. The whole tone
shifts.'
This shift from isolation to engagement was confirmed on Tuesday by Mr
Clinton. He noted that removing sanctions was not enough. 'Americans who
have been so active in toppling apartheid must remain committed to building
South Africa's non-racial market democracy.'
'The visit confirms a real interest in South Africa's potential as a viable
trading partner and bulwark of economic strength and stability in the region
and on the continent,' said Mr Brown.
Despite the impact of sanctions, there is a substantial base upon which to
develop US-South Africa trade relations.
South Africa is only the US's 34th largest export market, but it remains the
largest in Africa, a continent where, Mr Lyman concedes, 'the US has not
done very well'.
The US recently surpassed Germany as South Africa's largest trade partner.
Mr Lyman estimates bilateral trade now to be in the region of Dollars 5bn.
Commerce Department figures show that in 1992 US exports to South Africa
totalled Dollars 2.4bn, 14 per cent of South Africa's total import market,
with US imports from South Africa of Dollars 1.7bn.
The US has fared less well in terms of investment. Figures from the
Washington-based Investor Responsibility Research Centre (IRRC) show that as
of September only 135 US companies had employees or direct investment in
South Africa, compared to 267 in May 1986.
The stock of US investment in South Africa is put at about Dollars 1bn.
Certainly, however, the trend has started to turn.
The past two months have seen food manufacturers Pillsbury and CPC
International enter the market, following such other companies as Mars,
Microsoft and Digital Equipment Corporation. IBM has recently confirmed it
will probably be returning, Procter &amp; Gamble is known to be taking a close
look and McDonald's, Anheuser-Busch and Hyatt are all expected to establish
a presence.
A focus of Mr Brown's visit - his 50-member delegation contains
representatives of many large US companies - will be an attempt to establish
links between US companies and the emerging black business community in
South Africa. Another issue sure to be discussed is South Africa's offer to
Gatt in terms of the Uruguay round of trade talks. Aspects of the offer -
particularly the high protection, and longer phasing-in period for tariff
reductions for the clothing and textiles, motor and electronics industries -
did not meet with approval from South Africa's trading partners.
