FT  30 JAN 93 / Books: Just a bundle of energy - AC Grayling goes in search
of the grail of fundamental physics
DREAMS OF A FINAL THEORY
by Steven Weinberg
Hutchinson Radius Pounds 16.99, 260 pages
SCIENCE has advanced so dramatically in the 20th century that its
practitioners often feel, says Steven Weinberg, like 'Siegfried after he
tasted the dragon's blood, when he found to his surprise that he could
understand the language of birds'. First, Einstein's relativity theories
changed our concepts of space, time and gravity. Later, quantum mechanics
dissolved the world of material particles into wave functions and
probabilities. And then the marriage of relativity and quantum theory
produced a surreal world of hidden symmetries in which the concept of matter
no longer figures.
This is heady progress. Part of Weinberg's aim in his stimulating book is to
tell how it happened and what it means. He is well-equipped to do so; in
1979 he won the Nobel Prize for physics, and later wrote a famous popular
account of the origins of the universe, The First Three Minutes. But
Weinberg has a second and for his own purposes more important aim, which is
to argue in support of a dramatic 'Big Science' project aimed at exploring
hitherto unreachable levels of physical reality.
In the last two decades, Weinberg says, particle physicists have been
frustrated. The reason is that theory has outstripped experimental capacity.
Theoreticians have leaped ahead in conceptualising the deep structure of the
universe; but to test their ideas new laboratories are needed,
unprecedentedly large and expensive. This book states the case for building
them.
It is a topic close to Weinberg's heart. He is head of an Dollars 8bn
project in Texas to construct a Superconducting Super Collider (SSC), a
53-mile-long oval tunnel in which protons can be smashed together at energy
levels far greater than those now experimentally possible. The results
promise a dramatic increase in scientific understanding.
In testifying to Congressional funding committees on behalf of the SSC,
Weinberg found that he had to explain the recent history of particle
physics, its present deadlock, and the discoveries that an SSC promises. He
also found himself defending fundamental physics against its critics, among
them other scientists wishing to promote their own research in the fierce
competition for funds. An obvious format for a non-specialist statement of
Weinberg's case is a book; and here it is - highly literate, comprehensive,
challenging, a survey of an exciting and extraordinary field of enquiry by
one of its leading figures.
Weinberg's task is to describe the current 'standard model' of elementary
particles and forces, and to explain why it is now at an impasse. The model
results from marrying relativity and quantum mechanics, which are mutually
incompatible in all but a very few interpretations. The standard model is
the best of these few. In older theories, atoms were conceived as miniature
planetary systems with electrons orbiting a nucleus. The new model argues
that there are no particles as such, only bundles of energy in various
fields. Fields are modifications of space, and there is one for each type of
particle. Electrons are energy bundles or 'quanta' in electron fields,
photons are quanta in electromagnetic fields. The nuclear particles are
themselves compounds of more elementary quanta, 'quarks', each with their
own fields. These phenomena are described by field equations, and their
interactions - the strong and weak nuclear forces, the electromagnetic
force, and gravity - are governed by the general principles of quantum
mechanics and relativity.
This model has proved highly successful in its predictive and explanatory
power. But it is full of problems, which theoreticians have been trying to
understand and which SSC-type experiments might resolve. The chief is that,
although the standard model offers some success in unifying the
electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces, it does not unify them with the
strong nuclear forces. Still worse, it has no way of describing gravitation
in terms of quantum field theory.
The aim of deriving a unified theory for all nature's forces is therefore at
a stand. Such a theory is the grail of fundamental physics, and would, in
Weinberg's view, constitute the "Final Theory' about physical reality.
Theoreticians offer proposals, like 'superstring theory', to overcome the
standard model's difficulties. But only SSC-type experiment can turn such
guesses into progress.
Weinberg promotes the SSC as a key towards discovering the final truth about
the universe. This involves him in two controversial commitments. First, he
is a realist about the standard model; he believes that field theory
describes the world as it really is. And therefore, secondly, he is a
reductionist about particle physics; he believes that all other sciences
rest on it, and 'with enough computer power and time' can be explained by
it. These beliefs involve him in quarrels with fellow-scientists unpersuaded
by reductionism, and with philosophers unpersuaded by realism.
Many biologists count among anti-reductionists. They see living organisms as
having 'emergent' properties inexplicable on the basis of microstructure
alone. Emergent properties are those which complex systems have but their
parts lack; consciousness, and life itself, are examples - neither seem
inferrable from an organism's underlying physics. Even some of Weinberg 's
fellow-physicists, those working on condensed matter and low temperature
phenomena, are unpersuaded that particle physics answers their questions.
These issues are profoundly important, and not just because billions of
research dollars turn on them.
Weinberg is right to oppose those philosophers whose scientifically
illiterate relativism leads them to think that science is merely one among
many ideologies, and - according to some - a 'sexist, racist and
imperialist' one at that. But he misunderstands Positivism, which he defines
as the claim that science should avoid talk of unobservable entities and
forces. Positivists indeed allow such talk, but treat it as purely
instrumental in helping us to construct useful theories. Weinberg believes
that one can deduce a theory's truth from its utility, but Positivists deny
this; Ptolemy's geocentric astronomy worked for navigation and prediction of
eclipses, they point out, but we do not think it true.
Weinberg's controversial claims are stimulating and the whole issue of
fundamental physics, now at a crucial point in its history, is immensely
important. The question is: should we invest further huge sums in attempts
to understand the universe, with so many other demands on our purses?
Weinberg has written an important, and an exhilarating, book in urging the
affirmative answer.
