FT  16 NOV 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Make mine a python -
Exporting from the periphery of Europe is not easy. A company that has
succeeded
Eleven years after starting his business in a Northern Ireland farmhouse,
Robert Beckett was last week toasting the developed world's taste for cold
beer.
Beckett's company, Valpar Industrial in Bangor, County Down, had just won
the Northern Ireland section of an excellence award sponsored by the
Institute of Export, the Financial Times and NatWest Bank. Valpar, which has
picked up six business awards since 1989, has succeeded in spite of its size
and the logistical handicap of being on the periphery of Europe.
It has done so by, among other things, developing a clever product in a
niche market, appreciating the importance of quality, investing heavily in
research and bringing in outside help to enhance its strategic thinking.
Valpar, which has 43 employees, now exports 60 per cent of its Pounds
3m-a-year turnover and claims a 50 per cent share of the domestic UK market.
'This proves you don't have to be a giant to do things right,' says Ian
Campbell, director-general of the Institute of Export and one of the judges.
'We were looking for excellence. Valpar demonstrated it in efficiency,
quality, education, innovation and in ensuring that exporting was a general
direction of the company, not just a bolted-on function.'
Valpar makes a product known in the trade as python - a prefabricated line
cooling system for dispensing drinks which looks like a thick snake and is
similarly flexible. It consists of several plastic tubes - which carry beer,
or any other type of beverage, from storeroom to tap - bundled round two
inner tubes through which a coolant flows to keep the beverages in the
surrounding tubes cool. The whole bundle is encased in insulating foam,
forming a thick, black, cable.
Beckett's innovation, which he patented, was to automate the bundling and
insulating process. Others, such as the brewers themselves, still make
python by hand. Beckett has offered them an outsourced solution to a
troublesome, labour-intensive problem.
His own problem in marketing it, meanwhile, was that of a small business
selling to big business in the food industry. Credibility was all,
particularly over quality, so Valpar dispelled any doubts by becoming
accredited as soon as it could under BS5750, the UK quality standard, and
ISO9002, its international equivalent, in 1989.
Siobhan McAleer, an international business studies graduate of the
University of Ulster who did a project for Valpar and is now business
development manager, says this is now paying dividends in export markets
because quality can be taken for granted.
An impressive list of customers also helps. It includes most of the UK's
leading brewers, as well as continental giants such as Heineken. Northern
Ireland's relative remoteness has not proved to be a disadvantage. The
company was used to long-haul delivery to UK domestic markets; shipping
farther afield was not much more difficult.
In the US, Valpar's production is licensed to the supplier of python to all
McDonald's restaurants, where Coca Cola is the main beverage carried. The
chilled Coke dispensed by Moscow McDonald's flows through python made in
Northern Ireland. So do all the chilled drinks at Euro Disney.
Another secret has been Valpar's decision to opt for a vertically integrated
structure, so that, for example, it manufactures its own plastic pipes. This
enabled the company to win German health and safety approvals for its
python, helping it to sell into Europe's biggest beer market.
Beckett believes in sharing some of the company's profits - normally above
10 per cent of sales - with his employees. Performance-related pay accounts
for up to a quarter of senior managers' earnings. But most of the remainder
is ploughed back into the business, notably into research. Valpar sponsors
several postgraduate research students at Queen's University, Belfast or the
University of Ulster with a view to improving its products. It is currently
developing a nylon-based pipe that will be almost self-cleaning, saving
downtime.
It is also diversifying into fuel lines for the automotive industry, as well
as pythons down which telecommunications companies can propel optical fibres
using compressed air. This means cheap python can be installed anywhere,
with expensive optical fibre blown down it only when the customer wants it.
Not everything has gone smoothly, but when trouble hit, Beckett wisely
sought outside advice. 'Three years ago I was not enjoying things as I had
before,' he says. 'I brought in consultants to interview all the staff and
was forced to conclude that the problem was me. I was starting to get a bit
dictatorial.'
He decided he needed someone to keep him in check and help the company stay
focused. KPMG Peat Marwick, his accountant, helped in headhunting Peter
McKie, the Northern Ireland-based managing director of Du Pont UK, who
became non-executive chairman in 1991.
Simultaneously, Beckett started five-year corporate planning under the
guidance of KPMG and Ledu, the Local Enterprise Development Unit which runs
Northern Ireland's small business support services. At 38, and with most of
Valpar's workforce under 30, he says he still has a long way to go. The
question, as with any successful young entrepreneur, is where. If Valpar is
not a candidate for flotation, it must surely risk becoming a target for
predators.
'I don't want to sell,' Beckett says. 'We are a tightly-knit team and I
couldn't do it to the people who have built this company with me.' He thinks
diversification into telecommunications and automotive markets offers the
best means of both development and defence.
