FT  09 JAN 93 / As They Say in Europe: How history kills in
Bunkum-an-der-Oder - James Morgan studies rhetorical lessons of the past
'HISTORY,' said Henry Ford, 'is bunk,' and there is a sense in which he was
right. He was not foolish enough to be a member of the 'End of history'
school of nonsense which emerged a few of years ago just in time for history
to collapse on it like a tidal wave gushing from an ancient sewer.
When Ford talked of bunk he was using the familiar abbreviation of the word
bunkum. That in turn comes from Buncombe, a county in North Carolina. Its
congressional representative in 1820, Felix Walker, spoke at length because
'Buncombe expected it of him.'
So bunkum is a mixture of anecdote, tall stories and claptrap, and, as such,
provides the main constituent of what passes for political debate over much
of Europe today. The representatives of the Buncombe school of history are
having the time of their lives, and, unlike Congressman Walker, are able to
influence events. The Czecho-Slovak divorce resulted from the overblown
rhetoric of Slovak politicians. They played on the popular feeling that
Slovaks had been done out of their rights by the more numerous and
domineering Czechs.
This merely ensured that they were full participants in the revival of that
ancient Euro-game of finding someone to resent. And so, of course, they fell
into the trap laid for them by the crafty Czech prime minister, Vaclav
Klaus.
When the split came, the Bratislava papers were still trying to define what
it meant to be Slovak while their headlines proclaimed the establishment of
the frontier with 'Moravia', implying that the Czech Republic would itself
break up into its constituents - Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia.
In fact the determination of the Slovaks to believe that their neighbour
will fall apart would be pathetic were it not for the malign assistance of
the European Community. By placing strict quotas on exports of the products
of the north Moravian steel industry it has given a boost to local
separatists.
Thus there is a revival of that theme of the 1930s when the newspapers of
the Third Reich called Czechoslovakia the 'Mosaic-state'. Then, after the
creation of independent Slovakia in 1938, Hungary took over the bit
inhabited by its people and so today the lifeblood of the Budapest press has
become stories of the hardships facing the Hungarians of Slovakia - 'our
Upper Land' in Magyar. Hungarian nostalgia for the Austro-Hungarian empire
is a natural result.
During the Yugoslav conference in London last August, one unreported element
was the way that every national minority the Balkans arrived in the Queen
Elizabeth II Conference Centre to have its say.
The Macedonian and the Montenegrin Albanians both began their press
conferences with the dread words, 'In 1878 . . . ' That reference unleashed
a litany of grievances that left the audience of mainly west European
reporters baffled and bored. One inflamed Albanian was asked if his was the
largest minority in wherever it was that it was a minority. He replied, 'We
are not a minority. We have always been there. It is ours.'
The resentments are often based on real injuries. They are, however,
subjected to the catalyst of paranoia that has already led to the
construction of Buncombe-cum-Serbia whose present deplorable conduct is
founded on a bizarre mixture of fact, fantasy and epic distortion.
So it is that we have become familiar with Bunkum- an-der-Oder as old East
German communist youth leaders easily transform themselves into neo-Nazi
rabble rousers. In Baincombes- sur-Aube, politicians tell peasants that they
have an absolute right to sell everything that they produce at no matter
what cost because it is historic destiny and glorious vocation of la France
profonde etcetera etcetera. And in the bars of the south Antrim village of
Ballybunkum, either tears are shed or glasses raised in memory of the events
of the late 17th century.
In England, fortunately, history has been theme-parked into trivia. In the
'Neighbours' bar of the the Polystyrene Arms, the villagers of Buncombe St
Michael consume their microwaved chicken tandoori in a basket, suck
mouthfuls of Mexican lager through little bits of yellowing lime and argue
whether they can really be at the heart of a European Community which
threatens the future of prawn-cocktail flavoured crisps.
This provides a haven from the 'historical correctness' which has become the
prevailing philosophy of east and central Europe. But it can catch its
practitioners out.
Since reunification, the German media have, more than ever, taken to using
the old German names for Polish towns and cities. Nothing wrong with that,
perhaps - the English would never say 'Roma,' but in middle Europe these
things sound different. Last week, however, German sports editors faced a
nasty problem. The Polish team which qualified for the European ice-hockey
championships in Dusseldorf, called Unia Oswiecim. Now that might be
rendered in English as Auschwitz United. The German media settled for the
Polish name.
At the Yugoslav meeting last August the prime minister of the rump state,
and loser in the recent Serbian elections, Milan Panic, spoke at length of
the damage wrought by historical obsessions in his part of the world and
made a valuable suggestion: the teaching of history should be banned. Henry
Ford may have been mistaken but he was not talking bunk.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
