FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Personal and Portable Computers (5): Game of
prevention - Michael Dempsey examines security packages
COMPUTER games are a serious business. Playing one on a portable computer
cost a Birmingham Midshires Building Society salesman his job last year. The
society insists that its employees avoid exposing its computers to any risk
of a virus. And computer games are a prime source of damaging bugs.
Introducing one is regarded as a breach of contract.
Birmingham Midshires uses NCR/AT&amp;T Safari portable computers to sell life
insurance and mortgages to potential buyers at home. The portable gives its
salesforce the means to calculate and demonstrate mortgages and pension
packages. This accelerates the sales process, but leaves the sales staff
holding sensitive data on a machine that attracts thieves. And any bug on
the software could infect branch computers when sales data is fed down the
network.
The building society has spent Pounds 300,000 issuing its 90 salesmen with
the machines and associated software, notably a security package from Fifth
Generation Systems called Safe. Three portables have been stolen in the last
12 months. The object of Safe, which evolved from a product called Triumph,
is to make sure the thieves are left holding an attractive but useless piece
of hardware.
'Safe is a package that makes our data totally secure, you put the sensitive
data on the hard disk and you can't access it without going through three
levels of password,' says Mr John Edkins, who is manager of business
improvement at Birmingham Midshires. Provided his staff follow the rules, no
thief will benefit from confidential information provided to Birmingham
Midshires. A stolen portable can be used again - but only by installing a
new hard disk.
Safe also limits how far unapproved software, notably games, can go on the
portable. A game can be played, but only if loaded with its own
disk-operating system. Only head office has the ability to copy software
from the A drive to the C drive of the hard disk. Software is copied from a
central computer via a modem at branch offices.
The society's employees are not issued with disks. This reduces the danger
of contamination by computer virus. And the copying limitations make it
difficult for a member of staff to copy client lists before giving notice.
If these security precautions sound unflattering to Birmingham Midshires
staff, there are significant compensations from using a portable PC. The
technology dispenses with the need to heave books of life insurance and
mortgage rates from door to door. Administrative work at branch office is
reduced to downloading software via the modem. This leaves the salesforce
free to concentrate on selling.
'The sales people like it and the clients are very positive. We've had some
clients take over the PC and enter their own details.' Mr Edkins is
convinced the portables have paid their way. 'Perhaps 30 per cent of sales
are now attributed to the technology. At around Pounds 3,000 a machine, one
extra mortgage sold will pay back the value of the system.'
One company that relies on portables and knows the reality of the virus
threat is Reflex Magnetics. Reflex is a media duplication house, supplying
disks and tapes across the computer services sector. Mr Andy Campbell, the
sales director, works entirely from a portable. With master disks arriving
by the dozen to be mass-replicated, he has always been aware of the danger.
Nevertheless, the company eventually did load a virus by accident. It was
uncovered and dealt with during testing, but the incident made an
impression. Once bitten, Reflex decided to write its own security program.
Most virus incidents can be traced back to the floppy disk, Mr Campbell
says. 'So we came up with a product that forces us to check any disk before
it is loaded.' Disknet costs Pounds 89 and will not allow the user access to
the hard disk unless his floppy has been cleared for bugs by virus-scanning
software. The correct password must also be entered. The A drive can still
employed, but data held on the hard disk is protected.
Mr Campbell is pragmatic about the extent to which Disknet can guarantee
security. 'Any security device can be cracked if you have enough knowledge
and time. Our technical director does his development work on a portable. If
a commercial rival targeted and stole that machine they would get past
Disknet.' There is clearly only so much you can expect from a security
package. But Disknet is robust enough to be ordered by the RAF and financial
services group HFC.
Physical protection through programs like Safe and Disknet needs to be
accompanied by security practices. Marlborough Stirling Group writes
financial systems for use on portable computers. Mr Jim Deane, MSG's
technical director, recommends pulling data back on to a branch computer at
every opportunity. This is known as docking, and reduces the client's
exposure to staff defecting with valuable files.
The incentive for field sales personnel to co-operate with docking is that
it speeds up the processing of a new policy or product.
The pharmaceuticals arm of ICI, recently re-named Zeneca, issues its
salesforce with Sanyo 386 portables. The machine comes with a removable hard
disk and ICI adds its own security software. But that is not considered
enough. ICI issues internal guidelines on the security of information,
dividing it into what can be carried off-site and what can be held on a
laptop.
'You're in the game of prevention,' says Mr Graham Burton, information
systems manager at ICI/Zeneca. 'You should prevent sensitive information
beng put on portables in the first place.' He acknowledges that this places
a limitation on the use of the system, but that is a price he is willing to
pay.
