FT  25 MAR 93 / Leading Article: Ways and means
THE GOVERNMENT'S go-ahead for a Pounds 2.5bn rail link between London and
the Channel tunnel is a welcome commitment to a long-delayed and badly
needed project. Commitments, however, do not build railway lines - that
takes money and shovels, and so far neither are much in evidence.
Against this background, it is perhaps worth asking exactly what the
rail-link commitment amounts to. First, the government has committed itself
to a route. Second, it has committed itself to introducing legislation that
will permit the line's construction. And third, it has committed itself to
seeing the project go forward as a joint venture between public and private
sectors, with the government 'prepared in principle to provide substantial
public-sector support'.
What is missing from this list, of course, is any promise that the rail link
will actually be built. The government cannot make such a promise because it
still does not know who is going to build the line or how it is to be
funded.
The hope must be that the chancellor's recently stated enthusiasm for
encouraging private-sector participation in the funding of infrastructure
projects is about to bear fruit. After amiable discussions between the
private sector and the Treasury, the two will supposedly agree a funding
package that allows the private sector to make a good profit while
simultaneously ensuring value for money for the taxpayer.
Yet this kind of optimism suggests a triumph of hope over experience. The
objectives of public and private sector in any joint venture are clearly in
potential conflict, because the point at which the private sector begins to
make money is the point at which the Treasury begins to feel cheated. Hence,
at the government's last attempt to get the Channel tunnel rail link built
through joint funding, the government contribution demanded by the private
sector proved to be so large that the government tore up the proposal in
horror. And even where public and private sectors do find it possible to
agree on the principles of a funding package, there can be severe
difficulties in translating the agreement into cash. Witness, for example,
the long delays in getting the private sector to deliver its promised
contribution to the Pounds 1.8bn Jubilee Line extension.
Perhaps it will all be different this time. Certainly, the government's
commitment to joint funding sounds stronger than ever. Certainly, the
government's plans for developing the east Thames corridor add a new
imperative. But with each new go-ahead for transport projects that never
materialise, the British public grows wearier and more cynical about the
prospects that any of them will happen. The government stands to be judged
on whether this latest private funding initiative has real substance, or
whether it is just the latest in a long line of excuses for procrastinating
over vital improvements to the nation's inadequate transport infrastructure.
