FT  02 APR 93 / Survey of Spain (11): The artistic triangle - Culture in
Madrid
THE Palace Hotel in Madrid, which is owned by the Ciga group, has slashed
its prices, as have all the other luxury hotels in the city. Providing an
extra perk, the Palace has struck a deal that allows its guests to jump the
queues at the Thyssen-Bornemisza museum across the street.
The onset of recession has powerfully concentrated certain minds. Along with
a more than welcome bid to make Madrid affordable, promoters have woken up
to its potential for gallery-gazing culture vultures.
It used to be said that the only valid reason for hanging around in Madrid
was the Prado museum. A score of Spanish cities, starting with Barcelona,
offer more interesting architecture, better food and less drug abuse, smog
and traffic chaos.
As of six months ago, there are two very powerful additional reasons for
staying on in Madrid after a business trip. The 800-odd works of the
Thyssen-Bornemisza collection are one and the Reina Sofia arts centre, the
now permanent home of Pablo Picasso's Guernica, is the other.
The two new museums are within five minutes' walk of the Prado and Madrid is
consequently blessed with a tight, compact triangle of artistic excellence
that is perhaps without parallel anywhere.
If one were to prolong the 'what picture would you save if the museum burnt
down?' game and play 'what neighbourhood would you spare from a global
earthquake to show succeeding generations what art is all about?', the Prado
triangle would top many discerning lists.
The government is currently negotiating the outright acquisition of the
Thyssen-Bornemisza collection. Baron Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza says he
expects the purchase to be concluded shortly and the price mentioned,
Dollars 264m, looks a snip for it represents a tenth of the collection's
valuation and is only six times more than what Madrid is already paying for
9 1/2 years' lease of the paintings.
Every city in the world might well envy Madrid's possession of the
Thyssen-Bornemisza treasures but most dispassionate souls would concede that
its present home in an 18th century palace, expressly and expertly restored
to show off the collection, could hardly be improved. Above all, the
Thyssen-Bornemisza is exceptionally well located because of its proximity to
the Prado.
The Prado and Thyssen-Bornemisza complement each other perfectly. The first
has a quite extraordinary depth, the second has an almost as extraordinary
breadth. The Thyssen-Bornemisza has something, and often several things and
of great quality, of virtually everything, from Italian primitives to pop
art. The Prado, which essentially ends its collection with its hoard of some
140 Goyas, has towering strengths but makes no pretence to be all-embracing.
There is no reason why the Prado should be. Its core is the royal collection
that was built up in the 16th and 17th centuries. With more than 30 Titians,
almost as many Tintorettos and only a few less Veronese canvases, it has
arguably the most complete rendering anywhere of the Venetian school.
The Prado is the indisputable home of Velazquez for it has every picture he
painted save a dozen or so that are elsewhere and there is, of course,
nowhere else in the world where the visitor will find some 50 elongated El
Grecos and over 80-odd voluptuous Rubens works under the same roof.
The Prado has, however, recently lost possession of Picasso's Guernica,
along with the 63 preliminary studies that the artist sketched before
embarking on his masterpiece, and also its small but impressive collection
of Juan Gris and Joan Miro canvases that were donated to the museum by the
Cubist art historian Douglas Cooper and by Miro's widow. All these pictures
were removed from a Prado annexe to the Reina Sofia arts centre which was
launched last year as the city's museum of modern and contemporary art.
Occupying a huge classical edifice that was built in the 18th century to
serve as Madrid's main hospital, the centre has space to spare for special
art shows and exhibits some 360 pictures of its permanent collection.
Weighted towards Spaniards, the centre has had a couple of windfalls with
the arrival of a large body of Miro works on the back of a death duties
arrangement and with Salvador Dali's decision to bequeath his own private
pictures to the nation.
Since Madrid now offers just about everything that an art lover could ask
for it is just as well that the hoteliers have reduced their prices.
