FT  18 FEB 93 / Survey of World Taxation (5): The network expands -
Bilateral treaties girdle the globe
INTERNATIONAL double taxation has long been identified as an inhibition to
international trade and investment. It arises when two countries each assert
their taxing authority over the same source of income or capital gains.
Although international tax treaties have been around for over 100 years, it
is only since the Second World War that they have grown in numbers and
significance. There are now more than 1,200 treaties dealing with taxation.
Tax treaty networks have developed around patterns of trade and investment.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the most dense network of treaties is among
OECD members. Treaties between former colonial powers such as the UK and
France and their former colonies are also notable networks.
Within the European Community, the treaty network is almost complete. Only
Greece, Portugal and Spain do not have income tax treaties with all other
member states. The European Commission, however, has encouraged the
completion of the intra-EC network to assist in eliminating fiscal barriers
to cross-border trade and Investment.
The vast majority of treaties deal with income tax and capital gains and are
patterned on the models prepared by the OECD fiscal committee. There are a
number of more limited treaties dealing with shipping and air transport
income. These are usually found between countries where double taxation is
not an important issue generally because of the limited way in which each
country levies its taxes on local source income only.
Since, with two exceptions, all tax treaties are bilateral, there are
variations and anomalies between tax treaties of which multi-national
businesses and investors have sought to take advantage.
This treaty shopping has been exacerbated in relation to countries such as
the US which, in spite of its size and importance in the world economy, has
a relatively limited treaty network. It currently only has about 40 income
tax treaties compared with, for example, the UK's 80 or so treaties. The
OECD recently released a revised model treaty to replace its earlier
versions released in 1963 and 1977. The new OECD Model Convention - and tax
authorities generally - have sought to impose limitations on what is
regarded as permissible use of tax treaties, particularly by persons who the
authorities believe were not intended to benefit from them.
The US has led the way in seeking to impose so-called limitation of benefits
provisions in order to exclude residents of third countries from benefiting
from particular treaties.
This has given rise to enormous technical difficulties in drafting the rules
and particularly in taking into account the recommendations of the OECD that
limitations of benefits clauses should be restricted so as to exclude bona
fide economic activities that may unintentionally be covered by them.
Limitation of benefits clauses have also caused considerable difficulty for
countries such as the Netherlands who have sought to encourage
multi-nationals to use it as a base location for international operations
and financing in particular.
It has therefore facilitated the use of its tax treaty network by companies
based outside the Netherlands.
In the EC, this issue is further complicated by the interaction between
Community law prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of nationality under
the Treaty of Rome and such limitation of benefits clauses.
Many experts hold that member states are not entitled to enter into treaties
that discriminate against EC nationals, whether they are individuals or
companies. This area of EC law is in its earliest stages of development and
the outcome is uncertain.
A new income tax treaty just signed between the Netherlands and the US
contains an extensive limitation of benefits article along with a memorandum
of understanding requiring claimants under the treaty to demonstrate their
entitlement to its benefits.
Apart from Dutch individual residents and non-profit organisations, Dutch
resident companies may qualify if they fall within one of seven different
tests.
While the clause may deter the most aggressive treaty shopper, it will also
add significantly to the compliance costs of bona fide taxpayers seeking to
benefit from the treaty.
The OECD Model Treaties and those following it have approached the avoidance
of double taxation largely by seeking to eliminate tax in the country of
source of income. The country of residence of the taxpayer has retained the
right to levy taxes on foreign income earned by their residents. This
largely favours capital exporting countries and as a result many developing
countries have questioned the value of tax treaties.
Treaty networks between developing countries are the thinnest. In addition,
the UN Model Convention has attempted to shift the balance in favour of
countries where income is generated.
Some developing countries have recently succeeded in concluding treaties
which permIt them to tax the activities of foreign investors more
extensively. They leave the country of residence to rely on foreign tax
credits to eliminate double taxation.
These successes have typically been in the area of more expansive
definitions of permanent establishment and entitlement of developing
countries to impose withholding taxes on payments for technical assistance
and related services. Under the OECD Model such services would not be taxed
in the country of source of the income.
Although the avoidance of double taxation was the original purpose of tax
treaties, the prevention of tax evasion has become an increasingly important
issue. The internationalisation of economic relations has caused growing
interest in the reciprocal supply of information between countries on the
basis of which domestic tax laws are administered This is the case even if
the application of a treaty is not in question. Exchange of information
falls into three categories:
routine exchanges such as the details of interest dividend or royalty
payment;
spontaneous exchanges where tax authorities of one state believe that the
authorities in another state may be interested in a particular piece of
information;
exchanges on request.
Tax administrations keep their cards close to their chests in relation to
this issue and little is made public about the amounts and nature of such
collaboration.
In most countries, taxpayers do not know when information is being exchanged
and typically no opportunity is provided to correct information erroneously
given.
In some countries, such as Germany, taxpayers must be advised when
information is exchanged, however. Other programmes are well publicised such
as the US-Canadian joint audit programme where simultaneous investigations
are conducted by both the Internal Revenue Service and Revenue Canada.
Some treaties provide for mutual assistance in the field of tax collection.
These are unusual, however, and are limited in their scope.
Within the EC, a Directive on exchange of information sets out extensively
the rules for this process covering all fields of taxation.
The only other multilateral attempt at such collaboration is to be found in
the OECD/Counc1 of Europe Convention for Mutual Administrative Assistance.
This provides for extensive cooperation between tax authorities in not only
exchanging information but in pursuing tax claims on behalf of treaty
partners.
Although it has been ratified by the US, other major industrial countries
such as the UK and Germany have indicated they will not ratify the
Convention and it has thus far not entered into force.
As the international tax treaty network matures, it is likely that more and
more attention will be focused on refining the rules governing double
taxation of income and capital gains. One by-product of the process is
clearly that scope for abuse of tax treaties will become more limited.
Companies involved in international business will need to pay more attention
to ensuring that they can fall within tax treaty rules, even if they do not
engage in aggressive tax planning.
Jonathan S Schwarz is a partner of Paisner &amp; Co., city solicitors, and
Editor of the FT World Tax Report.
