FT  12 MAY 93 / Tireless campaigner for investment trusts: Obituary of
Philip Chappell
PHILIP CHAPPELL, one of the pillars of the British investment trust
industry, died last week at the age of 63 after a long illness.
Chappell's diverse interests led him through a career in which he was at one
time a director of City merchant bank Morgan Grenfell, the chairman of the
National Ports Council and the chairman of the Economic Development Council
for the Food and Drink Manufacturing Industry.
But most recently he made his name as the intellectual architect of the
government's personal pensions legislation with a paper written jointly with
Lord Vinson in 1984.
He argued strongly for the right of the individual to control his or her own
pension, irritating Britain's powerful occupational pensions industry in the
process.
'He had unassailable integrity and absolutely believed in the personal
ownership of pensions. He would rarely concede the political need to bend
and trim his opinions,' said Mr Philip Warland, the chairman of the
Association of Investment and Unit Trusts, a trade organisation with
occasionally rival interests to those of the Association of Investment Trust
Companies, the trade association for which Chappell was special adviser.
In his role as a tireless campaigner for the virtues of investment trusts,
Chappell saw the assets of investment trusts soar. Savings schemes took
nearly Pounds 120m in each of the past two years, compared with less than
Pounds 1m in 1985, before he became their adviser.
As an adviser to the Parliamentary committee on social security Chappell was
influential in persuading legislators that individual ownership of pension
rights was a goal to be pursued.
But in other areas Chappell was not as successful. In 1980-81 he served as
chairman of the troubled computer group ICL, a move which former associates
say called into question his skills as a financier.
While the criticism may have been unfair, it was believed to have been a
factor in 1985 when, after 21 years as a director at Morgan Grenfell, he was
dismissed by its chairman Mr Christopher Reeves.
Chappell is survived by his wife and four children.
