FT  27 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Belgians under fire in ERM
THE BELGIAN and Portuguese authorities were forced to raise their official
interest rates yesterday as continuing tensions inside the European exchange
rate mechanism put their currencies under pressure, writes James Blitz.
The French franc had a respite inside the ERM after two days of intense
speculation against the currency at the end of last week. But the currency
was still close to its ERM floor against the D-Mark at the European close,
and dealers said pressure could re-emerge after Thursday's Bundesbank
council meeting.
Many dealers believe that the Bundesbank must cut its official interest
rates by at least 50 basis points to alleviate tensions. The French franc
closed yesterday at FFr3.414 per D-Mark from a previous FFr3.416. But at
least one London based dealer said that large-scale selling by international
corporates and pension funds was continuing.
The main focus of interest in currency markets was on the Belgian franc,
which saw sharp selling pressure early in the European morning.
The Belgian currency opened at around BFr20.69 to the D-Mark but soon
slipped to a low of BFr20.78. It also fell outside the 50 basis-point margin
which Belgium's central bank has imposed on the franc's parity against the
D-Mark in the ERM grid.
The Belgian franc's fall forced the authorities to raise a series of
official interest rates. Most importantly, the seven-day advances rate was
lifted from 6.7 per cent to 8.5 per cent. This allowed the Belgian currency
to appreciate to a close of BFr20.73 per D-Mark.
The other rate rise in Europe yesterday was by the Central Bank of Portugal,
which lifted its special facility rate by 2.5 percentage points.
In part, this was a response to pressures on the escudo last week. But the
Portuguese authorities will have been concerned by another sharp fall in the
peseta's value yesterday, from Pta79.60 per D-Mark to Pta80.40 at one stage.
The peseta ended at Pta80.15, but the price of this crisis is that Spain
remains unable to cut interest rates as it would like.
The Danish krone closed more or less unchanged at DKr3.8843 to the D-Mark.
But Mr Mark Austin, treasury economist at Midland Global Markets in London,
said a depressing sign for the Danish currency was that it had not enjoyed a
post-weekend rally similar to the one experienced a week ago.
Sterling, the Italian lira and the dollar all continued to profit from the
ERM crisis, with all these free floaters seen as safe-haven currencies.
The British currency rose as high as DM2.5948, its strongest level since the
immediate aftermath of Black Wednesday, before finishing at DM2.5900, up 1
3/4 pfennigs on the day.
The dollar edged up some  1/2 pfennig to end at DM1.7245, bolstered by the
view that the Bundesbank will reduce rates. In New York the US currency also
closed at DM1.7245.
