FT  02 FEB 93 / Arts: Creme de la creme goes sour - William Packer reflects
on the Barclays Young Artist Award
Oh dear: here we go again - for nothing is more dispiriting than to find
oneself yet again playing the critical curmudgeon when the whole point of
the exercise is the celebration of youth and hope and precocious
achievement. So the Barclays Young Artist Award comes round again, for the
ninth time and, at Pounds 10,000 to the winner and a further Pounds 10,000
shared between the other finalists, very generous it is. Drawn from London's
post-graduate colleges, nine young artists, if we count collaborating twin
sisters as one, make it to this year's final exhibition - three from
Goldsmiths'; four from the Slade; two from Chelsea; no-one from either the
Royal College or the Academy Schools. Seven are women.
The young, like the poor, are always with us, and I am ever less convinced
that they should be encouraged in this way. I can see well enough how
attractive the scheme must seem - young artist starving in garret, help when
most needed and all that - but in truth young artists need encouragement no
more than the rest of us. Some of them, of course, have much to offer in
prospect, but those committed to their vocation will persist in any case. As
for the quality of the work, student work is by definition, well, student
work. Test it in open competition by all means, but to limit it to itself is
to indulge in a kind of special pleading.
But if there is to be such a student competition, one drawn moreover from
the very cream of the country's art students, skimmed at their most
ambitious and particular, the very least we might expect is a fairly broad
trawl through the full range of student activity. A certain mature
accomplishment might well be lacking, but in its place surely we should find
some excitement, idiosyncracy, experiment, above all some variety. If you
cannot take any risks when you are a student, when can you take them?
It seems that the riskiest thing to do nowadays, if student preferment is
aspired to, is to work directly from the visible world. Is there really not
a single student in all the London post-graduate schools of a sufficient
quality to interest the selection panel who is working from the life-model
as painter or sculptor, or looking at landscape or still-life, or modelling
or carving, or even welding and assembling, the unique object? Evidently
not. Is it because, such technical, disciplined and analytical instruction
is no longer to be had in the modern art school? Are such arcane
preoccupations actively discouraged? Who can say?
What we get instead, distilled in the Barclays' selection, is the critical
orthodoxy of the international market-place of the late 20th century. The
important thing is to strike an attitude, make a statement, present an
image, an idea, a formula. If it is about art, or may be made to bear a
feminist, socio-political or economic reading, so much the better. Glenn
Brown (from Goldsmiths', that seminary of the thinking artist) makes
paintings of reproductions of paintings, that follow every mark of the
original images in the closest detail - yet offer nothing of their reality
of surface and texture, and the active qualities of their making. They are
'completely devoid of vitality' remarks the catalogue approvingly.
The only other painter is Suzanne Walker (Slade), whose large canvasses each
carry as image a single flat, black silhouette. These turn out to be derived
from tower-blocks, thus enabling her 'to discuss both the language of
painting and its relevance to contemporary urban life . . . the epitome of
post-war idealism turned sour.' Laura Thomson (Chelsea) is a painter too, of
sorts, but makes of her painting a performance to be registered on video. A
single line appears on the wall as she pulls away the strip of masking-tape.
Face to the wall, her arm describes a broad black circle around her body.
The rest is sculpture, photography and installation. From high on the wall
of an otherwise empty white space, the recorded voice of Georgina Starr
(Slade) drones on in impenetrable, indulgent monologue, 'a highly emotive
'absent presence''. Tacita Dean (Slade) offers a series of photographic
tableaux after a 'Martyrdom of St Agatha', she of the severed breasts.
Siobhan Hapaska (Goldsmiths') has filled narrow channels of perspex with
brown sugar to make cumulative minimalist reliefs, thereby, we are told,
'redefining categories, discovering unexpected potential for speeded up or
slowed down communication.'
Hilary Wilson (Slade) makes wooden bed-ends that she leans against boxes of
various sizes, confounding expectations of ease and comfort, these rather
'sites of physical displeasure and psychic unease.' Renato Niemis (Chelsea)
has simply made two small rooms or large boxes, roughly the size of a
rubbish skip, and as roughly made of timber and board, the one floor
carpeted, the other plain. The artist stresses 'the inadequacy of these
meagre, jerry-built structures as containers for human aspirations.'
And at last we come to the joint-winners of the Award, the Wilson twins,
Louise and Jane (Goldsmiths'), with their photographic and mixed-media
installation, a metal crush-barrier, a patch of paint, a number of
photographs leant negligently against the wall, showing corners, stairs and
doorways littered with odd scraps and remnants, vaguely suggestive of some
active destruction. The ensemble arouses 'the guilty suspicion that one is
somehow responsible for the sordid circumstances, if only through
indifference or neglect.' Or not, as the case may be.
The Barclays Young Artist Award Exhibition, 1993: The Serpentine Gallery,
Kensington Gardens W2, until February 28; sponsored by Barclays Bank
