FT  06 JAN 93 / Flying into flak over fish and Falklands: UK cabinet
minister makes first trip to Argentina since 1982
WHEN Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd arrives in Buenos Aires this morning,
the first UK cabinet minister to visit Argentina since the 1982 Falkland
Islands conflict, he will fly into a barrage of inflated expectations.
The Falklands may have become a peripheral issue in Britain, but Argentina
remains obsessed with the islands and clearly hopes that Mr Hurd's five-day
visit will signify another step on the tortuous road to 'recovering' the
islands, this time through diplomatic means.
The British have publicly disabused their hosts of any belief that the
Falklands is up for negotiation. Mr Hurd told Argentina's La Nacion
newspaper at the weekend: 'I do not expect, and neither should you, that my
visit will set in motion any great advances.'
Instead, he said, his visit would be devoted to further consolidating
Britain's improving links with Argentina.
Britain and Argentina re-established diplomatic relations in 1990, a year
after President Carlos Menem took office. Since then relations have improved
steadily to the point where they co-operated militarily during the 1991 Gulf
war. Britain is assigning greater importance to its relations with Latin
America, and Mr Menem's free market and pro-western policies have made
Argentina an increasingly visible reference point in the region.
The economy has settled down to rapid growth and its privatisation policies
have involved British banks, consultancy firms and industrial companies, the
most notable being British Gas's leading position in the consortium which
took control of the Buenos Aires gas distribution company last month.
Argentina has also opened up its secretive atomic establishment and scrapped
its Condor II missile project. Britain and the US viewed both projects with
great suspicion as a source of proliferation. At the same time Argentina has
sent troops as UN peacekeepers to the Gulf and Yugoslavia, for reasons of
prestige and to keep its habitually restive troops busy.
That still leaves the awkward question of the Falklands. Buenos Aires
continues to press a claim to the islands, despite the humiliating defeat of
1982. Equally, Britain refuses to discuss sovereignty formulas. Both have
agreed to disagree over sovereignty, but cannot agree on how to manage
shared resources, especially oil and fisheries.
There have been some advances. Seismic tests for oil will be carried out in
Falklands waters this year by two companies. The two sides have also worked
out a fisheries conservation agreement for 1993, and are now working on a
more permanent arrangement. UK and Argentine scientists have started joint
research on fish conservation.
Curiously, the illex squid, prized by gourmets in the Far East, is the
centre of a dispute which islanders see as a continuation of the 1982
conflict by other means.
The islands have become one of the richest spots on earth by selling
licences to Far Eastern squid-fishing fleets. But in December, Argentina
announced it would start issuing cut-price licences of its own, breaking the
Falklands' monopoly.
The move is expected in Port Stanley to deprive the islands of half or more
of the Pounds 30m a year in revenues from licence sales. Some two-third of
the islands' revenues come from licensing.
Provided the Argentine decision has a commercial, rather than predatory,
motivation, the British government is virtually powerless to influence the
move.
However, Mr Hurd has warned that attempts to use squid licences as
'political toys' could threaten wider bilateral relations.
Mr Hurd, who travels on to Chile, will be pressed to invite Mr Menem on an
official visit to London. Mr Menem himself first asked to be invited to the
UK over a year ago. But there is little sign that an invitation will be
forthcoming.
