FT  24 FEB 93 / International Company News: Hyundai abandons its brief
political detour - South Korea's giant has survived Chung Ju-yung's
ambitions
WHEN Hyundai recently selected its corporate slogan for 1993, it went for
'The releap year'. The phrase signifies that South Korea's largest
conglomerate is hoping to make a fresh start after a year of turmoil.
The group's problems were caused by the political activities of Mr Chung
Ju-yung, the Hyundai founder. His unprecedented attempt to involve business
directly in politics by standing as a presidential candidate displeased the
government, which applied sanctions against Hyundai.
But Mr Chung's defeat in the December elections, and his withdrawal from
politics, has relieved the pressure on Hyundai. 'We hope that relations
between Hyundai and the government will be normalised this year,' said Mr
Park Il-kwon, Hyundai's spokesman.
Hyundai executives are now assessing the damage inflicted on the group last
year. Penalties included credit squeezes and tax penalties imposed by the
government.
Group sales among its 41 subsidiaries totalled Won42,000bn (Dollars 52.7bn),
slightly below the 1992 goal of Won44,000bn, but a 16 per cent rise from
turnover of Won36,000bn in 1991. Hyundai has set a sales target of
Won50,000bn for 1993.
Estimated earnings declined for at least half of Hyundai's 16 listed
companies. But this reflected mainly sluggish growth in the domestic economy
and weaker demand abroad - factors that also affected other Korean
conglomerates.
Although Hyundai officials last year claimed that credit sanctions were
hampering investment in such key industrial sectors as motor vehicles and
semiconductors, they now admit they exaggerated the problem to persuade the
government to be lenient.
'What last year's events revealed was the strength of the group. It had the
resources to survive,' said Mr John Wadle, an analyst with Barclay de Zoete
Wedd in Seoul.
Other observers believe that Mr Chung created as much trouble for Hyundai as
the government. 'Many of Hyundai's problems were its own fault. They had
their eye off the ball,' explained one analyst.
Mr Chung recruited Hyundai executives to work full-time for his political
party, which caused the disruption of business operations.
The problem was exacerbated during the waning days of the presidential
campaign when Hyundai employees were asked to canvass for Mr Chung. This
caused sales to drop for Hyundai companies in December. The Bank of Korea
blamed the sluggish activity at Hyundai for a fall in the nation's exports
that month.
For example, the domestic market share of Hyundai Motor, the country's
biggest vehicle manufacturer, fell to 38.6 per cent in December, as car
dealers campaigned for Mr Chung. Its market share rebounded to 54 per cent
in January.
Earnings for Hyundai Motor, the biggest industrial subsidiary in the group
with sales of Won6,080bn, consequently fell to Won40bn for the year, against
Won54bn in 1991, instead of rising as had been predicted.
The operating profit for Hyundai Motor Service, the auto sales organisation,
was also halved.
The question surrounding Hyundai is how soon business activity will return
to normal. Although Hyundai managers involved in Mr Chung's campaign
returned to the group after the election, some are in hiding for alleged
election law violations.
They include Mr Choi Soo-il, the president of Hyundai Heavy Industries, the
group's shipbuilding subsidiary, the most profitable unit with estimated
earnings of Won260bn in 1992 on sales of Won2,500bn. His absence coincides
with declining orders for the company.
'The fate of these executives will having a lingering effect on Hyundai,'
explained Mr Stephen Marvin, research director for Jardine Fleming in Seoul.
'Hyundai is an autocratic organisation, and any paralysis at the top affects
overall management. When the generals are gone, the foot soldiers don't know
what to do because mid-level management is weak.'
Hyundai officials admit that Mr Chung's defeat, the arrest of executives and
other adverse publicity about Hyundai has caused morale problems among the
group's 170,000 workers.
But they hope that spirits will rise soon as the departure of Mr Chung from
politics leads to an expected easing of official pressure on Hyundai.
The new government of President Kim Young-Sam wants to revive the flagging
economy. Further attacks on Hyundai would harm that effort since the group
plays a central role in the Korean economy.
Indeed, the government continued to provide business to Hyundai during its
clash with Mr Chung last year.
Hyundai Engineering and Construction, the group's flagship company, won the
tender for the first phase of a project to build a new international airport
in the Seoul area. The construction company, the largest in Korea, is
expected to report a 14 per cent rise in sales to Won3,200bn for 1992, while
net profits will be around Won25bn.
The possibility that the 77-year-old Mr Chung will play a less active role
in Hyundai management, together with his recent sale of shareholdings in the
group to pay for election expenses, might mollify the government.
