FT  04 MAY 93 / Survey of Flanders (5): Astronaut ambassador - High
technology is on a high
IN MARCH 1992, when Dr Dirk Frimout became Belgium's first astronaut since
Tintin, the whole country was enthralled - and Flanders was over the moon.
Dr Frimout is a Fleming, from the small village of Poperinge. As such, he is
the ideal symbol of Flanders' desire to make a name for itself as a centre
for high technology.
The Flanders Technology International Foundation was quick to name the
Belgian astronaut as its first 'ambassador' - an accolade created for people
deemed to have advanced or promoted science and technology.
With or without Dr Frimout, the FTI Foundation is on a high. It runs the
biannual Flanders Technology International fair, which takes place in Ghent
this week, and is celebrating its 10th anniversary.
Mr Erik Jacquemyn, managing director of the foundation, says it is no
coincidence that Flanders is holding what it claims is the biggest and best
attended technology fair in Europe. 'There's a natural atmosphere of
creativity towards research and technology within Flanders, which makes it
an obvious venue.'
In fact, the focus on technological development in Flanders is relatively
recent. It is also politically motivated. When the modern government of
Flanders was set up in 1980, Mr Gaston Geens, the chief minister, framed a
regional economic policy which set out to renew the old industrial base of
the region by introducing new technologies into the production process.
Flanders Technology International was one way of encouraging the exchange of
information.
The success of that policy is relatively difficult to enumerate. But
according to a study by the Flemish Foundation of Technology Assessment,
nearly all companies in Flanders now have a totally or partially automated
production process. Some 17 per cent of large Flemish companies and 7 per
cent of small companies use robots or automatons. 'That seems to me very
solid proof that this action has been successful in the 1980s,' says Mr Luc
Van den Brande, Mr Geens' successor, when he launched this year's technology
fair in March.
Mr Jacquemyn is adamant that Flanders Technology International is not a
'trade fair' like the much larger annual exhibition in Hannover, for
example. 'These fairs say, 'Let's bring together as many visitors and
exhibitors as we can and let them buy from one another.' We're completely
different. We try to confront people who are active in technology with other
solutions in other fields.'
Faithful exhibitors agree that their main purpose in attending the FTI is
not to sell products, but to make contact with other innovators. Mr Jeff
Vanwildemeersch is marketing director of Pauwels International, a Flemish
manufacturer of electrical transformers which has had a stand at all six
fairs since 1983.
He says it is still a general showcase for Flemish technology, but he
wonders how many companies demonstrate their most innovative technologies in
such a hothouse atmosphere. 'I would personally give a press conference (on
a new technology) a fortnight after the fair, because otherwise people lose
interest amid all the background noise (from other technology launches),' he
says.
Mr Vanwildemeersch also suggests that, after 10 years, it might be worth
rethinking the aim of the fair: 'If we want to sell products we have fairs
that meet our needs, and there are specific events for our sector. This is
more of a general show, with no specific focus.'
To an extent, the FTI foundation is already working on giving the event a
sharper focus. This year, the emphasis is less on the size of an exhibitor's
stand than on the quality and depth of the research displayed.
With the same objective in mind, the number of days when the fair is open to
the general public has been cut this year from three to two. 'It's moving
further in the direction of professionalism and innovation,' says Mr
Jacquemyn. Or, as Mr Van den Brande put it in his launch address: 'The
mega-event of the 1980s has been replaced by a niche-event which
concentrates on innovations and quality products.'
At the time of writing, with some potential participants still to be
assessed by the FTI's committee of experts, it already looked as though the
number of genuine 'innovations' likely to be displayed this year had risen
from 144 in 1989 to more than 250, in spite of the fact that the number of
exhibitors has dropped.
In addition, the Foundation has given this year's FTI a new structure.
Exhibitors have been asked to choose between four colour-coded areas of
specialisation: nature (biotechnology, energy and environmental technology);
matter (advanced materials, production and transport technology); data; and
'know-how', including research, engineering and software.
Mr Jacquemyn says this year's FTI will be 'four specialised fairs in four
non-competing areas, under one roof.' He believes Flemish companies will be
demonstrating their strength particularly in the data section, with displays
of microelectronics, telecommunications and speech technology. But he is
also eager to stress the international aspect of the exhibition, at which
nearly a third of participants were non-Belgian in 1991.
For the last three fairs, Wallonia cannily opted to participate in the FTI
as a region. To the irritation of some Flemish exhibitors, that meant it was
granted a separate distinctive showcase, while Flanders technology was
dispersed through the whole event.
This year, however, the Walloon regional government is trying to organise
its own fair, in competition with the FTI. Mr Jacquemyn is clearly
flattered, but he is sceptical about Wallonia's chances of matching the
FTI's success.
'It's pretty difficult to jump on to a train which is already running at
high speed,' he says, smiling.
