FT  05 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Bombay gem trade picks up the
pieces - Life is getting back to normal after the riots
ST VALENTINE'S Day sales are usually a highlight of the year for the Mr
Shrenik Zaveri, an Indian diamonds and jewellery merchant, whose gems are
sold all over the world.
But not this year. The inter-religious riots which brought death and
destruction to Bombay in December and January also disrupted one of the
world's largest production centres for diamonds and jewellery. Thousands of
workers, mainly from the minority Muslim community, fled for their lives and
did not return for a month or more. Merchants closed their offices for fear
of being looted. The industry postponed its show-piece annual international
exhibition. 'We lost time, we lost business and we lost money,' says Mr
Zaveri, an executive working for Rosy Blue, a Bombay-based group owned by Mr
B. Arunkumar, which is one of the world's biggest diamond cutting
enterprises.
The industry is now slowly getting back to normal, with workshops in Bombay
and in the nearby city of Surat resuming production, merchants moving around
the country in safety again and the exhibition rescheduled for this month,
albeit in truncated form.
Mr Zaveri is certain that the unrest will prove only a temporary break for
the Indian gems and jewellery industry, which is set to benefit greatly from
the country's effort to modernise and integrate its economy with the rest of
the world.
It will not come too soon for India, which has failed to fully capitalise in
modern times on its long tradition in gems and jewellery. Diamonds were
mined in India for hundreds of years before they were discovered in South
Africa. The Koh-i-noor diamond in the British crown jewels is only the most
famous of the millions of stones unearthed in India before the mines were
exhausted.
But it is only since the Second World War that India has emerged as an
important international centre for cutting gemstones, largely thanks to the
efforts of long-established diamond trading families, mostly bearing the
surname Zaveri. Low-cost, high-skill labour gave India an advantage over the
traditional cutting centres of Antwerp and Israel. Nearly two-thirds of the
world's diamonds are now cut in India, plus a substantial share of the
rubies, sapphires and other coloured stones. Gems and jewellery exports
earned India USDollars 2.5bn in exports in the year to March 1992. In
1992-93 it should exceed Dollars 2.6bn, in spite of the unrest. The global
economic slow-down has hit sales, but, as a low-cost producer, India is
surviving the downturn better than other centres.
However, with improved manufacturing techniques and better marketing India
could greatly increase its revenues by increasing the added value in its
exports. In particular, it could diversify from cutting stones into making
and exporting more of its own jewellery. While India has about 40 per cent
of the market in cutting (by value) it has less than 1 per cent of
international trade in jewellery.
Rosy Blue and other companies are beginning to exploit this opportunity.
'Large-scale jewellery exports only started in the late 1980s. We are
diversifying into jewellery. That's where we see the future,' says Mr
Zaveri. Last year exports sales jumped 50 per cent to Dollars 299m and are
expected to exceed Dollars 350m in 1992-93.
Rosy Blue has built a factory dedicated to jewellery exports on the edge of
Bombay airport, in an export-processing zone where customs formalities are
kept to a minimum. Mr VSA Sury, secretary of the Gem and Jewellery Export
Promotion Council, says it is vital for India to expand jewellery-making
because other countries - including Thailand, China, Sri Lanka and Malaysia
 -also have reservoirs of low-cost, high-skill labour capable of cutting
stones.
However, Indian jewellery makers face some severe difficulties. They are
hampered by the red-tape that still binds much of the Indian economy,
despite recent deregulation. For example, special licences are needed to
secure foreign exchange to fund imports of stones and precious metals.
Furthermore, the high-cost of bank credit in India - the minimum lending
rate is 17 per cent - hinders stock-building.
There are as yet no internationally-known Indian brand names in jewellery.
Indian designs too are often too ornate for western and Japanese tastes.
Quality control is frequently not as well controlled as in developed
countries. 'We must improve our manufacturing techniques and our marketing,'
says Mr Sury.
Yet Bombay's diamond merchants are confident enough of the future to plan
building a new headquarters - a Rs6bn (Pounds 130m) tower to be called the
Bharat Diamond Bourse.
