FT  09 DEC 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Why 3i catches the
eye
This autumn's launch of a series of newspaper advertisements by 3i
(Investors in Industry) continues the tradition of colourful advertising
established by Britain's largest venture capital company in the early 1980s.
The first in the five-strong series, devised by J. Walter Thompson, showed
brightly coloured offices and factories - to represent the medium-sized
company sector - surrounded by the grim blacked-out skyscrapers of big
business.
The darker tone of this series reflects the tougher economic climate, says
Chris Woodward, 3i marketing director. 3i has long had a reputation for
innovation in an otherwise dull financial advertising sector, although its
ads have been criticised as lacking in gravitas. But, says Woodward, you
must grab the reader's attention.
British financial advertising may be old-fashioned, but in Germany, where 3i
has also established a market presence, it is Jurassic. So if anyone could
be expected to dismiss 3i's ads as lightweight it would be the German
entrepreneur or manager. But even in Germany response has been favourable,
says Woodward.
In the early days, 3i's ads featuring a pastel-wash 'eye' logo were striking
but little thought went into communicating what the company did - equity and
long-term loan finance for small and medium-sized firms. In recent years
advertising has focused more tightly on the 3i message and reaching the
right people. The latest campaign targets managers in the UK's 10,000
medium-sized businesses, a sector which 3i expects to grow rapidly.
In 3i's most recent managers survey, 200 were asked who they would approach
to start, grow or buy a business - 60 per cent mentioned 3i.
This figure compares with just 8 per cent in 1983 and is higher than for any
of the banks, says Woodward.
That is not surprising, given 3i's established position in the venture
market and the number of competing high street banks, but, claims Woodward,
it does show that 3i has established a brand for middle businesses, creating
a positive feeling among potential customers.
