FT  06 MAR 93 / Skiing: In the Valleys of confusion
THERE ARE so many possibilities to get it right and get it wrong when skiing
in France's Les Trois Vallees. The vast ski arena that surrounds Courchevel
(1500, 1650 and 1850) Le Praz, La Tania, Meribel (Mottaret, 1400 and Les
Allues), Les Menuires (Croisette, Reberty and Praranger) St Martin de
Belleville and Val Thorens is truly awe-inspiring and equally confusing,
especially for skiers who have never previously visited any of the resorts.
How do you find your way around this maze of green, blue, red and black
runs, never mind the dozens of off-piste itineraires? How do decide whether
to go the whole hog and buy a 3-Valleys lift pass for your stay, or just a
Belleville Valley pass, a Meribel Valley Pass or a Courchevel Valley Pass,
perhaps upgrading to a full 3-Valleys pass for the occasional day when you
want to ski far and wide?
If you do decide to ski all three valleys in one day, will you be worrying
all day about missing the last lift home and contemplating the cost of an
overnight stay in the wrong valley, or a taxi ride home to the right one?
Will you know where to find the out-of-the-way mountain restaurants for a
last-minute hot chocolate? Or the extra-special runs that you might miss
even if you come here every year?
Even if you live and work in Les Trois Vallees you can never know every run.
I have been visiting the area for 15 years, but it was only after a solid
fortnight this year of trying to explore as many nooks and crannies as
possible that I began to put the jig-saw together.
In terms of skiing logistics, the Meribel Valley is probably the best base.
Whether you visit the Courchevel Valley or the Belleville Valley (Val
Thorens, Les Menuires or St Martin de Belleville) you need only be two or
three lifts away from getting up and over whichever mountain ridge you have
chosen to cross.
If you are staying in Courchevel 1650 or 1850, a visit to Val Thorens, or
Les Menuires, or St Martin de Belleville barely gives you time for lunch
before you have to start backtracking, even if you are a fast skier, so it
is important to plan your journey properly. Likewise, if you are staying in
the Belleville Valley, a visit to 1650 only allows time for a speedy lunch.
What are the key lifts and when is the last one?
If you end up in Les Menuires or St Martin de Belleville when you are
staying in Val Thorens, it is simple and inexpensive to get a bus home. It
is also not a major setback to miss the last gondola from Mottaret towards
Menuires and catch the Combes triple orange chair and Roc de Tougne button
lift instead, but unless you catch the connecting Grand Lac button lift back
to Roc des Trois Marches you will end up in La Croisette.
This is fine if that is where you are staying, but a nuisance if you are
staying at Reberty-Bruyeres, which will involve a walk, a navette (which
runs until 7 pm) or a taxi - not the end of the world, but an irritation. If
you end up in 1650 when you are staying in 1850, or vice versa, there is a
similar problem.
In Les Menuires there are pluses and minuses both on your doorstep in the
Belleville Valley and in skiing over the hills and far away. Your nearest
skiing is on La Masse, often ignored by skiers intent on trying to get to
Courchevel and back in a day, and therefore often queueless. Ski La Masse in
the morning: it will be in shadow in the afternoon and often cold, but that
also means the snow is often better.
Do not miss the off-piste itineraire down the back of La Masse to the Lac de
Lou - a wonderful, away-from-it-all descent with stunning scenery. Any
problems with the occasional steep mogulfield can be circumvented by
traversing to the left or right. It is a wonderful introduction to easy-ish
off-piste. There is an equally easy route to the lake (do not ski over it,
even if everyone else is) from Cime de Caron at Val Thorens.
Also do not miss the delightful, leisurely and long ski all the way down to
the only old town in the valley, St Martin de Belleville (return by coach or
taxi) with its picturesque floodlit monastery, or the Pourquoi Pas Piano
Bar, with its roaring fire, quaint cellar and exotic 'Lumumbas' (hot
chocolate, cognac and cream).
And do ski the Maurienne Valley. opened up three or four years ago at the
back of Cime de Caron - another vast, desolate valley with easy-ish
off-piste skiing, a refuge/restaurant at the bottom and a chair to bring you
back. The valley can also be skied after a half hour's traverse along the
shoulder of the Pointe de Thorens, reached via the Moraine quad chair and
the (rather chilly) Col double chair which takes you to the summer skiing
area in the shadow of the magnificent Aiguille de Peclet (11,630 ft).
From the same location you can ski one of the classic descents in the
Tarentaise: a superb 15 kilometre descent from the Gebroulax Glacier right
down to Mottaret. This is an arduous but not particularly difficult run with
breathtaking scenery that first involves about an hour walking up either on
skins or carrying your skis. A guide is advisable as there are some huge
crevasses. Although they are easily negotiated, you will enjoy the descent
much more without the worry]
Meribel is the cross-roads of the three valleys, and usually the worst area
for lift queues. If the Pas du Lac bubble and Ramees chair are crowded, try
the cognoscenti's special by-pass round the back: the long La Truite green
run. You would never know it was there, and it brings you - gently - to the
Burgin Saulire gondola.
If that too is crowded, take Rhodos 1 and 2 (12-person gondolas which take
you above the Altiport) and from there either take the Rocher de la Loze
chair direct to Courchevel - a beautiful sunny route that brings you in
above La Tania and Le Praz - or the Frasse and Saulire button lifts high
towards Saulire (although not quite high enough) before dropping down to
fill spare places in the top stage of either the Burgin Saulire gondola or
the Pas du Lac bubble.
Once into the Courchevel Valley, the Les Creux area above 1650 - accessed by
taking the Jardin Alpin gondola from 1850 and traversing just below the
airport - is worth studying on the map. Both this lift and Marmottes next to
it are important routes when returning from Courchevel to Meribel via the
all-important Aiguille Fruit chair and Les Creux button lifts. So is another
adjacent lift, Les Suisses. Although this involves a black (of the same
name) it is not a difficult one.
Opposite these three get-you-home lifts is the Chanrossa chair, which takes
you to some of the most contrasting runs in the three valleys. From the top
you can ski the biggest bump run in the region or drift down Roc Merlet and
Pyramide to a major cross roads near Le Signal at the top of the Roc Mugnier
chair, which starts only yards from the Aiguille Fruit and Les Creux lifts.
Do not miss the lower Creux run itself, a wonderful, swooping, gun-barrel
trail.
From the top of Roc Mugnier there is some exhilarating motorway skiing
beneath the orange Ariondaz gondola to 1650. On the way down you will pass
the sunny deck of probably the best mountain restaurant in Les Trois
Vallees, the Bel Air. The service is electrifying, the food good and the
smiles fulsome. Otherwise enjoy a no-nonsense snack in 1650, in contrast to
the more chic restaurants in 1850. You can get a cheap and cheerful meal in
the sun at the Signal Bar, for example.
Finally, try to obtain a Les Trois Vallees piste map before you go: an
hour's study will save precious skiing time later.
