FT  15 MAY 93 / Property Plus: A penthouse - for one-third of the price -
Having fallen by up to two-thirds, prices are now rising - but not as fast
as vendors with negative equity would hope
FROM ONE of the two penthouses in 25 Jermyn Street, next to the department
store Simpsons in the heart of London's West End, there are splendid views
over Piccadilly, across Regent Street and on to Soho. So I was not surprised
when Kevin Ryan, of Mayfair agent Egerton, said it had been sold. The
surprise was the price: Pounds 295,000. Why? Because, during the property
boom, the same penthouse was on the market at Pounds 900,000.
When the developer, Michael Salliss Group, went into receivership, it had
sold only 15 of the 35 refurbished flats in this Grade II-listed Edwardian
building above the National Westminster Bank. One was the show flat, at
Pounds 600,000. But two buyers were repossessed, one of them committing
suicide. A year ago, the receiver appointed Egerton (tel. 071-493 0676) and
Horne &amp; Sons (071-499 9344) as joint agents to sell the remaining 20. They
priced the penthouses at Pounds 395,000 each; now, despite having taken
Pounds 100,000 off, one remains on offer. The prices of the other flats,
which are studios or one-bedroom apartments, were also cut by 25 per cent
and now range from Pounds 95,000-Pounds 175,000. Only five remain, but two
have no view at all.
While these prices show greater reductions than most in London, property
prices in the capital rose so high in the 1980s' boom that they had a long
way to fall. In fact, they fell further than anywhere in the UK except East
Anglia, where average prices almost trebled between 1983 and their peak at
the start of 1989, since when they have fallen 35 per cent.
In Greater London, prices fell by an average 32 per cent from their peak to
the end of last year, according to the Nationwide building society (although
the Halifax, Britain's leading mortgage lender, claims the figure is only 23
per cent).
Since then, the market generally has shown signs of improvement, although
there is no consensus about this. The Nationwide says prices in Greater
London rose by 2.6 per cent in the first quarter of this year, but the
Halifax says that they fell a further 2.4 per cent. In the prime central
London market, however, prices rose by 1.8 per cent in the first quarter,
according to Yolande Barnes, head of residential research at West End agent
Savills International (which, for good measure, puts the total fall in
prices at 26.9 per cent from their 1989 peak).
House prices dropped less than flats, with the greatest reductions being in
the highest-priced developments in central London or in peripheral areas of
the capital where flat prices continued to drop in the first three months of
this year, especially for apartments in converted houses.
A survey by London's largest independent agency network, Winkworth, shows
that flat prices have fallen most in Streatham, Notting Hill, Shepherds
Bush, Tooting and Catford. John Wriglesworth, housing analyst at stockbroker
UBS, says the typical 1980s' conversions of older houses to produce
bed-sitters and one-bedroom flats for yuppie first-time buyers could now be
almost unsaleable.
Savills believes that the worst is over in central London, where prices of
new houses fell by less than second-hand ones. The greatest recovery this
year has been in higher-priced houses in areas like Mayfair, Belgravia,
Kensington and Chelsea. And interest is reviving in Docklands, where the
Bank of China has bought 48 flats in The Anchorage, at Sufferance Wharf on
the Isle of Dogs, from the receiver of the Rosehaugh group
Meanwhile, a British company, Barratt Developments (071-231-2628), has begun
work on 275 new houses and flats at Sovereign View in Rotherhithe, with
prices starting at Pounds 65,000; and Fairview New Homes (081-366-1271) has
bought 2.4 acres of land at Timber Wharves, on the Isle of Dogs, for starter
homes at prices from about Pounds 39,000 for one-bedroom flats. Many
properties in Docklands are still being offered by the receivers of
over-ambitious developers or owners with negative equity.
Most property people say that the recovery of the market dates from
September 1992 when Britain left the European exchange rate mechanism; this
made property 15 per cent cheaper for the overseas buyers who form 30 per
cent of the market for prime properties in central London.
Although it was December before this made itself felt in the market, Mayfair
agent Anthony Lassman points out that by then 'the strength of the US dollar
and the fall in UK house prices represented in real terms a discount of 50
per cent on price levels achieved at the height of the boom.' No wonder
properties began to be snapped up.
The National House-Building Council operates an index which projects the
ability of first-time buyers to acquire property. When the base lending rate
was cut to 6 per cent a few weeks ago, the index hit an all-time high of
112, indicating that property had become cheaper than at any time since
1975. The result was that viewings increased, offers were made and mortgage
applications soared.
Even now, though, there is no unanimity on the recovery. A few weeks ago,
Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, told a committee of
MPs: 'The recession is probably over.' And the National Association of
Estate Agents says that the first quarter was the most encouraging time in
the property market for three years. But South Kensington agent Patricia
Farley cautions: 'While there is no doubt that things are better than this
time last year, that does not say much.'
Andrew Langton, of Aylesford, is more cynical: 'The London market has been
brought to its knees over the past seven years and I don't see any signs of
recovery.' On the other hand, Wilson &amp; Wilson, an agency that acts for
buyers, says: 'All the evidence suggests prices in prime residential areas
have bottomed out. This is very much a market for opportunists.'
All agents agree that there is a shortage of activity. But perhaps the most
reliable indicator of the apparent up-turn is that agents are opening new
offices again. Winkworth, which closed five in the recession, is launching
two - in Dulwich and Ealing - at the end of May and Barnard Marcus is
opening in Holland Park in June.
