FT  03 DEC 93 / Leading Article: Private finance
It is easy to be cynical about the government's initiative for attracting
private finance for UK public sector projects. One year after the initiative
was launched, there are still no new holes in the ground. Patience is
running out among many of the construction companies which would like to
build roads, railways, hospitals and schools and for the banks which would
like to finance them.
Yet some progress has been made in clearing the ground for involving the
private sector in providing public services. In the health service and on
the railways the initiative has eased rules on leasing expensive equipment.
NHS hospitals are now forming partnerships with the private sector to build
patient hotels. The home secretary plans to use the private sector to build
and manage six new prisons.
This week's Budget has opened up new possibilities. The firm commitment to
introduce tolling on motorways will eventually provide a stream of income to
reward companies which build new roads. Since it will be years before
electronic tolling can be introduced, the government has sensibly reversed
its opposition to shadow tolling. Thus investors in a new road can be paid
by the Department of Transport according to the number of vehicles using it.
The chancellor also committed the government to three larger projects,
including the modernisation of the west coast railway line between London
and Glasgow. This should reassure companies which have become frustrated
with 'no win competitions', where expensive tenders are submitted for
projects that are subsequently withdrawn. Mr Clarke has shown himself
commendably willing to sweep away Treasury orthodoxy on private finance,
especially in endorsing shadow tolling.
Yet most projects so far agreed have been either free-standing private
investments, such as the Dartford bridge over the Thames, or almost entirely
financed by the public sector, such as the Jubilee line underground
extension. The test will come with joint partnerships involving investment
by both the private and public sector.
The Treasury still appears to have an unrealistic view of the level of risk
which the private sector will accept in such partnerships. With the Channel
tunnel rail link, investors are being invited in before the legislative and
planning process is complete - against the advice of most experienced
advisers. The Treasury may also find it hard to stomach the returns that
private investors expect to make - especially if earned on the back of a
sizeable investment of taxpayers' money.
Striving to find solutions acceptable to both sides is, however, well
worthwhile. Contracting out services such as refuse removal and computer
management has already produced better value for money in central and local
government. The private finance initiative promises to extend similar
benefits throughout the public services.
