FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (29): Income with a
chance of growth - Management teams are pursuing the double in a variety of
ways / What's New?
MOST INVESTORS have simple desires: high income plus guaranteed capital
gains with low risk.
They look to investment managers to provide as much as possible of this
implausible combination - preferably in one tax-free package. The variety of
ways in which companies respond has been fully reflected in the latest
products to reach the market.
Framlington's Quarterly Income Pep has an estimated yield of 5.4 per cent
annually tax-free. Based on a unit trust investing in a mix of equities,
including investment trusts, as well as bonds and convertibles, it will aim
to produce income in excess of the yield on the FT-A All-Share index.
Investors will also have a chance of capital growth, because of the
predominantly equity-based nature of the investment.
Framlington's charges on the Pep are an initial 5 per cent and an annual 1.5
per cent. Income is to be paid out on the 9th days of January, April, July
and October, beginning on July 9 this year.
CITIBANK LIFE's Global Market Bonus bond is a non-qualifying,
single-premium, whole life assurance policy linked to a fund run by
Schroder, offering investors protection against losses and a quarterly
lock-in of any capital gains achieved.
Each quarter, Schroder will pick three or more indices from a list that
includes Australia, France, Germany, Spain, Switzerland, Hong Kong,
Singapore, the UK and the US. Using derivative contracts, the managers will
aim to maximise capital growth without loss. Any gains made are to be added
to the value of the fund by way of an increased unit price.
The minimum investment in the bond is Pounds 3,000, and the charges are 5
per cent initially and 1 per cent annually. Brokers are to be paid 4.5 per
cent commission on the bonds. Bondholders who cash in during each of the
first three years will be charged 3 per cent, 2 per cent and 1 per cent
respectively.
GENERAL PORTFOLIO Life, possibly the only French-owned company to use a Duke
of Wellington silhouette as its logo, has launched a new series of its
Maximum Income Account, a single-premium insurance bond investing in
A1-rated banks, building societies and short-term fixed-rate bonds.
At launch, the MIA was offering an interest rate of 5.15 per cent on the
minimum investment of Pounds 10,000, rising to 5.36 per cent net on
investments of Pounds 50,000 and above. After the first three months,
investors can make withdrawals on demand without penalty.
General Portfolio notes that, unlike building society interest, income from
an insurance bond such as the MIA is not grossed up for the purposes of
assessing higher-rate tax. Under present tax rules, higher-rate taxpayers
can cash in up to 5 per cent of the original investment free of tax for up
to 20 years, using tax deferral allowances. Any excess over 5 per cent would
be taxed at the holder's highest rate but less the basic rate.
CATER ALLEN in Jersey has added an 'overnight account' to its offshore range
of accounts.
This is a deposit account with penalty-free access which pays interest gross
at 0.625 of a percentage point below the overnight rate for wholesale money.
During March, for example, the wholesale overnight rate ranged from 4.75 per
cent to 6.375 per cent.
The minimum deposit is either Pounds 50,000 in sterling or the equivalent in
dollars, Deutsche Marks, Ecus, French or Swiss francs, Spanish pesetas or
yen.
LLOYDS BANK's unit trust arm is targeting investors with Pounds 20,000 or
more, making this the minimum investment for two fund-of-fund type trusts,
called the Growth Portfolio and the Income Portfolio.
Investing in between five and 16 trusts, Growth Portfolio, the higher risk
of the two, will aim for capital growth by buying into trusts invested in
Britain and abroad, some based offshore.
The Income Portfolio will hold high-income UK unit trusts, offshore funds,
gilts and cash, and will pay out income each quarter.
The charges on both are 6 per cent initially and 0.5 per cent annually, in
addition to the annual charges on the underlying trusts.
SAVE &amp; PROSPER will launch in May a high-income bond that will guarantee a
high level of net income, partly by drawing on a capital amount put into the
bond.
Earlier this month, details were still being finalised, but, as an example,
S&amp;P said that an investor who chose to take 8 per cent guaranteed net annual
income from the bond would get back a guaranteed minimum of 60 per cent of
his capital after five years if the FT-SE 100 index had either remained
static or fallen over that period.
He would get back his capital in full after five years if the index had
risen by 4.58 per cent annually or 25 per cent in total over the period.
However, despite the guarantees on income and capital, S&amp;P has deliberately
avoided any precise commitment on what investors who cash in before the end
of the five-year term will receive.
Product development manager Mike Hayhurst said the group had been tempted
not to offer any surrender values at all, but had been obliged to do so by
market forces: the fact that competitors offered them. All S&amp;P says is that
the surrender value prior to the five-year mark will be based mainly on the
level of the FT-SE 100 at the time the bond is cashed in.
'We intend this as a five-year product,' said Mr Hayhurst, 'we don't
currently intend to penalise anyone.' He added that the few investors who
had so far cashed in S&amp;P's guaranteed stock market bond, launched last
November, had all received the market value of the bond in line with the
index at the time.
