FT  07 OCT 93 / Jordan calls time on a high-flying career
PORK bellies may not have moved much yesterday on the Chicago commodity
exchanges, but there was news out of the second city that can be said to
have wobbled the Sears Tower and the nation, at least momentarily.
Michael Jordan, by any yardstick the world's best-known sportsman, who
played basketball for a very large living, quit the sport at the age of 30.
Jordan broke the news late on Tuesday. 'The desire has gone,' he told some
local reporters, who thought their big story of the night was the opening of
the baseball playoffs. At his press conference yesterday he said the same
thing repeatedly. He had been thinking of retiring for at least a year, even
before he led the Chicago Bulls to a third consecutive championship and
propelled himself far into the air for a seventh consecutive scoring title.
Last year he also won his second Olympic gold medal.
He had talked about quitting with his father, who was murdered in North
Carolina last July. 'At least he got to see my last basketball game,' Jordan
said. Investigations into his passion for gambling at casinos and on the
golf course were not material, he said.
But he could not depart without some cracks at press hounding of public
figures.
Just as, in 1962, a certain politician had declared (wrongly as it
transpired) that 'you won't have Richard Nixon to kick around any more,' so
Jordan told his audience pointedly: 'Hopefully I won't be seeing too many of
you guys in the future.' If that message was not received, he added: 'Stay
away from my house.'
Jordan's reputation has probably only been matched in modern sporting
history by Pele, the Brazilian soccer legend. But it was only partly based
on his unquestioned sporting prowess, substantial though this was. Along
with Earvin 'Magic' Johnson and Larry Bird - both retired in the last two
years, the first after declaring he was HIV positive, the second suffering
the effects of age and chronic injury - Jordan made the 1980s a golden age
for basketball, no longer primarily an American inner-city game.
His visibility made him the most successful television advertising salesman
for commercial products around the world. According to Forbes magazine, his
income from promoting Nike shoes, McDonald's hamburgers, Wilson sporting
goods, Gatorade soft drinks and Sara Lee confectionery earned him about
Dollars 32m (Pounds 21.1m) last year, far more than the Dollars 3.9m he
picked up from shooting a basketball.
His loss will be felt hardest in Chicago, which had been unaccustomed to
sporting success. The two local baseball teams, the Cubs and the White Sox,
have not won a World Series since 1908 and 1917 respectively. The White Sox
lost their opening playoff game on Tuesday, after Mr Jordan had thrown the
ceremonial opening pitch.
There was hope in Chicago, and elsewhere, yesterday that his retirement
would not be permanent, not least because quitting at the peak is uncommon
in professional sport. Asked the inevitable question, Jordan merely replied:
'I don't believe in never.'
