FT  09 MAR 93 / Architect of austerity ahead in Bolivian poll: But Sanchez
will not be counting on victory
PRESIDENTIAL campaigning is hotting up ahead of a June election in Bolivia,
as the four-year term of President Jaime Paz Zamora draws to its close.
Surprisingly, since popular support for economic reform is supposed to be
eroding, opinion polls show one of the main architects of economic austerity
in the 1980s significantly ahead of his four main rivals.
Mr Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, the candidate of the National Revolutionary
Movement (MNR), was a key minister in the government of President Vctor Paz
Estenssoro which in 1985 embarked on one of Latin America's first and most
radical economic stabilisation programmes.
This brought inflation down from 23,000 per cent in 1985 to 11 per cent last
year, one of the lowest rates in Latin America. It also helped to restore
economic growth, to 2-4 per cent a year between 1987 and 1992.
This expansion has not, however, lessened extreme poverty - a United Nations
report says Bolivia has the highest proportion of rural poor in the world -
while income distribution appears to have become even more unequal during
the 1980s.
Exports are falling and the trade deficit widening. Foreign debt, which
dropped by Dollars 1.1bn between 1987 and 1991, is again rising, by more
than Dollars 300m in 1992 to Dollars 3.7bn (Pounds 2.6bn).
Mr Paz Zamora's ruling coalition, an unlikely alliance between two parties
of the political left and right, is widely criticised for failing to
capitalise on the legacy of the previous administration's economic changes.
According to successive US State Department reports, the government has been
plagued by widespread corruption and weakness in policy implementation.
The present government has botched its infant privatisation programme and
been forced to suspend joint venture deals designed to attract foreign
investment to state mining corporation Comibol.
Mr Sanchez says: 'The biggest sin of this government has been lost time. In
1989, the majority of Bolivians supported a market economy. Today, most are
against it.'
While this might be expected to hinder him, the MNR leader appears to have
improved his chances with the appointment of a well-respected indigenous
leader, Mr Victor Hugo Cardenas, as vice-president.
This is in part a response to the growing challenge of newly-formed populist
opposition parties, led by ambitious individuals excluded from the ruling
class because of their origins or skin colour. Local elections and opinion
polls show they have struck a chord with the electorate.
Two candidates, Mr Antonio Aranibar, leader of the opposition centre-left
MBL party, and Mr Carlos Palenque of the more populist Condepa, say they
seek to include indigenous voices in national politics.
Another populist is Mr Max Fernandez of the UCS party, a beer magnate. His
campaign has already brought insinuations about the source of finance for
his extensive campaign and links, strongly denied, to the drugs trade.
But Mr Sanchez's chief rival could be General Hugo Banzer Suarez of the
National Democratic Action (ADN), military dictator from 1971 to 1978. He
has alarmed the business community by choosing a former Communist party
leader as a running mate.
Even though, according to most opinion polls, he seems to be ahead, Mr
Sanchez is unlikely to be counting on victory. Opinion polls in this
predominantly rural country are unreliable and Bolivia's singular electoral
system usually means the choice of president is made in August by the lower
house of Congress.
This has advantages in that Bolivia's presidents generally are able to
govern with a majority in the lower house. But it also means that the most
popular candidate in the election often does not end up as president, unless
he wins more than half of the votes. Mr Sanchez knows this to his cost: he
polled most votes in the 1989 election but lost because Gen Banzer threw his
party's weight behind Mr Paz Zamora.
