FT  09 NOV 93 / Akzo to take over Nobel Industries: Paul Abrahams and
Christopher Brown-Humes report on a pounds 1.38bn deal
AKZO and Nobel Industries, two leading European specialty chemicals groups,
yesterday announced a deal under which Akzo will pay SKr16.6bn (Pounds
1.38bn) to take control of Nobel, creating the world's biggest paints group.
Akzo of the Netherlands is making an agreed all-share offer for Nobel,
valuing the Swedish company at SKr29.6 per share, 35 per cent above the
SKr22 level at which its shares were suspended last week.
The combined group, Akzo- Nobel, will have revenues of more than Fl 20bn
(Pounds 7bn) and around 75,000 employees.
It will be bigger than Imperial Chemical Industries, of the UK, in the world
coatings market, and become the second biggest pulp and paper chemicals
producer. The groups say their operations complement each other industrially
and geographically, enabling them to boost market share and profitability.
The deal is a neat solution for the Swedish state, which owns 72.9 per cent
of Nobel through a bad debt unit called Securum. It enables Securum to sell
Nobel as a package for a SKr5.4bn capital gain, while offloading much of the
group's debt on to Akzo. It will gain a 20 per cent stake in Akzo-Nobel.
Nobel's interests in Spectra-Physics, biotechnology and the defence group
Celsius will be acquired by Securum for SKr5.3bn, including debt.
Akzo is offering two new shares for every 57 Nobel A or B shares, and a cash
alternative worth SKr26.5 per share. It has also agreed to take over the
group's preference stock for cash and shares. The Dutch group plans to raise
Fl 1.3bn through an institutional placement to fund the cash parts of the
deal.
Akzo said the merger would dilute earnings by less than 10 per cent in the
first year. Synergy benefits, estimated at Fl 180m, are expected to enhance
earnings thereafter.
Akzo shares closed at Fl 186.50, down from the Fl 197.20 close last Friday.
Some analysts in Amsterdam said Akzo was paying a high premium but others
noted the decline follows the stock's all-time high last week, after the
announcement of strong third-quarter results.
Mr Aarnout Loudon, Akzo chairman, said the group's dependence on the
European market would grow to more than 60 per cent.
Additional reporting by David Brown in Amsterdam.
