FT  08 OCT 93 / Hard words in prospect on debt
NEGOTIATIONS to reschedule at least Dollars 26bn of Russia's debts to
western commercial banks opened in Frankfurt yesterday, as a top Russian
minister indicated that he would seek more generous terms.
The 'London Club' of some 600 commercial bank creditors, represented by a
committee chaired by Germany's Deutsche Bank, have offered a 15-year
rescheduling arrangement. It involves a five-year grace period, and then
repayment over a further 10 years.
As preliminary talks opened yesterday, led by Mr Andrei Vavilov, the first
deputy finance minister on the Russian side, a statement was released in
Moscow saying Russia could not afford the Dollars 6bn due to both commercial
bank and official creditors next year.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, the deputy prime minister in overall charge of
relations with international institutions, said the government was 'calling
on its official and commercial bank creditors to consider another
restructuring scheme more acceptable to Russia'.
Mr Shokhin, who is due in Frankfurt today to head the Russian team, said
Moscow could only afford to pay Dollars 2.5bn of debt servicing in 1994.
The Russian government was divided on the issue, with some ministers
favouring a debt write-off. But opinion has now swung behind Mr Boris
Fyodorov, finance minister, who believes Russia can and must manage to
service its rescheduled debts.
The Russian delegation is likely to meet a tough attitude from the western
bankers, who believe Russia has considerably more foreign exchange than the
Dollars 6bn reserves held by the central bank. Mr Georg Krupp, the Deutsche
Bank director responsible, suggested recently that Russian banks held up to
Dollars 10bn outside the country, and enterprises a further Dollars 20bn.
Moscow has already agreed a rescheduling arrangement with the Paris Club of
official government creditors, involving some Dollars 15bn of the Dollars
37bn they are owed.
The commercial banks are owed an estimated Dollars 37.5bn, including a
backlog of Dollars 1.5bn accumulated for 1993 alone. So far this year, the
debt has been subjected to repeated 90-day roll-over agreements, which the
new deal would replace.
Yet to negotiate an arrangement with Moscow is the group of unsecured trade
creditors, owed some Dollars 12bn.
When the recent backlog of payments is included, total Russian debt is now
estimated at around Dollars 80bn.
