FT  16 SEP 93 / International Company News: VW cautions on impact of
forecast DM1.2bn Seat loss
THE expected DM1.25bn (Dollars 781m) loss at Spanish subsidiary Seat will
have a 'considerable impact' on the Volkswagen's group earnings this year,
the company said yesterday.
It said an emergency cash injection of DM1.5bn would not have an immediate
effect.
Officials would give no firm forecasts, but maintained that the German
parent company would break even.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman, yesterday told workers at the main
Wolfsburg plant that the parent and the group would make a profit in the
third quarter.
Meanwhile, analysts said any 'lingering illusions' that the group could
cancel out the first-half loss of DM1.6bn and break even this year had
evaporated. VW shares dropped DM11 to DM350.50 yesterday in a falling
Frankfurt market.
New figures produced by Mr Piech on vehicle deliveries so far this year
showed little improvement to support recent claims that orders were
improving steadily.
Total group deliveries to customers for the eight months to the end of
August were 2.1m, 13 per cent lower than in 1992.
Even though the figure for Germany was 24 per cent lower at 651,000, home
market share had risen 0.4 per cent to 20.5 per cent.
Deliveries in the rest of western Europe were down 20 per cent at 704,000,
and market share was 16.5 per cent.
He gave no figures for North America or Asia, where the group recently
admitted it was having difficulties. The new Golf, made in Mexico, is
finally filtering into the US. It had been launched in California, the
company said.
Mr Piech, who has steadily back-pedalled on earnings forecasts for this
year, yesterday also appeared to throw doubt on plans to build a new small
car, the Chico, in Wolfsburg.
This was still the aim, but only if 'production costs at the plant can be
reduced to compare with those on a green-field site', he said.
Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs, a senior spokesman, said the group 'understood' the
decision by Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the federal economics minister, to abandon
his role as peacemaker between VW and Adam Opel in their row over alleged
industrial espionage.
Opel was clearly not prepared to talk and Mr Rexrodt had recognised there
was nothing to be done.
The minister, speaking in Brussels, claimed a good part of his aim had been
achieved. He had 'never mediated in a formal sense,' he said.
