FT  07 MAY 93 / Survey of Turkey (12): Ceasefire demonstrates Ocalan's
control - Both Kurds and Turks hope that the long nightmare of violence may
be over
FOR EIGHT-and-a-half years, from August 1984 until March this year,
south-eastern Turkey was the scene of a guerrilla war, fought with equal
ruthlessness by Kurdish separatists on one side and the Turkish army on the
other.
But on March 20, from his base in Damascus, the leader of the separatist
Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), Abdullah Ocalan, known as Apo, proclaimed a
25-day unilateral and unconditional ceasefire.
As a result, the traditional Kurdish new year celebrations ('Nawrouz') on
March 21 passed off peacefully, in stark contrast to last year when 105
people were killed, and three towns shelled by government forces in full
view of German TV - causing a crisis in Turco-German relations and,
indirectly, the resignation of the German defence minister (who was found to
have supplied weapons to Turkey without authorisation from the Bundestag).
Apo's decision to call the ceasefire is seen in Ankara as an acknowledgement
of military defeat, as well as a response to pressure from his Syrian hosts
and from the Iraqi Kurds who were determined not to let him jeopardise
Turkish support for their 'safe haven'. Certainly the army has inflicted
severe losses on his units in south-eastern Turkey over the past year, while
in northern Iraq fellow Kurds have forced the PKK to move well away from the
Turkish border.
But the fact that the ceasefire has held amounts to something of a political
victory for Apo, since it shows his ability to control guerrilla forces
scattered over a wide and ruggedly mountainous region. The Turkish side,
too, has shown discipline: the government, which had two weeks' warning of
the ceasefire, gave strict instructions to its forces not to overreact to
any non-violent demonstrations during Nawrouz, and by and large these were
obeyed.
Last month, when the 25 days were up, Apo prolonged the ceasefire
indefinitely. In fact, he announced he was abandoning the armed struggle in
favour of peaceful politics, and that his aim was no longer a separate state
but recognition of Kurdish rights within Turkey. For good measure, he
renounced his former Marxist principles as well.
It all seems too good to be true, and may yet prove to be. There was a
similar moment of hope at the end of 1991, when the present government came
to power. Then, too, Apo had spoken of a federal solution, and hinted at a
ceasefire; and the prime minister, Mr Suleyman Demirel, toured the
south-east proclaiming his determination to treat its people democratically
and his recognition of the Kurdish identity. But at that time neither's
words were reflected in the actions of his troops, and the war soon resumed
more fiercely than ever.
This time, both Kurds and Turks are hoping desperately that the long
nightmare of violence may really be at an end, but no one is betting on it.
Turks find it difficult to believe Mr Ocalan can have changed his spots
completely, and Kurds wonder if the government has the courage and
imagination to seize the opportunity he has offered.
Many see the death of President Turgut Ozal on April 17 as tragically
untimely. He had done more than anyone to open up the debate on Kurdish
identity within the Turkish establishment, exploiting both his own partly
Kurdish origins (he claimed to remember speaking the language with his
grandmother) and the crisis over the Iraqi Kurds which followed the Gulf
war. He struck up a personal leadership with the Iraqi Kurdish leaders,
particularly Jalal Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), who
has played a key role in persuading Apo to switch to a non-violent strategy.
Although Ozal no longer controlled the executive, since his Motherland party
lost power in the 1991 general election, he did chair the National Security
Council, and continued to take a close interest in the Kurdish issue. Many
observers doubt whether, in his absence, the government will be able to take
the decisions needed to defuse Kurdish grievances, or be brave enough to
impose them on the armed forces.
But Ismet Imset, a Turkish journalist who has become the country's leading
expert on the PKK, believes Ozal had already made his vital contribution by
bringing the Kurdish issue into the open and changing the way people think
about it - including senior figures in all the main political parties.
Imset says that people who called him a traitor two years ago, when he
published his first interview with Apo, now ring him up to ask his advice.
Indeed, he is known to have briefed the cabinet informally after his most
recent trips to interview the PKK leader in Syria and Lebanon.
In any case, it is Suleyman Demirel who will now have to take the crucial
decisions, whether as prime minister or as a president who will still have
great influence over the main governing party. Interviewed by the Financial
Times last month, he claimed not to 'hear' Apo's pronouncements, arguing
that to do so would amount to opening a dialogue. At the same time he could
only welcome the ceasefire as a fact, and hinted at a possible amnesty for
Kurdish fighters who came down from the mountains 'to seek justice under
Turkish regular law'.
It seems likely, if the situation remains calm, that the state of emergency
in the south-east, under which the army's more repressive actions are
carried out, will soon be lifted. A big public investment package for the
south-east, whose economic backwardness is widely seen as the root cause of
the trouble, has already been announced.
But Demirel is much more reluctant to commit himself, as some of his
advisers are urging, to allowing the Kurdish language to be used in schools,
or on private radio and television - two of the most widely voiced Kurdish
demands. (For the last two years it has been allowed in newspapers and in
public speech; and in March the interior minister, Ismet Sezgin, announced a
further significant concession: the restoration of Kurdish names to
thousands of renamed towns and villages. Parents will also be free
henceforth to give their children Kurdish names.)
Ocalan's official demand is now for a federal solution - something President
Ozal also spoke about once or twice in rather vague terms. Many Kurds would
regard that as the ideal, but most know it is very unlikely to happen at all
soon. Many - some say a majority - would not benefit directly from it in any
case, since they no longer live in the south-east but in the big cities of
western Turkey.
Perhaps the most striking fact about the situation today, compared with a
few years ago, is the total freedom with which the issue is now discussed,
and the passion with which Turkish Kurds now proclaim their Kurdish
identity. For many of them this seems quite compatible with a strong Turkish
patriotism. But even those who most firmly condemn the PKK's violence and
reject its separatism also warn that it has genuine popular support, and
that from now on the Turkish state cannot afford to ignore Kurdish
aspirations.
