FT  15 OCT 93 / International Company News: J P Morgan shares ease despite
48% improvement
BUOYANT trading and corporate finance revenues helped New York banking group
JP Morgan post a 48 per cent increase in third-quarter earnings to Dollars
468m yesterday.
The results were better than most Wall Street analysts had expected, but
disappointment among some investors who were unhappy with the modest decline
in trading earnings, and profit-taking by others after a recent strong run
by bank stocks, left JP Morgan's share price down Dollars  3/4 at Dollars 77
3/4 by the close on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
Sir Dennis Weatherstone, the bank's chairman, remarked that 'the year so far
has presented plentiful opportunities, and we've been prepared to capitalise
on them around the world', and said he was particularly pleased with JP
Morgan's return on equity, which rose to 23.9 per cent from 18.8 per cent a
year ago.
Trading revenues again made the biggest contribution to JP Morgan's bottom
line. Although they failed to match the record Dollars 520m achieved in the
second quarter, they remained strong at Dollars 464m, up 50 per cent from a
year ago thanks to big returns from the trading of debt instruments, swaps
and other interest rate contracts, particularly in Europe and emerging
markets.
Although trading remains at the core of JP Morgan's business, analysts said
yesterday that they were impressed by the bank's efforts to boost its
earnings from other business lines. In particular, analysts singled out for
praise the 14 per cent increase in corporate finance revenues to Dollars
140m. The improvement was due mostly to a rise in fees from the underwriting
of securities issues.
Other business segments also showed strong growth. Investment management
fees rose 20 per cent to Dollars 116m, operational services fees (primarily
from custody, clearing and brokerage services) climbed 14 per cent to
Dollars 122m, and gains from the bank's investments in equity and
fixed-income securities edged ahead to Dollars 98m. 'Other' revenues soared
to Dollars 179m following a big gain from sale of part of JP Morgan's
investment in Hospital Corporation of America and net gains from equities
sales.
Finally, net interest income fell slightly to Dollars 439m.
