FT  19 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Nafta vote raises Gatt deal hopes - US
decision means just half of the battle is won, says Sutherland
TRADE officials urged yesterday that US congressional approval of the North
American Free Trade Agreement should be used to secure a successful
completion of the Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation talks.
Mr Peter Sutherland, director general of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, praised President Bill Clinton's success, but noted that the
234-200 vote in the House of Representatives was 'just half of the battle
won'.
The priority would now necessarily turn to successful completion of the
Uruguay round.
'Nafta and similar enterprises - no less the European Union - cannot thrive
in isolation. They are not economically self-sustainable and must be part of
a broader world trading system under the aegis of the Gatt,' he said.
'The other half of the battle, making the Nafta a genuine positive force in
the world economy, must be the conclusion of the Uruguay Round.'
The Nafta vote cast a shadow over Gatt talks in recent weeks, tying US
negotiators' hands when the time remaining for completing the round has been
perilously short, and difficult deadlock-breaking compromises have been
urgently needed.
Amid rising optimism that a long-elusive trade-liberalsing package is
finally within negotiators' grasp, expectations have run high in Geneva that
the success of the Nafta vote would free top US and EU trade negotiators
meeting in Washington early next week to provide long-awaited impetus.
Mr Sutherland's comments came during a briefing intended to underline trade
liberalising moves that have already been provisionally agreed in Uruguay
Round negotiations, and to focus on what is at risk if the small number of
outstanding differences result in failure.
'What is in the bank is still capable of being lost,' he said.
In Brussels, Sir Leon Brittan, EU trade commissioner, welcomed the House
vote in favour of Nafta, saying it would remove a big distraction for the
Clinton administration and allow a final drive for agreement in Gatt talks.
However, Sir Leon sounded a note of caution, telling reporters that he
needed to look at the 'small print' to see what the White House may have
offered members of Congress to get their vote and how it might affect Gatt.
With only four weeks remaining to the December 15 deadline for a Gatt deal,
Sir Leon is due to hold talks with Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade
representative, in Washington next week.
Meanwhile, France said it was now up to the US to produce 'new proposals' to
bring the Gatt negotiations to the same successful conclusion as the Nafta
accord.
Mr Gerard Longuet, France's foreign trade minister, said the the Clinton
administration could and should henceforth 'devote itself fully to the
Uruguay Round'.
Mr Sutherland warned that 'if what is currently on the table is now lost,'
then 'the threat from unreconcilable disputes will be intense'.
Mr Gijs de Vries, a Dutch member of the European Parliament speaking for the
body's liberal group, hailed the Nafta vote as a 'victory for common sense'.
'The only 'sucking sound' Americans will hear is the sound of exports going
south,' he said, referring to Mr Ross Perot's oft-quoted description of
Americans losing their jobs to Mexico as a result of Nafta.
Another one under his belt, Page 25
Lex, Page 26
