FT  20 MAY 93 / Arts: A cut in the wrong direction - Cinema
THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION (12)
James Cameron
NOWHERE TO RUN (15)
Robert Harmon
PASSENGER 57 (15)
Kevin Hooks
I WAS ON MARS (15)
Dani Levy
When it was first released in 1989, The Abyss was a half hour away from
being a very strong movie indeed. Its writer and director, James Cameron,
seems to have realised something was amiss and has now used the clout he has
garnered from making Terminator 2 to have the movie released in a special
edition, or director's cut. The idea is that the decision of his studio's
marketing people to alter the film to make it more audience friendly is
thereby reversed. Unfortunately, Cameron's final version is a half hour
longer than the original, when what the film always needed was to be a half
hour shorter.
For those who missed it in its first incarnation, The Abyss portrays a group
of likeable redneck divers whose underwater oil rig is commandeered by the
US navy to rescue a sunken nuclear sub. Matters are complicated by the
fraught marital relationship between the chief divers (Ed Harris and Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio), the insanity of the navy commander (Michael Biehn),
a looming hurricane, encroaching Russians and, finally, a colony of
underwater aliens. It was the last ingredient that ruined the recipe the
first time around, transforming what might have been a taut, sweaty
adventure flick into a ludicrous fantasy feature.
Unfortunately, Cameron's new version expands on this very aspect of the
film, further padding out his picture with a tendentious morality play in
which world war III is averted by these squishy ETs when they unleash giant
tsunamis on the superpowers to make them put their nuclear weapons away. The
resulting blend of dated and simplistic cold war politics, overwhelming
special effects and sentimentality thoroughly undermines the two hours of
skillful action and suspense that preceded it, forcing one into the rather
alarming conclusion that those chop-happy studio executives might not be so
purblind after all.
Cameron's special edition also calls into question the whole recent trend of
director's cuts, which, with the exception of last year's restored Blade
Runner, seems to be little more than yet another way Hollywood is trying to
have its cake and eat it too. After all, film-making is a collaborative
process. What does the future hold - actor's cuts? cinematographer's cuts?
The only thing you can be sure of is that the studios and the producers will
certainly be getting their cuts, both times around.
If there were such a thing as an audience cut, Nowhere to Run would be five
minutes long. One minute for the amount of time Rosanna Arquette spends
naked, the other four devoted to Jean-Claude Van Damme as he ruptures the
spleens and deviates the septums of various baddies with his vaunted martial
arts. As for the remainder of the film, it is hard to see who the makers had
in mind as potential viewers when they consigned it to celluloid.
The plot, such as it is, has Van Damme playing an escaped con who holes up
on the farm belonging to a noble widow (Arquette) being threatened by greedy
real estate developers. After the obligatory rocky start to their
relationship, Van Damme and Arquette soon fall into the sack and then join
forces to see off the bad guys.
Nowhere to Run is the latest step in the effort to domesticate the Belgian
bruiser. As such, it is a resounding failure. Unlike Schwarzenegger or
Willis, Van Damme is utterly lacking in charisma, his bland stoicism failing
to suggest anything other than, well, bland stoicism. He is unable to
humanise his macho antics with the sort of self-deprecating wit needed to
break free of the straight-to-video category. To makes matters worse, his
toned down and surprisingly lacklustre fighting here should prove a
disappointment to his regular core of fans. And as for Arquette, it is sad
to see this once promising actress reduced to playing little more than
bearnaise sauce to Van Damme's slab of beef.
It is easy to see why a video star wants to go upmarket. What is harder to
figure out is why the fine film actor Wesley Snipes wants to travel in the
opposite direction. After a series of roles that put him well on the way to
becoming one of the most popular black leading men of all time, Snipes finds
himself up in the air in Passenger 57, a hackneyed action movie that might
have given even Van Damme pause.
The story has Snipes playing a former cop turned airline security consultant
who locks horns with a 'sophisticated British aristocrat' (Bruce Payne) who
also happens to be a lunatic with a penchant for blowing up 747s. What
results is so laughably ill-conceived that you keep on expecting Snipes's
agent to burst out of one of the hijacked plane's toilets and force the
whole thing to make an emergency landing. Unfortunately, it keeps on going
right up to the bloody finale, in which, ironically, Snipes fights with far
more aplomb that the new model Van Damme.
I Was on Mars is the story of Silva (Maria Schrader), a young Polish woman
who arrives in New York with plenty of dollars but apparently little in the
way of motivation or common sense. She wanders aimlessly about the city for
a few days, only to be relieved of her cash by Alio (Dani Levy), a slick con
man with a line of patter only someone fresh off the boat could buy. Not one
to take this sort of thing lying down, Silva decides to pursue Alio, soon
involving herself in his bizarre existence and exacting a subtle yet telling
revenge.
Fans of Stranger Than Paradise and Johnny Suede will find themselves on
familiar turf here, though the film lacks the bizarre sublimity of those two
efforts. Director Levy has a wonderful eye for detail - Silva carries an
iron in her briefcase but only one change of clothes, while Alio garnishes
his cocktails with Twinkies. And Schrader's Silva is a memorable creation, a
woman who uses passivity as a weapon more effective than anything the men
she finds herself among can employ. But the film fails to establish a
consistent comic pitch, undermining its fine observation and
characterisation with an unevenness worsened by a tendency to indulge in
weirdness for its own sake.
