FT  07 AUG 93 / Arts: Behind the Fringe - Off the Wall
NEXT WEEKEND thousands of wannabes will be arriving in Edinburgh for the
biggest annual audition in the arts world. The Edinburgh Fringe, which in
size, audience and innovative achievement now surpasses the Edinburgh
Festival, is the one place where you can still go on stage a kid and come
off a star.
The precedents are most encouraging. In pre-history there was the Beyond the
Fringe crew (who were actually appearing at the Festival); in living memory
there is Rowan Atkinson; and every subsequent year there have been young
entertainers who have turned up as unknowns and left with a TV contract in
their jeans' pocket. Last year it was Bruce Morton; the year before Frank
Skinner.
There are many complaints about the Fringe - that it has become a business;
that it is dominated every year by the same group of stand-up comedians;
that the best venues are stitched up well in advance - but every year the
entertainment industry moves there en masse. In 1993 there will be a record
571 companies presenting over 1,200 shows, and that excludes the students,
street artists, eccentrics and drifters who flock to Edinburgh in August,
just in case . . .
But the very success of the Fringe is producing change. The money men are
moving in. This year the three leading venues, the Assembly Rooms, the
Pleasance and the Gilded Balloon, which between them control 17 performing
outlets and claim half the Fringe audience of 600,000, are pooling their
marketing. This loose merger has been greased by Stella Artois, which is
giving over Pounds 100,000 towards a Comedy Festival embracing the venues.
An indication of the new commercial spirit is that if the acts on the bill
do not attract a fixed amount of TV coverage, with the inevitable plugs for
the lager, Stella Artois can withhold some of its investment. Two other
medium-sized venues, Hill Street and Old St Pauls, are also joining forces
on promotion.
Bill Burdett-Coutts, who runs the Assembly Rooms, justifies this approach
with the economic facts of life. His three-week residency at the Rooms turns
over almost Pounds 1m but profits rarely top Pounds 5,000, and some years
there is a loss. Karen Koren at the Gilded Balloon has suffered severe
deficits, especially in her attempts to keep open throughout the year. Only
by attracting outside money and co-ordinating the publicity can the venues
guarantee their future, and ensure that a wide range of performers,
theatrical groups as well as the cheap stand-up comedians, feature in the
programme. This year actors from Georgia and the Ukraine are at the Assembly
Rooms because Burdett-Coutts can afford to take more risks. The venues want
to develop a productions fund to ensure that the Fringe does not become, as
many fear, just a comedy festival.
But there is concern that the three powerful venues, presenting performances
all day, will draw audiences away from smaller, out of the way, Fringe
events. It is good for the Steven Berkoffs, the Jo Brands, and the Arthur
Smiths: not so good for the new faces.
Mhairi Mackenzie-Robinson, administrator of the Fringe, is not worried -
yet. 'The Fringe is self-regulatory. It is an open festival'. Its strength
has always been its ability to absorb anyone that turns up at Edinburgh and
seeks its advice and support.
This year that includes everyone from elderly comedians like Michael Bentine
and Barry Cryer to the usual eclectic mish-mash. The Fringe reflects what
concerns artists at any particular moment. This year there are three shows
about The Carpenters, the wholesome 1960s pop group, and three about Don
Quixote. Make what you can of that.
*****
The Arts Council is back-tracking furiously on its proposal to cut Pounds
1.4m from its drama budget by axing the grants of ten leading regional
theatres. A meeting of its drama panel this week recommended that if the
budget has to be reduced by 3.6 per cent then every theatre receiving a
grant should suffer equal misery.
This runs counter to the view of the Council's boss, Anthony Everett, who
wants to create priorities, but it gives the Council a chance to get off the
hook. The panel is also asking the Council to rescind the basic decision to
cut the theatre grant. The general drift is to wait and see the size of the
total Arts Council budget after the Chancellor's November statement.
The Heritage Minister Peter Brooke has made it clear that he opposes the
decision to hit the theatres, and this week gave Pounds 175,000 in
restoration grants to the Belgrade, Coventry, which is reported to be on the
list. Since Brooke decides the size of the Council's grant he is well placed
to discreetly get his way - and make a nonsense of the arm's length
principle.
*****
In the last three months 64 works of art, including a Tompion clock and a
Sisley landscape, have been added to the list of works of art which are
conditionally exempt from inheritance tax because they are, in theory,
available for public view. In all around 9,100 objects enjoy this status.
The joke is, of course, that the public never gets to see them.
Before the scandal broke in 1992 perhaps one or two people a year asked to
see the list, kept at the V&amp;A. The number of enquiries has scarcely
increased. How many asked an owner whether they could come and view the
object no one knows. This seems a poor return in terms of public aesthetic
pleasure for the Pounds 1b which the nation has lost in tax during the past
decade through this loophole.
Of course few object to exemption for the Duke of Sutherland's pictures, on
permanent view in the National Gallery of Scotland, or the collection at
Chatsworth, or in the many noble houses open to the public. But the 3,169
pictures; the 1,189 items of furniture; the 912 pieces of European ceramics
and glass included on the now computerised list and not regularly available
for inspection, should be exposed to searching public gaze.
Museum directors should examine the list to see if it includes objects that
would grace their collections through short-term loan, and the Inland
Revenue must continue with its hesitant policy of shedding some light,
through a quarterly progress report, on what is little more than a tax
dodge.
