FT  24 NOV 93 / Roads plan flawed, says NAO report
A government programme to widen 600 miles of motorways is expected to cost
nearly twice the original Pounds 3.4bn estimate and will not be able to
tackle the most congested motorways first, says the National Audit Office.
The NAO, which reviews government spending programmes, says in a report
issued yesterday that financial and environmental constraints will mean that
some stretches cannot be designed to meet forecast traffic demand and some
projects will have an expected life of just 15 years instead of the normal
40 years.
It says that original cost estimates were based on the assumption that only
one lane would need to be added and that simple construction methods could
be used.
'But in practice motorway widening has encountered specific design problems
and some motorways require more than four lanes,' the report says. Revised
traffic forecasts show in many instances that far higher numbers of vehicles
will be using the motorways.
The Department of Transport said it would carry out additional research into
whether road widening added to traffic growth, and into the impact on road
congestion.
The government announced its road widening programme in 1989 but estimates
of its cost have since risen by 46 per cent to nearly Pounds 5bn. The NAO
says further widening schemes identified since then will take the total cost
of the programme to Pounds 6bn, a 78 per cent increase on the original
estimate.
The cost of widening the London end of the M2 - the route runs from
Rochester to Faversham, extending to London and Dover through the A2 at each
end - is now expected to increase more than threefold from Pounds 41m to
Pounds 141m.
Few examples of planning large road-widening schemes were available when the
programme was first drawn up. The plans did not account for the demolition
and replacement of bridges and alterations to junctions. The widening and
improving of the Surrey stretch of the M25 is to come under attack in the
High Court today when Surrey County Council will seek leave to apply for a
judicial review.
Progress on the Department of Transport's Motorway Widening Programme. HMSO.
Pounds 7.40.
