FT  26 OCT 93 / International Company News: No quick recovery from IBM's big
blues - Analysts see further losses at the troubled computer group
THE summer of 1993 brought big changes for International Business Machines.
These included a new management structure and accelerated cost cutting - but
not, it appears, any sign of recovery from two years of heavy losses.
Even the most optimistic analysts are predicting that today, IBM, once the
bluest of the blue chip stocks, will report a loss for its third quarter.
The only question is how deep the red ink will flow. While the consensus is
an operating loss of about Dollars 170m, or 30 cents per share, it could be
double that, some IBM-watchers fear.
The stage has been set for IBM by disappointing results from several other
companies in the computer sector. Digital Equipment, in the midst of
restructuring, last week reported net losses of Dollars 83m on revenues of
Dollars 3bn for its first quarter, in spite of a Dollars 20m lift from
accounting changes.
Digital's revenues declined almost 10 per cent from the same period last
year, reflecting weak sales in Europe - particularly Germany and Italy - the
company said. Even Hewlett-Packard, which earlier reported a 44 per cent
earnings rise to Dollars 271m for its third quarter, ending in July, with
revenues up 23 per cent at Dollars 5bn, saw a sharp drop in European order
growth rates to 10 per cent, from 28 per cent growth in the previous
quarter.
Depressed economic conditions in Europe, the largest export market for the
US computer industry, are taking their toll on companies and IBM is expected
to be no exception.
Last year, European sales of Dollars 23.75bn accounted for almost 37 per
cent of IBM's total revenues. Germany, Italy and France are IBM's largest
European markets. Thus the continuing weakness of the European economy
represents one of the most formidable barriers to IBM's efforts to return to
profitability.
Another factor in the gloomy projections for IBM's third-quarter performance
is rapidly declining mainframe computer prices. Mainframe computers,
together with associated storage devices represent about 20 per cent of
IBM's revenues.
Amdahl, one of IBM's direct competitors in the mainframe computer market, is
due to report this week. The company has warned it expected to report an
operating loss 'considerably larger' than its second-quarter Dollars 23.7m
loss.
The company cited slow mainframe computer sales and 'intense competitive
pressure on pricing' as the principal reasons for anticipated losses.
Industry analysts say mainframe prices have declined by about 40 per cent in
the 12 months ending in July, with IBM driving the trend with heavy
discounting.
The personal computer market, in contrast, is rising and after losing market
share to competitors, the IBM PC is on the rebound. IBM's share of the
worldwide PC market rose to 14.9 per cent in the first quarter of this year
from 10.9 per cent in 1992, according to IDC, a market research group.
Yet IBM's ability to take advantage of strong demand for its PCs has been
hampered by parts shortages. In particular, IBM has been unable to get
enough of the active-matrix flat panel displays used in its popular Thinkpad
portable notebook computers.
Analysts estimate IBM may have lost as much as Dollars 1bn of business in
the third quarter because of inability to keep pace with demand for its PC
products.
Similar problems dogged Apple Computer and Compaq Computer last year and
industry executives see the ability to forecast demand accurately - and
order parts in advance - as a critical element of success in the PC market
that IBM has yet to master.
Rival Compaq Computer, which last week reported a 64 per cent jump in sales
to Dollars 1.75bn for the third quarter, with income more than doubling to
Dollars 107m, seems to have been the chief beneficiary of IBM's supply
constraints.
'Compaq is well prepared with manufacturing capacity and parts availability
to take advantage of the strong demand we are experiencing,' said Mr Eckhard
Pfeiffer, Compaq president and chief executive.
As in other segments of the computer industry, personal computer profit
margins are declining rapidly amid intense price competition.
Apple Computer, which reported its results this month, saw gross margins
fall to below 26 per cent from above 40 per cent. In spite of record
revenues of Dollars 2.14bn for its fourth fiscal quarter, Apple recorded a
meagre net profit of Dollars 2.7m, down 97 per cent from the same period
last year.
IBM's painful struggles to adjust to lower gross margins have seen its
workforce cut by 125,000 since the end of 1986. Another 60,000 workers are
expected to leave the company before the end of 1994. The company has
written off Dollars 2.9bn in assets this year, half of it in manufacturing
facilities.
While the short-term outlook for IBM is still bleak, at least one analyst
believes Big Blue is on the right track.
'I'm not predicting it will happen in the fourth quarter or in the first
quarter of next year, but the ingredients are in place for a recovery,' says
Mr John Jones of Salomon Brothers in San Francisco.
IBM's operating expenses and manufacturing costs are now 'almost at parity'
with industry competitors, Mr Jones says.
There is a new 'fire in the belly' of its product divisions; a new
determination to beat external competitors rather than squabble among
internal divisions, he believes.
The decline in IBM's mainframe computer business will bottom out in
1995-1996, Mr Jones predicts. The company's introduction - expected next
year - of parallel processing mainframe computer technology could lead to a
reduction in mainframe computer costs, creating stronger demand.
'Of the data stores in Fortune 500 companies, 80 per cent is on mainframe
computers today,' Mr Jones points out. He expects IBM's new parallel
processing technology, which will not require any software changes, to be an
important factor in IBM's recovery.
New sources of revenue and profit for IBM include its emerging merchant
semiconductor business.
Until recently, it has manufactured semiconductor chips only for its own
use, but it has set aggressive goals to become a multi-billion dollar chip
supplier to outside customers over the next few years.
Chips are one example of IBM's strategy to sell technology, components and
even finished products to other companies, rather than end-users. IBM has
set a goal of Dollars 3bn in original-equipment sales to industry customers
this year.
These efforts are unlikely, to yield short-term returns and today's
third-quarter financial report is expected to demonstrate that there is no
quick fix for IBM's big blues.
