FT  27 OCT 93 / Business and the Environment: Signs of order spring from
chaos - Argentina is starting to take green issues seriously, but progress
is slow
When seven people died last month in a working-class suburb of Buenos Aires,
overcome by highly toxic fumes from industrial waste which a company had
dumped into drains near their homes, the tragedy featured nightly on
television news programmes.
But within days, judges, politicians and regulators began squabbling over
who was responsible for the disaster and who should be hunting down the
owners of the waste disposal company blamed for the incident.
Meanwhile, the government felt compelled to 'do something' and dusted off a
requirement - never previously enforced - that companies handling hazardous
waste must register with the Natural Resources and Human Environment
Secretariat.
However, after a few weeks, both the media and the government had forgotten
about the incident.
Sadly, nothing about this event was unique. Every time an environmental
accident hits the headlines, as frequently happens, competing bureaucracies
start rival investigations and issue a blizzard of rules and regulations
which are soon forgotten.
Argentina's most important body of environmental laws was born under similar
circumstances. Reports in 1991 that industrial waste from developed
countries was being dumped in Argentina led to a new toxic waste law in
January 1992. The government also included environmental offences in the
civil and criminal codes.
Basically, the law established a cradle-to-grave rule making companies
responsible for the safe disposal of waste. But it took the Environment
Secretariat 17 months to publish detailed regulations making the law
enforceable. Until then, companies were in legal limbo.
The law is contradictory and confusing. Jenny Valdirio, an environmental
consultant, said it 'is practically a copy of US legislation, but conditions
(here) are not similar. There is less technology and there are fewer
treatment possibilities'. And its definition of toxic waste is so broad that
anyone with an open oil can in their garage is violating the law.
Until recently, none of this mattered much. Argentines were too busy coping
with military repression and economic instability to worry about the
environment. Advanced legislation introduced during the turbulent 1970s,
such as the clean air law of 1975 and a decree establishing the 'polluter
pays principle', were rarely enforced.
Now, with democracy and economic stability more firmly established, people
are demanding a halt to environmental degradation, particularly of water
sources.
In Buenos Aires, untreated sewage is poured into tributaries of the River
Plate. In the city's industrial belt, factories, slaughterhouses and
tanneries dump waste ranging from animal blood to heavy metals into the
rivers. Environmentalists claim companies often have waste treatment units
but do not use them. People who live in the industrial belt suffer from
dysentery, gastroenteritis, hepatitis and worms. The water table is
contaminated.
Raymond Florin, executive director in Argentina of the Business Council for
Sustainable Development, the body created by the environmentally-conscious
Swiss businessman Stephan Schmidheiny, says demand for change 'is coming
from all over the place - people, politicians, judges, NGOs, the state, the
media - and very quickly. Great changes are taking place (so rapidly) that
people don't know what to do'.
Companies are struggling to adapt. 'Six or seven months ago nobody talked
about the environment. Now you talk to any manager and he'll have something
to say about it,' says Florin. However, he admits that even large companies
are still unwilling to set up environmental control departments.
The government is changing slowly. Its Environment Secretariat is staffed
with political appointees who have little understanding of environmental
policy. The secretariat's 1993 budget of Dollars 19m (Pounds 12.5m) is half
the sports budget. Even the government admits the courts are slow,
inefficient and corrupt. Thus offenders are rarely punished. Amid this
chaos, however, order is beginning to emerge. More rational economic
organisation is a big part of this.
The government has privatised environmentally sensitive steel, chemical,
energy, water and petrochemical industries. Before, these companies were run
by authoritarian bureaucracies which disregarded the law and were not
publicly accountable.
Privatised utilities are now charging consumers the real cost of water,
electricity and gas - which the state once provided at artificially low
prices that discouraged conservation.
As well as buying state assets, private companies also took on the state's
environmental liabilities. Independent government regulators are starting to
enforce environmental and quality standards that were once ignored. Some
business people admit that if they had realised the size of these
liabilities, their privatisation bids would have been much lower.
Pedro Tarak, executive director of Fundacion ARN, a Buenos Aires
environmental foundation, says individuals, associations, local government
and congress are demanding greater participation in policy-making and
enforcement. Even the much-criticised Environment Secretariat is reforming
and hiring professionals.
Argentina has a long way to go. Accidents like the one that cost those seven
lives will recur. Tarak says 'unfortunately we still need more situations
(like that) so we all understand the need to get organised'.
