FT  07 DEC 93 / Student union reform defended
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, yesterday cited the weekend
disruption of his advice surgery by university students in support of his
proposal for student union reform.
He said he felt ashamed to represent the 'yobs' from Balliol College in his
Oxford constituency. He also attacked the incident in which Mr Michael
Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, had eggs thrown at him during a
demonstration by about 90 students when he was opening new university halls
of residence in Liverpool on Saturday. Two students were arrested after the
protest against student grant measures in the Budget.
Opening the fourth day of Commons debate on the Budget, Mr Patten said it
had been 'an outrageous attack'.
He told MPs: 'Mr Portillo and his staff had eggs thrown at them, at least
one of which struck the chief secretary. I think that is disgraceful
behaviour on the part of university students.'
Mr Patten said events in Liverpool, Norwich and Oxford were 'extraordinarily
bad examples of bad behaviour by university students'.
It showed the importance of the proposed reform of students unions outlined
in the education bill, he said. The measure will end the unions' 'closed
shop' and allow students to opt out of them.
Mr Patten defended the government's student loans scheme and the Budget
decision 'accelerating the already-planned shift in student support from the
grant to the student loan'.
Mr Donald Dewar, shadow social security secretary, said he had no sympathy
with 'yobs', whether in Oxford or anywhere else, who threw eggs or acted
violently.
'I do not believe that helps the course of public or political debate,' he
told Mr Patten.
'But you must recognise the 10 per cent cuts (in student grants) year by
year for the next three years are not likely to be forgotten and will be
persistently resented.'
Mr Dewar repeated Labour accusations that Mr Kenneth Clarke's package was a
'pay-more-get-less Budget', adding that it had a 'mark of dishonesty about
it'. He said: ''We are going to face really difficult times ahead and I take
no pleasure from that.'
There would be a rise in social security spending, he acknowledged. 'But
that is not a rush of generosity to the head of the minister.
Mr Dewar said Labour had known invalidity benefit was 'marked for execution'
 -but the incapacity benefit which would replace it was not an attempt to
reform or improve the welfare system.
'It seems a rather petty change which has a lot to do with minor savings for
the Treasury and some of the prejudices that can be found on the Tory side
of the house.'
On the replacement of unemployment benefit with the new jobseeker's
allowance, Mr Dewar said Labour recognised parliament could change the
rules.
'The question is not 'can we do it?' but 'should we do it - and what does it
do to confidence in the contributory system?'.'
