FT  25 SEP 93 / A priest in turbulent times: The Japanese leader's first 50
days in office
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa has taken the priestly approach to prime ministership.
At public gatherings, he stands with hands clasped before him, head slightly
bowed, and delivers small sermons to his flock on the virtues of good
government, the vices of regulation, and the need to confront Japan's
wartime guilt.
His style is in striking contrast to his sometimes arrogant predecessors at
the Liberal Democratic party, thrown out of office in a July election at
which the public showed its desire for change from the party's habitual
corruption and backroom intrigues.
But altering Japan's political structure requires more than a congenial
personality. The big question after Mr Hosokawa's first 50 days in office is
whether he can change the electoral system and weed out corruption in
government before the seven-party coalition collapses under the weight of
personal and policy differences. Could this priest end up a martyr?
The coalition has already put together a small but honourable list of
achievements. Mr Hosokawa has introduced a Y6,150bn (Pounds 38bn) package to
stimulate the economy, overseen a cut in official interest rates, agreed on
the framework of electoral reform, begun snipping away at regulations
restraining economic freedom, and avoided the chaos predicted by some
political observers.
Mr Hosokawa will go to the US on an official visit today knowing that about
70 per cent of Japanese, according to opinion polls, apparently like his
style, if not his substance. President Bill Clinton, whom he will meet on
Monday, might feel a touch envious that another provincial governor elevated
to the national leadership has had such early success in office. Mr Hosokawa
will explain to his US counterpart the thinking behind his economic
measures, which came partly in response to US pressure on Japan to curb its
record current account surplus.
But the high domestic approval rating of Mr Hosokawa is as much a measure of
expectations as of achievements. The prime minister conceded the point in
parliament this week: 'I am well aware that the real time of testing starts
now.'
In his short time in office Mr Hosokawa has made surprising progress but he
still has much to do. The coalition has shifted economic debate towards
consumers and away from the traditional focus of the producer. But it has
yet to deliver the policy changes that would put the consumer permanently at
the centre. And Mr Hosokawa's deregulation drive is run by bureaucrats who
have, so far, conceded mainly superficial reductions in their power.
Critics suggest that Mr Hosokawa is charming but indecisive. 'I don't know
who is making the decisions, but I know that it is not Mr Hosokawa,' says Ms
Makiko Tanaka, daughter of former LDP prime minister Kakuei Tanaka and newly
elected to parliament herself.
Unstated in her observation was the suggestion that Mr Hosokawa is the pawn
of a more powerful player: Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the former power-broker behind
the scenes at the LDP. Mr Ozawa is now performing a similar role at the
Japan Renewal party, a coalition partner run by the LDP defectors who
brought down the government of Mr Hosokawa's predecessor, Mr Kiichi
Miyazawa.
Mr Ozawa manoeuvred Mr Hosokawa into the prime minister's job by negotiating
a deal with the disparate coalition parties. The popular wisdom is that Mr
Ozawa needs time for the public to forget his associations with politicians
facing corruption charges. According to this view, when Mr Ozawa feels the
time is right he is likely to make a bid for the prime ministership. In the
meantime he is happy to let Mr Hosokawa's fine reputation hang on the fate
of a fractious coalition.
It is a sign of Mr Hosokawa's early success that Mr Ozawa and his associates
at the JRP are edgy. Many JRP members hope that Mr Hosokawa's team will only
be an interim administration to prepare the way for a JRP-led government.
One JRP leader said economic or foreign affairs matters should not
'distract' him from political reform: 'I don't think we have the time to
deal with other issues.'
But Japan's unexpectedly deep economic downturn has obliged Mr Hosokawa to
devote much time to 'other issues'. The economy appears to have moved
officially into 'recession' this quarter, the second consecutive period of
decline in gross national product.
The government also faces challenges on several other fronts:
Income tax. It is under growing pressure to cut rates from business leaders,
concerned that failing consumer confidence is undermining growth. But the
government cannot deliver because the JRP and the Socialists are divided on
how to finance the income tax reduction.
Deregulation. A reduction in costly burdens on business will assist
long-term economic growth, and Mr Hosokawa is planning to launch a more
radical deregulation drive than the 94 measures announced in recent weeks.
But bureaucrats are, not surprisingly, unwilling to deregulate away their
own considerable powers. Political reform. Mr Hosokawa has been obliged to
scale back plans for a ban on corporate donations to political parties. But
the procession of contractors and provincial politicians through the Tokyo
Detention Centre is a reminder of the need for action. Mr Teruzo Yoshino,
chairman of Shimizu, the country's largest contractor, was arrested this
week for allegedly attempting to bribe a prefectural governor.
Foreign policy. Mr Hosokawa has apologised for Japan's wartime brutality,
but there is the unresolved question of whether Japan wants permanent
membership of the UN Security Council. Several coalition partners believe a
permanent seat is a necessary part of Japan's growing international role,
though the Socialists fear a re-emergence of militaristic sentiment.
If the Socialists or the JRP withdraw support over this or another of the
divisive issues, the coalition will collapse. But both parties would risk
rejection at the next general election if they could not convince voters
that their withdrawal of support from a popular administration was
justified.
Mr Hosokawa has earned such popularity by keeping his promise to introduce a
more open style of government. He may not be able to answer tough questions.
But he has not resorted to the purposefully confusing double and triple
negatives favoured by his predecessors in their sentence structure.
The longer Mr Hosokawa tries to keep the answers straight, the more
difficult it will be for his successor, LDP or not, to revert to the old,
obtuse ways. For now, the priestly prime minister has convinced much of his
congregation that there is life after the LDP.
