FT  04 JUN 93 / The end of an African story: 500 years of ethnic hegemony
AFRICA'S longest dominating ethnic minority is bowing to the winds of
change. Nearly 500 years after establishing their hegemony, and 30-odd years
after Harold Macmillan warned white South Africa that the days of apartheid
were numbered, Burundi's Tutsi elite seem set to surrender power to the
country's Hutu majority.
On Wednesday this week the first ever democratic elections in the central
African nation marked a watershed in a country scarred by tribal genocide.
Mr Melchior Ndadaye, a 40-year-old banker and leader of the Burundi
Democracy Front, won 60 per cent of the vote to defeat military president
Major Pierre Buyoya.
The presidential poll is to be followed by legislative elections on June 29
ending a two-year transition to full democratic rule.
'Mr Ndadaye needs to win both (polls) to have real control of the country,'
cautioned one western election monitor quoted by Reuters in the capital
Bujumbura, but the Tutsis' ancient hold on the country appears to have been
broken.
Major Buyoya, a former army officer who came to power in a bloodless coup in
1987, has presided over a transition as difficult as any in Africa,
overcoming a bloody history.
The Tutsi minority, an unusually tall race making up 14 per cent of the 5.6m
population, have dominated the Hutu majority (85 per cent) since the 16th
century and little changed with independence in 1962.
A Hutu-led coup attempt in 1965 was ruthlessly suppressed, with many leading
members of the Hutu tribe losing their lives. Worse was to come.
In April 1972 began one of the worst slaughters the continent has known.
Michel Micombero, a young Tutsi army officer who seized power in a coup in
1966, claimed to have discovered a Hutu plot aimed at exterminating the
Tutsi.
There transpired 'the systematic killing of as many as a quarter of a
million people. . . . Over a four month period men, women and children were
savagely murdered at a rate of more than a thousand a day,' concluded an
investigation funded by the Washington-based Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.
International concern was ineffectual and short-lived, and Burundi returned
to obscurity. Mr Micombero was replaced in a bloodless coup by his cousin,
Col Jean-baptiste Bagaza in 1976, himself deposed by Major Buyoya.
His first act of reconciliation was to share cabinet posts between the two
tribes, giving Hutu their first real voice in government in 20 years and
naming the first Hutu premier since 1965. But a further bout of ethnic
slaughter in 1988 killed at least 5,000 people, giving renewed urgency to
reform. Like the minority leaders in southern Africa, Burundi's president
had set in train a process of change he can no longer control.
