FT  11 MAY 93 / Management (The Growing Business): One man's beef - A look
at difficulties experienced by a slaughterhouse / Cutting red tape
COLIN Kinmond says his small slaughterhouse business could take on two extra
staff if he were not obliged by new European Community-inspired legislation
to employ a vet. Alongside a full-time meat inspector who keeps an eye on
the quality of the cut meat, since January 1 Kinmond has also been required
to pay for a vet to come in twice daily to look at the live animals before
slaughter. The meat inspector, employed under long-established legislation,
costs Pounds 30,000 a year while the vet costs another Pounds 1,500 a month,
Kinmond calculates.
'The vet has stopped us having an apprentice and a slaughterman and takes a
lot of money out of our profits,' comments Kinmond, a director of Bishop's
Castle Meat, a Shropshire company with 14 employees and turnover of Pounds
4.5m.
The requirement to employ a vet as well as a meat inspector came in as part
of the EC's Fresh Meat Directive. This was translated into UK legislation in
the form of the Fresh Meat (Hygiene and Inspection) Regulations 1992.
This legislation extended to smaller slaughterhouses - serving local or
national markets - the rules which had applied for many years to larger
slaughterhouses involved in exporting meat products.
Many small firms and the recently established Quality Meat and Livestock
Alliance blame these new regulations on the closure of about 200
slaughterhouses over the past two years. The Ministry of Agriculture
counters that only seven slaughterhouses have been closed for hygiene
reasons and says the rest, spurred by over-capacity in the industry, have
shut down for commercial reasons.
Bishop's Castle Meat has been able to bear the cost of the new regulations
but Kinmond is critical of the new legislative regime. 'The red tape is
ridiculous,' he says. 'We are not exporting. The meat inspector has been
doing his job for the 14 years we have been in business and our meat has
never killed anyone.'
Kinmond's complaint is that the vets who now inspect the animals make no
contribution to increased hygiene. All the animals come in from auctions
where they have been inspected, while the vets have only a brief training
which does not equip them to spot problems.
But the requirement for veterinary inspection is only part of the new
regulations. Slaughterhouses are also faced with a range of structural
alterations to bring their drainage systems, work surfaces and loading bays
up to scratch.
Very small slaughterhouses processing fewer than 20 units a week (a unit is
one cow, three pigs or seven sheep) escape the new structural regulations
but a swathe of medium-sized companies which were previously exempt have had
to come to terms with the tough new requirements.
Bishop's Castle Meat has spent about Pounds 200,000 on alterations (though
some went on a new boning room the company wanted) including stainless steel
surfaces and equipment and larger pens to hold the animals awaiting
slaughter. This last requirement leads to large numbers of animals being
brought together in the same space and increases the stress they suffer,
critics of the regulations claim.
The strictness of the new legislation is a classic case of UK civil servants
'improving' the initial EC legislation, comments Richard North, secretary of
the Quality Meat and Livestock Alliance. National legislation tightened up
on the EC directive; Ministry of Agriculture guidelines tightened up on the
legislation; and individual vets interpret the guidelines very strictly, he
says.
The directive calls for the slaughterhouse to have a clearly defined
boundary which has been translated into a requirement to have a wall or a
fence. One slaughterhouse owner had to build a wall costing Pounds 8,000
which cut off direct access from his house, says North.
As part of its opposition to the new rules the alliance is urging its
members not to pay vets' fees. Kinmond has just received a summons for
failing to pay. Ultimately, says North, the alliance is prepared to take its
fight to the European Court of Justice.
The Ministry of Agriculture said British representatives in Brussels had
argued successfully against some member states which had wanted a more
far-reaching directive. The legislation had to strike a balance between
public confidence in meat hygiene and not making the rules too onerous, a
spokesman said.
The Growing Business Page will highlight over the next few months businesses
entrapped by red tape. It will award a bottle of Laurent-Perrier pink
champagne to each one featured.
The owner-managers of independent businesses are invited to describe their
experiences - on no more than two sides of A4 please.
Letters should be addressed to:
Charles Batchelor,
Growing Business Correspondent,
Financial Times,
Number One Southwark Bridge,
London SE1 9HL
