FT  30 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Harrisons &amp; Crosfield turns in 19% advance
THE BENEFITS of a wide-ranging cost cutting programme appear to be feeding
through to the bottom line at Harrisons &amp; Crosfield, the agribusiness,
chemicals and plantations group which yesterday reported a 19 per cent
increase to Pounds 48.4m in first half profits.
The group, which lifted sales by 24 per cent to Pounds 1.1bn, also announced
the retirement of Mr John Maltby, chairman, who will step down in May. He
will be replaced by Mr George Paul, chief executive. Mr Bill Turcan, finance
director, steps up into the chief executive post.
A disappointing performance from the BOCM Pauls animal foods business,
acquired in April last year, held back growth in the agriculture and foods
division. Nevertheless, this business still increased operating profits by
30 per cent to Pounds 19m on sales ahead 85 per cent to Pounds 373m.
Mr Paul said BOCM Pauls had suffered a sharp decline in margins in spite of
considerable cost savings. The group's failure to secure lower raw materials
prices at the time of sterling's devaluation last year had had a
significantly adverse effect in the first quarter, he said. However, margins
were now beginning to recover.
The chemicals division raised profits from Pounds 17.2m to Pounds 20.7m, on
the back of large cost savings in the pigments division. The group closed
four of its six factories in the US.
Timber and building supplies returned a 4 per cent increase to Pounds 11.5m.
This masked a sharp rise in the builders' merchant business in the UK, where
rationalisation resulted in a 20 per cent increase in profits.
The plantations division enjoyed one of its most successful years with a 46
per cent rise in profits to Pounds 12.4m.
Earnings per share rose by 0.3p to 4p, and the interim dividend is
maintained at 3.6p.
COMMENT
Harrisons has enjoyed some success with its restructuring, and promises yet
more in the chemicals and animal feeds divisions. However, animal feeds is
regarded as a mature market with heavy competition becoming the main
feature, while chemicals is increasingly exposed to the depressed
continental European market. On the brighter side, economic recovery is
bound to do a world of good for all divisions, especially building supplies.
The main attraction of this stock, however, seems to be the yield. At 6 per
cent, this is tempting when all talk is of another base rate cut. Forecasts
are for Pounds 105m this year, for a prospective p/e of 21. Although not a
sell, one wonders just how much higher the shares can go in the short term
under the circumstances.
