FT  13 MAR 93 / Industrial espionage laws placed under surveillance: John
Mason on questions raised by the NCP trial and the furtive methods used by
security companies
THE two defendants in the National Car Parks industrial espionage trial
walked free from the Old Bailey yesterday - but left behind them calls for
reform of the law about the secretive methods used by private security
organisations in the commercial world.
Mr Gordon Layton, chief executive of NCP, and Mr Simon Hewitt, a former
manager with KAS, the security firm hired by NCP to spy on a business rival,
were acquitted of conspiracy to defraud.
That followed a two-month trial in which details of their spying operation
were never in dispute. The operation included surveillance of directors of
Europarks, the target company, rifling of dustbins and briefcases, and the
use of infiltrators to obtain confidential financial information.
Under the law, none of these techniques is illegal in itself. The law is
broken only when the intention is to damage the interests of the target
company. In this case the prosecution agreed there was no evidence that
Europarks had suffered as a result of the espionage operation.
Calls for clarification of the law were led by lawyers acting for Mr Layton
who had rested their defence on the assurances given to him by KAS that its
methods were legal.
The calls were echoed by solicitors from other law firms which have been
frequent, if discreet, hirers of private security firms. 'The law is
unclear,' said one solicitor. 'There has also been the temptation for us to
be somewhat disingenuous about how information is obtained - that must now
change.'
Mr Layton first heard of KAS, the security firm formed by the late Sir David
Stirling, founder of the Special Air Service, in late 1986. The firm
employed several former members of the regiment.
Mr Layton had become concerned about the inroads Europarks was making into
NCP's dominance of the car-parking market. He suspected that Mr Steven
Tucker, Europarks chairman, was undercutting NCP to win prime-site contracts
by obtaining inside information from NCP.
A meeting with Sir David was arranged and Mr Layton, impressed by the
organisation's SAS background and its claims to offer the 'Rolls-Royce' of
corporate investigations services, hired KAS to investigate both Europarks
and security within NCP. But Mr Layton had apparently misjudged KAS.
In the security business KAS had acquired the reputation of a poorly managed
concern, still wrapped up in the mythology and thinking of its SAS ancestry.
One witness told the court that considerable time was once spent discussing
how the company should defend itself against a possible IRA attack on its
Mayfair offices.
The staff at KAS may have been highly trained, but the organisation lacked
the managerial control to question properly the wisdom or legality of
applying techniques of covert military work to the commercial world, said
the director of one security firm.
But however bizarre and badly managed KAS may have been, it did ultimately
succeed in discovering the most confidential financial secrets of its rival.
The operation was headed by Mr Ian Crooke, a former colonel in the SAS. He
would have appeared in the dock alongside Mr Layton and Mr Hewitt, but has
remained in South Africa beyond the reach of the UK's extradition powers.
Early in 1987 Mr David Paterson, who before joining KAS had once been a
Rhodesian policeman, carried out initial investigations and said he could
find no evidence of dirty tricks by Europarks. Its success, he reported, was
based on trimming all its costs down to the absolute minimum.
This did not satisfy Mr Layton. He ordered KAS to maintain surveillance on
Europarks. For the next year Mr Tucker, his family and other Europarks
directors were closely followed by KAS staff. This provided little
information except worthless tittle-tattle.
So, in February 1988, KAS stepped up its operation. Realising it needed an
insider to obtain the information it wanted, the firm set about trying to
infiltrate Europarks.
A KAS employee, known during the trial as 'Witness E', obtained a job as a
kiosk manager at Europarks' Heathrow offices. But he was in too low a
position to get the information needed. What was necessary, KAS decided, was
an insider in Europarks' management.
By May 1989 Mr Crooke had left Britain to look after KAS's anti-poaching
activities in southern Africa. Mr Simon Hewitt, a member of the Territorial
Army SAS, was brought in as a replacement manager and took charge of the NCP
account.
He recruited Ms Jane Turpin, a former Army captain, to KAS. Using a false
CV, she secured a job with Europarks as Mr Tucker's personal assistant.
With free access to his offices there was little she could not obtain. In
six months she provided a welter of confidential information about the
company's finances. It was crucial information, which, Mr Tucker said, laid
bare the soul of his company.
Ms Turpin - who but for health reasons would also have been prosecuted  -
left Europarks in November 1989, and the operation, which had cost NCP more
than Pounds 46,000, was wound up.
The operation would never have come to light but for a dispute within KAS.
Mr Hewitt had not proved a popular choice with his colleagues and, in early
1990, he was sacked. He approached a Sunday newspaper with the NCP story,
which appeared in print in June 1990. The day before, when approached for
his reaction, was the first time that Mr Tucker had heard anything of the
three-year operation against his company.
The calls for clarification of the law on industrial espionage may not be
easy to carry out. The issues are complex, particularly the question of
using pretexts, said Mr Stephen Smith, a director of Carratu, an established
security firm.
To him the KAS operation was ill-advised and one whose objects could have
been reached equally well using methods that were more acceptable and
clearly legal.
But he questioned whether infiltration was a significant problem compared
with other, more obviously illicit activity. Leaving aside industrial
espionage, more information is obtained by companies prepared to use the
illegal technique of old-fashioned bribery, he suggested.
