FT  01 OCT 93 / Survey of Lanarkshire (1): Foundations for recovery are in
place - Lanarkshire, at the heart of Scotland's central region, is the focus
of government initiatives to revive its economy following the closure of the
Ravenscraig steel works last year. Its enterprise zone is already attracting
inquiries.
LANARKSHIRE, for decades identified with coal, steel and heavy industry, is
seeking to acquire a new economic base and shed its grimy industrial image.
The process could take 15 years or more, and so far only the first expensive
building blocks have been laid. It is too early to speak of results.
This latest attempt in Britain to regenerate an area where the old
industries are dying or have disappeared started in 1991 when British Steel
began delivering heavy blows to the Scottish steel industry which had been
the lifeblood of the northern part of the county, around Motherwell.
In little more than a year, at an accelerating pace as the UK recession
deepened, British Steel closed the big Ravenscraig steel complex and shut
down the nearby Clydesdale tube mill, making about 4,400 people redundant.
It now employs only 1,100 people in Lanarkshire.
The speed with which the closures of the main plants came was a blessing in
disguise. It forced Scottish politicians and the local community to face
facts and embark on a recovery strategy, undistracted by the polemics which
had dogged Ravenscraig for more than a decade.
The continuing campaign to save Ravenscraig meant that until the middle of
1990, when the now privatised concern said it would shut the plant's hot
strip mill, it would have been politically suicidal for any Scottish
politician or development official to utter a word in public about reviving
the area after the steel industry had gone.
Only in 1990 was a working group set up by the Scottish Office to consider
Lanarkshire's future. The following year the Lanarkshire Development Agency
(LDA) began operating.
There is, of course, much more to Lanarkshire than steel towns. The steel
industry was concentrated in the heavily populated northern tip of the
county, where towns such as Motherwell, Coatbridge and Airdrie are part of
the Clydeside conurbation.
But Lanarkshire - the county was abolished in 1975 but still exists in
people's minds and is the area covered by the LDA - includes the town of
Lanark, one of the cradles of the industrial revolution, and extends much
futher south into the southern uplands of Scotland.
In the upper Clyde valley the big economic issue is not industrial
regeneration but improving the marketing of cattle and tomatoes. But nearly
90 per cent of Lanarkshire's 500,000 people live in the urban north of the
county. West of Motherwell and Hamilton, separated by green belt, lies the
prosperous, landscaped new town of East Kilbride with a cluster of big
foreign-owned electronics plants.
The former steel towns are far from being places of dereliction. The
Ravenscraig site, whose future is still to be decided, is a depressing
scene. But the rest of the area is not one of oppressive decay or poverty,
despite a number of derelict or vacant industrial sites.
Instead, the almost contiguous urban areas north of Motherwell look dreary,
ill-planned and in need of better roads, better industrial sites and more
open spaces.
'People expect to see a place down on its luck,' says Mr Terry Currie, the
director of business development at the LDA. 'They're surprised to find it
isn't. We're in a transitional phase, between a proud industrial past and a
dynamic future.'
The steel closures have aggravated existing problems of economic decline and
recession. Unemployment in Motherwell and Monklands districts has risen from
about 10.5 per cent at the beginning of 1990 to 12.5 per cent in mid-1993,
and male unemployment exceeds 17 per cent. But Lanarkshire is far from being
one of the worst areas of unemployment in Scotland, which the 1991 working
group warned that it would become.
In fact, Mr Donald Leigh, area manager for the Royal Bank of Scotland in
Motherwell, who has worked in Lanarkshire for 27 years, says: 'We've been
used to depressed conditions for years. The recession of the last two years
has not been so noticeable.'
Lanarkshire's problem is that along with the rundown of steel, the area's
traditional manufacturing base is under threat, with engineering companies
facing competition from eastern Europe and the Pacific rim. Too many
businesses were dependent on British Steel and the birthrate for new
companies is low. Apart from East Kilbride, the area has not attracted much
inward investment from abroad. In short, the Lanarkshire economy needs
modernising.
The regeneration effort can build on the large existing manufacturing base,
a skilled and committed workforce, and the fact that Lanarkshire is
strategically placed at the heart of Scotland's central belt, at the
crossroads of its motorway system and on the main west coast railway line.
The main aim of the LDA, whose expenditure has risen from Pounds 54m last
year to Pounds 64m this year, is to bring in new businesses and to improve
existing companies.
One of the first things the Scottish Development Agency did when the
Ravenscraig closure loomed was to buy 500 acres of land for industrial
development in north Lanarkshire. The Scottish Office then pressed the
government and the EC to create an Enterprise Zone.
The Enterprise Zone, spread over nine sites, some of which are still to be
completed, came into existence on February 1 this year. It is beginning to
attract inquiries and the first small developments have begun, although
full-scale marketing of the zone has not yet started. It is calculated that
the zone will create 8,000 new jobs over 10 years.
On the splendid Strathclyde Business Park at Bellshill, which is not in the
Enterprise Zone, the Scottish headquarters of Mercury, a bottling plant for
the distillers William Grant and a number of other plants and offices are
going up.
Work on Scotland's terminal for Channel tunnel railfreight began last month
at Mossend near Bellshill. The hope is that the terminal, to be ready in
time for the tunnel's opening next May, will lead to the setting up of
warehouses and factories on the 800 acre adjoining site.
The LDA is spending Pounds 9.5m this year to help existing Lanarkshire
companies and to stimulate start-ups. A scheme for encouraging managers to
formulate new business ideas has already led to the creation of several
little companies.
For a county that does not exist, Lanarkshire has a strong sense of local
identity and people show determination to revive their economy, with few
signs of apathy. A civic pride campaign based on the slogan Supercounty,
displayed on signs all over Lanarkshire, has been launched by local
authorities and companies.
But the challenge facing Lanarkshire is immense. Its past industrial
vocations are being whittled away and there are few obvious candidates to
take their place. Apart from the clever idea of exporting the local
expertise acquired, of necessity, in the reclamation and decontamination of
industrial land, the aim is to attract a broad mix of high technology
industries, like many other parts of Scotland.
Much of the regeneration strategy relies on outside businesses coming to
realise the advantages of a Lanarkshire location and deciding to move there.
Whether they do so depends partly on the UK and the Scottish economies
generating the necessary growth. It also depends on Lanarkshire beating
competition from other Scottish towns. Enterprise Zone status is not the
only factor influencing investors.
That is why it is so important that the regeneration campaign changes the
face and the image of Lanarkshire.
