FT  20 NOV 93 / Books: My Book of The Year - Our reviewers choose the books
they have enjoyed most published during 1993
all 1349 pages of it. Its people have remained with me vividly both as
individuals and as part of that post-Independence Indian society of which
the novel gives an amazingly complete picture. The story never loses sight
of its beautiful young heroine Lata whose choice of a partner for life is
its core; but it also deals brilliantly with many fascinating choices,
personal, political, spiritual, made by the other members of its large cast
of characters. The book is vastly long but never over-facing or boring. Here
is a contemporary novel in which you can immerse yourself happily for weeks
on end.
ANTHONY CURTIS
                             *      *      *
FEW biographies wear well. One that just might is my book for 1993 - Harold
J Laski: A Life on the Left by Isaac Kramnick and Berry Sheerman (Hamish
Hamilton, Pounds 25.00). It is an exceptionally competent, comprehensive,
readable work. A truly worthy centennial tribute. Laski has been dead 43
years, and is almost forgotten in the west. Not so in India. The
Gandhi-Laski encounter in London 1931 described here gives a fresh insight
into their characters. The authors write that,'There was a vacant chair at
every cabinet meeting in India, reserved for the ghost of Prof Harold
Laski'. That ghost still turns up in Delhi when least expected.
K. NATWAR-SINGH
                             *      *      *
MINE MUST be Margaret Thatcher's The Downing Street Years (Harper Collins,
Pounds 25.00). I found it compulsive reading, evangelistic yes, biased, not
nearly as much as I had expected. She is generous about most of her
colleagues, bears very little malice, if much pain. She is superb on the
Falklands, splendid on Scargill and dreadfully right about Europe. Too
starry perhaps about Gorbachev: and I shudder a little at her adulation of
'Ron'. Small blemishes on a magnificent career that bought a sinking Britain
safe to shore. The book has longueurs and is not well constructed, but is
head and shoulders above the waffling Macmillan or the verbose Wilson. What
a fighting spirit, what a sad loss] Read it.
JH PLUMB
                             *      *      *
MY BOOK this year is Dr Johnson &amp; Mr Savage by Richard Holmes (Hodder &amp;
Stoughton Pounds 19.99). It has always been a puzzle why Johnson, in later
life a domineering pillar of propriety, wrote in 1774 a curiously haunting
life of Richard Savage, obscure poet, drunken debtor, reprieved murderer,
self-deluded claimant of aristocratic parentage and regular biter of the
hand that fed him. Holmes most percipient of literary biographers
brilliantly analyses their short relationship in 1737-39. Savage alternated
between grand salons and lowest Grub Street; the young Johnson fresh from
the provinces fascinated by Savage's worldly charm, paced the night streets
of London with him in endless talk. This, as Holmes says is the 'story of a
friendship' and the 'biography of a biography' - in fact of the first
English biography. It is based on profound research and is wonderfully
readable.
ROBERT BLAKE
                             *      *      *
LIKE EVERY English-speaking Verdian I have been waiting a long time for Mary
Jane Phillips-Matz to finish her biography of the composer. It has been in
the works for decades, while the author - a tireless, indeed relentless
investigator - has dazzled, sometimes infuriated fellow-scholars with her
discoveries, making all of us re-examine not only beloved legends (like
Verdi's self-invented rags-to-riches story) but also traditional attitudes.
Spending months every year in Verdi's native area, the author knows every
building in Busseto, every field Verdi owned. No parish archive, no village
registry has escaped her scrutiny. At last her Verdi is here (Oxford, Pounds
30.00) A long story, it is as irresistible as the Po in full flood. Like all
biographies, it contains conjecture, some of it bold, but most of it
convincing; in any case, the detective-author fairly presents all her clues;
the reader can judge for himself.
WILLIAM WEAVER
                             *      *      *
WHAT A delight to discover Ursule Molinaro's Fat Skeletons (Serif, Pounds
7.99), a witty, pungent, short novel that targets both the feminist and
literary worlds. Having never read anything of Molarino previously, I see
from the blurb that she is 'a grand and eccentric old dame of letters' with
a long list of translations and novels to her name. This may account for the
certainty of touch and economy of words that make this story of a top woman
translator working in New York city such an effective novel. I can only say
that sparkling and amusing books in this genre are difficult to find. This
one made me laugh uproariously. It is the perfect Christmas stocking-filler.
ZARA STEINER
                             *      *      *
I FOUND great enjoyment in Madame Blavatsky's Baboon by Peter Washington
(Secker, Pounds 20). It casts a splendidly cold eye on the bizarre
collection of gurus who confected Theosophy, not least on Helena Petrovna
Blavatsky (she of the poached egg eyes and the burning glance), and on such
cranks as Charles Leadbeater (ex Anglican curate and reluctant even to shake
hands with a woman). The cast is gruesomely comic; the narrative - and its
conclusions - fascinating. And, as a tale of financial adventure, but a true
one, let me recommend Charles Gordon's The Cedar Story, (Sinclair Stevenson,
Pounds 18.99) whose subtitle - The Night the City was Saved - rightly
conveys the energy of Gordon's buccaneering narrative.
CLEMENT CRISP
                             *      *      *
MY BEST book is Francis Haskell's History and its Images: Art and the
Interpretation of the Past (Yale University Press, Pounds 29.95.) We take it
for granted that art illumines the past. Yet Haskell shows it was not until
the 18th century that historians became confident about using visual
evidence. He explores scholars' views over three centuries of argument as to
what art can reveal about the past. If an emperor's portrait makes him look
evil, was he? Does art reveal a nation's moral health? Can art prophecy -
did David's 'Oath of the Horatii' foretell the French Revolution?
Haskell marshals hundreds of clever men and batty judgments, forgotten names
and towering figures such as Gibbon, Michelet, Burckhardt, Ruskin. This is a
long book written with vigour, wit, and clarity. Should you get
side-tracked, on no account miss the final chapter on Johann Huizinga,
author of the Waning of the Middle Ages.
PATRICIA MORISON
                             *      *      *
HISTORY SEEN through personal experience may gain in vividness and passion
what it loses in balance and breadth. Richard Lamb's War in Italy 1943-45: A
Brutal Story (John Murray, Pounds 19.99), my choice, is an account of his
two years fighting with the Royal Italian Army, while Italy starved and
struggled between opposing armies and ideologies and armed factions of its
own, disease and chaos increased and liberators often seemed like enemies.
In telling his tale very much from the Italian point of view, Lamb is often
idiosyncratic in judgment, but he deals with aspects of the total upheaval
that may have been missed by more orthodox historians, and his love of Italy
and Italians shines through the horrors he recalls with passionate,
sometimes angry, regret.
ISABEL QUIGLY
                             *      *      *
I WAS thrilled to come across Christians Morgenstern's Songs from the
Gallows (Yale University Press Pounds 16.95) in a brilliant new translation
by Walter Arndt. Morgenstern was a German nonsense poet whose upside down
world and playful magic language resembled Lewis Carroll's. He began writing
his fantastical gallows songs in the 1900s, after a happy outing passed
Gallows Hill, near Potsdam. His characters include a watch that winds up and
down by drinking glasses of Mocha and Scotch, a drivel-shrivelling machine
and a menagerie of weird and melancholy chattering beasts. His metaphysical
jokes and haunting images work well in English; the German original also
appears alongside each translation. The volume is beautifully produced, and
should win this great lyric/comic poet a wide new audience.
JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER
                             *      *      *
AUDEN SAID that for writing well, Time would pardon even Paul Claudel. There
is no denying a degree of political incorrectness in Alan Clark's Diaries
(Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, Pounds 20.00) but it would be a very blinkered
spirit who could not enjoy them until time has drained all Clark's
offensiveness away. Pleasure springs not just from every page but from
virtually every sentence. There is of course, a lot of politics, including
some wonderful stories. But this is not a book to be valued primarily for
what is going on in Westminster and Whitehall. It is what was going on in
Clark that counts. Like all good autobiographers, he relishes his faults no
less than his virtues. His clear, un-self-justifying eye, his exposed heart
and his exact prose provide a rivetting experience: comic, provocative and
elegiac by turns.
KIT MCMAHON
                             *      *      *
LENIN'S TOMB by David Remnick (Random House, Dollars 25.00) came my way in
the course of work, and I certainly did not expect it would fit that
splendidly composite cliche, unputdownable. Remnick redeems a whole
generation of reporters who provided phoney descriptions of the late,
unlamented Soviet world. It was his - and our - good luck that he was in
Moscow during the years when Gorbachev brought the whole edifice down.
Evidently energetic and curious by nature, he gives you a sense of what it
was like to experience this weird historic event. This is a real-life
thriller written by someone unafraid to pass moral judgments - and all in
graceful prose too.
DAVID PRYCE-JONES
                             *      *      *
I CHOOSE Christopher Hope's The Love Songs of Nathan J. Swirsky (Macmillan,
Pounds 13.99), a small, wry, often wonderfully funny addition to the
literature of childhood. In a way, this is To Kill a Mockingbird turned
upside down: for these vignettes of suburban white Johannesburg in the 1950s
add up to a pessimistic vision of the South African apartheid society taking
shape at the time. Hope's writing shows here a new economy, a glancing
lightness, which makes his hitting of comic targets all the more precise.
MAX LOPPERT
                             *      *      *
AT LAST there is a UK edition of Raymond Carver's selected short stories,
Where I'm Calling From (Harvill, Pounds 8.99) compiled by the American
writer just before he died at 50 in 1988. Carver was the son of a saw-mill
worker and a waitress; he worked as a porter, petrol pump attendant,
deliveryman and dictionary salesman. Publishers ignored him until 1976. Each
story is a sideways glance at life from a passing train; and Carver's
melancholic wit and sad actualities are the best you will find outside
Chekhov. These 37 pieces cover domestic, family and professional life, each
wonderfully different but reassuringly similar. After reading them, as
Carver says, 'maybe our hearts or our intellects will have moved off the peg
just a little from where they were before.' But you have to be in rude
psychic health: Carver offers no cheer to the unhappy.
ANDREW ST GEORGE
                             *      *      *
VED MEHTA'S delightful Up at Oxford (John Murray, Pounds 17.99), reminded me
of my own days there in the late 1950s. The Indian English Literature
student, with his unending supply of girls eager to read him poetry and
novels, was already something of a legend. His book is generous, even
reverential, treating the absurdities he encountered as lovable examples of
English eccentricity. 'What games do you intend to play?' asks the Master on
their first meeting, 'Cricket, rugby, tennis?' The frontispiece shows him
playing croquet. Ved is blind.
WILLIAM ST CLAIR
                             *      *      *
A MAYOR who attacks picnickers in the Botanical Garden with a Stinger
missile. Outraged citizens who tie him to four different cars and drive off
in opposite directions. A schoolmaster who keeps the remains in his freezer
until he can bury them piece by piece . . . The book I enjoyed most this
year was Elect Mr Robinson for a Better World (Heinemann, Pounds 9.99), a
splendidly funny first novel by Donald Antrim. It's an absurdist satire on
small-town America, in the finest traditions of Heller and Roth. It passed
with barely a ripple when first published in England. But everyone who
bothered to review it enjoyed it enormously. They could hardly have done
otherwise.
NICHOLAS BEST
                             *      *      *
ANYONE WITH a taste for spicy food and wild tales of the Mexican Revolution
will enjoy Like Water for Hot Chocolate by Laura Esquivel (Doubleday Pounds
13.99/Pounds 6.99). The recipes are authentic ones from the turn of the
century and full of mouth- watering detail, but do not expect to find the
ingredients in your local supermarket. The linking love story is as exotic
as the food, a kind of soap opera gone mad which leaves a strange, sad
after-taste.
ALANNAH HOPKIN
                             *      *      *
MANY GREAT religious paintings have been produced by profoundly unholy
artists but for Fra Angelico, art was an expression of faith. That has not
stopped most art historians form ducking the problem of what it means to be
both friar and painter. William Hood in his exceptionally beautifully
illustrated Fra Angelico at San Marco (Yale University Press, Pounds 45.00)
look at the different kinds of decoration of the various zones of the
monastery of San Marco in Florence as aids to devotion. He convinced me at
least of beginning to see these works as a Dominican monk at the monastery
might have seen them in the 15th century. It is rather like having surtitles
that allow you to understand what is going on in the opera rather than
simply enjoy a divine noise. The supple - at times poetic - monograph is a
model of its kind.
SUSAN MOORE
                             *      *      *
I HAVE been driving around the country a great deal this year and have been
converted to the Audiobook, which is, apparently, a fast-rising medium.
Nothing speeds a journey so happily. Consider, for example, the recently
released set of Derek Jacobi's magnificent reading of The Iliad in Robert
Fagles' wonderful new translation (Penguin Audiobooks, Pounds 19.99). To
listen to these six cassettes (playing time about 9 hours - call it 600 to
700 Motorway miles) is revelatory: Homer brought to life. In less elevated
mode, John Le Carre reads his own new novel, The Night Manager (Random House
Audiobooks, four tapes, Pounds 11.99). Le Carre is a famous mimic and there
is much fascination in hearing the accents and inflexions he gives his cast
of warring Whitehall bureaucrats and City villains. It is almost better than
the book, except that, as with so many of these tapes, it is 'abridged'. I
would argue that abridgement is A Bad Thing, and recommend you ideally to
try 'Cover-to-Cover', a splendid firm that refuses to tolerate such
commercial barbarity as cutting down the author's text.
JDF JONES
                             *      *      *
I WAS struck by Anne Wallace's unusual choice of subject-matter and
independent-minded approach in Walking, Literature and English Culture: The
Origins and Uses of the Peripatetic in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford
University Press, Pounds 30.00). Much of the book is concerned with the
change in attitudes to walking that took place between the 1790s and the
1820s, as a result of a transport revolution that made it possible to see
wandering round on foot as a matter of deliberate choice - rather than an
activity confined to the poor, the raffish and the criminal. Wallace
discusses not only writers such as Wordsworth, who explicitly link poetry to
pedestrianism, but also some less obvious exponents of 'the peripatetic',
such as Jane Austen. The topic seems especially interesting now that walking
is, perhaps, on the verge of being reclassified as eccentric or aberrant -
as has long been the case in American suburbs.
CHLOE CHARD
                             *      *      *
I VOTE for the richly detailed bleakness of Penelope Lively's Cleopatra's
Sister (Viking, Pounds 14.99), a journey through the problems of fate and
choice for a couple who meet and fall in love when the passengers on an
aircraft are kidnapped. This happens somewhere west of Egypt (where she set
Moon Tiger - this new book develops from it) in Callimbia, a by-passed
country where Berenice, sister of Cleopatra, once reigned. How different
history could have been if Antony had turned to visit her instead. Lively
tells a sharp story, making life's improbabilities painfully vivid. I liked
her understanding of the compulsion of the fossils that drives the
palaeontologist hero; her sense of the nightmares of travel in much of the
world (not that they deter travellers); and the fragile truth of her
indecisive ending.
GERALD CADOGAN
                             *      *      *
I thought that Alan Clark's Diaries were snobbish, self-indulgent and not
written from the inside. On another hand, so many other people seem to have
enjoyed them that they are clearly a candidate for book of the year. They
are also more readable than the other political memoirs published as the
year went on. Clark can write.
I admired John Campbell's biography of Sir Edward Heath and Philip Ziegler's
of Lord Wilson, but would recommend neither for holiday reading except to
the most earnest. The first 100 pages or so of Sir Peregrine Worsthorne's
Tricks of Memory are wonderful - skip the rest.
It was also good to see a biography of William Archer, the man who brought
Ibsen to the English stage. New translations of Ibsen are less stilted than
anything that Archer produced, but at least Archer saw the talent. The
biography is by Peter Whitebrook and published by Methuen.
MALCOLM RUTHERFORD
