FT  19 JAN 93 / Survey of The European Single Market (11): It started with
coal, iron and steel - Ian Davidson surveys Europe's 40-year route march
towards a friendly union of historic enemies
TRADE liberalisation has consistently been the most successful aspect of the
process of European integration, and the Single European Market brings it to
a triumphant conclusion.
Paradoxically, however, Europe's political leaders have always, just as
consistently, aspired to carry European integration into the superior
uplands of high politics. In a sense, the history of the European Community
is made up of the antithesis and alternation between these two themes.
From the beginning, the founder members of the European Community believed
that they were engaged in an essentially political enterprise, and they made
repeated attempts to put flesh on these aspirations. Yet, their efforts to
build an integrated Community with an explicitly political character have
run into repeated difficulties.
By contrast, the negotiation of the removal of barriers and the progressive
liberation of trade turned out to be surprisingly quick and easy, first in
the inaugural 1960s, and again in the past seven years.
The political aspirations of the high priests of European integration are
apparent in the names they use: the Brussels-based organisation started out
as the European Economic Community; it then became simply the European
Community, and now in the Maastricht Treaty it is renamed simply the
European Union.
Yet, the title which best matches its most unquestionable achievements is
the unofficial name long used by most ordinary people: the Common Market.
Even as they were embarking on economic integration, the founding member
states aimed to give their enterprise an explicitly political character. The
Schuman Plan of 1950 broke new ground in economic cooperation and trade
liberation, by bringing the coal and steel industries of the Six member
states under common rules; but the ulterior purpose of this new economic
enterprise, as described at the time by French foreign minister Robert
Schuman, was mainly political, to make war between France and Germany not
only 'unthinkable but materially impossible'.
Similarly, when the European Economic Community was formed at the end of
that decade, the central treaty responsibility of Walter Hallstein, the
first president of the European Commission, was to oversee the removal of
internal customs duties and the installation of a common external tariff.
But his constant refrain was: 'We are not in business, we are in politics.'
This antithesis between the political and the economic has meant that the
history of the European Community has been marked by an alternation between
attempts to get into overtly high politics, and lower-key phases of economic
regulation and liberalisation.
Repeatedly, the political leaders from the six founding member states have
tried to accelerate the pace of events, by building a new European
bridgehead on the high ground of politics. Just as repeatedly, their
political projects foundered. But each time they followed up their political
defeats by new and usually successful initiatives in the field of economic
or trade liberalisation.
This antithesis between high politics and pragmatic trade liberalisation has
been the most consistent single theme in the running policy debate between
the members of the Community, and it has regularly pitted the United Kingdom
against the original Six. Indeed, that argument, which is still going on
today, is the central key to the Community's development.
In the post-war negotiations which led to the creation of the Paris-based
Organisation for European Economic Cooperation (now the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development), Britain opposed the supranational
ideas advanced by France. In effect Britain won, because the OECD is still a
loose organisation of sovereign states without supranational powers.
But the argument did not end there. The next time it was the French who won,
since the primary characteristic of the first European Community, the
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) founded in 1951, was that it had a
High Authority with significant supranational powers. The British stayed
away, but the Six went ahead.
Euphoria over the launch of the ECSC caused the Six, and especially the
French, to underestimate the difficulties of political integration. When the
Korean War broke out in 1950, and America pressed for the re-arming of West
Germany, the Six threw themselves enthusiastically into negotiations for the
creation of a European army. These concluded in 1952 with the signature of a
treaty for a European Defence Community, from which the British again stood
aside; but after long and fevered debates in France, the EDC treaty was
eventually rejected in the French National Assembly in 1954, through the
combined opposition of the Gaullists and the Communists.
The defeat of the EDC caused a major psychological shock among the Six. But
the momentum behind the European idea was nevertheless so strong that they
quickly developed another new initiative, for a Common Market. They
negotiated the Treaty of Rome in 1955-57, and launched the European Economic
Community (EEC) in 1958. Once again the British stayed away.
This was the moment when the Six finally began to find the right balance
between politics and economic liberalisation, between pre-ordained
objectives and future policy making.
In one sense the Rome Treaty was obviously an attempt to compensate for the
failure of the Defence Community, by launching a more cautious initiative at
the work-a-day level of trade liberalisation.
But the originality of the EEC was that it embedded the first policy
objectives of the Rome Treaty, the elimination of internal tariffs and the
creation of a customs union over a 12-year transition period, in an
ingenious machinery of common institutions, so as to enable this new
Community to improvise in the world after the customs union.
In practice, the removal of customs tariffs proved remarkably painless. The
French had feared that their industry would be unable to compete with that
of Germany; that was why they insisted from the outset that the industrial
customs union must be balanced by a common agricultural policy. In the
event, their fears proved groundless: like the other member states, their
economy was buoyed up by the rapid growth of the 1960s, and the Six were
able to complete their customs union in mid-1968, a year ahead of schedule.
The irony of this thriving Common Market was that it became the back-drop
for a re-run of the old battles between nationalists and supranationalists.
This time, however, it was France in the person of President Charles de
Gaulle which championed the nationalist cause from within; while the
British, who had refused membership when it was freely available, now wanted
to join but were refused entry by the French.
In 1961-62 de Gaulle tried to emasculate the European Community with a new
inter-governmental Treaty restoring political authority to the member
states. And in 1965 he returned to the fray, with a frontal attack on the
principle of majority voting under the Rome Treaty. Neither attack
succeeded; but the second left the Community bruised and politically
traumatised.
This political trauma lasted long after de Gaulle left the scene in 1969.
For the euphoria of the rapid economic growth of the 1960s gave way to
Euro-pessimism in the 1970s and early 1980s.
The international monetary system was thrown off balance by the US
abandonment of Bretton Woods in 1971. The world economy was thrown into
stagflation by the two oil crises of 1974 and 1979. And inside the
Community, it became apparent that tariff liberalisation was only the first
step towards a free market; member states were compensating for the
slow-down with national regulations, state subsidies and industrial policies
whose purpose and effect was protectionism.
The Community attempted to grapple with the consequences of the slow-down,
by searching for a follow-on programme for the customs union. In 1969 it
issued a declaratory call for an Economic and Monetary Union in Europe, and
again in 1972; but in practice nothing became of the idea.
It was not until the end of the decade that Europe began to recover its
inventive energy. In 1979, President Giscard d'Estaing of France and
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of Germany provided their solution to the
instability of the international monetary system, with their scheme for a
European Monetary System (EMS), which has since become the basic building
block of the more recent plans for Economic and Monetary Union.
Five years later (in 1985) the Twelve resolved that they must after all
settle down to turning the customs union into a true Common Market, by
removing the many remaining non-tariff barriers and other obstacles to
complete commercial freedom.
Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the then British prime minister, saw the Single
European Act as an attractively free-trade alternative to the more
politically ambitious projects which France and Germany seemed to be
promoting.
But as so often in the EC, Mrs Thatcher's ideological victory in favour of
simple free trade turned out to be more incomplete and more treacherous than
she may have hoped.
The immediate price of a commitment to a single European market, with its
four freedoms for goods, persons, services and capital, was a significant
enlargement of the role of majority voting. The deferred price, was that the
logic of the single market paved the way for the Delors report, which in
turn paved the way for the Maastricht Treaty and the programme for Economic
and Monetary Union.
These latest grand schemes have not necessarily been any better designed
than the EDC of 1952, and they may collapse under their own weight. But the
central fact about the Maastricht treaty is that it is an attempt to unite,
at a high level, the political and the economic themes of European
integration.
