FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (5): Key to future prosperity - North
American Free Trade Agreement
IN the frontier town of Laredo, no one has been waiting for the North
American Free Trade Agreement.
This fast-growing agglomeration of rail yards, truck depots and warehouses,
perched just on the US side of the Transamerican highway, bears testament to
the rapid build-up in US-Mexican trade since the mid-1980s, even without a
free trade agreement between the two countries.
Yet if the North American Free Trade Agreement is not ratified, the future
prosperity of towns such as Laredo - and the Texan economy as a whole -
looks much less assured.
More than a third of US exports to Mexico pass through this ramshackle
border crossing: 671,000 trucks crossed the two bridges that span the Rio
Grande at this point last year, nearly twice as many as three years
previously.
The demand for facilities to handle this burgeoning trade flow has made the
town of Laredo probably the fastest growing in all of Texas. Based on the
building permits issued by the city government, for properties worth Dollars
150m this year, it has been growing at an average of more than 20 per cent a
year for each of the past five years.
Employment on the Texas side of the border has jumped by 40 per cent over
the same period, to about 55,000.
The reason for this feverish growth: Mexico's decision to sign the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt). Joining the international trade
liberalisation movement took tariffs on US goods in Mexico down from 80 per
cent or 100 per cent in some cases to an average of only 8 per cent, says Mr
Peter Vargas, Laredo's town manager. That fall has had a far more
significant effect on trade flows between the US and Mexico than is likely
from abolition of the tariffs that remain. 'We've already seen all the
increase with Gatt,' says Mr Vargas. 'I don't think Nafta will be a dramatic
increase.'
However, even though Laredo has boomed without Nafta - and Texas as a whole
has benefited from the increased trade flows - continued prosperity may
depend on the free trade agreement being adopted. To many in Laredo, it is
like an insurance policy - a confirmation that Mexico will continue to
pursue the liberalising economic policies which have been so beneficial in
recent years.
'It will institutionalise in an international agreement the economic
practices that have been put in place by the Mexican president,' says Mr
Vargas. Like others, though, he warns of the danger of Mexican retaliation
if the US Congress refuses to ratify the treaty: 'If Mexico decided to
withdraw from Gatt, it would have a devastating effect on the Texas
economy.'
Across the Rio Grande, on the Mexican side of the border, the mirror-image
city of Nuevo Laredo has been immersed in its own pursuit of new prosperity.
It is a distorting mirror, though: Nuevo Laredo's packed-together tenements
and bustling streets are a reminder of the economic gulf that lies between
the two cities, and their respective countries.
Nuevo Laredo, like other Mexican towns along the border with the US, has
already seen the benefits of US investment. Under the Maquiladora programme,
begun in the 1960s, assembly plants along the Mexican side of the border can
receive components from the US side tariff-free, provided the finished
articles are re-exported to the US.
Some 20,000 people work in the 70-odd Maquiladoras in Nuevo Laredo. Most of
the new jobs have come since 1986, when there were only 22 plants employing
a total of 4,000 people.
Production standards and attention to quality here have been driven by
demanding US managers, for whom Mexico has become a significant source of
low-wage assembly jobs.
'Compromisos de produccion' (production targets) declares the the wall sign
as you enter the Elamex plant in Nuevo Laredo where 200 workers earn Dollars
6 a day each mending portable telephones sent across from the US side. Many
of these telephones have already been shipped back to the US for repair from
China and other countries in the Far East, before being sent on across the
Mexican border.
The target is for no more than 10,000 defects per 1m - or 1 per cent.
Another sign shows the monthly pattern so far this year, putting the average
defect rate so far at 9,300 per 1m.
Whatever the outcome for Nafta, such operations - which operate with a
skilled workforce and an attention to quality - should continue to prosper,
even though the initial reason for setting them up on the border would
disappear in a free-trade environment.
In the same way that Laredo has benefited from its position on the border
between Mexico and the US, the state of Texas as a whole has been well
situated to take advantage of the growing trade links. According to a 1991
study by Perryman Consultants, an economic consultancy based in Waco,
Texas's exports to Mexico amount to Dollars 10bn a year. Directly and
indirectly, this export business contributes Dollars 27.6bn annually to the
Texan economy and supports 290,000 jobs in the state.
The successful completion of Nafta would cement Texas' position at the heart
of trade flows with Mexico. Should the agreement fail, though, one of the
state's biggest engines of future economic growth could easily stall.
