FT  01 JUL 93 / CBI urges plan to cut deficit
HIGHER SPENDING on education and cuts in key areas of social security
spending were urged yesterday by the Confederation of British Industry. The
suggestions are part of a plan to help industry while cutting the Pounds
50bn government deficit.
The employers' body called for phased reductions in public spending over the
next three years, bringing the total in 1996-97 to Pounds 10bn less than the
government's target.
Spending on training, export support and transport infrastructure should be
protected, while outlays in areas such as child benefit and unemployment pay
should be aimed more at the needy, it says.
The ideas are part of a CBI plan to reduce the gap between government
spending and income from an expected 8 per cent of gross domestic product
this financial year to 3 per cent by 1996-97.
It says the Treasury does not go far enough in its projections, which
envisage the deficit being cut only to 4.5 per cent of GDP in three years.
The CBI also wants the government to freeze its pay bill next year. This
could be helped by shifting control of civil-service wages away from the
Treasury and towards individual government departments.
In this way, pay for key groups of public officials could be set according
to local factors such as productivity.
The CBI wants ministers to set up an agency to bring in private finance to
big capital investment projects and so reduce overall state spending.
Mr Howard Davies, the CBI's director-general, said the ideas on containing
spending were 'not pie in the sky' but realistic. They were based partly on
what had been achieved in cost-control in the private sector during the
recession.
Mr Davies said he was 'disappointed' that Mr Kenneth Clarke had not been
tougher in his comments about cutting public spending. The CBI did not rule
out the need for tax rises taking effect from next April to add to those
already announced, although 'tax increases on companies would threaten the
investment and export-led growth that the UK economy needs'.
