FT  01 DEC 93 / DTI man outlines assumption on Iraq
Machine-tool manufacturers would have assumed that their arms-related
shipments to Iraq were being condoned by the government, an export licensing
official admitted yesterday.
Mr Anthony Steadman, director of the Department of Trade and Industry's
export licensing unit from May 1987 to November 1991, said that with
hindsight this would have been the case. Mr Steadman was outlining to the
Scott inquiry the behind-the-scenes preparations for a meeting between
machine-tool companies and Mr Alan Clark, the trade minister in January
1988.
At the meeting, attended among others by Matrix Churchill, the Coventry
machine-tool manufacturer, companies were worried because the government had
frozen their export licences for Iraq before they had completed their
shipments.
Mr Steadman told the hearing that both the DTI and the manufacturers were
aware that the machine tools were going to Iraq for munitions use, but
neither party mentioned it at the meeting.
Mr Steadman, an official with crucial responsibilities in one of the most
important areas of the inquiry, said the nature of the exports was not
raised because of concerns to protect intelligence sources.
Ms Presily Baxendale, counsel for the inquiry, said: 'Everyone at the
meeting has at the back of their mind the knowledge that the DTI's concern
is about the equipment being used for munitions.'
Mr Steadman agreed, but denied there was anything strange about the fact
that it was not mentioned. 'We didn't want to be specific,' he said.
He added: 'I think we didn't want to disclose the extent of what we know.'
Mr Steadman said the manufacturers would have known of the DTI's concerns.
Asked by Lord Justice Scott whether he thought it would have been a 'natural
assumption' for the manufacturers to believe that the DTI did not mind about
the exports, Mr Steadman said: 'In hindsight, perhaps yes.'
Discussion at the meeting was a central issue in the trial last year of
three Matrix Churchill executives accused of illegally exporting machine
tools to Iraq. The case collapsed after Mr Clark admitted he had been
economical with the 'actualite' in his approach to the manufacturers.
