FT  18 MAR 93 / Simple formula for friction: US drug companies are joining
battle against healthcare reform plans
Battle-lines are being drawn between the Clinton administration and the US
pharmaceuticals industry over the president's determination to remake
America's healthcare system and put a cap on drug prices.
The idea of imposing price controls - hinted at this week by Mr Ira
Magaziner, a top White House adviser - is fuelling the already fiery debate.
The options range from placing ceilings on health insurance premiums to a
freeze on medical costs.
The controversy over Mr Clinton's healthcare thinking began even before he
was elected last November and was reignited last month when the president
said he was shocked at the behaviour of the drug industry. He claimed that
the sector's price rises had been unjustifiable, its profits excessive and
its investment on advertising and lobbying - Dollars 1bn more than its
spends on R&amp;D annually - unwarranted.
Mr Roy Vagelos, chairman of Merck, the world's largest drug company, who
supported Mr Clinton's presidential campaign, said he was disappointed and
pained by the attack. In an unprecedented step, he published an open letter
to the president in five US newspapers, defending the industry's position.
Mr Kirk Raab, president of Genentech, a leading US biotechnology company
which researches genetically engineered drugs, warned that 'if there are
price controls on new products it could stifle research and development'.
The war of words between drug industry executives and the White House has
caught the public's imagination, becoming a prime item on television news
and a subject for talk shows. A large part of the controversy revolves
around the role that Mrs Hillary Rodham Clinton has been assigned as head of
the White House taskforce on healthcare reform.
Mrs Clinton is supposed to produce a comprehensive set of reforms by May 1.
Her role in devising a scheme to expand healthcare coverage to every
American while cutting costs has raised hackles among conservative
politicians uncomfortable with the idea of a first lady who makes policy.
Although the reforms have yet to be announced, concerns about their scope
and possible legislation to enforce them have hit pharmaceuticals stocks.
Since Mr Clinton's election in November, American drug shares have
underperformed the US market by 18 per cent. Shares in Merck and Pfizer have
fallen by 20 per cent and 27 per cent respectively.
At the root of the administration's determination to overhaul the healthcare
system has been a sharp increase in costs. Between 1980 and 1992, costs -
including prices charged by hospitals, doctors, laboratories, equipment
makers and drug companies - increased at more than double the rate of
inflation. Health expenditure as a proportion of GDP rose from 7 per cent in
1965 to 12 per cent in 1990. It is now Dollars 800bn a year.
'However you measure it, healthcare costs are killing America. US society
just cannot afford to keep spending this much on health. Medical inflation
is out of control and it is not even delivering better health. Just look at
the US's poor infant mortality rate,' says Mr Curtis Thorne, head of
pharmacy at Cigma, which manages healthcare programmes for US companies.
For politicians looking for a solution, the pharmaceuticals industry has
proved an easy target. Between 1980 and 1992 drug prices increased by 128
per cent - nearly six times the rate of inflation, according to the Bureau
of Labour Statistics. Prescription medicines are far more expensive in the
US than elsewhere: on average, a drug costing Dollars 1 in America costs 67
cents in Canada and 60 cents in Europe.
The industry's high profitability - conspicuous during the recessionary
early 1990s - has also made it vulnerable to complaints. Senator David
Pryor, a Democrat from Arkansas and a leading critic of the industry, says:
'Drug companies have been making returns on sales three times greater than
the average for the Fortune 500 companies, and twice the return on equity.
Whatever measure of profitability you take, pharmaceuticals companies come
out on top.'
Mr Bob Cawthorn, chairman and chief executive of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the
Franco-American drug company, admits: 'The pharmaceuticals industry has
become the whipping boy of politicians because its price rises and profits
have been so visible.'
Drug groups have argued they are not to blame for the healthcare spending
crisis. Only 7 per cent of US healthcare spending is on medicines, they
maintain.
'Cutting the drug sector's profits would not have that much of impact. If
you cut all the industry's profits and cut all its research that would only
reduce healthcare spending at most by 3 per cent,' says Mr Cawthorn. 'That
would not solve the problem for government, patients or the employers that
pay for insurance.'
The industry also says it needs high prices to fund the research and
development of new medicines. The drug companies say that society needs a
viable and innovative industry if it is to find a response to Aids, cancer,
Alzheimer's and other illnesses.
Such arguments have not impressed politicians who have been emboldened by
public support for aggressive measures. Some members of Congress are taking
advantage of the drug sector's poor public image to launch attacks both
inside Congress and in the media.
Indeed, the drug sector looks like replacing the chemical or oil sectors as
the industry held in least esteem by the public, says Mr Henry Wendt,
chairman of SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group.
The sector's poor image stems partly from its bungled response to pressure
for price cuts. Last year, 10 leading pharmaceuticals groups, including
Merck and Pfizer of the US, Glaxo and ICI of the UK, and Roche of
Switzerland, pledged they would in future not increase prices by more than
the rate of inflation - on average.
Few consumers and politicians noticed the words 'on average'. Inevitably,
the prices of some drugs rose faster than the rate of inflation, even the if
the groups' average prices were within the set limit.
Moreover, prices offered to bulk buyers of drugs such as Medco, a company
that specialises in selling cheaply to company healthcare plans, are often
at a discount. That means there is an increasingly uneven price burden for
consumers. Many older Americans, whose insurance fails to cover the cost of
medicines, have been left shouldering large price rises. Senator Pryor
claims the drug groups broke their promises and should not be trusted.
'The announcements were ambiguous,' says Mr Wendt at SmithKline Beecham. He
says his group's price increases were limited to 1.6 per cent last year.
'The industry has reacted too slowly to concerns about pricing. . These find
it easiest to defend the status quo. Senior executives have not shown
sufficient leadership. We are at the 11th hour and the 59th minute,' says Mr
Wendt. He believes it may be too late for the industry to head off the
administration's reforms.
The exact nature of the measures being considered by the new administration
remain unclear. 'Nobody, probably not even Mrs Clinton's task force, yet
knows what will be proposed on May 1,' says Mr Cawthorn at Rhone-Poulenc
Rorer.
The industry, shocked by the relentless attacks by Democratic politicians
and facing reform measures from the White House, is launching a last-ditch
attempt to protect itself.
This month, Mr Wendt issued a rallying call for the sector to negotiate a
new social contract between the pharmaceuticals industry and society. 'We
must show our customers that medicines are good value,' he said. He called
for the industry to engage in price restraint and to invest in studies that
not only showed that drugs were safe and effective, but that they were
cost-effective as well.
But there is little time to get this message across. Almost daily assaults
by congressmen have started to take their toll, while a fresh attack by Mrs
Clinton is unlikely to leave the industry unscathed.
