FT  30 JUN 93 / An economist with political nous: Larry Summers has made his
mark
IN POLITICS your job is as important as you make it. This, at any rate,
appears to be the modus operandi of Mr Lawrence Summers, the forceful
under-secretary for international affairs at the US treasury.
Mr Summers is only the third-ranking official at the treasury; yet this has
not stopped him from speaking out authoritatively on a wide range of issues,
some of which would appear to be the responsibility of other departments.
For example, in a series of speeches - most recently to Japanese businessmen
in Tokyo - Mr Summers has set out the general principles underlying trade
relations between Japan and the US.
Mr David Mulford, who held Mr Summers' job in the Bush administration,
tended to focus more narrowly on the financial services sector and left
general trade policy to the US trade representative or the commerce
secretary, the two top trade officials.
While many appointees of President Bill Clinton are still struggling to find
their feet, Mr Summers has set about rapidly carving out a position of
influence within the administration.
His stature in part reflects his having served the perfect apprenticeship
for his job.
As chief economist at the World Bank for two years up to last November's
election, Mr Summers became familiar with nearly all the issues now
confronting him, such as economic reform in Russia, policy co-ordination
between Group of Seven countries and third world development.
He also had a chance to build important personal relationships with leading
economic policy makers in Europe and Japan.
But Mr Summers also brings intellectual gifts to the job. Still technically
on leave from Harvard University, Mr Summers has just won an award he long
coveted: the John Bates Clark Medal, presented every two years to the
'outstanding American economist under the age of 40.'
Academics do occasionally get political posts but it is rare for a young
economist to drop research for the hurly-burly of Washington politics.
As most members of Mr Clinton's economic team have been fully absorbed with
domestic policy - especially the struggle to win congressional support for
the deficit-cutting economic package, Mr Summers has had a relatively free
hand to mould international policy.
He has been instrumental in shaping a two-pronged global strategy consisting
of a 're-invigorated multilateral effort' to strengthen global economic
growth and an 'export-activist' trade policy designed to open markets and
make other countries 'bear a greater responsibility for supporting the
global trading system.'
In both areas Mr Summers has tried to present policy in terms likely to
appeal to Washington's Group of Seven partners.
For example, he encouraged his boss, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, to stress that
economic co-operation is a 'two-way street' in which the US will respect the
views of allies.
Viewed from Tokyo, Mr Summers' brand of co-operation looks more like
coercion: Tokyo is being pressed hard to adopt a more expansionary fiscal
policy and to halve its current account surplus as a fraction of national
income.
Mr Summers has been active on many other fronts. He is one of the
administration's strongest proponents of more generous US and international
support for Russian economic reforms.
Soon after arriving at the treasury he began to put pressure on the
International Monetary Fund to agree new more flexible rules for lending to
formerly communist countries.
The so-called 'Systemic Transformation Facility' was duly announced in April
and the IMF announced the first tranche of a Dollars 3bn loan to Russia this
week.
Mr Summers is also showing greater sensitivity to the needs of developing
countries than his Republican predecessors. He has signalled that the US
would join other industrialised countries in offering more generous debt
relief to low-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere.
He is putting his inside knowledge of flaws in World Bank operational
procedures to good use. He has pressed the World Bank and other development
institutions to sharpen their focus on poverty relief and alter the way they
conduct business by placing less emphasis on the approval of loans and more
on the supervision of projects.
