FT  26 FEB 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russians meeting Espy today to
discuss grain debt defaults
A HIGH-level delegation of Russian officials will meet US secretary of
agriculture Mike Espy today to discuss Russia's mounting grain debt defaults
and seek a solution to the credit crisis that has stalled US grain exports
to the former Soviet Union since November.
However, US grain trade groups do not expect the visit to produce a quick
solution to the credit impass.
Mr Aleskey Shokhin, first deputy prime minister of Russia, and a party to
Russia's Paris Club debt negotiations, will lead the delegation. Mr Leonid
Cheshinsky, president of the Russian domestic grain agency Roskhleboprodukt,
and Mr Oleg Klimov, president of the semi-private Exportkhleb grain-buying
agency, will accompany Mr Shokhin, as will deputy finance minister Mr Andrei
Vavilov.
The delegation will stay in Washington until next Wednesday, visiting
congress and members of the Clinton administration. The visit precedes a
meeting between Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, and Russian
foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev in Geneva on Thursday.
Mr Espy met grain trade representatives on Wednesday to discuss possible
financing alternatives in advance of the Russian visit. Mr Nelson Denlinger,
executive vice president of US Wheat Associates, said Mr Espy tried to
dispel the notion that he had arrived at a solution to the Russian credit
problem. 'I don't think there are any simple solutions on the table,' Mr
Denlinger said.
For one thing, Mr Espy has said any plan would have to be co-ordinated
through an 11 agency committee that includes the Treasury and the State
Department.
In the meeting, the North American Export Grain Association proposed that
the US form a fund to buy out Russia's bad loans and then place the country
on a longer-term loan programme. The plan, while allowing Russia to resume
grain purchases, would be expensive. It would also contrast sharply with US
Department of Agriculture staff proposals that Russia be given direct food
aid while allowing the credit arrears to mount.
'My reading of the (NAEGA) plan is, given current sentiment to cut
programmes and reduce the deficit, that it would not fly (in Washington),'
Mr Denlinger said.
CIS countries are Dollars 367.7m in arrears on US-backed grain loans. Bank
claims against the defaults have begun to rise. To date, five banks, all of
them foreign, have made claims totalling Dollars 6.7m, and the USDA has paid
out Dollars 5.6m against those claims.
