FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Rhone-Poulenc sell-off price
fixed
THE French government yesterday launched its second big privatisation. It
has set a price of FFr135 per share for individual investors in
Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals and pharmaceuticals group.
The price is lower than expected by most analysts and compares with the
FFr153.6 at which Rhone-Poulenc's shares closed yesterday.
It reflects the government's desire to attract the French public and
maintain momentum in its plans to sell 21 public sector groups.
Individual investors will now have six days to buy shares.
The price for institutional investors will be set by a book-building process
and will be announced next week. There may also be a clawback of shares for
individuals if, as expected, the issue is oversubscribed.
Mr Edmond Alphandery, the economy minister, estimated, however, that the
sale of the government's 43 per cent stake in Rhone-Poulenc was likely to
raise about FFr13bn (Dollars 2.2bn) compared with the FFr28bn received from
last month's privatisation of Banque Nationale de Paris.
Mr Alphandery described the privatisation of the first industrial group on
its privatisation list as an important step in the government's programme
and said he was confident of a successful sale.
Under the terms of the issue, the government will sell 47.6m shares through
a public offering. A further 31.7m shares will be sold to institutional
investors in France and abroad. Current and former employees will be able to
buy up to 8.8m shares.
Of the government's 43 per cent holding in Rhone-Poulenc, 6 per cent of the
company's shares are being reserved for a core of stable shareholders.
These will comprise several companies, including Fiat of Italy and Credit
Suisse, the Swiss bank, which will both hold about 1 per cent of the shares.
Both companies will join existing shareholders, such as Credit Lyonnais and
Assurances Generales de France, with the combined core of stable investors
accounting for about 24 per cent of Rhone-Poulenc's capital after
privatisation.
Fiat, which has an industrial alliance with Rhone-Poulenc in the fibres
market, is expected to have a seat on the company's administrative board.
The board is an 18-member panel which meets about once a quarter.
New investors in Rhone-Poulenc will enter the group's capital at a time when
it is faced with difficult markets and declining profits.
Yesterday the group confirmed earlier forecasts by announcing net profits of
FFr776m for the first nine months of the year, a fall of 30 per cent over
the same period last year.
The company said that a similar decline was expected for the full year as a
result of continued weakness in the chemicals, fibres and agrochemicals
markets and a slowdown of growth in pharmaceuticals sales.
