FT  14 DEC 93 / PM says any accord must be 'balanced'
Mr John Major acknowledged yesterday that a Anglo-Irish declaration designed
to restore peace to Northern Ireland would have to balance guarantees to
unionists with recognition of the aspirations of the province's
nationalists.
As British officials suggested that he might yet hold a third meeting with
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, as early as tomorrow, Mr Major
told MPs they were seeking a declaration that would end IRA terrorism.
Despite a fierce warning from the Rev Ian Paisley, Democratic Unionist
leader, of a Protestant backlash, Mr Major said both premiers wanted a
'balanced' declaration.
His comments appeared to signal that the government is ready to give some
ground to demands from Mr Reynolds that Dublin's acceptance of a unionist
veto must be accompanied by language in the statement which would have a
reasonable chance of securing a cessation of IRA violence.
Mr Major appeared to shift further in that direction with his explicit
acknowledgement during comments on the weekend IRA murder of two policemen
that he was looking for 'a circumstance that will end such murders in
future'.
It is thought that the talks inched forward during the course of the day. An
Irish government spokesman said last night that the two prime ministers
would be in touch by phone this morning to review progress and to try to
agree the date for their third meeting in as many weeks.
Mr Major said he could offer no guarantee that a declaration would be agreed
before parliament breaks for the Christmas recess on Friday, and it was
still possible that the talks would break down.
But Downing Street aides said a further meeting would take place before
Christmas.
Mr Paisley warned that the price demanded by the IRA was 'too high'.
Another warning was delivered by a leading member of Sinn Fein, the
political wing of the IRA. Mr Mitchel McLaughlin, chairman of Sinn Fein's
Ulster executive, said that if the opportunity of peace was 'squandered',
Northern Ireland could face civil war.
