FT  29 JUN 93 / Iraq exports advice 'deficient'
CIVIL SERVANTS across three Whitehall departments secretly justified the
export of machine tools to Iraq in breach of the government's own publicly
declared guidelines, the Scott inquiry heard yesterday.
Documents shown to the inquiry showed that the officials told ministers that
exports to Iraq did not breach the guidelines.
An internal memo written for Mr David Mellor, then the junior Foreign Office
minister, by Mr William Patey, a Foreign Office official who was chairman of
the Whitehall Inter-departmental Committee, argued that if existing export
licences for machine tools were revoked, the government could face legal
action from the companies concerned.
Yesterday Mr Patey admitted to the inquiry that the Foreign Office had never
taken legal advice on the issue.
The memo added that the machinery was 'not technically defence-related' and
that not to carry out the contracts would mean Britain's foreign competitors
stepping in.
Mr Patey told the inquiry that advice given by civil servants to ministers
on the export of UK machine tools in January 1988 was 'deficient' in that it
glossed over the extent to which they might have contravened declared
policy. 'The advice could have been clearer . . . It could have been better
put,' he said.
It emerged yesterday that the memo was written after the Foreign Office had
apparently spent two months ignoring specific information it had received
from SIS (MI6) that Iraq was building up its indigenous arms manufacturing
capability after signing contracts with Matrix Churchill and other UK
British machine tool companies.
The government's guidelines restricted the export of defence-related
equipment that could significantly enhance the capability of both Iraq and
Iran to exacerbate the Gulf conflict.
Documents referred to yesterday show the selective use that was made within
Whitehall of additional information made available to government officials.
This was that one of the machine tool companies, Matrix Churchill, was being
encouraged to trade with Iraq as a way of providing intelligence.
The bulk of these documents were released after the collapse in November of
the controversial trial of three former Matrix Churchill executives which
led to the setting up of Lord Justice Scott's inquiry.
The executives had been arrested for breaching export controls. However it
emerged during the trial that they had been deliberately encouraged by
officials to conceal that they knew the machine tools were being put to a
military use.
The inquiry continues tomorrow, with evidence from Mr David James, chairman
of Eagle Trust, and Mr Robin Fellgett, a Treasury official.
