FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (9):
Wrap up warm, but with style - Lucia van der Post looks at what the
best-dressed skiers are wearing this season
the wet, the cold, the knot in the stomach as you stand at the top of a
black run wondering how you will ever make it down, the humiliation as tiny
tots who not only knock spots off your skiing but ALSO speak fluent French
whizz past . . .
In ski brochure-land it is forever sunny. The snow is crisp, the skies blue,
the runs blemish-free. Nobody is anything but beautiful, nobody ever falls
over and nobody, of course, is anything but perfectly dressed.
We may not be able to do much about the weather and the snow but when it
comes to clothes we can at least look the part. The key, though, is which
part do you want to look?
Regular piste-bashers will know that the options are many. Chalet groupie,
old-timer, powder freak, posh yuppy, ski bunny . . . which is the look for
you?
The bray of a chalet groupie can usually be heard before she is seen but if
you spot one first you can tell who they are: they sport an all-season tan,
a kerchief round the neck, and their gear is seriously scuffed (they are
such old hands, you see). Come April they are larking about in bikini tops.
Old-timers often belong to the oldest skiing club in the world - and if they
don't they would like you to think so. They wear understated gear that looks
as if it was bought in the 1960s and probably was. All the rage though they
may be for the rest of us, one-piece skisuits are not for them. Old,
well-worn anoraks, (the wonders of Gore-Tex have passed them by), black or
navy-blue ski-pants and big leather gloves which have seen better days are
what they wear. And their skis are twice as long as anybody else's.
Powder freaks, and their near-relation, the ski-bum, are obsessed by labels.
They love Day-glo colours and go in for lots of techno-flash. Skin-tight,
rippling suits are the style for them - so aerodynamically efficient.
T-shirts, jumpers and everything from the boards themselves to the gloves
they wear will carry an all-important label that says it all.
Posh yuppies wear the latest Gore-Tex one-piece suit in a suitably
understated colour - no labels, no logos. 'Nothing flash about me' says his
clothing, loud and clear. He may only ski once a year but being up to the
minute matters - he couldn't be seen drinking his gluhwein in anything less
than this year's latest gear. Glacier glasses and a headband are the
finishing touches.
As for our old friend the ski bunny . . . treat her gently, for she is an
endangered species. Her natural habitat is the grandest bar, the sunniest
terrace, the most imposing hotel. You can spot her at once, for what she
goes in for is glamour, glamour, glamour.
Somebody once told her that there was nothing so flattering round the face
as fur, so lusciously-soft coats with fur-trimmed hoods (she has never heard
of Lynx) are what she wears. On sunnier days when she wants to create a
little stir she wears a slightly too small brand-new ski-suit from one of
the grandest of names. Now that Steinebron, the Christian Lacroix of the
ski-world, has gone under, Bogner is the name she looks for. Gloves and
wind-cheaters, blizzard protection and efficient parkas are never a part of
her armoury.
As you can see the chance for role-playing is all part of the fun of the
slopes. Whether you are looking for something practical and functional or a
pretty little number to look fetching in while wrapped in rugs in a
fur-lined sledge, the skiwear departments this year will have it.
Skiwear never changes quite as fast as the rest of fashion for the obvious
reason that, on the whole, its primary function is to be . . . well,
functional. It needs to keep you warm and dry, so not surprisingly, the
scope for flights of fancy is limited.
However, these days the fashionable looks translate much more easily into
everyday life. Most good skiwear departments have a host of beautiful (and
flattering) long-line jackets made from soft-as-butter microfibre fabrics
which not only make marvellous off-duty jackets but also provide all the
warmth and protection you need for skiing. Prices range around Pounds 390,
but remember these are real high performance garments.
The most successful skiwear is based on the layer system. Not only do
conditions and temperatures vary hugely but in extreme cold several light
layers keep the skier infinitely warmer than a single layer ever could.
Columbia, one of the most successful brands from America (Simpson of
Piccadilly in London has a good selection) seems to have got its strategy
right. Its success has been grounded in its versatility. Its speciality is
the three-in-one jacket - you buy two pieces, say, a fleece lining and an
outer jacket, each of which can be worn separately and together giving you
three options. The most basic of its three-in-ones start at Pounds 149 and
are reversible.
Skiwear has been much affected by the new, younger sports such as
snowboarding. Clothing has become both jollier, younger and tougher - the
baggier clothing (because skiboarding requires a different range of
movements), reinforced elbows, padded seats and knee pads have become chic
even for those who have never touched a ski-board. Tokka Tribe is the
with-it label to look out for here - lightweight 100 per cent micro jackets
with quilted linings and fleece tops can be worn with Lycra salopettes or
jeans.
Marks and Spencer has no offerings on the skiwear front this year but C &amp; A
deserves credit for providing the keen skier with an excellent range of
clothing at very good prices. The department store is particularly to be
recommended for those embarking on the slopes with children. For adults
all-in-one ski suits that were Pounds 200 last year are now selling at
Pounds 150 - wonderful concentrators of the mind, these recessions.
Other good ranges for children include Nevica's skisuits (padded knees,
covered zips and hidden hoods) and Snowmachine for the really tiny set
(available right down to toddler size).
The Snow + Rock skiwear group has a parka at Pounds 89.95 and a salopette at
Pounds 59.95 which must be unbeatable value. They are exact replicas of the
British Team's ski suit and have all the essential details to keep the chill
and wet out - drawstring waist and base, storm flaps, zipped pockets and a
detachable hood.
The hip set need look no further than C &amp; A's very own snowboard range -
'Ice Age'. It comes in dark, military colours with an air of heavy-duty
toughness about it. Lots of ribbed fabrics, big, baggy tops and pants that
can be worn 'heavy-duty' style over jeans.
For those looking for glamour labels, the piste equivalent of St Laurent and
Chanel, then the names to look out for probably have to be Chervo and
Outrage from Italy, and Bogner from Germany.
For chaps Bogner this year has a wonderfully classic flying suit in dark
green or burnt red (Pounds 799 - chic never did come cheap) while for women
the distinctive hallmark of the 1993 Bogner skisuit is its embroidery -
discreet and mostly the same colour as the suit, it nonetheless is
recognised by all those in the know.
More flamboyant types could go for one of Outrage's leopard or lily-printed
jackets at Pounds 279 a time while the perfectly formed can try one of Henri
Duvillard's daring body suits at Pounds 199 for the jackets, Pounds 129 for
the pants.
Those who do not live near a good ski shop might like to know that Snow +
Rock has a comprehensive free mail order catalogue (telephone 0753-830868
for a copy) from which everything the keen skier needs can be ordered.
