FT  20 APR 93 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (6): More help for decision
makers - . . . For EIS
or at least, it did once, since it keeps changing. The term is now commonly
interpreted as Enterprise Intelligence Service or Everybody's Information
System, embracing wider managerial applications such as budgeting, planning
and reporting.
The original idea of an EIS was that top-level directors need a periscope on
the rest of the world as well as a magnifying glass on internal data. The
assumption is that the higher the executive, the more of a klutz (ie more
incompetent) he, or less likely she, is supposed to be when seated at a
computer keyboard. These IT dunces, however, are expected to know more about
the entire company than anyone else.
An EIS therefore has to take information from all available sources inside
(and outside) the company, distill it, and deliver it in such a way that
will woo the least IT-confident people in the building. The detail must not
be blurred: the user must be able to investigate and 'drill down' to the
component data to examine what lies behind the pretty graphs.
It is this easy-to-use 'handle' on the information that distinguished the
EIS from the long-established MIS (Management Information Systems) and DSS,
Decision Support Systems. Another characteristic supposed to distinguish the
genuine EIS from other systems is that it links not only with all internal
data sources, (accounting, sales processing, and so on) but with external
data sources, such as online database for share prices.
EIS systems have been around for more than a decade, but have changed, as
the latest shift in emphasis suggests, according to the prevailing view of
executive needs. Comshare used to be known for modelling and forecasting
software: now its Commander system claims to be the leading EIS with more
than 40,000 users worldwide, many moving off the mainframe to the PC.
However, a recent survey by EIS software house Cognos found that 70 per cent
of companies interviewed do not currently use EIS, but 55 per cent believed
they might help solve poor management and communication.
Top executives have always had to make far-reaching decisions and hold the
'big picture' of their companies in their heads. In the past they relied on
people, not computers, for information.
Here lies the real expense of installing EIS, not in the computer hardware
or software, but in the analysis of what information is needed, a job often
done better by outsiders. Rod Newing, freelance EIS specialist, points out
that many top managers dislike discussing business strategy with internal IT
professionals.
'The point about EIS is that it should enable managers to do things with
information they couldn't do before. A hefty document specifying
requirements is a waste of time because the user doesn't know them. The
important thing is to set up a prototype and get people to use it.'
The evolution of requirements necessarily demands time from the top people
who are to use the system. It can be radical in that it often challenges the
established order of things. Who communicates with whom, and about what,
defines the structure of organisations, and it is this reporting process
that is taken apart and rebuilt.
'The process is valuable in that it challenges assumptions - that can be of
great value,' says Jon Morgan of Executive Information Solutions. 'The
resulting EIS can be used to reinforce the new way of working.'
Companies with EIS projects are often coy about revealing costs, which are
often high at the start of the cycle, and hard to evaluate when the system
is running. Chase Manhattan's Global Security Services sector has built an
EIS using Comshare's Commander, called Managing Service Performance. David
Da Costa, second vice-president within GSS operations at Chase Manhattan,
says: 'EIS allows us to manage our service pro-actively and in partnership
with our clients through the use of service and quality indicators, fed
directly by our production systems. Its value to us is that it ensures we
provide a premier service to our clients and differentiates us from our
competitors.'
VIEWPOINTS
Another Commander user, British Steel, has discovered that top executives
use the system less than expected, and prefer to dip into the database
rather than use the ready-made screen displays.
'The costs exceed the benefits as far as top executives are concerned, but
the next layer down, the middle managers, find it invaluable,' says Richard
Hewitt, manager of management accounts.
There are many well-established EIS suppliers such as Acuity, Comshare,
information Resources, Holistic Systems, Pilot and many others. The
Softworld exhibition of EIS and Decison Support systems in October 1992
attracted nearly 30 suppliers, and in four years the show has mushroomed.
Yet Cognos' survey revealed that a large proportion of companies, 51 per
cent, use their own DP departments to create EIS systems, and around 80 per
cent, wrote and implemented their own systems - 'there is a lot of education
to be done in this field, with companies having limited knowledge about the
technology, how much it costs, and what business benefits it can bring,'
comments Paul Hart, Cognos' UK marketing manager. 'It leaves the EIS market
wide open.'
Malcolm Harding, marketing director of Holos, sees the market as wider than
just the top people - 'it's a technology, rather than a marketplace,' he
says. Holos is now designed for the middle managers, accountants and others,
not just a few people in the boardroom. For instance, there are as many as
1,200 users in British Gas.'
'There is a lot of scepticism about how important the external resources
are. Lots of people put the tick in the box, but apart from the common use
of share-price access, we only know of one Holos-user who regularly uses the
system for the retrieval of text and numeric data, both internal and
external.'
