FT  09 DEC 93 / Personal View: Flexibility is a friend of the jobless
The most important issues facing the European Union and its political
leaders are growth and unemployment. There are 19m people unemployed in the
EU, and the figure is rising fast.
International comparisons of job creation speak for themselves. North
America has created about 36m jobs since 1973 and Japan 12m, mostly in the
private sector. The EU has created fewer than 8m jobs in the same period,
most of them in the public sector. This has added to the tax/borrowing
burden, which in many countries is increasingly seen as insupportable.
There is a high degree of agreement among EU member states about the cause
of Europe's unemployment problems. Increasingly they recognise that, while
the recession has an effect, there are more deep-seated structural problems
in Europe's labour markets: a lack of flexibility in the operation of labour
markets, partly as a result of excessive or misdirected regulation; high
labour costs, particularly social contributions; inadequate incentives to
work; and a lack of the skills, among significant parts of the labour force,
needed to compete in a fast-changing world.
What needs to be done? Recovery from the recession is important. All
countries must have sustainable and non-inflationary economic and fiscal
policies. We must continue to develop and maintain free trade and more open
markets. We must create an environment which encourages enterprise and
innovation.
But we need to do more than this. We must try to remedy those labour market
deficiencies which are making it increasingly difficult to create jobs in
Europe, and against which employers are protesting.
To help economies compete, labour markets must act as an aid to growth,
increasing competitiveness and the creation of jobs, rather than as a
barrier. Otherwise, we may suffer from 'jobless growth' - and the gap
between the employed and the unemployed will widen.
There is no one blueprint. Different countries have different problems, such
as high labour costs, insupportable levels of social protection, and
excessively rigid legislation in the labour market.
We in Britain have pursued our own course over recent years to tackle labour
market rigidities through deregulation, and revisions of the legal
framework. We have seen a significant growth in self-employment and
part-time work as employers and individuals have taken advantage of our
progress. But we still do not match the best in Europe in our workforce's
skills.
In emphasising the desirability of greater flexibility and diversity in
labour markets, there is one lie I should like to nail. There is no question
of abandoning systems of social protection. Nor do we want to compete with
the third world on wages. Our competitive edge must come in terms of the
skills and abilities of our people, higher productivity and the quality of
the goods and services we offer. But we must still ensure that European pay
and cost levels and over-rigid rules do not undermine competitiveness.
Most of the necessary action is for individual member states. However, there
is a role for the EU, too. We fully accept the need for action in areas such
as health and safety, free movement of labour, and the promotion of growth
and jobs through the structural funds.
The problem we have had in the past is that European Union social and
employment legislation was rarely introduced with sufficient regard to its
effect on competitiveness and jobs, and in some cases it had serious adverse
effects.
This is why I have proposed that all social legislation, existing and
planned, should be subjected to a 'competitiveness audit', through which
there would be rigorous analysis of its effects in terms of growth,
competitiveness and jobs.
There are no easy answers. We cannot spend our way out of the problem. There
are no billions of pounds or Ecus to be spared, except at the cost of
crowding out the private sector. There are no magic, uniform solutions such
as sharing out the available jobs.
It makes good sense to develop new and more flexible working patterns.
Work-sharing may be feasible at company level as a voluntary, negotiated
short-term adjustment, but imposed at a national or EU level it would result
in costs and rigidities which would endanger the productivity and dynamism
on which more jobs depend.
Our task is to increase jobs, growth and prosperity, not to settle for what
we have and share it out. We have a chance to strike the right balance for
the future in the debates at the European heads of government summit, which
starts tomorrow, and in the months that follow. That is an opportunity which
must not be missed.
The author is UK secretary of state for employment
