FT  20 SEP 93 / International Company News: IRI reconsiders options for SME
IRI, Italy's biggest state holding company which is mounting an ambitious
privatisation campaign, will this week reconsider its options after another
embarrassing setback.
IRI has said that it will re-examine plans to privatise the supermarkets and
catering operations of its big SME foods and retailing subsidiary, after
failing to find suitable buyers last week.
The group will turn to the government to redraw the criteria for disposing
of the SME operations after potential buyers indicated they found the terms
too unattractive to warrant acceptable bids.
The failure to sell SME's GS (supermarkets) and Autogrill (catering) arms
follows last month's failure to sell another part of SME on account of a
lack of acceptable bids.
Selling GS and Autogrill would have marked the biggest transaction in IRI's
privatisation plans, which include the disposal of its majority stakes in
Banca Commerciale Italiana and Credito Italiano, two of Italy's biggest
banks.
The latest setback is a blow to IRI's credibility and especially to its
urgent cash-raising plans. On Friday night, the group announced the creation
of a new privatisation and restructuring department.
IRI, which had consolidated debts of about L73,000bn (Dollars 47bn) last
year, has targeted privatisation receipts as a vital financial lifeline at a
time when two of its biggest operations, Ilva (steel) and Iritecna
(construction and general contracting) are losing money heavily.
Last week, IRI suffered a further blow when parliament failed to approve a
government proposal to repay the group about L2,000bn in overdue tax
credits.
SME's supermarket subsidiary had sales of L2,631bn last year, making it one
of Italy's biggest retailers. The catering side is the nation's biggest
operation of its kind, with 1993 turnover of L1,115bn.
IRI said the offers to buy just over half its 62 per cent holding, had been
either 'unsatisfactory' or had failed to conform to the terms stipulated.
IRI's management, advised by Wasserstein Perella, the US investment banking
group, had adopted a complex formula to create a hard core of investors and
avoid the need for a full public offer for the minority of shares already
floating.
Separately, IRI could shortly announce the outcome of its renewed attempts
to find buyers for SME's Cirio, Bertolli, De Rica (CBD) foods arm. The
previous bidding round is believed to have collapsed when none of the
interested parties came up with offers which met IRI's terms, or made very
low bids.
The failure of the first round for CBD means potential buyers may now be
allowed to bid for separate parts of the tinned foods, vegetable oils and
milk group, rather than only for the entire operation.
Subject to government approval, the terms are also likely to be relaxed for
SME's GS and Autogrill operations, with separate bids being permitted for
the retailing and catering arms and potential buyers being allowed to take
all IRI's 62 per cent stake, rather than having to form a consortium.
