FT  07 AUG 93 / Gardening: Violas - many virtues, few vices - Robin Lane Fox
is already planning next year's display of his most useful plants
IF YOU are lost in all the financial turmoil, try pansy futures instead.
They are not the new financial instrument of a progressive local authority;
they are a way into the best additions to my gardening life. The best of
them will flower for months, persist for ages and bring the range of soft
colours which a garden of any size can accommodate. In spite of previous
visits to this column, they still seem to elude gardeners who will go to any
lengths to grow potted jasmine and cultivate their own parsley.
Perhaps they are foxed by the timetable of their best supplier. Hence, the
need for pansy futures: the best violas have to be booked up to nine months
in advance. I have just received the latest catalogue at a time when violas
are needing one of their rare periods of attention. This weekend, pen and
scissors are poised for action.
Alert visitors to Chelsea Flower Show will know already that the best violas
come from Richard Cawthorne, of Lower Dalton Nursery, Swanley Village,
Swanley, Kent BR87 NU. Cawthorne does not receive visitors and only takes
orders in advance. The new catalogue is available and you have until the end
of October to send for your selections.
He will then take cuttings from the stock plants and invoice you early next
year when he knows the numbers available. In April, he sends out excellent
plants, well rooted in proper earth so that they grow away and flower
promisingly in their first season. There is no risk in ordering them unseen:
all the plants begin in the same way, at the same date. You get what
everyone else is getting, and the packing is admirable.
The best value is not necessarily the best-known. People seem to think
pansies should be universal or one of those large-flowered forms, grown
yearly from seed. Violas, on the other hand, should be quaint or
old-fashioned. Among violas, people go for green-black flowers on Molly
Sanderson, the lavender-pink of Nellie Britten or the yellow and chocolate
markings of Jackanapes, which Gertrude Jekyl named after her pet monkey.
I began in the same way and cursed the results. None of these old varieties
seems to last for more than two years, whereupon they fizzle out. The right
course is to follow the Cawthorne catalogue, forget about curious colourings
and build up a basic stock of the forms which he marks with a special
symbol. He ought to know. He holds the National Collection and has bred
dozens of varieties himself.
The line between a pansy and a viola is rather arbitrary on the margins of
his long list. Where possible, he prefers the smaller-flowered forms which
have greater vigour and less pansy blood. He has also expanded into the wild
species forms, though not, as yet, into the desirable canadensis and the
late-flowering striata, both of which were favourites of that fastidious
expert, E A Bowles.
I have two favourite groups. The first are the various forms of Viola
cornuta which extend from an excellent white to a good sky-blue. All of them
are easy and are particularly welcome because their habit is to trail, so
that they can be trained among taller plants in a border.
They grow well in slight shade or in the company of a mixed border, and so
long as they are kept clipped and watered they will grow for anybody. In a
lightly-shaded London garden, they remain my first choice at ground level,
although few Londoners seem to display them. They are excellent at ground
level in one of those typically square beds in a front garden which
otherwise runs to straggly Tea roses.
Down a different line of family, we find the many-named varieties which
include Cawthorne's own creations. My top six, after wide experiment, are
Rebecca, Fiona, pure white Morwenna, pale yellow Beshlie, silvery-lilac
Maggie Mott and the amazing Inverurie Beauty. Other forms are as
well-coloured but they lack the same stamina. Inverurie Beauty arose long
ago in Scotland and it remains the most rewarding plant in my entire garden.
It bears flowers on long stems from early spring until autumn if you leave
it uncut.
In 1992, its violet flowers appeared with me for 11 months out of 12; they
took two months' holiday and this year they have resumed their continuity
since March. One plant will multiply with the greatest ease from any sort of
cuttings or divisions in springtime. The Inverurie blood-line has been bred
into other forms, one of which has been shown for the first time by
Cawthorne at this year's Chelsea.
The point about these violas is that they flower madly and make the most
obliging carpets of soft colour. I use them all over the place and find them
reliable if I follow the Cawthorne rules.
This weekend, the most important comes into action. The plants are still in
full flower but you must harden your heart and cut all their long stems
right back to a central cluster, the base for future growth. People who lose
their violas after one good flowering are omitting or mistiming this
necessary job. If they are cut now, they make a nest of short young stems
which will then come easily through winter.
The second Cawthorne rule is to spray regularly against greenfly. Phostrogen
now produces an organic spray against greenfly which will satisfy green
consciences and dissatisfy green insects. Cawthorne also recommends a spray
with Benlate after planting in order to guard against the dreaded pansy
sickness. The chances of catching it are slim and you should not conclude
from all these rules that violas are in any way temperamental.
To prove it, I can look back on 12 years of happy life with them, counting
my original plants of the cornuta varieties of which I have taken hundreds
of cuttings. What they all like is a good feeding with a liquid fertiliser,
applied through a hose throughout the early summer.
If they are fed and watered, they will also refute a widespread myth. Like
so much else, violas are believed to be plants which need shade or a cool
position in front of shrubs. What they really need is enough water. Often,
the shade will be dry under trees or a wall and the taller shrubs will take
away the moisture. Some of my best ones grow in light shade but others are
as old and almost as happy in the open on stony soil. The enemy is drought,
not sunshine. The same is true of violets which modern mythology also
banishes into the shadows.
Violets have never been better grown than by the great French suppliers to
the cut-flower trade at the turn of the century. The best of these suppliers
insisted on the importance of hot sun to ripen the crowns and to induce the
fullest flowering.
Violas do not have the same sort of crown as violets but they are equal
kings in their family. People who fail with them forget to cut them or to
keep up with the best varieties, many of which have just been bred for new
vigour. Often, especially in early June, I look round my ever-expanding
flowerbeds and wonder what is making the semblance of a good show. Again and
again, the answer is a single big plant of a viola, the best value for
civilised gardeners and one in which you can deal safely this month.
