FT  06 DEC 93 / SFO's powers may be widened in fraud battle
The government is considering increasing the responsibilities of the
embattled Serious Fraud Office as part of a shake-up in the battle against
white-collar crime.
The SFO would be enlarged to take on the most important cases currently
investigated by the Fraud Investigation Group, of the Crown Prosecution
Service.
The proposal reflects strong government support for the SFO in spite of the
growing criticism over its handling of a range of high profile trials.
The controversy mounted last week in the wake of the sentencing of disgraced
financier Roger Levitt to 180 hours of community service and the SFO's
admission that it had given privileged defence documents to the prosecution
in the case of fugitive businessman Mr Asil Nadir.
The government has set its face against dramatic changes at the SFO, such as
a switch to a single City regulatory body, along the lines of the US
Securities and Exchange Commission. Such a change it says is 'not on the
agenda'.
A small team of Whitehall officials led by a senior Treasury official is
reviewing all the SFO's cases, including the prosecutions of Mr Terry
Ramsden, the former head of Glen International which collapsed in 1987 with
losses of Pounds 142m, and big cases such as Blue Arrow and Guinness II.
The group, which began work in October, is expected to report within two
months. However, the government is confident it will show that the SFO
remains the most effective unit for fighting serious fraud.
Reverses are said to have been caused by a mixture of bad luck and
unexpected trial rulings which do not detract from the 'great skill' with
which the cases were handled.
The SFO is said to have received insufficient credit for its 59 per cent
conviction rate, or for successes such as the jailing of Mr Joseph Szrajber
and Mr Paolo Sorelli earlier this year for conspiring to defraud BP.
The exception is the case against Mr Nadir, former head of failed trading
company Polly Peck International, who is charged with theft involving Pounds
34m. Sir Nicholas Lyell, attorney general, admitted on Friday that the SFO
wrongly released privileged documents to lawyers prosecuting Mr Nadir who
fled to northern Cyprus in May. The government view is that the documents
were mistakenly released by an official who was not sufficiently well
supervised.
Ministers are satisfied that Mr George Staples, the SFO's director, has
taken prompt action to overcome management weaknesses exposed by the Nadir
case.
In the longer term, the government is considering merging the Fraud
Investigation Group into the SFO to create a single agency to investigate
major fraud. A more likely option would be to transfer some of its larger
cases to the SFO, leaving the Fraud Investigation Group to deal with less
important matters.
The government is also pressing for greater co-operation between the SFO,
the CPS, the metropolitan police and City regulatory organisations.
The agencies have been told to establish formal structures to discuss large
cases, some of which could be handled by regulatory bodies rather than in
the courts.
A separate review has cleared the CPS of allegations it failed to prosecute
winnable cases.
