FT  15 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Prison management's first rule
proves hard - Group 4's prisoner escort services
hang on to the prisoners.
Officials of Britain's prison service will be anxious to ensure that Group
4, the private security company, is able to fulfil the rule when they meet
its managers today. The meeting has been called to review the inglorious
start last week to Group 4's handling of Britain's first private contract
for escorting prisoners between prisons and courts. Four men escaped or were
wrongly released within as many days.
There is more at stake in today's meeting than the usual embarrassment over
escapes. The government's ambition to extend private management to wide
areas of the criminal justice system depends on the private sector being
able to deliver a reliable service.
Group 4, one of the largest security organisations in the world, is at the
forefront of this. In addition to gaining the contract to escort prisoners
in the east Midlands, Yorkshire and Humberside it runs Wolds, the first
privately managed prison in the UK. And it is among this week's bidders to
manage Strangeways prison, Manchester. Security companies were natural
candidates when the government sought private-sector involvement in the
criminal justice system. But their established activities in cash delivery,
guard services and security patrols still left them short of the specific
expertise needed to run prison services. The new court escort service is
operated by 400 prison custody officers and support staff - recruited from
6,500 applicants since it was announced in November Group 4 had won the
contract.
Custody officers undergo a six-week training programme. Group 4 Court
Services' Nottinghamshire training centre contains a mock courtroom and
cells, and training is the responsibility of Mr John Bown, a former police
service head of training recruited by the company. Mr David Corbally,
quality manager responsible for maintaining performance standards on the
escort service, is another former senior police officer.
Group 4 has recruited some high-ranking staff from the public sector. Mr
Charles Erickson, a senior Home Office civil servant, and Mr Walter
MacGowan, a former governor of Strangeways, joined the company last year.
Group 4's director of the new prison escort contract is Mr Michael Hirst,
until January chief constable of Leicestershire.
'Bidding for government prison contracts is in line with our business
objective of remaining in security activities rather that diversifying,' Mr
Stephen Brown, managing director of Group 4 Total Security said yesterday.
'We needed the most experienced staff available to run prison and escort
services, and in Britain that expertise is in the public sector.'
Mr Brown says Group 4's line-up of senior staff with police and other
specialist experience demonstrates that it has the necessary skills
necessary to deliver the court escort service. The company blames deficient
design of vehicles, built to Home Office specifications, for two of last
week's escapes and says a third man was released on the order of the court.
'There was always a possibility of complications in taking over a complete,
complex contract on a single day.' said Mr Brown. 'But it should be
remembered that since Group 4 started managing Wolds prison a year ago we
have been responsible for escorting prisoners between Wolds and the courts.
We have handled 8,000 movements in a year without incident.'
