FT  17 FEB 93 / Clinton hard sell aims to soften nation: The White House has
been preparing the ground for unpalatable policies
IT CANNOT be said that his country is unprepared for what President Bill
Clinton has to say tonight in his televised State of the Union address to a
joint session of both houses of Congress. Indeed, there has been no advance
marketing of a speech quite like it for the last 12 years.
Just as President Ronald Reagan and his advisers prepared the ground for his
proposals on February 19 1981 to cut taxes and government spending, so has
Mr Clinton. Just about everybody who works for the president has followed a
similar script, especially now that extraneous issues, such as the search
for a new attorney-general and the debate over gays in the military, no
longer compete for attention.
The only difference, and it may be crucial, was that Mr Reagan was offering
the sort of medicine most people like to take, while Mr Clinton will try to
force some less palatable prescriptions down the nation's throat.
Nevertheless, on national television on Monday night Mr Clinton told the
country that to support what he would propose - to bear some of the pain
today in order to enjoy a better tomorrow and to frustrate the evil designs
of special interests - was nothing less than 'patriotism'. It could have
been vintage Reagan, coming from the mouth of a man who looked a third of
the old gunslinger's age.
The address, Saturday's radio broadcast and last week's televised town
meeting and the haranguing of and exhortation to business leaders constitute
the populist side of the selling of the programme. Later this week the
president and his Cabinet will fan out across the country to drive home the
message.
But there has been some tough selling in Washington too. Hardly a day has
passed without congressional delegations having their ears bent by the
president, his wife, and his staff or without members of the Cabinet
pontificating on television.
Policy kites on Medicare for the elderly, social security and other taxes
have been flown around Washington as if every day was windy. Some have
seemed aerodynamically unsound but others have probably been sent aloft
deliberately to be shot down and thus make alternatives more attractive.
Equally, to show he is capable of leading from the front and to drive home
the cause of 'shared sacrifice', Mr Clinton has announced a 25 per cent cut
in his White House staff and an extensive programme to eliminate government
waste.
The president's strategic approach is clear. He knows he must deal with
Congress, and that the Democratic majority in the legislature does not
guarantee obedience. Thus he will seek to create his own political
relationship with the country-at-large.
His early problems in Washington notwithstanding, there remains plenty of
polling and anecdotal evidence that the country wants Mr Clinton to succeed.
Having elected him into office because of the state of the economy and the
size of the federal budget deficit and national debt, it is looking forward
to him putting his presidential money where his candidate mouth was.
The big change since last November is in the growing evidence of economic
recovery which, in turn, has led many economists and the markets to conclude
that the stimulus elements in Mr Clinton's proposals ought to be toned down.
However, true to his campaign promises and partly reflecting a conviction
that even in recovery the economy is still not creating enough jobs, there
is likely to be about Dollars 30bn (Pounds 21.1bn) in additional public
works spending and investment tax credits. This will be offset by generally
higher taxes on incomes and on commodities such as energy, and by additional
cuts in government spending.
This approach lends itself to easy criticism from Republicans. Mr Robert
Dole, their leader in the Senate, has already dismissed the Clinton package
as yet another variation on traditional 'tax and spend' Democratic policies.
But the Republican ability to frustrate the president may be more apparent
than real, if for no other reason than that the party cannot be seen as
perpetuating Washington 'gridlock'.
Other special interests in the Washington power structure may work their
wills more deviously, but more effectively, on integral parts of the new
proposals as the legislative battle unfolds.
Pre-emptively, Mr Clinton warned on Monday night that 'within minutes of the
time I conclude my address to Congress the special interests will be out in
force. . . many have already lined the corridors of Congress with
high-priced lobbyists.'
What he did not say, naturally enough, is that not every lobbyist is a
chartered member of the 'Gucci gulch' club representing only corporate and
trade interests. Many work for those constituencies - the poor, the elderly,
and the family farmers - which voted for Mr Clinton but which could suffer
from any serious budgetary cuts.
Having raised the rhetorical stakes so high and having painted apocalyptic
visions of the future if problems are ducked, it is also up to Mr Clinton to
deliver proposals that not only can be sold but are credible and tough.
The suspicion still exists, mostly in Washington, that this is a president
whose analytical abilities are greater than his determination to proceed
with the unpopular. Tonight he is going to tell the middle classes, to whom
he promised lower taxes last year, that they will have to pay more. Making
it stick will not be popular.
Twelve years ago Mr Reagan made the reverse pitch and in the end won much of
what he wanted, partly because the consensus for the change he advocated was
there and partly because the opposition faded into insignificance after the
president was wounded in an assassination attempt.
There are differences today - in the relative performance of the economy and
in the lack of real national consensus about what should be done. Still, on
Monday night Mr Clinton again sounded like Mr Reagan when he said his
approach was 'just common sense'. But then he added: 'In the 26 days I've
been your president I've already learned that here in Washington common
sense just isn't too common.'
