FT  30 MAR 93 / National Grid plans Pounds 300m cable link with Ireland
THE National Grid and Ireland's Electricity Supply Board are planning to
build a Pounds 300m high-voltage link under the Irish Sea.
The cable - with a proposed capacity of 600 megawatts - would connect the
Irish grid to the rest of Europe for the first time. It could also provide a
much-needed export opportunity for the UK's coal-fired power stations in the
future.
If the interconnector ran full-time at full capacity from Wales to Ireland,
it would consume power approximately equal to the coal produced by one mine.
In real operation, it is likely to account for about half the output of one
pit.
National Grid and ESB have just completed an economic appraisal and
engineering study of two possible routes. Surveys of the sea bed show the
cable could run from Dublin to Anglesey in north Wales or from Wexford to
Pembrokeshire in south Wales.
The next stage will be to arrange financing. According to the provisional
timetable, the project could be approved within a year; construction would
then start in 1995 and electricity would flow in 1998.
The two parties expect the EC to make substantial funds available, in
keeping with its policy of encouraging a Europe-wide transmission network.
Earlier this month the EC agreed to contribute Pounds 61m towards the cost
of a smaller 250MW link between Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The electricity systems of Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic have been
isolated since the 1970s when the cross-border interconnector was taken out
of commission after repeated attacks by the IRA. It is unlikely to be
reopened unless the overall security situation improves.
ESB is keen to end its isolation because Ireland's electricity consumption
is still growing steadily and an international link is a much cheaper and
more flexible way of meeting peak demand than building power stations. The
proposed connection with Wales would expand Ireland's present generating
capacity of 4,000MW by 15 per cent.
The link would be able to send power in either direction, depending on the
relative price and demand for electricity in the UK and Ireland. But Mr
Steve Drummond, head of interconnections at National Grid said: 'We are
predicting that it will be used mainly to export to Ireland. There will be
an opportunity for coal to provide an extra 600MW of electricity in the late
1990s.'
Whichever route is chosen for the link, National Grid faces heavy
expenditure to minimise the impact on the Welsh landscape.
Rather than build an obtrusive line of pylons, the company is likely to bury
the cable underground from the point where it comes ashore to the substation
where it joins the grid.
