FT  22 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Mr Yeltsin's gamble
ALL THIS year the Russian political situation has recalled that of 1917.
There is a general feeling of anarchy, and there are ostensibly two centres
of power: the government of President Boris Yeltsin, and the parliament. But
there is no Lenin. Mr Yeltsin is a shrewd if erratic political fighter, and
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker, is a cunning tactician.
Neither has Lenin's capacity for strategic thought, nor probably his
ruthlessness, nor even his total contempt for formal democracy. Neither, so
far, has been willing to invoke the final argument of physical force.
The army, even though as much confused, divided and demoralised as the rest
of the population, has not disintegrated as it did in 1917. Its leaders
rightly regard civil war as the outcome to be avoided at any cost, and in
that too they are representative of the population at large. Russia has so
far conspicuously avoided the mass violence that afflicts so many of its
southern neighbours. The terrible sequel of 1917 is burnt very deep into its
folk memory.
This context gives a certain unreality to the constitutional struggle.
Parliament and president confront each other, but neither controls very
much, and neither is willing to use bloodshed to achieve its ends. Thus
previous crises have proved anticlimactic. The army has intervened in the
corridors rather than in the streets. Half-baked compromises have been
reached, and the opponents have continued to circle each other.
More serious
This time things look more serious. There have been reports of troop
movements, and 'special government telephones' in the parliament building
have been cut off. Mr Yeltsin has not had his opponents arrested in their
beds, nor has he cut off all their communications, as would the author of a
true coup d'etat. But he does seem to have taken steps to prevent parliament
directly usurping, or confiscating, his authority in response to his
decision to dissolve it. He has probably assured himself of the loyalty of
key army units in the vicinity of Moscow - enough, at least, to ensure that
Mr Alexander Rutskoi's claim to replace him is as inconsequential as was his
own deposition of Mr Rutskoi from the vice-presidency some weeks ago.
Whether either act is constitutional is a question not so much moot as
meaningless. There is effectively no constitution, and cannot be until prior
questions of legitimacy are settled. Mr Yeltsin hopes to clarify the
question by holding new parliamentary elections. He could and should have
done so two years ago, at a time when his popularity following the defeat of
the August coup would have made it much easier for him to dissolve
parliament, and would have ensured the election of a majority pledged to
support him. But by early this year, when he first canvassed that solution,
he was not strong enough to impose it. It is far from certain that he is so
now.
Popular mandate
Even if he succeeds, a new parliament will not now solve his problems.
Although probably less conservative than the present one it might be no less
recalcitrant, and it would have the legitimacy of a fresh popular mandate,
which Mr Yeltsin himself can no longer claim. It would be much better if the
constitutional distribution of powers were clearly settled before the
election, but who has the authority to do that? Perhaps only an elected
constituent assembly. If so, the only way to square the circle may be for Mr
Yeltsin to decree an interim constitution, and then submit himself for
re-election simultaneously with the election of a new parliament with an
explicit mandate to draft a permanent one, to be ratified finally through a
referendum.
The west's interest in all this is to see the consolidation of democracy in
Russia through the continuation of economic reform. The reform will not
succeed if democracy is discarded, but it may also fail if too much
attention is paid to constitutional niceties in a country that still lacks
the social and cultural bases of constitutional rule.
The west's instinct will be to support Mr Yeltsin so long as he respects
fundamental freedoms and appears decisively committed to pushing reform
through. In recent months there has been more doubt about the latter than
the former.
