FT  29 SEP 93 / International Company News: Arbed loss deepens steel sector
gloom
ARBED, the Luxembourg-based steelmaker, yesterday underlined the depth of
the crisis facing the European Community steel industry when it announced a
LFr3.03bn (Dollars 86.6m) net loss for the first half of 1993. In the same
period of 1992, the company recorded a net profit of LFr364m.
The Arbed group is Europe's sixth-largest steelmaker, with an annual
production capacity of 8m tonnes.
Mr Joseph Kinsch, the group's chief executive, warned that if the EC failed
to clamp down on state aid to publicly-owned steel producers the Community
steel strategy would be called into question. Private steelmakers believe
subsidies are distorting the European market and making their job more
difficult.
Mr Kinsch said Arbed would probably lose about LFr5.5bn in the full year,
slightly less than Arbed's worst expectations at the beginning of this year.
Mr Kinsch said the group was still unlikely to pay a dividend for 1993.
His warning on subsidies came only five days after Mr Jean Gandois, chairman
of Cockerill Sambre, the Belgian steelmaker, revealed a BFr3bn loss for the
first half, compared with a BFr1.3bn profit in the equivalent period. Mr
Gandois warned that shareholders should not expect a dividend for 1993, and
forecast that the Belgian group would lose between BFr4bn and BFr6bn in the
full year.
The EC's private steelmakers were set a deadline of tomorrow to submit plans
for voluntary cuts in capacity, as part of an overall European Commission
strategy to alleviate the pressure of overcapacity, recession and low
prices. But an EC-wide restructuring plan cannot be agreed until the
sensitive state-aid question has been resolved. Industry ministers met last
week in Brussels to discuss the problem, but are unlikely to vote on subsidy
proposals before their next scheduled meeting in November.
'It's inadmissible in this situation that others, like Spain, Italy and
certain regions of Germany, continue to subsidise steelmaking,' Mr Kinsch
said yesterday. 'The rules of the game should be respected by everybody and
it isn't acceptable that subsidies should spare state-owned industry.'
Arbed managed to increase its turnover by 1 per cent in the first half to
LFr98.6bn, although that was partly due to inclusion of the group's east
German subsidiary in the consolidated results, as well as an increase in
stainless steel production.
The Luxembourg group is nine months into a three-year 'crisis plan' which
involves spending LFr12.5bn, in particular on the replacement of traditional
coal-fired blast furnaces with electric furnaces.
A new electric furnace will come on line at one of the group's Luxembourg
plants in December, and the company said yesterday this would have a
decisive impact on the cost of manufacturing long products.
