FT  04 FEB 93 / UK Company News: Application of FRS 3 hitting teething
troubles says Capel
TEETHING troubles are beginning to appear in the application by companies of
FRS 3, the new accounting standard on the profit and loss account, City
analysts James Capel said yesterday.
In a circular distributed to clients, the firm warned that a number of
variations were creeping in to the implementation of the standard by
different companies.
It stresses that users of accounts should not rely on the sub-totals shown
in the new-style profit and loss account any more than on the new volatile
earnings figure.
Capel, which has produced a detailed analysis of the effects of the new
accounting standards, reiterates that earnings will be substantially higher
under FRS 3 than the existing format.
Capel said that the ratio for industrial quoted companies in 1991 was 9 per
cent lower using its own 'continuing earnings' figure than using the figure
calculated by FRS 3. It is 7 per cent lower for 1992.
Mr Paul Walton, a Capel analyst, said there was a risk that companies would
take advantage of FRS 3 to present their results in the best possible light.
The Capel document cites BOC, which by highlighting its early adoption of
FRS 3 and a large goodwill write-off, attracted little attention to a
substantial provision it made to rationalise its healthcare business.
Capel also announced its own formulae for calculating a continuing earnings
figure and a cash flow per share figure
Its earnings per share figure will take the FRS 3 earnings figure and
exclude costs in closure or withdrawal from a business segment, gains or
losses on disposals and some other specific unusual items.
Its cash flow figure will take net cash inflow from operations, add returns
on investment or servicing of finance, and deduct tax, dividends paid and
movements in working capital.
It hints that the Accounting Standards Board's forthcoming discussion
document on acquisition accounting due out next month may well limit any
revaluations to certain assets such as properties, and to larger and listed
companies.
