FT  06 AUG 93 / Alcohol market in EC 'worth Pounds 95bn annually'
THE European Community's alcoholic drinks market is worth Pounds 95bn a
year, according to a report published yesterday.
About 225m people - 85 per cent of EC adults - are drinkers, consuming
between them 26.6bn litres of beer, 13.7bn litres of wine, and 1.8bn litres
of spirits a year.
The French, Germans and Spanish are the heaviest drinkers; the British and
Irish among the most abstemious. The average European's annual consumption
of 9.8 litres of pure alcohol, however, has fallen nearly 15 per cent since
1980.
The drinks industry provides full-time employment for about 3m people in
production and distribution, 2 per cent of all EC jobs.
It contributes a Pounds 4bn trade surplus to the Community, and it raises
Pounds 36bn in tax revenues, almost enough to fund the EC Commission's
annual budget.
To raise an equivalent amount, EC governments would need to increase income
tax rates by 12 per cent or VAT rates by 16 per cent.
This assessment of the industry's economic importance by the European
Insistute of Business Administration is included in a report submitted to
the European Commission by the Amsterdam Group, formed by leading drinks
companies to help combat alcohol abuse.
Mr Richard Owen, chairman of the group's committee responsible for the
report, said yesterday: 'The industry has a vested interest in encouraging
responsible drinking among the majority while actively discouraging alcohol
abuse by a small minority.'
It is estimated that while more than 90 per cent of consumers drink in
moderation between 4 and 7 per cent drink excessively.
The report agrees there is a range of significant health risks from
excessive consumption, but argues that moderate drinking alone poses no
problems and can be beneficial.
Attempts to curb overall drinking have little or no effect on irresponsible
drinkers, it says. The report recommends the extension of information and
education programmes but suggests that the most effective alcohol policies
are developed at national level.
'No reasonable case can be made on social, health or economic grounds for
curbing the industry's right to normal commercial freedoms,' it concludes.
