FT  27 OCT 93 / World Stock Markets: Corporate recovery boosts Swedish
stocks - Strong overseas buying has also provided support
It could hardly be more ironic. In the month when Sweden's blue collar trade
union has said that the country is in a depression and not in a recession,
and the government has predicted the worst economic performance since the
Second World War for this year, shares have broken through the all-time high
reached in August 1989.
At yesterday's close the Affarsvarlden general index showed a gain on the
year to date of more than 50 per cent, making the Stockholm stock exchange
one of Europe's strongest performers.
A combination of falling interest rates, corporate recovery and record
foreign buying have created the conditions for the rally. Interest rates
remain on a downward trend, as the central bank demonstrated last week when
it cut its key marginal rate further to 7.75 per cent.
At the same time, the weaker krona and massive corporate restructuring have
made the big multinationals much more competitive, causing exports and
profits to recover strongly in spite of weak demand in key markets.
Sweden's finance minister said last week that the economy had reached
bottom, echoing common expectation that economic growth will resume next
year after three consecutive years of contraction. This has encouraged
investors, who are getting ever less from keeping money in the bank, to buy
now for the recovery.
Adjusted for inflation, shares are still well below their former peak in
1989. Strip out Astra and Ericsson, the stock market's star turns, and the
performance is still less impressive. These two companies alone account for
some 24 per cent of total market capitalisation.
Ericsson has had a phenomenal year, rising from a low point of SKr172 in
January to SKr444 yesterday. At these levels a huge recovery in profits is
already being discounted; what seems to be driving the share price now is
expectations of a very heavy inflow of orders in a booming world
telecommunications market.
Astra has performed less spectacularly, but its shares have still risen from
SKr148 to SKr174, helped by very strong sales growth for key drugs.
These two companies apart, it has been the banking sector which has put in
the best performance, on the strengthening belief that the worst of the
Swedish banking crisis is now over. The bank and insurance index is up
nearly 280 per cent since the start of the year.
Most analysts believe that the market will climb as interest rates come down
and evidence of economic recovery becomes more visible. They point to a
series of corporate tax reforms as another factor which should help to
sustain upward momentum.
The reforms, to take effect from January, will scrap taxes on dividends from
Swedish companies for domestic residents, and halve the capital gains tax on
equities to 12.5 per cent.
The single most significant development on the stock exchange over the last
12 months has been the surge in overseas buying, which has lifted foreign
share ownership to around 24 per cent from just 10 per cent at the end of
1991. International institutions have been attracted not just by the
prospect of profits, but by a big increase in market liquidity.
Foreigners now hold around 44 per cent of Ericsson, compared with 27 per
cent at the end of last year, and some 38 per cent of Astra. Such levels of
ownership make the stock market far more sensitive to the behaviour of
international investors. The obvious danger is that the market will suffer a
setback if foreigners start to lock in profits.
There are other reasons to be wary, according to Mr David Longmuir, a
Scandinavian specialist with James Capel in London. One worry is how much
scope the government has for further deep cuts in interest rates. 'The
budget deficit is an enormous cloud on the horizon which will not go away,'
he states.
Another concern is the recent spate of rights offers and the prospect of new
privatisation issues. These are making heavy demands on institutional funds
and could stem the buying required to drive share prices higher.
