FT  29 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Brent Walker questioned on compensation
SIR KEITH Bright, chairman of Brent Walker, told shareholders at yesterday's
annual meeting that the group was 'considering a number of possibilities
with regard to the financing of William Hill', the group's betting shop
chain.
He said 'when these become firm we shall give you further details.'
Although questions from shareholders lasted for an hour, the meeting only
occasionally became heated. One shareholder asked if the board were 'all
dummies' when the directors were unable to answer a question about
compensation to former directors.
William Hill's syndicate of banks, owed Pounds 350m, are due to be repaid on
March 1 next year. Options open to the group include a full or partial sale,
flotation or refinancing of the debt.
A consortium of investors, led by SG Warburg, has approached Brent Walker
with a Pounds 360m leveraged offer.
Asked about that offer Sir Keith said 'there are one or two people around
who would like to make a turn for themselves.'
Any sale of William Hill would be subject to shareholder approval. He said
William Hill's turnover was 'substantially' higher following the start of
evening opening, but that it had had a run of bad luck lately.
Since joining the group in January he had been reviewing all its activities.
He aimed to improve profitability to provide a firm base for a 'sensible
financial and capital structure to be evolved'. The review would be
completed shortly, he said, and would go to the board and the group's banks.
He said shareholders would be given details of those matters as they were
resolved.
Asked about the Pounds 240,000 payment in compensation to former directors,
Mr John Leach, finance director, confirmed that this was a payment to Lord
Kindersley, the group's former chairman who resigned in July last year.
Lord Kindersley had had a five-year, fixed-term contract and was entitled to
the salary for the remaining portion of the contract, Mr Leach said. The
contract was signed when Mr George Walker was still chief executive of the
group.
Sir Keith has a fixed three-year contract, running to January 1996. He was
initially appointed on a salary of Pounds 15,000 a month for a two-to-three
day week. That was increased to Pounds 20,000 a month for a three-to-four
day week. He also receives Pounds 30,000 a year in pension contributions.
The company pays 75 per cent of his salary to a company of Sir Keith's with
the rest directly to him. He has an incentive plan linked to the successful
repayment of the banks' debt.
