FT  06 NOV 93 / Israelis assured on EC agreement
MR Manuel Marin, EC commissioner for development policy, said yesterday the
EC was working on a 'tailor- made' association agreement with Israel to
consider all Israel's trade demands in agriculture and high-tech exports.
He also said the EC would begin on Monday to work out a 'new vision' for a
joint policy in the Middle East and would continue to press for the lifting
of the Arab economic boycott against Israel.
Mr Marin was responding to criticism by Israel that the EC mandate for a new
agreement fell far short of Israel's needs to close a trade deficit of
Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.3bn). He said Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime
minister, had expressed strong criticism of Brussels in a private meeting
yesterday morning and that 'to some extent I understand his feelings'.
Mr Rabin has in the past said the EC was 'dragging its feet' in responding
to Israel's request for a new agreement after the signing of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace accord.
Mr Marin said the EC recognised Israel as a special case and wanted to reach
a deal on closer political, economic, trade and scientific co-operation. 'We
have to recognise that the government of Israel has created a historic
change in the Middle East, so our answer is a political answer to improve
the level of political and financial co-operation.'
Mr Marin said the EC, the biggest donor to the Palestinians, wanted to
increase co-ordination of regional policy and this would begin at meetings
on Monday with Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman.
Mr Benjamin Ben-Eliezer, housing minister, said yesterday Israel was working
hard to get Jordan to sign a peace agreement and indirectly confirmed
reports that Mr Shimon Peres, foreign minister, had secretly met Jordan's
King Hussein on Tuesday.
A meeting mainly aimed at establishing principles on spending the roughly
Dollars 2bn of international aid pledged for the West Bank and Gaza said
yesterday that the Palestinians must fully account for aid they receive.
The recommendation came from the first meeting in Paris of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, chaired by Mr Johan Jurgen Holst, Norwegian foreign
minister and chiefly composed of the US, Canada, the EC, Japan, Saudia
Arabia, the Palestine Liberation Organisation and Israel.
