FT  08 NOV 93 / US Pollution Scandal: Race to move mountain of waste in the
Rockies - When spring melts the winter snow, water carrying toxic heavy
metals could bring death to the streams feeding the Rio Grande
HIGH UP in Colorado's Rocky Mountains, Hayes Griswold and his team are
racing against time. They are trying to dump 6.5m tonnes of dangerous mining
waste back into the pit it came from. They need to get as much of the work
as possible done before winter sets in, bringing some of the world's
cruellest weather.
They know that if they don't succeed, then in spring, as the snow melts,
1,000 gallons a minute of water polluted with toxic heavy metals will pour
from the waste dump to threaten the streams that feed the Rio Grande River
far below.
This is Summitville, a gold mine that has come to epitomise all the worst
aspects of modern mining.
It is a public relations disaster for the mining industry which has spent
millions of dollars to promote the idea that modern mines do not create
environmental problems. Environmental groups everywhere point to Summitville
as evidence that they do.
It will cost Dollars 25.3m to move the dump at Summitville, tip the waste
back into the pit and treat it with neutralising materials. Another Dollars
5m will be needed to treat the contaminated ground beneath the dump.
The bills are being paid by the US Environmental Protection Agency, Hayes
Griswold's employer. The EPA is spending Dollars 50,000 a day to prevent a
toxic mixture of cyanide and heavy metals spilling from the mine site.
The agency was forced to take emergency action early this year after the
mine's owner, Galactic Resources, a Canadian company, declared itself
bankrupt. But, while narrowly averting an environmental catastrophe, the EPA
was plunged into a financial nightmare. It estimates the final bill for
cleaning up Summitville will be more than Dollars 100m.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is checking out events at the mine,
which within six days of going into production was leaking water
contaminated with cyanide and heavy metals into the headwaters of the
Alamosa River, which supplies water to farms and ranches on its way to the
Rio Grande. Within a year it had poisoned all the fish in a reservoir 15
miles downstream and was corroding irrigation equipment used by farmers in
the valley below.
The Colorado Bureau of Investigation is carrying out a parallel inquiry to
establish 'if there have been violations of criminal laws at Summitville'.
US law enables the EPA to claw back money for cleaning up a polluted site
from any person or organisation in any way previously connected with that
site. The agency is investigating whether Vancouver-based Galactic's
bankruptcy means the company and its executives are insulated from these
claw-back provisions.
Among the EPA's prime targets is Robert Friedland, aged 42, the Chicago-born
son of a German architect. For the first six years of the mine's short life
Mr Friedland was chairman of Galactic. For much of that time he was also
president and chief executive. To develop the Summitville mine Mr Friedland
raised more than CDollars 300m (Pounds 147.7m) for Galactic, much of it from
European institutional investors, particularly in Switzerland and the UK.
Today Mr Friedland's main corporate investment vehicle is a Vancouver
investment company, Ivanhoe Capital. He has been promoting Vengold, a
company exploring for gold in Venezuela. He is also negotiating with RTZ,
the UK-based world's biggest mining company, for a stake in the Lihir gold
project in Papua New Guinea. This is probably the biggest gold deposit in
the world outside South Africa.
Mr Friedland has a considerable personal following among some investors. He
helped Vengold raise more than CDollars 50m in North America and Europe this
year, one of the biggest capital-raising exercises by a Vancouver-quoted
company.
He was the executive driving force at Galactic when Summitville was
commissioned.
Local legend has it that gold mining started at Summitville, 12,500 ft up on
the north-east flank of the San Juan mountains, 25 miles south-west of Del
Norte in Rio Grande County, in 1750. The skeletal remains of wooden
buildings from mining activity in the 1870s still cling forlornly to the
mountainside near the huge pit dug by Galactic after mining resumed in 1986.
Galactic used a technique known as cyanide heap leaching to recover gold
from the ore it mined. This process usually starts with the construction of
an impermeable lined pad on the ground. Then heaps of crushed ore are dumped
on the pad and sprinkled with a cyanide solution that leaches the precious
metal from the ore.
It is a process that has been used by the mining industry for many years.
But this was the first time it had been used on such a scale in Colorado or
at such a height.
Cyanide started leaking from the Summitville ore heap almost immediately.
Yet rather than call a halt and order the pad to be repaired, regulators
from Colorado's state Mine Land Reclamation Board allowed Summitville to
collect the contaminated water and pump it back up to the top of the heap.
Thus over-ambitious management, botched construction, reckless mining and
weak state government regulation combined to create one of the biggest
scandals in recent mining history.
Summitville 'will likely be used as a case study of what can go wrong at a
mine site', says a report prepared for a group of mining industry and
environmental organisations.
Summitville, which was set up as a subsidiary of Galactic, claimed that
there was not enough flat land for a conventional heap leach pad. It was
allowed to dam a narrow valley and build a huge heap in it which was
eventually 127 ft deep and spanned 48 acres.
A creek ran through the valley but Galactic simply lined the heap with
plastic and ran a drain under it. It also built an unlined waste pile -
without regulatory approval.
Big problems quickly developed. More water flowed into the heap than flowed
out or evaporated, creating a risk that toxic water would spill over the
top. Acidic water, which dissolved the heavy metals such as copper, zinc and
iron in the waste material, began to flow from the waste pile. Cyanide
started to leak into the creek and from there into the ground water.
The company tried to pump the leaking water back into the heap, but that
raised the water level at an alarming rate. The Colorado authorities
considered closing the mine but were worried about the loss of jobs and
taxes. The state also feared it would be left with the cost of an emergency
clean-up for which there were no state funds. So Summitville was allowed to
continue as long as it installed a water treatment plant.
But the plant could not cope. There were more spills of water laced with
cyanide and heavy metals. The Colorado authorities then gave permission for
contaminated water to be dispersed over 16 acres of nearby land. But
disposal was concentrated in only 5.5 acres of steep mountainside. The
cocktail of cyanide and heavy metals flowed into nearby streams that feed
the rivers below.
The Colorado Department of Health was alerted and when Mr Jim Horn, one of
its inspectors, arrived at the mine, contaminated water was not only flowing
from the land disposal operations but also from nine other unauthorised
discharges.
'Literally, there was 1,000 to 2,000 lbs of heavy metals - iron, zinc and
copper - leaving the site in dissolved form,' he says. 'It was like adding
half a Buick (car) a day to the Whiteman Fork that flows into the Alamosa.
There was no life in the river for 17 miles and no life in the Terrace
Reservoir.'
An anonymous telephone call sent the Environmental Protection Agency rushing
to Summitville in September 1990. The EPA insisted the state authorities
act. Summitville paid Dollars 100,000 in civil penalties (on top of previous
fines totalling Dollars 30,000). As part of the settlement, it started work
on a plan to clean up the site.
By November 1992 this plan was ready - showing the projected cost for the
first phase alone would be Dollars 20m. Neither Summitville nor its owner,
Galactic, which had disposed of all its saleable assets to keep pace with
the mine's financial demands, had that kind of money. Summitville declared
itself bankrupt and said it would quit the site on December 15 1992.
Galactic quickly followed its subsidiary into bankruptcy.
Although Colorado insists that mining companies provide 'clean-up' bonds
before they start operations, Summitville had been asked for only Dollars
7.2m. About Dollars 2.5m of this had been handed back to help finance the
early reclamation work.
With only Dollars 4.7m to cover the clean-up, the state had no choice but to
call on the EPA to use emergency powers to take over the mine. The EPA,
whose income mainly comes from levies on the US chemical and oil industries,
is now footing the bill for the clean-up.
The timing of the Summitville scandal could not be worse for the US mining
industry. President Bill Clinton has promised to change the mining laws,
which date back to 1872 and, some claim, are too favourable to the industry.
The Summitville story is being cited as proof that federal mining laws need
toughening. Mr Phil Hocker, president of the Minerals Policy Centre, a
Washington-based lobbying group, says: 'The mining industry is attempting to
portray Summitville as an isolated, atypical incident. But it is typical of
a whole class of incidents in the US because often the political and
economic power of one industry in one particular state can be so
intimidating that regulators cannot resist it. There is a need for federal
minimum standards to be set for mining.'
This view is reinforced by a report on Summitville for Colorado's natural
resources department by Mr Luke Danielson, a Denver lawyer. This suggests
that permits for the mine were rushed through even before a reclamation plan
had been prepared. Then, just as Summitville's problems were becoming clear,
Colorado drastically cut funding for the mined land reclamation programme,
'leaving it understaffed, demoralised and under-equipped to cope effectively
with a problem of this magnitude and complexity'.
Colorado has already enacted, virtually with no opposition, sweeping reforms
to its state mining laws. 'The political climate has changed. The state is
no longer as tolerant towards the mining industry,' says Mr Alan Salazar at
the state Office of Policy and Initiative.
At the EPA, Mr Robert Duprey, director, waste management division, says:
'The most important lesson from Summitville is that we must have financial
assurances up front from mining companies. And we must have more effective
policing (of their activities). Also, we need a federal permitting process
for dealing with hazardous waste. This should not be left to individual
states. We have a lot of historic mining clean-up to do, we don't want new
ones.'
Environmental activists in California, Montana, Oregon and Washington states
are using the political ammunition provided by Summitville to call for an
end to the use of sodium cyanide in mining, which mining companies say is
essential in some forms of gold and copper mining. The Washington Wilderness
Coalition has coined the telling phrase: 'They take the gold. We keep the
cyanide.'
Summitville has also led to moves towards tighter mining legislation in
Latin America. Mr Oswaldo del Castillo, mining expert at Venezuela's
National Council for Investment Promotion, says: 'It is a relief to us that
Mr Friedland is not involved in mining in Venezuela.'
Mr Friedland says that, because of the various investigations, his lawyers
advise him not to give interviews about Summitville. But in a prepared
statement he said that while he was an officer of Galactic he was never
aware of any improper activity by any employee which would compromise the
environment.
'My primary role was attending to the financial affairs of the company.
There were numerous employees, consultants and government agencies who were
directly involved in technical evaluations and decisions at the mine site. I
am not a mining engineer and I of necessity deferred to the advice and
expertise of these qualified professionals who were engaged to design,
construct and manage the facility.'
Meanwhile, up in the Rocky Mountains, winter is closing in on Hayes Griswold
and his team. If they fail in their efforts to deal with the huge heap of
contaminated ore, the spring will spread Summitville's legacy into the
valleys and fields below.
