FT  29 OCT 93 / Jobless figures 'not absolute'
THE MAIN measure of UK unemployment, the monthly claimant count, is a useful
indicator of changes in labour market pressures but not an accurate measure
of absolute levels of unemployment, according to Mr Peter Stibbard, director
of statistics at the Employment Department.
Mr Stibbard's comments, made at a meeting of the Labour Market Statistics
Users' Group yesterday, will be exploited by opposition parties and
unemployment campaigners who have long criticised the claimant count for
underestimating real unemployment.
The unemployment measure has been changed several times since the start of
the 1980s and unemployment campaigners say it would be nearly 1m higher if
it was calculated as it was before 1982. To qualify for the current count an
individual must be claiming unemployment benefit or income support and be
available for work. That excludes nearly 1m people who are included in the
broader International Labour Organisation definition.
Those excluded are about 100,000 young people who are not on Youth Training
schemes but are not eligible for benefit, 250,000 married women and several
thousand other people - including many single mothers - who are on other
benefits such as sickness and disability benefit.
The UK's claimant count includes nearly 1m who are excluded by the ILO
definition - mainly people who are signing on but are not actively seeking
work and people who are working, but only for a few hours each week.
Although the divergence between the two measures did have the effect of
reducing unemployment by as much as 250,000 in the late 1980s they have been
at about the same level for the past three years.
Mr Stibbard's broader comments on the accuracy of the claimant count are
politically sensitive but have long been accepted by labour market
statisticians.
Some statisticians welcomed the fact that Mr Stibbard had made his comments
in public as evidence of a new 'glasnost' over employment statistics.
The meeting yesterday heard calls for a broader base of measures to be
issued each month, as in the US. Mr Stibbard did not rule out establishing a
group to advise on whether that would be practical but he warned that the
costs might be prohibitive.
