FT  23 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: More cogitation than agitation -
The birth of the first 'holistic' think tank
A HEAD-ON assault on Britain's political system and the disillusionment it
engenders begins in London today with the launch of a progressive
non-partisan think tank committed to affirmative, if intellectual, action
for change.
If nothing else, Demos, the brainchild of Mr Martin Jacques, one-time editor
of Marxism Today, and Mr Geoff Mulgan, a former aide to Mr Gordon Brown, the
shadow chancellor, is a courageous and ambitious creation.
Its advance publicity promises nothing less than 'to inject a new vitality
into the political world' and to be 'the first political think tank for the
21st century'.
Such claims are certain to fuel the cynicism that Demos hopes to cure. But,
by bringing together business people with the impecunious chattering
classes, the enterprise has at least succeeded in meeting its initial
funding target of Pounds 180,000.
Beyond rounding up many familiar faces from past crusades for change
(Professors Stuart Hall and David Marquand to name two), Messrs Jacques and
Mulgan have also persuaded figures like Mr Martin Taylor, chief executive
and chairman-designate of Courtaulds Textiles and Ms Yve Newbold, company
secretary of Hanson, to endorse their product by joining Demos's advisory
council.
A four-page explanation of its goals says politics has become a cultural
backwater 'defensive, unimaginative and no longer able to attract the
brightest and the best', while the traditional parties fail to lead but
merely react - often years too late - to events.
Demos promises to marry the values of liberty, equality and community with
those of individual initiative and responsibility.
'It (the think tank) is founded on the belief that we need a new and more
imaginative way of thinking about politics that draws on the best of the
democratic traditions without losing a hard headed rigour about what works
in the real world,' the blurb says.
Such goals might equally well be claimed by the Labour party and its allied
if independent think tank, the Institute for Public Policy Research. But at
Westminster there is ill-disguised hostility from many Labour MPs - much
aimed personally at Mr Jacques for his recent withering critique of Mr John
Smith in the less-than-progressive Daily Mail.
Many of the 500 guests at tonight's launch party at the National Theatre can
be counted on to enjoy Demos's hospitality while also mocking its calls for
people to think in 'a more holistic fashion' or its view that 'the new can
trickle upwards and outwards, rather than raining downwards'.
But a think tank can only be judged on its thoughts, and lest anyone thinks
Demos lacks gravitas, the first paper it intends to publish will be on the
unflakey subject of tax and public expenditure.
