FT  27 AUG 93 / VW and the Lopez espionage affair: Good PR gives GM chief
the edge - The Victim
The raids yesterday by German police and prosecutors on Volkswagen's
headquarters and other facilities in Wolfsburg marked an extraordinary
day in the history of the German car industry. Officials in Bonn did not
hide their concern over the potential political and economic damage
which could ensue from the battle 'between two great German car
companies'.
Christopher Parkes examines the personalities and issues in what one
German judge said could be 'potentially the biggest-ever case of
industrial espionage'.
THE patch of calm at the eye of the storm seems to suit Mr David Herman,
chairman of Adam Opel, the German subsidiary of General Motors.
From his office in Russelsheim, near Frankfurt, little seen and seldom
heard, he has conducted his company's campaign in the Lopez affair with a
conviction and consistency in striking contrast to the chaotic style of his
Volkswagen counterpart, Mr Ferdinand Piech.
Legal training embellished with a bit of New York street wisdom gained in
childhood has given him an edge in the fracas over Mr Piech, the engineer
from Vienna. He has a mild, relaxed manner. Mr Piech is tense and cold.
Mr Herman's standpoint has not wavered from the start of the affair this
spring, when it became known that Opel had registered with the German public
prosecution service its suspicions of the theft of thousands of items of
secret data by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and several colleagues who
followed him from GM to VW.
His often-repeated statement 'They had our documents. We don't have them
now, and they say they don't. Then where the hell are they?' colourfully
encapsulates Opel's case.
Reporters from the magazine, Der Spiegel, have been allowed a long leash and
granted considerable access from the top level to Opel and General Motors
employees and property. Starting in May, revelations and claims in the news
weekly - many since strengthened or largely substantiated - have played a
key role in Opel's strategy.
They have kept the public prosecutors on their toes. But more important, the
magazine's reports are the source from which German popular and political
belief in Opel's integrity and motives have grown steadily as the case has
progressed.
Skilful public affairs management is not common or even much-valued in
German industry. This is a failing which Mr Piech and Mr Klaus Liesen, the
worried chairman of his board of supervisors, have regretfully acknowledged
in the past few weeks.
While Mr Herman may be satisfied with his team's PR efforts, he has been
hurt and shocked by the reaction. He said at the outset that he expected
Opel and General Motors to be attacked. But his liberal American mentality
was not prepared for repeated claims from Mr Piech and Mr Gerhard Schroder,
the prime minister of VW's home state of Lower Saxony, that this was a
commercially-motivated attack by a 'foreign' company on Germany's finest.
Adam Opel has been established for 130 years in Germany and provides and
supports 400,000 jobs. Nor was Mr Herman, the lawyer, impressed by
suggestions that he was using the law, out of pique, as a weapon in a
personal attack on Mr Lopez.
'Inaki' Lopez was once a close colleague. They met first in the late 1970s
when both worked for GM in Spain, where both were given their first real
chance to prove themselves in business. Spain, where he met his wife, Mr
Herman readily admits, 'is associated with all the best things that ever
happened to me'.
Germany, where he has been in charge of Adam Opel for just over a year in
the middle of what Mr Piech describes as the worst motor industry crisis
since the war, has some way to go to match that.
