FT  09 JUL 93 / World Stock Markets: North Americans excited by casino
building craze - But the boom is blurring the distinction between gambling
and investment
Nowhere has the distinction between investing and gambling become more
blurred than in the high-stakes performance of casino operators listed on
North American stock exchanges.
The confusion is evident even in the names of the companies which are raking
in investors' money. Goldrush Casino &amp; Mining Corporation is one of this
year's most heavily traded and volatile shares on the Vancouver exchange.
The hottest performers on US markets include such companies as Casino Magic
and Boomtown.
Goldrush, which hopes to strike it rich with casinos in Colorado, Las Vegas
and the Caribbean, soared from a low of CDollars 3.05 in April to a peak of
CDollars 20.25 in June, with more than 7.5m shares changing hands in the
past three months. By this week the share price had tumbled back to CDollars
12.50.
The wheel has spun equally erratically for the veteran US gaming palaces
centred on Las Vegas and Atlantic City. Shares of Circus Circus Enterprises
have jumped more than 50 per cent on Wall Street in the past year to above
USDollars 60. The shares will be split three-for-two later this month.
But Morgan Stanley downgraded its rating on the company yesterday from buy
to hold, and the shares showed an immediate fall of Dollars 4 1/8 to Dollars
54 3/4 .
Caesar's World has bounced over the past 12 months between a low of Dollars
28.13 and a peak of Dollars 50.88. It presently trades at about Dollars
41.75.
Almost a dozen casino operators are listed in New York, and three in
Vancouver. Investors on the Toronto Stock Exchange can put their chips on
Dion Entertainment Corpor-ation, which is using the experience it has gained
in 17 bingo halls on the Canadian prairies to expand into fully fledged
casinos.
The casino boom stems largely from a drive among hard-pressed regional and
local governments to broaden their tax base without raising politically
sensitive income or property taxes.
The Canadian province of Ontario recently called for bids for its first
casino, to be built in Windsor, across the border from Detroit. The
provincial government will keep 20 per cent of gross revenues, as well as
any profits left over after expenses and a management fee paid to the
operator.
In the US, prospects for casino operators have been buoyed by a flood of
licences for floating 'riverboat casinos'. Mr John Rohs, an analyst at
Wertheim Schroder in New York, points to a 'domino effect', in which the
legalisation of gambling in one state inexorably puts pressure on its
neighbours to follow suit. For instance, if Windsor, Ontario, has a casino,
can Detroit be far behind?
In addition, several dozen Indian bands in both countries are turning to
casinos as a sure and recession-proof way of raising money for their
communities.
Mr Rohs is confident that the proliferation of casinos is far from over, and
that share prices will rise further. But he advises investors to place most
of their bets with the well-established industry stalwarts. His current
recommendations include Mirage Resorts and Promus Companies.
Others are nervous, however, that the wheel of fortune may be about to stop.
Mr Douglas Taylor of National Securities in Seattle describes the casino
craze as a 'big fad'. Noting that the market value of some of the newcomers
already matches that of a medium-sized airline, Mr Taylor declares that 'the
entire population of the US is going to have to gamble once a day to keep
these people going'.
One sign that the gambling instinct may have overtaken sound investment
judgment is that one of the biggest buyers of Goldrush Casino &amp; Mining
shares on the Vancouver Stock Exchange has been reported as a group known as
the High Rollers Investment Club.
