FT  24 APR 93 / BCCI has 'black hole' of Dollars 12.4bn
LIQUIDATORS yesterday warned of a Dollars 12.4bn (Pounds 8bn) 'black hole'
of unrealisable assets around the world in the collapsed Bank of Credit and
Commerce International.
Partners at accountants Touche Ross said they had realised only 4.5 per cent
of the bank's stated assets of Dollars 14bn. They expected further
realisations to total another 6.7 per cent. But they stood by their original
projection that creditors would receive dividends of 30p to 40p in the
pound.
The figures were announced as Mr Christopher Morris, one of the joint
liquidators to BCCI SA, released a report submitted to the Department of
Trade and Industry and circulated to the bank's creditors.
Mr Morris warned that he was studying the involvement of regulators -
including the Bank of England - in the supervision of BCCI. 'If there are
actions we can properly bring against the regulators we will bring them,' he
said.
The liquidators disclosed that they had launched a Dollars 10bn action in
the US at the end of last year against the National Commercial Bank of Saudi
Arabia, Sheikh Khalid bin Mahfouz, and a third party. They are already suing
Price Waterhouse and Ernst &amp; Whinney - now part of Ernst &amp; Young - former
auditors to BCCI, for about Dollars 8bn.
They also issued a bankruptcy order on Wednesday against Mr Nazmu Virani,
former chairman and chief executive of Control Securities, for personal
debts to the bank.
Other money is expected to come from a settlement negotiated by the
liquidators with the government of Abu Dhabi, the majority shareholders in
the bank.
But Mr Fred Goodwin, another partner involved in the liquidation, said that
most of BCCI's stated assets in 1991 had been grossly inflated and that
billions of pounds had been 'deliberately removed' to a network of trusts
and nominee corporations.
Against realisations until January 15 this year of Dollars 719m by the
British liquidators to BCCI, liquidators' fees totalled Dollars 133.3m and
legal fees Dollars 37.3m. Total expenses were Dollars 280.4m.
Aggregated fees including figures from other liquidators to the bank
totalled Dollars 194.1m, compared with realisations of Dollars 794m.
Mr Morris said the sum included 'many millions of pounds' in work from the
consulting arm of Touche Ross, which developed new computer programmes and
systems to replace BCCI's 10-year-old systems.
The level of fees was attacked yesterday by Mr Adil Elias, chairman of the
BCCI Depositors' Protection Association and a member of both the UK and
Luxembourg creditors' committees. He said he planned to call on the UK
courts to appoint an independent auditor to scrutinise the figures.
Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney general, told the Commons yesterday that
the inquiry by the Serious Fraud Office into BCCI had so far cost Pounds
6,203,000.
