FT  02 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: D-Mark defends position
THE D-MARK rose against the dollar and other European currencies yesterday,
in spite of the Bundesbank's announcement of its long awaited rate cuts,
writes Gillian Tett.
Speculation about the rate cuts before the German central bank's
announcement initially pushed the dollar up above DM1.71 during morning
trading in Europe.
But following a brief surge in the aftermath of the announcement, the D-Mark
then staged a surprising rally, recouping its losses to close at DM1.699 to
the dollar, around  1/2 pfennig stronger than the previous day.
The D-Mark also strengthened against the French franc, finishing at
FFr3.377, up on the previous day's close of FFr3.371. Against the Italian
lira and Spanish peseta the D-Mark closed little changed.
Dealers said one reason for the D-Mark's rally was that the market had
already been pricing in a rate cut, either at yesterday's council meeting or
later this month.
'Although the D-Mark did weaken at first, the dollar quickly ran into profit
taking,' explained Mr Michael Feeny, market analyst at Sumitomo Bank.
'Everybody knew that the Bundesbank would have to cut soon.'
However, another reason for the dollar's drop was the release of figures
from the National Association of Purchasing Management in the US, which
showed a sharp fall in confidence among US manufacturers.
Coupled with the growing fears that today's US non-farm employment figures
might also prove disappointing, the survey prompted concern about the patchy
nature of the US recovery.
'A lot now depends on the US non-farm payroll figures,' said Ms Alison
Cottrell, international economist at Midland Global Markets, who predicts
that any big fall in jobs could severely undermine the dollar, particularly
against the yen in the coming days .
Nevertheless, rumours that the Bank of Japan was now preparing for a rate
cut allowed the dollar to gain against the yen in late trading, leaving it
closing at Y107.4 up on a previous day's close of Y106.4.
In spite of the D-Mark's general rally, sterling continued to strengthen
against the German currency.
After rising in the morning on the back of the Bundesbank announcement, it
then fell back after speculation grew in London markets about the
possibility of further UK rate cuts.
However, a lunchtime statement by the Treasury discounting the possibility
of rate cuts in the near future pushed sterling up again, leaving it at
DM2.5625 at the end of the day - its strongest position since devaluation
last September.
It also closed up against the dollar, finishing at Dollars 1.5085, up from
the previous day's position of Dollars 1.4935.
