FT  26 FEB 93 / UK Company News: Expansion in UK market planned
TRANSATLANTIC Holdings, the financial services group, is gearing up for
expansion in the UK.
'We intend to increase our exposure in the UK insurance market and
increasingly in the insurance markets of the English speaking world,' said
Mr Donald Gordon, the South African life insurance entrepreneur who chairs
the company.
Mr Gordon said a number of larger UK insurance companies were 'looking for a
big brother' and that TransAtlantic was aiming to acquire a business in the
'larger end of that market. The bigger they are, the better the bargain.'
Union des Assurances de Paris, the state-owned French company, which owns 18
per cent of TransAtlantic, was particularly keen to expand in UK non-life
business where increases in premium rates are leading to improved
profitability after three years of losses. The two companies jointly own Sun
Life, one of the UK's largest life insurance companies.
However, Mr Gordon ruled out any interest in Guardian Royal Exchange, the UK
composite with which he has had longstanding links. GRE sold part of its
South African subsidiary, Guardian National, to Liberty Life in 1978, but
retains a 51 per cent interest in the company. Mr Gordon is a member of the
GRE board. 'It is not part of an agenda I have for myself. It would get too
close to being incestuous.'
Mr Gordon also delivered some sharp criticisms of UK valuation techniques,
which he claimed exacerbated the downturn in the property market. They were
'particularly inappropriate' for high quality shopping centres such as
Thurrock Lakeside, he said.
Valuations of UK property depend on past property sales, since they are
based on the price that the property could be expected to fetch if it were
placed on the market by a willing seller. Mr Gordon argued that this process
was flawed in the case of large shopping centres because they were hard to
compare with each other and were rarely sold.
Furthermore, he claimed that 'no rational company or person would . . . be a
willing seller of a major, high potential regional shopping centre or any
other prime property in the depths of serious recession.'
Future valuations for the entire industry could be affected by forced sales
or a price obtained by a liquidator or receiver, he said. Valuation
techniques 'may have played a part in exacerbating the downward spiral of
values in recessionary conditions and the upward movement in valuations in
boom times.'
He claimed that valuers were wrong to value high street shops more highly
than shopping centres, which he said had better prospects for income growth.
If Thurrock Lakeside had been valued on a 6 per cent yield, like many high
street shops, it would increase its valuation by Pounds 45m to Pounds 425m.
Mr Gordon's criticisms of open market valuation techniques were dismissed by
Mr Andrew Cherry, head of the assets valuation standards committee of the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. Banks were only willing to lend
against the open market value of property, he said. 'At the end of the day,
a property is worth what someone is willing to pay for it.'
