FT  12 NOV 93 / French take hammer to crack a nut
THE swoop by French police on suspected lslamic fundamentalists this week
was more a warning against possible future trouble than a response to any
actual terrorist threat.
Mr Charles Pasqua, the interior minister who gives the Balladur government
its hardline conservative edge, told parliament that the dawn arrests on
Tuesday of 88 suspected fundamentalists, mainly of Algerian origin, had
uncovered 'a number of arms, important sums of money and false identity
papers'. But the arms haul amounted to two guns and a few electronic
components that allegedly could be used in bomb-making.
Most of the 88 were released as swiftly as they had been arrested. By
yesterday, police held only three men, had confined six others to their
homes and had returned one imam (Moslem priest) to Turkey for recently
telling Le Figaro newspaper that Islamic law should take precedence over
that of France.
Police did find quantities of tracts sympathetic to the Islamic Salvation
Front (FIS) banned in Algeria. More sinister was the apparent discovery of a
copy of the same message warning French expatriates to leave Algeria which
was given to three kidnapped French consular officials on their recent
release by an FIS sister organisation, and a note of the London telex number
through which responsibility was claimed for the killing of two French
geologists in Algeria.
But the evidence is that the French government was more interested in
scaring the handful of FIS activists in France, than scared by them. Paris
does not seem to have been pushed into overt action by Algiers; the Algerian
government was apparently quite happy with the close but passive French
police surveillance of suspected FIS members over the past months.
The French authorities are very nervous at any signs of fundamentalism
spreading among France's 3m Moslems, the country's second largest religious
group, way ahead of Protestants or Jews. France weathered the 1991 Gulf war,
with its large population of Maghreb origin showing none of the objection to
French involvement which was displayed back in north Africa.
But there are home-grown reasons for the spread of Moslem fundamentalism in
France, particularly in deprived, drug-ridden suburbs where unemployed young
'Beurs' (as French-born Arabs are known) often find solace in Islam. In such
areas traditional social and political forces like the Catholic church and
the Communist party are giving way to imams and mosques. France has some 100
mosques capable of taking more than 100 worshippers, but a far larger number
 -an estimated 900 - which are simply converted suburban basements or flats.
Yet, there are very few home-trained imams - only 4 per cent of the 500 in
France, according to one estimate. At the recent opening of a Moslem
seminary, Mr Pasqua himself said he hoped more imams would be trained in
France. In the town of Nantua in south-east France from which the Turkish
imam was expelled this week, two Turkish and two Moroccan girls have been
suspended from their school for wearing 'tchadors' or head scarves. Such
girls face a cruel dilemma: ostracism at school if they wear scarves, or
ostracism at home if they do not.
Serious though these long-term integration problems are, the French
government faces a more immediate diplomatic challenge with Algeria itself.
Paris has found itself pushed from denouncing the cancellation of elections
in January 1992 to reluctantly backing the same government.
'Our interest is stability in Algeria, in democracy if possible, but not in
the arrival of fundamentalists in power there,' says one official. This
support, bolstered by a FFr1bn (Pounds 110m) credit earlier this year, is
tempered by warnings to the Algiers authorities that they must lose no more
time in embarking on political and economic reform. But the longer the
Algiers authorities drag their feet, the more France become a target of
their opponents.
