FT  16 AUG 93 / Director with direct line to the boss: Simon Weinstock is a
GEC board member - his father is MD of the group. The perils of following in
a parent's footsteps
AT THE first mention of his father Mr Simon Weinstock pulls his shoulders
back, sits upright in his chair and says: 'If my father was not here I would
not be here. I have to be quite open about that.'
By his own admission, the 41-year-old scion has no obvious qualifications to
be a director of General Electric Company with responsibility for
acquisitions and GEC Marconi, the group's defence arm.
He qualified neither as an accountant nor as an industrial manager. But he
does have the ear of his father, Lord Weinstock, GEC's managing director.
It is this, more than anything else, which guarantees him a unique position
on the board of one of Britain's biggest companies, with annual sales of
Pounds 9.4bn. As a fellow director explains: 'Arnold does not move without
consulting Simon first.'
If this bothered him in the past, and there is anecdotal evidence to suggest
it was a reason for his shyness, it no longer causes him concern.
When he joined the board six years ago he was described by some of his
colleagues as at times petulant, shy and often anxious not to be continually
thought of as the son of Lord Weinstock. Now they say he has become more
relaxed, confident and delighted to be seen as the son of Lord Weinstock.
The softly spoken Mr Weinstock now has a friendly, if still awkward, manner.
He cannot think of a single disadvantage of being the boss's son. He
dismisses the accusation of nepotism as ridiculous. 'GEC is not a family
business, has never been run on those lines and never will be,' he says.
The advantages, however, are numerous. Perhaps most important, he knows how
to dodge the pitfalls of working for a managing director who can have an
intimidating, even threatening, presence. 'I know what he is looking for and
what he does not want to see,' says Mr Weinstock.
This gives him an edge over other GEC senior executives, who often ask him
to intervene in their dealings with Lord Weinstock. 'It depends on the
situation, but it can be daunting for some people to deal with my father
alone. I will then get involved.'
He says he has an excellent relationship with his father. They share many
interests such as a love of music, regularly visiting the Salzburg festival
and La Scala Opera House in Milan, and a passion for horse racing.
Perhaps most surprising is Mr Weinstock's contention that his father never
put any pressure on him to join the company. After working at SG Warburg,
the merchant bank, first in advising the government on rescheduling debt and
then on the investment side, he thought it was time for a change.
'With a certain amount of trepidation I decided to work for GEC. My father
was pleased but he put no pressure on me to join the company. If he had not
wanted me to come then I would have done something else.'
Lord Weinstock may not have pressed his son to join him, but he appeared
keen that he should succeed him three years after Mr Weinstock was appointed
to the board as commercial director in 1987.
Asked on Channel 4's Answering Back programme whether he would like to be
succeeded by his son, he said: 'Of course I would like it, but only on
condition that it fulfilled his life and not that he did something to please
me.'
He added, however, that it would be for GEC's senior managers to choose his
successor and it would be up to his son to decide whether he wanted the job.
There is little doubt that Mr Weinstock would like to take over from his
father, although he adds a third condition: the institutional investors
would have to want him for the job.
'I would not want to do it unless I could do it and the senior management
and shareholders wanted me to do it.'
Mr Weinstock, regarded by many in GEC as the leading internal candidate,
warns of the difficulties of bringing in an outsider. 'It would be hard for
someone to come from another company to lead this one, but not impossible.
Companies generally prefer to promote from within.'
He is backed in this view by some key executive directors. One says: 'The
boss's son imposes himself more naturally.' Sir Ronald Grierson, a former
vice-chairman of GEC who remains on the board of GEC International, one of
the group's subsidiaries, says: 'There is no prima facie reason to assume
that dynastic succession is worse than any other kind of succession. I even
happen to believe that, other things being relatively equal, continuation of
management by the founder's family can be a good recipe.'
Yet a number of the group's shareholders say there is no question of Mr
Weinstock succeeding his father. A senior fund manager says: 'It is unlikely
that Simon Weinstock will emerge as his father's successor. It would look
like a massive piece of nepotism. There is an inbuilt inclination from
investors not to want him however good he is.'
Another says: 'No one should try and stop Arnold's ambition for his son to
become boss. But I am not sure his father would want him sacrificed on the
altar of GEC.'
Mr Weinstock, sensitive to both views, alludes to the possibility that the
top job could be split when his father, who is 69, decides to retire.
Since 1989 GEC has formed joint ventures with Alsthom of France in power
engineering, Siemens of Germany in telecommunications and General Electric
of the US in consumer appliances. This, says Mr Weinstock, has transformed
GEC into a different company from the one his father has been running for
most of his working life.
'A large chunk of our business is now in joint ventures and there will
probably be more of this than less. In the long term the management
structure may be different. We need to be flexible about it.'
But Mr Weinstock is in no hurry for a chance to take over at GEC. He says
that while his father remains at the helm he is content with his job on the
board, and he sleeps better at night knowing that he is making a
contribution to the company in which he holds 31m shares.
