FT  14 APR 93 / Government Bonds: Hopes of lower interest rates lift
European paper
HOPES of lower interest rates lifted the main European government bond
markets yesterday, with the recent strong performance of the US Treasury
bond market providing an additional boost.
The Bank of France lowered one of its key interest rates yesterday morning,
and dealers said many participants in the bond markets expect to see a
further easing by the Bundesbank at this week's repo.
French government bonds closed higher on hopes that money market rates would
continue to decline in the near future, following the decision by the Bank
of France to cut its ceiling rate - the five to 10-day rate - from 12 per
cent to 10 per cent. The central bank held its intervention rate at 9.10 per
cent.
The cut in the ceiling rate had been widely expected, but the French bond
market took further encouragement from Mr Edmond Alphandery, the economy
minister, who said he expected French interest rates to continue to fall
over the next few days.
The June futures contract ended up 0.32 at 118.22 after a high of 118.36,
while the yield on the 10-year benchmark bond ended at 7.09 per cent against
7.14 per cent.
AFTER posting early gains on news of unexpectedly weak retail sales, US
Treasury prices lost ground following a disappointing seven-year note
auction.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  3/16 at 104
3/8 , well below its highs for the day, and yielding 6.778 per cent. At the
short end of the market, the two-year note was slightly firmer, up  1/16 at
100 5/32 , to yield 3.774 per cent.
Prices gained ground in early trading after the Commerce department
announced that retail sales fell 1.0 per cent in March, and declined 1.2 per
cent if car sales were excluded. The market had been expecting March sales
to be flat, and the data was initially viewed as evidence that economic
activity may be slowing down. Analysts pointed out, however, that the severe
storms in March may have been behind the drop in sales.
The market dropped back from its morning highs, however, after the auction
of Dollars 9.75bn of seven-year notes met with poor demand. The ratio of
bids tendered to bids accepted was unusually low at 1.93-to-1.
GERMAN government bond prices gained about a quarter of a point on hopes
that the Bundesbank would lower its repo rate from last week's 8.13 per cent
to perhaps between 8.05 to 8.10 per cent at this week's repo.
Dealers pointed out that the move by the Bank of France - coupled with the
pressure on the Spanish currency - could encourage the Bundesbank to lower
German interest rates.
The Liffe bund futures contract opened at 96.40 and hit a high of 96.57
before trading at 96.48 by late afternoon.
SPANISH government bond prices, which had fallen back very sharply on Monday
in the domestic market on political uncertainty, regained some of their
losses yesterday but still ended the session down from their pre-Easter
levels.
Monday's sharp fall was triggered by the prime minister's decision to call
an early general election - on June 6 - leading to worries that the peseta
may come under pressure and then be devalued.
'The early election heightens the uncertainty and the devaluation risk has
been increased,' said Mr Steve Major, bond analyst at Credit Lyonnais.
Yesterday, the peseta came under pressure in the foreign exchange markets,
and dealers said they suspected the Bank of Spain had intervened in order to
support the Spanish currency.
Traders noted that there had been heavy selling on Monday by domestic
investors, many of whom appeared to expect a wave of foreign selling.
However, dealers pointed out that selling by foreigners was not
'particularly heavy' yesterday.
A STRONGER lira and the firm tone in the European government bond markets
gave Italian government bond prices a boost yesterday.
On Liffe, the June BTP contact rose 80 basis points to 95.38. The lira rose
to around 964 against the D-Mark from 978 on Friday.
UK government bond prices gained between  1/8 and  1/2 a point, taking their
cue from the recent firmness of the US bond market, sterling strength, and
hopes of lower interest rates across Europe.
JAPANESE government bonds fell back yesterday, responding to the strong
stock market rally. The Nikkei stock index ended 858.15 points higher at
20,740.29 as share prices were boosted by news of the government's Y13,200bn
fiscal stimulus package.
The bond market opened on a firm note helped by the strength of the yen,
which moved to Y112.70 to the dollar before falling back. Bond prices
remained relatively stable during the day but fell back towards the end of
trading.
