FT  08 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: White Nights partners keen to
press on
WESTERN PARTNERS in a Russian oil extraction joint venture have said they
hope to be able to continue a project which is seen as a test of Russia's
ability to attract foreign investment to its ailing energy sector.
Phibro Energy Production, a subsidiary of Salomon, which owns 45 per cent of
the White Nights joint venture, had threatened to pull out of the project
unless the Russian side, a state-owned company called Varyoganneftegas,
radically changed its behaviour.
Mr Brian Lavers, Phibro's chairman, said on Friday that crisis talks, begun
last month with Russian partners in the Siberian town of Raduzhny, would be
resuming in 10 days time.
''We haven't solved all the problems. . . (but) we're definitely making
progress towards being able to continue with the White Nights joint
venture,' he said.
Phibro has alleged that Varyoganneftegas had threatened to halt payment of
contracts and of US workers on the site, and to stop efforts to obtain the
necessary licences and export tax exemptions. The US company has spent some
Dollars 115m on the project since it started two years ago.
Mr Lavers declined to give details of what kind of progress had been
reached, but he said 'the most important single issue' was to persuade the
Russian government to start operating an export tax exemption for joint
ventures created before January 1 1992. The exemption was announced last
July but the Russian authorities had not yet set up a committee to implement
it, he said, adding that in the mean time the company had paid Dollars 10m
in tax.
Mr Robert Denham, chairman of Salomon, told Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US
Treasury Secretary, before he paid a brief visit to Moscow last week, that
the action contemplated by Varyoganneftegas was 'theft'. Mr Bentsen noted on
Friday that one of Russia's big problems was 'capital to further modernise
and increase investment in equipment. They can expand much faster if they
get additional capital'.
