FT  29 OCT 93 / International Company News: Axa musters modest rise to
FFr831m
AXA, the second largest French insurance group, mustered a modest increase
in net profits to FFr831m (Dollars 146.8m) in the first half of this year
from FFr813m in the same period of 1992, and confirmed that it was on course
for profits growth in the full financial year.
'We think that our results for 1993 should be slightly better than the
figures for 1992,' said Mr Claude Bebear, chairman, who also forecast an
improved performance in the second half from Equitable, the US insurer in
which Axa holds a 49 per cent stake.
Axa last year saw net profits fall sharply to FFr1.5bn from FFr2.4bn in
1991, because of the sluggish state of the French insurance market and a
disappointing performance from Equitable. The French group earlier this year
staged a FFr3.65bn convertible bond issue to strengthen Equitable's capital
position.
However, Mr Bebear said that the outlook for Equitable was improving.
The US associate contributed FFr430m to Axa's net profits during the first
half, due to a robust performance from its financial services operation and
reduced losses from its insurance interests.
Equitable also contributed FFr27.4bn to Axa's turnover during the first
half, thereby fuelling an overall increase in turnover of 85 per cent to
FFr64.8bn.
Mr Bebear said that Equitable represented 42 per cent of the group's
activity. 'We're turning into a company that's more American than French,'
he said.
Axa, like other French insurers, has been affected by the pressures of the
recession, although the competitive strains on the market are now easing.
Insurance profits slipped to FFr724m from FFr895m, but the group benefited
from brisk growth in financial services, due to Equitable, with net profits
rising to FFr636m from FFr289m.
Mr Bebear confirmed that Axa might be interested in GMF, the French mutual
insurance group, in order to expand its motor insurance business.
However, he said that 'right now Axa doesn't have a plan of action regarding
GMF', and that the two companies were not even in negotiations.
