FT  09 JUL 93 / City banks defiant over IRA letter
OVERSEAS financial institutions in the City of London reacted defiantly to
yesterday's warning from the IRA of more bombing campaigns in spite of the
creation of the new security zone designed to deter such attacks.
In a letter sent by the IRA to some foreign-owned financial institutions in
the City and published in Republican News, the IRA leadership says: 'No one
should be misled into underestimating the seriousness of the IRA's intention
to mount future planned attacks in the political and financial heart of the
British state.'
An official from the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank, which confirmed that a copy
of the letter was sent to its Bishopsgate offices that were devastated by a
terrorist bomb earlier this year, said: 'Our record shows we will not be
influenced by this sort of propaganda. We've been in Lebanon since 1982 -
something like this will not make us move out of London.'
Mr Paul Hofer, regional head of Credit Suisse's northern Europe operations,
said: 'We have total trust in the UK authorities. We were back one day after
the last bomb.'
Mr David Prosser, deputy managing director of Daiwa Bank (Capital Markets),
said: 'We got bombed out of the Commercial Union building in the first bomb.
It didn't stop us then and another one or maybe two bombs would not stop us
now.'
Deutsche Bank yesterday confirmed it had received a letter but declined to
comment further.
City of London Police confirmed that a number of overseas banks had received
the letters and urged institutions to hand over the letters for forensic
examination. Police experts are now studying the copies of the letter sent
to Deutsche Bank and the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank.
Responding to the continued threat to the City, the Foreign Banks and
Securities Houses Association said its members were now putting more
emphasis on security and welcomed tougher anti-terrorist measures such as
the road check-points.
Mr Ian Mckay, secretary of the association, which represents 150 overseas
institutions, added: 'Our members will not be swayed by this attempt to
destabilise London.'
However, concern at the threat of a City bombing campaign yesterday prompted
a Scandinavian securities house, which asked not to be named, to draw up
contingency plans to leave the Square Mile.
A senior official at the institution said it planned to install dealing room
facilities in a building outside the City.
The IRA's letter says: 'In the context of present political realities,
further attacks on the City of London and elsewhere are inevitable. This we
feel we are bound to convey to you directly, to allow you to make fully
informed decisions'.
No copies of the letter are thought to have been sent to US-owned
institutions as the IRA is anxious not to alienate any republican sympathy
in North America.
