FT  18 SEP 93 / How to Spend It: From boardroom to the bedroom - Want to
work from home? John Morgan advises on how to set up the perfect in-house
office
ALTHOUGH many people dream of working from home, few seem to be very good at
it when they get the chance. Some, after years of institutionalised
corporate life, find it difficult to adjust to a self-imposed regime. Others
discover that they are easily waylaid by domestic distractions.
However, advances in technology and more elastic attitudes towards work are
making working from home, and its fashionable sibling, 'flexible' working,
increasingly feasible and attractive options. With a little planning,
judicious investment and some imagination, running your office from your
house can significantly improve your lifestyle. Here are a few tips.
First, stick to regular office hours. An acquaintance of mine, having left
the City of London to begin his own consultancy, kept to his previous
routine with military precision: he rose, bathed, dealt with his
correspondence and calls at the same time as before; he even dressed in his
business suit for a while.
This helped him make a successful transition from one way of working to
another.
It is also a good idea to have your office as far away as possible from the
diversions of home life: in a distant bedroom, attic, basement or, as in the
case of a certain romantically-minded writer, in a strawberry gothic
summerhouse.
Then you will want to construct an office. You will obviously need some sort
of desk, perhaps put together from components. The Nomos Collection by Tecno
is probably the most flexible and stylish of this kind.
Designed by Sir Norman Foster, it uses a simple tubular system to construct
a variety of surfaces ranging from the simplest table to workstations that
can accommodate complicated filing, sophisticated up-lighting and complex
electronic equipment with its attendant wiring and cabling.
The structures are free-standing and can be easily enlarged or modified.
Nomos is available in a choice of finishes including glass, laminate and
wood, and therefore manages to suit both traditional and modem interiors.
Prices start at Pounds 2,700.
Technology, although the sine qua non of the home office, remains a
stumbling block for many. A bewildering array of products, often with
overlapping functions, can make choosing the right equipment confusing and
unnecessarily costly.
The first investment is a good computer: one that will not only fulfil your
current needs, but that also has the capacity to accommodate your business
future expectations. Whether you choose an Apple Macintosh or an IMB
compatible system is now largely a matter of preference, as both systems now
share similar functions.
Apple was designed as a totally integrated graphical system and is thus
ideal for those whose work has a strong visual element such as designers,
journalists and even estate agents. It is very user friendly, elegantly
designed and includes myself in its loyal following.
Apple's Performa range is for the beginner and has been designed to be
simple to use. It is available in three models, the most advanced being the
Performa 600CD, Pounds 2199, which has an internal CD Rom Drive. Or users
can invest in the Mackintosh Duo System, around Pounds 2000, which combines
a portable notebook and desktop computer. The notebook slots (docks) in or
out of the main desktop computer and is ideal for working on the move. It is
light, powerful and has a standard-sized key-board and a bright easy-to-read
screen.
More advanced is the Centris 660AV, from Pounds 1964 - the computer that you
can talk to. It offers the latest audio visual technologies and provides new
ways to communicate by combining telecommunications, video and speech.
Frome the large array of IBM compatible machines the Dell range can be
recommended as its systems can easily be up-graded Of its three ranges, Dell
Dimension is ideal for the home worker as it is competitively priced at
around Pounds 859 and is backed by the company's excellent support service.
It comes pre-loaded with business software such as Microsoft Office which
has all the basic functions such as data base, spread-sheet and
word-processing.
IBM itself offers several grades of computer ranging from the IBM PS/1,
which is aimed at the first time PC buyer. It is easy to use, set up, and
includes all the basics. But most business users will want at least the PS/2
which has the new fast technology and also boasts a sophisticated data base
and multi-media capabilities.
A glance at one of the computer magazines will show a wide variety of
machines on offer with similar performance, including many offered by mail
order companies. If ordering by mail, however, it is important to be
satisfied that service guarantees will be honoured. Purchase by credit card
can give useful protection against non-delivery.
Increasingly sophisticated telecommunications are also greatly helping those
working from home. Both BT and Mercury now operate voice messaging systems.
Ideal for those who travel a great deal, these enable recorded messages to
be sent from and received through a central 'mailbox'.
The system records more and longer (up to five minutes) messages than the
conventional answering machine and will store them for up to a month. There
is also Email (electronic mail) that allows text messages on a PC to be
sent, via a modem, to mailboxes.
The answering machine, long the freelancer's best friend, has also greatly
improved. The Panasonic KX-F2090BE, Pounds 599 plus VAT, is one of the best
available: it answers calls, records voice messages and sends and receives
faxes. It requires only one line and switches automatically between fax and
telephone. It has a memory and polling function that allows you to check-in
for messages on compatible faxes.
BT has the new DF200, a fax, telephone and answering machine that uses new
digital technology rather than the usual tape. It is very small (slightly
bigger than A4), has ten minutes answering time.
You will also need your own photocopier. Xerox has just launched the 5310,
an easy-to-use, compact copier designed for the home worker. It costs Pounds
1600 and can cope with up to 1,500 copies a month, will reduce and enlarge
images between 70 per cent and 124 per cent, and, thanks to a special bypass
system, copies on to different sizes of paper.
Canon offers a wide choice of very good machines ranging from its new Mini
Copier FC330, Pounds 795 plus VAT, which is very small, portable and
suitable for low volume work to its all-singing, all-dancing big brother,
the CLC10 colour copier, for Pounds 3,450. It produces excellent quality
copies thanks to Canon's 'bubble jet' technology and therefore is ideal for
those who need to produce high-quality colour documents.
If your answering machine does not include a faxing option, a separate fax
machine is vital. Canon has the B200 for Pounds 900, a new plain-paper fax
which produces documents on real paper rather than the usual flimsy,
fadeable thermal variety. Its sharp resolution makes it ideal for faxing
photographs and a 24 hour transmission function allows you to send documents
at pre-set times, thus making the most of international time zones and
cost-effective telephone rates.
Amstrad has recently launched the PS8000 fax. Comfortably known as 'The
Personal Secretary', it sends and receives faxes, copies documents and
records telephone messages. It will also forward messages to you and record
the time they were received.
And finally, your very own portable super secretary - the brand-new Psion
Series 3a hand-held computer, Pounds 329.95. Although small enough to fit in
your pocket it has a remarkably large screen and software of a
sophistication and scale normally found on desk-top computers.
Add an excellent lighting system, a well-designed chair such as a Charles
Eames design from the 1950s, from Pounds 700, and a terrific hi-fi system
for a little music therapy and the totally efficient and life-enhancing home
office is yours.
