FT  14 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tories 'must speak for more Scots'
MR IAN LANG, Scottish secretary, said yesterday that Scottish Conservatives
needed to build on the new start they had gained at the last general
election and must seek to speak for more Scots.
In a largely light-hearted speech exulting the party's success in
confounding the sceptics by winning seats in last year's general election,
he said the Scottish party was now 'free from the siege mentality. Free from
the doubts and pessimism'.
He said that the Conservative party's agenda was the 'established agenda of
Scottish politics' and the party was 'central to the Scottish political
scene'.
What Scotland needed most in the 1990s was 'another dramatic advance for the
enterprise culture'. If Scottish industry had created as many new jobs per
head as the south-east of England, 'there would have been over 100,000 more
new firms in Scotland during the 1980s'. Scottish Enterprise, the
development body, had set a target of increasing the rate of company
formations by 50 per cent by the year 2000, creating an extra 50,000 jobs,
Mr Lang said.
He pointed out that since the Tories came to power in 1979 the rate of home
ownership in Scotland had risen from 35 per cent to 53 per cent. But he said
that was not enough. 'I want home ownership to reach 60 per cent by the end
of this parliament.' Although the rate of home ownership in Scotland has
risen, partly through the sale of council houses, it is still below that for
England which is close to 70 per cent.
Mr Michael Forsyth, the employment minister and a former Scottish Office
minister, closed the employment debate by praising Lady Thatcher.
He said: 'I made politics my career, sometimes I think my life, because I
was inspired by Margaret Thatcher and her determination to spread ownership,
choice and opportunity for all.' He added: 'That agenda is still unfinished
business and John Major is now carrying our torch.'
Indicating scepticism about the European Community, he said: 'I know there
are differing views in our party on the meaning and impact of the Maastricht
treaty, but there is one thing we can all agree on  - if Europe is to
succeed it must set its face against excessive regulation and
protectionism.'
He went on: 'Let's send a message to the European Commission: stop bringing
forward job-killing regulations which add to business costs, handicap
enterprise and lengthen dole queues.'
