FT  19 MAY 93 / Kohl set to reopen Turkish wounds
TURKEY'S often fraught relations with Germany start afresh today with the
visit to Ankara of German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The visit coincides with a period of considerable political change. Mr
Suleyman Demirel has just been installed as president and the search for his
replacement as prime minister, and perhaps a new coalition government, is
barely under way.
In a row last year over the use of German military aid in Turkey's fight
against Kurdish rebels, the late President Turgut Ozal outraged German
opinion when he compared the polices of Mr Kohl with those of 'Hitler's
Germany'.
There remains a residual resentment of Bonn's sometimes high-handed
attitude, but no Turkish administration can afford to ignore Germany,
Turkey's most important trade and investment partner.
Germany is also a leading aid donor, and has provided DM6bn (Pounds 2.4bn)
in military assistance either bilaterally under Nato programmes, or as part
of the 'cascade' effect following Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) arms
reductions.
If relations are strained today it will partly reflect realisation on both
sides that special economic ties have changed.
With the challenges of reunification, German assistance is expected to tail
off. Direct military aid to Turkey, together with Portugal and Greece, has
already stopped, while remittances from Turkish workers - at about Dollars
2.1bn (Pounds 1.36bn) in 1992, a vital part of balance of payments - have
peaked.
The labour issue is at the centre of Turkey's problems with Germany. Many
Turks believe it is the main reason for German opposition to Ankara's bid to
be a full member of the EC.
Instead of furthering these European ambitions, the presence of the guest
workers or Gastarbeiter has merely underlined the fact, for many Germans at
least, of Turkey's differences in religion and customs.
There is a programme to encourage repatriation; Turkey's Emlak Bank arranged
for mortgages in Germany to be transferred and the switching of social
security dues was guaranteed.
Lump sum payments were also used as inducement, with little success.
Germany's Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau, the official aid arm, then
launched a cheap loan programme with an interest rate of 3 per cent over 40
years for Gastarbeiter setting up businesses in Turkey.
However, many of the businesses were unable to survive once the subsidies
ran out. Moreover, much of the funding was diverted into 'Turkey's extended
family network'. The loan programme has been cancelled.
For those who have returned the problems of adjustment are often immense.
'We have a generation who do not speak good Turkish or good German. We are
dealing here with a problem of identity,' says Mr Midhat Seref, head of the
overseas workers department at the Turkish Labour Ministry.
Today's three-day visit by Mr Kohl coincides with the trial of two
right-wing activists charged with killing three Turks in a firebomb attack
in Moelln last November.
Many Turkish officials hope the tragedy will lead to a rethink of Germany's
immigration policy.
