FT  20 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Barclays' man
IF A Hollywood casting director were asked to find someone to play the
stereotypically reassuring banker, he would probably go for a man with an
air of avuncular probity and enough white hair to compensate for the lack of
a university education. Mr Martin Taylor, who is about to abandon his role
as chairman and chief executive of Courtaulds Textiles for the chief
executive's job at Barclays, could hardly be more different.
At a youthful 41, he suffers from a sharp intelligence, an Eton and Balliol
pedigree and an early career in journalism, which is close to being a fatal
handicap in commercial life in Britain, if not elsewhere. He also differs in
another crucial respect from his future colleagues: he has run a quoted
British company in an internationally competitive sector of industry with
notable success.
If executives have crossed the line from industry into banking fairly
infrequently, it is because the job of the deposit-taking and lending banker
has traditionally been regarded as a specialist task. But as banking has
moved from a cartelised, highly regulated business towards a more
competitive, profit-maximising ethos, the skills of the industrialist have
become increasingly relevant, notably in areas such as costing and financial
control. The industrialist's skills are even more relevant when, as in Mr
Taylor's case, he comes from a mature industry that has already confronted
uncomfortable decisions. In banking the broad strategic choices are by now
well understood, but there are plenty of difficult nettles that have yet to
be grasped.
Equally striking is the way in which the prudential culture of commercial
banking has been eroded by the increased pressure for profits. The vast sums
lost in Latin America and in property provide overwhelming evidence to that
effect; and that alone would suggest that the old view of industrialists, as
being too red in tooth and claw to be put in charge of fiduciary deposits,
is anachronistic. Nowadays it is the bankers who inspire less confidence.
Yet it is important that those who do cross the fence from industry should
grasp why it is that banking remains fundamentally different. For a start,
the cost of any given misjudgment is magnified by the enormous leverage in
bank balance sheets: a small wedge of capital supports a huge edifice of
assets and liabilities. Another peculiarity of banking that exerts pressure
in an equal and opposite direction is that big clearing banks will never be
allowed to go bust. It follows that the chief executive of a clearing bank
is, in effect, in a role of public trust and should recognise an implicit
duty to the taxpayer in the way he runs the business.
In the final analysis, then, the test for Mr Taylor is as much a matter of
judgment as of managerial expertise. He has to resist the temptation to
outgrow the competition for the sake of it. The gravitas and grey hair will
no doubt follow.
