FT  11 FEB 93 / UN soldiers fail to pacify the killing fields: The Cambodian
peace keepers were welcomed with relief a year ago but their popularity is
waning
THEY came at midnight, a dozen men firing automatic weapons and grenades at
a crowd of villagers who were dancing and watching videos outside a Buddhist
temple.
The party a few nights ago in the village of Sret, 12 miles east of Siem
Reap and the ancient Khmer monuments of Angkor, was an annual festival in
memory of a former abbot. Eight people were killed, including a 13-year-old
girl.
Nobody is sure who carried out the attack or why, but Khmer Rouge guerrillas
are among the suspects; three of the dead were government policemen.
Two days later the village looked sleepy and surprisingly cheerful. Yes, the
inhabitants agreed, they were frightened at night now, but they had lived
through bad times before.
They had survived the rule of Prince Sihanouk in the 1950s and 1960s, the
dictatorship of Lon Nol, who overthrew the prince, the terror of the Khmer
Rouge guerrillas who ousted Lon Nol, and the Vietnamese invasion which got
rid of the Khmer Rouge. Now they had Untac.
Untac - the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia - was immensely popular
when it was established in March last year because Cambodians thought it
would stop the killing. It has failed to do so, and its popularity is waning
fast.
Bangladeshi troops are stationed three miles from Sret, but they did nothing
because the attack on the village lasted only five or 10 minutes before the
gunmen melted into the countryside.
It was not an isolated incident. In the early hours of yesterday morning
gunmen, some of them on motorcycles, attacked Siem Reap with guns and
grenades, killing at least two Cambodians and firing at Untac's
pre-frabricated offices.
Mr Yasushi Akashi, the head of Untac, said he viewed the assault with 'the
utmost seriousness'. Siem Reap is Cambodia's main tourist destination, and
President Francois Mitterrand of France is due to go there this week to see
the temples of Angkor.
The failure of the UN's largest peace keeping operation, with its Dollars
2bn (Pounds 1.3bn) budget and its complement of 22,000 soldiers and
civilians, is as damaging for the reputation of the UN as it is for the
hopes of the Cambodian people.
Untac has succeeded neither in bringing about the ceasefire agreed by all
the factions at the Paris peace conference in 1991, nor in curbing banditry.
Mutilated corpses are still seen floating down the Mekong river, and
government troops continue to extort money from passing cars and river
boats.
In one particularly humiliating incident on a road north of Phnom Penh last
month, unarmed Untac troops from Poland saw soldiers shoot dead the driver
of a van that had failed to stop at a casual roadblock; then the Poles
watched helplessly as the soldiers killed the two passengers in the van in
cold blood.
Untac's reputation has been further undermined by traffic accidents
involving the UN's big white cars as well as the inevitable problems of
whoring and drinking in a country where both are cheap.
There have been successes. Indian army doctors at the Untac field hospital
in Siem Reap, for example, have been treating dozens of Cambodians for
tuberculosis.
The continuing repatriation of 370,000 refugees from Thailand has been
running much more smoothly than expected; and Untac electoral officers have
registered 4.7m Cambodians for the general election in May.
But even these successes are now at risk. In its announcement last week of a
government offensive against the Khmer Rouge, Untac disclosed that some
returned refugees had been conscripted by the government and used as forced
labour.
Worst of all, there are doubts about whether Untac can ensure that the
elections are 'free and fair', as required by the Paris peace accords.
Yesterday Mr Akashi acknow-ledged that he was 'still not satisfied that the
conditions for free and fair elections can be met'.
The troops and guerrillas of the four main factions should by now have been
regrouped in cantonment areas and disarmed, but the disarmament process was
abandoned when the Khmer Rouge refused to co-operate.
UN military observers say the civil war, now essentially between the
Vietnamese-installed government and the Khmer Rouge, has intensified since
1991, and both sides are using their weapons to intimidate voters.
Khmer Rouge guerrillas, as well as refusing Untac officials access to most
of their territory in north-western Cambodia, have seized voter registration
cards from villagers in contested areas.
Government soldiers are suspected of killing more than 20 people working for
the royalist party Funcinpec and have been accused by UN electoral officers
of widespread intimidation in the last few weeks.
Untac's response has been extraordinarily phlegmatic in the face of repeated
setbacks. Lt-Gen John Sanderson, the Untac military commander, has been
nicknamed 'No Problem' because of his apparently incurable optimism.
Untac's defence is that it cannot impose peace by force; it is for the
Cambodians to fulfil their obligations and for Untac to help them do so.
Certainly Cambodians must accept their share of the blame. Prince Sihanouk,
regarded by Cambodians and foreigners alike as the one man who might be able
to broker a deal between the various factions, has been spending more time
in Beijing than at home.
The Khmer Rouge has flouted the peace agreement and the ceasefire from the
start, while on the government side corrupt officials have filled their
pockets with ill-gotten gains in the expectation of losing much of their
power after the election.
If the elections go ahead as planned in May - and the expectation at the
moment is that they will in spite of the fighting - Funcinpec is likely to
emerge as the strongest party in the new assembly.
The outcome of the resultant imbalance between political and military power
is that Prince Sihanouk, who could become president, and his son Prince
Ranariddh, the Funcinpec leader and possible future prime minister, will
probably try to construct a coalition to accommodate both the Khmer Rouge
and the present regime.
Not everyone believes it will be possible to reconcile the two factions
which are even now fighting each other across much of northern and western
Cambodia. 'I think regardless of what happens during the elections, you're
going to have civil war immediately afterwards,' says one senior Untac
military officer. 'I think it's going to be pretty intense, and I think it
will reach Phnom Penh.' That view is a pessimistic one, but it is not
unique.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                             UNTAC INFANTRY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Miltary
sector          Battalion     Provinces
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1               Netherlands   Banteay Manchey
2               Bangladesh    Siem Reap
3               Pakistan      Preah Vihear
4               Uraguay       Stung Teng, Ratanakiri Kratie, Mondolkiri
5E              India         Kompong Cham, Prey Veng, Syay Rieng
5W              Indonesia     Kompong Thom
6               France        Takeo, Sihanoukville, Koh Kong, Kampot
8               Malaysia      Battambang
9E              Bulgaria      Kandal, Kompong Speu
9W              Tunisia       Kompong Chhnang, Pursat
Phnom Penh      Ghana         Phnom Penh
special zone
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (Untac)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
See Editorial Comment
