FT  16 OCT 93 / Markets: Urge to merge keeps dealers on their toes - Wall
Street
WHILE THEY might not have reached frenzy proportions yet, the Wall Street
investment bankers feeding at the takeover trough must be smacking their
lips in anticipation of more appetising deals to come. Not only is the surge
in mergers and acquisitions making Wall Street very happy but, for the first
time since the late 1980s, the M&amp;A business has energised the stock markets,
sending investors in a frantic and speculative search for the next potential
bid target.
M&amp;A activity has been picking up rapidly for more than a year, but it was
always going to take a huge deal to really get the juices flowing and spark
a wider market rally. That deal came on Wednesday when Bell Atlantic, the
regional telecommunications group, announced it had agreed terms on an
all-stock acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc., the country's largest
cable service company - a deal worth at least Dollars 20bn.
The Bell-TCI transaction is typical of the deals that have been struck this
past year in the telecommunications, broadcasting, entertainment, healthcare
and banking industries. Typical, because equity is being used to finance
much or all of the deal; and typical because the manoeuvre is motivated by a
desire to build a new company equipped to prosper in a business environment
that is being re-shaped dramatically by regulatory and technological change.
The merger mania of the 1980s was, primarily, financially-driven and about
earning short-term profits for the deal-makers. The merger mania of 1992-93
has been strategically-driven and is mostly about building long-term
prosperity.
If there is one thing that has not changed much from the 1980s, however, it
is the way stock markets have reacted to the deal-making. It might have
taken a long time to awaken them, but investors are now alert to the
possibilities opened up by the revival in M&amp;A activity. They have been
buying up stocks in a variety of sectors which they believe are ripe for
further re-structuring and consolidation, and that demand has helped propel
stock indices to new highs.
All indices, that is, except the Dow Dow Jones Industrial Average. While it
has remained strong, the Dow has failed to match the performance of other,
broader and secondary indices.
This is mainly because, in the industries which have been the focus of the
recent deal-making, the most obvious potential merger/takeover targets are
not part of the blue chip corporate community. Many are either hi-tech or
fast-growing telecommunications stocks. This means they are probably listed
on the over-the-counter Nasdaq market or they are mid-size companies like
banks and cable groups, which are usually either components of the
broad-based Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index or listed on the American Stock
Exchange.
So, the Dow has risen 'only' 1.3 per cent this week to around 3,630, and
still remains some 30 points short of its all-time high. Yet, the S&amp;P 500
has climbed 2 per cent to a new high of about 470; the American Stock
Exchange composite index has risen 4.2 per cent to an all-time peak of just
over 484; and the Nasdaq composite has advanced 3.1 per cent to a record
788.18.
There is more to this pattern than just merger mania, though. Secondary
indices have been outperforming the Dow because, with the economy still
struggling and the bull market looking overstretched, the stocks with the
'upside' potential attractive to investors are most likely to be found in
the equity market's undergrowth - the small or mid-sized companies that have
been overlooked in equities' long rally.
If this is the unexciting story of today's markets, the glamour can be found
with the telecoms: cable and entertainment stocks which are on the threshold
of a new information age. Stocks like Transcontinental Realty Investors,
which jumped 15 per cent on Thursday when the Bell-TCI deal was announced.
Transcontinental Realty Investors? What could a Dallas-based property
investment trust possibly have to do with a billion-dollar multi-media
communications merger? Nothing, apparently. When the news of the Bell-TCI
deal broke on Wednesday morning, many investors rushed to the 'phone to
order their brokers to buy shares with the stock symbol TCI, hoping to cash
in on the positive feedback to the day's big story.
TCI, however, is not the stock symbol for TCI, the cable company. It is
Transcontinental Realty's stock symbol (the real TCI's symbol is TCOMA).
Before anyone had noticed the mistake, trigger-happy investors bought 55,000
shares worth about Dollars 1m, lifting the company's price Dollars 2 3/8 to
Dollars 17 7/8 in the process. So much for the information age.
 -----------------------------------------------
Monday           3593.41     +     08.67
Tuesday          3593.13     -     00.28
Wednesday        3603.19     +     10.06
Thursday         3621.63     +     18.44
Friday           3629.76     +     08.10
 -----------------------------------------------
