FT  23 NOV 93 / International Company News: US offshoot holds key to
Rhone-Poulenc - The chemical group's future depends on the strength of
healthcare company RPR
Key to the fortunes Rhone-Poulenc, France's biggest chemicals group whose
privatisation issue closes this week, is Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (RPR), its 68.7
per cent-owned healthcare subsidiary.
Rhone-Poulenc's health sales, which include RPR and Institut Merieux,
generated 90 per cent of group operating profits on only 40 per cent of
group turnover during the first nine months this year.
RPR is the vast majority of Rhone-Poulenc's health sales and operating
profits. It accounted for FFr21.7bn (Dollars 3.6bn) of the health division's
FFr30bn sales last year, and its FFr3.5bn operating profits totalled 83 per
cent of the division's earnings.
The subsidiary was formed in 1990 from the merger of Rhone-Poulenc Sante of
France and Rorer of the US and, of all the mega-mergers of the late 1980s
and early 1990s, this has been the most successful. Between 1990 and 1992,
operating profits increased from Dollars 2.3bn to Dollars 4.96bn while
operating margins rose from 9.8 per cent to 16.8 per cent.
But in spite of RPR's impressive record, its ultimate success is far from
assured. Its early achievements were relatively easy.
In 1990, the group's gross margins were about 60 per cent, against an
industry average of about 75 per cent.
The group, which has been the fastest expanding company among the top 25 US
drugs groups, is now seeing a slowdown in underlying growth. Analysts expect
volume growth to be limited to about 7 per cent this year.
During the first three quarters turnover fell from Dollars 2.918m to Dollars
2.884bn. Adverse currency changes - the franc has fallen 22 per cent against
the dollar - will mean sales for the full year are likely to be flat.
Like other pharmaceuticals companies, RPR is facing a worsening environment,
with governments around the world reining in drugs spending.
Healthcare reforms in Germany and Italy, in particular, sapped sales growth,
with turnover down between 25 per cent and 30 per cent during the first half
of the year. Mr Robert Cawthorn, chief executive, warns that the second six
months are unlikely to see an improvement.
The group is vulnerable to the US and French markets, which represented 25
per cent and 33 per cent of sales last year. However, Mr Cawthorn insists it
will be less affected by the changes in the US than most. He argues RPR has
such a broad range of products it is not dependent upon a blockbuster that
could be attacked by generic competition.
Of reform in France, Mr Cawthorn says the government is more sensitive to
the needs of the pharmaceuticals industry than in many countries. 'It's
impossible to conceive of what has happened in Germany happening in France.
There would be a revolt.'
The group is responding by improving margins, among the worst in the
industry, and by paying off debt. Net debt, which in 1990 was Dollars 1.9bn,
is expected to fall from Dollars 774m in 1993 to Dollars 574m, according to
Paris-based brokers, Paribas.
In the medium-term, it is focusing on rapid growth through 16 key products,
new uses for existing medicines, and a global marketing strategy.
'We may be number three in Europe, but we are only number 22 in the US, and
that's not nearly as big as we ought to be,' says Mr Cawthorn.
Since the merger, RPR has tripled its US sales force to 1,000.
Japan is a strategic priority. 'We're definitely not strong enough there.
The economics of licensing your products to a Japanese group just don't work
any more, given the rising costs of developing each compound.'
The group's long-term focus is to generate growth through innovative
products that can justify premium pricing. But the immediate future is
looking thin.
Mr Cawthorn says: 'The two parents, Rorer and Rhone-Poulenc Sante, were
pretty ho-hum organisations. Rorer had no track record of developing
compounds. Rhone-Poulenc Sante had been very innovative but by 1990 the
group was no longer at the cutting edge.'
The company has twice reorganised its R&amp;D activities. After the merger, many
of the compounds in the pipeline were 'me-too' products with little to
differentiate them from drugs already on the market, he says.
The acid test of the new development will be Taxotere, an anti-cancer
compound.
'You have to be first or second to the market. We think Taxotere is
extremely exciting and only a little way behind Bristol-Myers Squibb's
Taxol.
'We used the resources freed by not developing me-too compounds to
accelerate its development,' says Mr Cawthorn.
The group is throwing all its development resources at Taxotere in a race
against time before rationalisation benefits begin to run out.
Taxotere will be filed for breast cancer and lung cancer next year in North
America, Europe and Japan within three months of each other. 'We've never
done that before,' Mr Cawthorn says.
But, in spite of the R&amp;D reorganisation, doubts persist. The company, which
spent Dollars 521m on R&amp;D last year - equivalent to 17 per cent of sales -
has focused on eight therapeutic groups.
However, it is still developing drugs that are increasingly commodities,
such as antibiotics, antihistamines, and cholesterol-lowering drugs.
To bolster the long-term future, Mr Cawthorn is trying to identify emerging
technologies. RPR's efforts to access these new technologies include a
Dollars 113m investment in 37 per cent of Applied Immune Sciences, a
Californian-based company specialising in cell and gene therapy.
'We will also collaborate with other pharmaceuticals groups,' says Mr
Cawthorn. 'We need to pool resources rather than compete.'
An example, says Mr Cawthorn was RPR's joint-venture with Chugai, the
Japanese group, to develop treatments to help chemotherapy patients. The
outcome of this long-term research effort is unlikely to be seen for at
least five years. In the meantime, most of RPR's immediate fortunes at the
molecular roulette table are riding on Taxotere.
Given the likely poor profitability of the rest of Rhone-Poulenc in coming
years, the stakes riding on this single drug are high.
