FT  28 SEP 93 / Police open fire on Indian truck strikers
A STRIKE by Indian lorry drivers, which has disrupted transport for the past
12 days, turned violent yesterday when police opened fire on strikers who
attacked a convoy of fuel tankers.
One man was killed and others injured in the firing, which occurred in the
southern state of Tamil Nadu. The incident will increase the pressure on the
central government to resolve the dispute, which is beginning to cause
serious delays in supplies of fresh food to cities and in industrial
deliveries. However, little progress was reported last night at talks
between Mr Jagdish Tytler, the transport minister, and representatives of
the striking drivers.
The dispute highlights the power of India's organised unions to cause
economic disruption - an important consideration for Indian and foreign
businessmen planning investments.
The strike began after India's constituent states earlier this month raised
the price of an annual permit for crossing a state boundary from Rs1,500 to
Rs5,000 (Pounds 31 to Pounds 104). Every lorry requires a permit for every
boundary crossed, so long-distance operators require several for each lorry.
The rise provoked strong protests from the All India Motor Transport
Congress, the industry's national body, which represents about 800,000
drivers, most of them owners of their own lorries.
The congress claims all its members are on strike though estimates made by
police and other observers put the figure at about 300,000. The precise
figure is difficult to obtain because individual drivers are breaking the
strike by using minor roads and driving by night. There have also been
numerous reports of hauliers bribing strikers to let their vehicles through
checkpoints.
The cumulative effect of the strike has been severe. Vegetable prices in
urban markets have risen 30 to 50 per cent. Some companies have been forced
to suspend production, notably Maruti Udyog, India's leading car maker,
which yesterday laid off its assembly line workers.
Mr Harsh Goenka, president of the Indian Merchants Chamber, said in an
appeal to the government yesterday that the strike was affecting ordinary
people, raising costs and causing unnecessary disruption to industry.
The government has until this week refrained from intervening in the
dispute, arguing it was a matter for drivers and the state administrations
which imposed the permit price rise. Mr Tytler told strikers they must first
call off their action before the states can reconsider their decision. The
strikers said the permit rises should first be withdrawn.
