FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (10):
Scaling up for manufacture - High costs may follow scientific success before
a drug can be marketed
DO NOT equate innovation with commercial success, warns Ian Smith,
pharmaceutical analyst with Lehman Brothers International. Companies that
are highly innovative in discovering potential new drugs may lack the
resources - financial and technical, for example - to capitalise upon their
success. It can take a lot of expensive science and engineering to bring a
new drug discovery to the market.
At an IBC conference on the management of pharmaceutical research and
development in London last year, Mr Smith addressed not just the perennial
problem of picking winners but how to pick 'blockbusters' early enough.
No-one should underestimate the technical effort and the cost that is needed
to translate scientific success in drug discovery into a commercially
profitable new medicine. In the late 1980s, when Wellcome came under
pressure to reduce the price of AZT, its compound for treating Aids, the
company had a manufacturing process it could not scale up because one stage
was too dangerous - had already exploded, in fact. As its (then) chairman
would point out, it had no idea at what cost, or when, it would solve the
problem.
Similarly, Schering AG is having difficulties devising a way of
manufacturing Betaseron, its new multiple sclerosis compound.
'There's a lot of hope involved in this sort of compound,' explains Prof
Gunter Stock, board director in charge of R&amp;D at Schering. 'I don't want
more hope than we can promise. It's a very complicated molecule and we don't
know if we can produce it in commercial quantities.'
Fisons ran into a different problem. Apparently trying to economise on the
costs of manufacture, it ran foul of the US Food and Drug Administration,
which claims the right to approve conditions of manufacture before licensing
new medicines for the US market. The FDA placed a 'detention order' on
Opticrom and Imferon and Fisons was forced to undertake extensive
improvements for Opticrom manufacture at its Holmes Chapel, Cheshire,
factory.
Imferon has been abandoned and licensed out to a US company. Problems with
these two medicines were blamed for a sharp fall in profits last year.
The importance companies now attach to these 'downstream' aspects of the R&amp;D
process can be gauged from the apportioning of corporate responsibility. ICI
Pharmaceuticals (now part of Zeneca) since the mid-1980s has brought
responsibility for R&amp;D, manufacture and production together under its
technical director, Dr Tom McKillop, who is also deputy chief executive of
the division.
For the past few years the division has been introducing a variant of what
the advanced engineering industries call concurrent engineering, to try to
tackle the technical problems of development successively instead of
sequentially, and while the medicine is in clinical trial. To make it work
you have to be technology-hungry, prepared to bring in technology from
anywhere to speed things up, Dr McKillop says.
It can take as long as 20 years to bring a new medicine to the market, Dr
Barry Price, research director of Glaxo Group Research, told a Royal Academy
of Engineering conference on Strategies for Effective Research last month.
Yet three out of four medicines that get to market fail to make money, he
said.
Glaxo faced problems with the FDA in the mid-1980s when the regulators let
it be known that they had worries about the man designated to be the
company's next R&amp;D chief.
As a result Glaxo recruited instead a former employee, Dr Richard Sykes,
from Squibb. Dr Sykes was acutely sensitive from the start to the
international influence of the FDA and its technical judgments. In a
management reshuffle at Glaxo last month Dr Sykes became chief executive
while retaining, as chairman of Glaxo Group Research, his responsibility for
R&amp;D.
Ian Smith in his address on spotting the blockbuster made direct comparison
between Glaxo and Fisons. The former was characterised by aggressive
development, done as quickly as possible - 'they throw money at it'. Fisons
spent less, were very successful at bringing new ideas to the point of
clinical development, but never achieved the commercial potential they
showed.
British Biotechnology, born in 1986 with the declared aim of becoming a
leading pharmaceutical company by developing a second generation of
genetically engineered drugs - was acutely aware from the start of the
hazards that lay downstream in the R&amp;D process. Unlike many research
scientists who launched new biotechnology companies in the 1980s its
chairman and chief executive had prior experience with the industry, at GD
Searle's laboratories. They had taken new products of genetic engineering
into pilot manufacture by the early 1980s.
Drs Brian Richards, chairman, who designed the Searle plant, and Keith
McCullough, chief executive, were acutely aware of the need for
manufacturing development to keep pace with the more highly publicised
activities of drug discovery, and of the fast-growing influence of
pharmaceutical regulators. They elected to sub-contract manufacture of new
chemical entities needed in quantities sufficient for clinical trials, but
to manufacture in-house the often trickier biological entities.
In 1990 they embarked upon the construction of their biological production
facility, close to the main office at Cowley. Designed with the help of
biotechnologists at University College, London, the contained facility
complies with the international regulations on the secure containment of
micro-organisms, as well as stringent quality control and quality assurance
standards.
The facility's main production area - a suite of nine rooms - is equipped
with fermenters of up to 450 litres capacity. It has separate rooms for
separation and downstream processing, as well as rooms for preparing
microbiology and animal cell inoculums. Three separate product streams can
run in parallel.
In addition, the building contains areas for protein purification by
chromatography, etc, and cold storage for sterile filling and for
decontamination by heat and chemical action.
The whole facility, including process development laboratories, is designed
to Category 2 containment standards.
It has been approved for production by the FDA.
Not every company is pinning its faith on genetic engineering. But
biotechnology could find a big role in manufacturing medicines from other
sources, not least because of pressure for purer products. A good example
lies with compounds that are mixtures of two steroisomers - left- and
right-handed molecules. Normally, only one of the isomers is
pharmacologically useful. The other is at best inert, and may even have
undesirable side-effects; in other words, it is an impurity amounting to 50
per cent of the product.
Many companies are already alive to the issue for their existing products,
both naturally derived and synthetic.
New methods of biosynthesis are emerging that yield only the desired isomer.
The result may be not only a purer product, but a cheaper one.
