FT  15 JUL 93 / Peers reject call for referendum on Maastricht treaty
THE GOVERNMENT last night delivered a crushing blow to a last-ditch attempt
to force a referendum on Maastricht, as the House of Lords rejected a
passionate plea from Lady Thatcher to allow the British people to decide
whether to surrender more of their powers to the European Community.
But Mr John Major still faces a strong challenge next Thursday in the
Commons debate on the social chapter. A coalition of opposition parties in
favour of the social agreement and Tory rebel MPs still seeking to frustrate
ratification threatens to defeat the government.
Some Tory Euro-sceptics plan to support a Labour move to prevent the UK
ratifying the treaty until it has committed itself to the social agreement.
Ministers welcomed peers' decisive rejection of a referendum by 445 votes to
176. Government business managers hailed it as the highest turnout ever for
a Lords vote. Their efforts to ensure supporters attended was a sign of the
determination to crush the move for a referendum despite its high-profile
campaigners.
Lady Thatcher told a packed House that EC institutions were diminishing the
UK's parliamentary sovereignty so far and so fast that the people should be
asked if this was what they wanted.
'It is the people's turn to speak. It is their powers of which we are the
custodian,' she said.
But the idea of a referendum on Maastricht was firmly rejected by the
government and opposition front benches, as well as in a series of speeches
from former members of the Thatcher cabinet.
Lord Lawson used his maiden speech in the upper house to argue that the UK's
'opt-out' on monetary union meant a referendum was not needed. The former
chancellor added, however, that since in his view monetary union implied a
loss of national sovereignty, if the UK were ever to opt for monetary union,
a referendum should be held at that point.
Many peers, including Lord Wakeham, leader of the Lords, said embarking on a
referendum so long after signing the treaty and after going through so much
of the parliamentary process would do 'the greatest possible damage to
Britain's reputation' in the Community.
Yesterday's debate marked the climax of the Lords' consideration of the
Maastricht bill. Although a further stage remains, it will not provide the
same opportunity for a set-piece occasion, which saw peers crowding into the
chamber.
In a speech which again raised the profile of the Euro-sceptic cause, Lady
Thatcher painted a picture of a parliament in which representatives were no
longer accountable to those who had elected them because they had passed
decision-making powers to the European Commission and had failed to prevent
the European court extending its powers.
The UK had 'surrendered too many powers already. We should surrender no more
unless the people wish it,' she said.
Thatcher rebuffed in massive referendum vote, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 19
