FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (14): Some plans may see the light of day -
Environment priorities are population control followed by water, water,
water - and water
The Helwan cement works is one of the bleakest legacies left to Egypt by the
late President Nasser. A sprawling jumble of pipes, chimneys and tips, it
creates a grotesque fug stretching 20km along the road south of Cairo -
streets, trees and residents cloaked in a fine white dust.
Little has been done to reduce emissions from the cement works, in spite of
a commitment from the government to 'do something,' and the existence of
several willing overseas donors. Like many environmental abuses in Egypt,
grand talk and large sums of money precede action by a long way.
Not all of Egypt's environmental problems are as visible as Helwan.
Unfortunately, many are even more pressing.
Mr Ahmed Abdel-Gawaad, an academic who specialises in environmental
pollution, says Egypt's priorities as far as the environment is concerned
are firstly population control, followed by water, water, water and water.
'What we do to the Nile today, we will pay one hundred times more in 10
years,' says Mr Gawaad, who despairs of the government's grandiose action
plan to clean up the environment, published last year.
He criticises it for being a document designed to attract international
donors, rather than a coherent strategy to tackle Egypt's environmental
problems from the bottom upwards.
Nonetheless, it is an impressive piece of work, covering everything from
degradation of natural resources to protection of Egypt's cultural heritage.
It describes Egypt's growing population and natural resources as being on 'a
collision course.'
'There is a growing concern that the very limited water resources are
becoming increasingly polluted because of the excessive and improper use of
the resource, and that the nation will have to bear heavy costs in terms of
health and productivity of its population, unless action is taken to improve
resource management,' says the report.
Some of the government's plans may see the light of day after June, when a
new environmental action law is scheduled to be passed. The law will lay out
the powers and functions of the environmental affairs agency , answerable to
the prime minister. Meanwhile, some Dollars 400m has been pledged by a
variety of donors for different projects.
The action plan identifies four main areas, all of which should be tackled
to a greater of lesser degree over the next five years.
Land and water resources: The Nile provides more than 95 per cent of Egypt's
water requirements, but untreated urban and industrial effluent is
endangering the health of the hundreds of thousands of people who depend on
it. Meanwhile, soil salinisation and water logging are affecting the
productivity of agricultural land. The government says that water pollution
is contaminating drinking water sources, encouraging the growth of
pathogenic bacteria and parasites and contaminating fish and other food
products.
Air pollution: According to the action plan, the emission of pollutants into
the air, particularly in the Cairo and Alexandria regions, has reached a
level at which serious health problems occur.
The number of vehicles in the greater Cairo area, for example, has increased
by 10 per cent a year since 1980.
The plan singles out Helwan as one of four areas with the worst air
pollution in Egypt. The efficiency of air pollution control equipment is,
the action plan report says, generally questionable.
Solid waste management: Rubbish collection in Egypt is haphazard. In high
and middle-income areas, collection rates are higher because of the greater
value of the actual waste, while in poor areas there is often no collection
at all. As the report says: 'The lack of an adequate management system
creates a large risk for spread of infectious, parasitic and epidemic
diseases, through people involved in the collection of the waste, children
playing in the streets and scavengers making their living on the dumpsites.'
There is as yet no system for disposing of hospital waste. This ends up,
along with everything else, on the communal tips.
Protecting Egypt's heritage: The government is concerned that earnings from
tourism will not be sustained if inappropriate developments degrade the
initial attractions. These would include not only the ancient monuments of
the Nile Valley, but also the precious coral reefs of the Red Sea.
Attached to each of these areas is a list of specific - and less specific -
proposals. Some, such as reducing subsidies on harmful pesticides, should be
relatively easy to implement. Others - developing air emission policies and
'methods of enforcing them' - might take longer.
The biggest frustration for Mr Tarek Genena, director of the Technical
Co-operation Office for the Environment, is that everything takes too long.
'We always end up with studies, plans and so on, but there is not enough
implementation. There is a great need for co-ordination between the
international and national efforts,' he says, adding that duplication of
studies and no central system of information mean that every time the
environmental affairs agency wants to embark on a new project, it has to
'reinvent the wheel'. Mr Genena says that an agreement with the Overseas
Development Agency to set up a documentation centre will move things in the
right direction.
International donors are interested in backing about 40 priority projects -
many to prevent discharge of industrial waste into the Nile. Donors involved
are the World Bank, Denmark's Danida, the EC and other European governments.
