FT  16 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: Society to pay compensation - News
in brief
ALLIANCE &amp; Leicester is to pay compensation to 50 investors following a
ruling by the building societies ombudsman. All had money in obsolete Gold
Plus accounts between October 1990 and March 1991 when they could have been
earning higher returns in other accounts with the society.
The ombudsman found that the investors had no way of telling their accounts
had been closed to new investors, and interest rates up to 1.4 percentage
points higher were available on similar accounts. The society has now agreed
to pay compensation based on the difference in interest for those six
months.
The ombudsman recommends that societies should let savers know about changes
to accounts, new products and the interest rates available through a
combination of personal notification to investors, notices in branches,
advertisements in the press, individual notification by branch tellers, or
inclusion of information with account statements.
The Alliance &amp; Leicester now posts notices about account changes in
branches, and puts advertisements in newspapers, but does not notify savers
directly because of the cost.
The Nationwide society was the subject of a similar ruling last year. Most
societies have now complied with the ombudsman's minimum recommendations for
informing customers of new accounts, but few notify customers directly if
their account has been made obsolete. Building society savers should keep a
sharp eye out for notices when they visit a branch.
*****
Northern Rock building society has launched a guaranteed equity bond which
offers basic-rate taxpayers 108.75 per cent of the rise in the FT-SE 100
index, or their money back. Higher-rate taxpayers will receive 87 per cent
of the rise in the Footsie; non-taxpayers will receive 145 per cent. As is
usual with these products, investors will get no credit for the dividend
yield on Footsie. Withdrawals are allowed after three or four years, with a
lower return. Minimum investment is Pounds 1,000.
*****
The Nationwide has revamped its range of fixed-rate mortgages.  Rates range
from 5.99 per cent (apr 8.0) for two years for first-time buyers, to 8.95
per cent (apr 9.3) fixed for 10 years. Mortgages are available on an
endowment or repayment basis, and borrowers do not have to buy any insurance
products, except for first-timers borrowing more than 90 per cent who must
purchase mortgage payment cover. Maximum available loans vary from 85 to 95
per cent and booking fees are between Pounds 95-Pounds 300. Early redemption
penalties vary from three to 10 months' interest.
*****
Applicants for shares in the recently launched Fleming Chinese investment
irust will receive fewer than they had hoped because the issue was 2.7 times
oversubscribed. It raised the planned total of Pounds 60m through placements
and the public offer.
All applications in the public offer have been scaled back: investors who
wanted to buy the minimum 1,500 shares will receive 1,000, while those who
wanted between 10,000 and 25,000 will get 2,900. Applicants for more than
30,000 have been allotted between 10 per cent and 4.6 per cent of what they
wanted. Share and warrant certificates, and return cheques, will be posted
to investors on October 18. Dealing in the trust starts the following day.
The article on futures funds in the 'Speculator' series will appear next
week.
