FT  13 SEP 93 / Ex-Wardley head faces bribe charges
MR EWAN LAUNDER, the former head of Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation's merchant banking arm, Wardley, who was arrested on Friday in
connection with the collapse of the Carrian empire in 1983, is expected to
appear as a key witness in the trial of Carrian's chairman, Mr George Tan.
Mr Launder is considered the front-man for Hongkong Bank's substantial
dealings with the group.
Scotland Yard yesterday confirmed Mr Launder was arrested by officers
attached to the internationally organised crime branch. He was seized on
Friday at the request of Hong Kong police as he flew into Heathrow.
Mr Launder appeared in Bow Street magistrate's court on Saturday, and is
facing extradition to Hong Kong on charges of accepting HKDollars 45m
(Pounds 3.8m) in personal bribes from Carrian group companies. He was
remanded in custody at Brixton jail until Friday.
The arrest follows last month's return to the UK by Mr Lorrain Osman, who
had been expected to play the role of key witness in the continuing
investigations into Mr Tan. Mr Osman's return, after 15 charges against him
were dropped, had led to the expectation that the Carrian affair, Hong
Kong's most notorious corporate scandal, was finally drawing to a close.
Carrian was formed from a shell listed company in 1979, and emerged as a
massive property investor in the early 1980's; Wardley acted as financial
adviser and financier from the outset. Carrian collapsed in 1983 with
estimated debts of more than HKDollars 10bn, and Mr Launder left Wardley in
the same year.
The case has cost Hong Kong taxpayers more than HKDollars 100m, but there is
little sense in Hong Kong that justice has been done.
Mr Tan, his righthand-man Bentley Ho, and two partners of Price Waterhouse -
Carrian's accountants - faced criminal charges, but were let off in 1987.
Further controversy came with the murder of a Malaysian investigator into
the scandal and with the suicide in 1984 of an eminent lawyer, connected
with Carrian, who was found at the bottom of a swimming pool with a manhole
cover around his neck.
In 1988, Mr Stewart Turner, a former employee of Barclays Asia, was found
guilty of accepting bribes in relation to a loan given to Carrian. Mr Osman
also pleaded guilty of defrauding Bumiputra Malaysia Finance Corporation by
authorising loans to a company controlled by Mr Tan.
