FT  06 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Cowie makes profit of Pounds 4.5m on sale
of 9.9% stake in Henlys
T COWIE, the motor trader, bus operator and car leasing group, has sold the
9.9 per cent stake it bought in Henlys Group when it bid for the motors, bus
and coach company a year ago. Cowie made a profit of about Pounds 4.5m on
the deal, compared with the Pounds 2.27m written down value of the stake.
The profit substantially exceeds the costs of the Pounds 32m bid, which
narrowly failed. The costs were put at Pounds 1.22m in Cowie's 1992
accounts, including the Pounds 511,000 cost of writing down the investment.
Mr Steven Lonsdale, Cowie's finance director, agreed yesterday that the sale
indicated Cowie had lost interest in Henlys. He said that since Cowie agreed
the Pounds 39.5m purchase of Keep Trust, the motor dealer subsidiary of
Fitzwilton, in April it had had its hands full.
He said the timing of the sale had nothing to do with Sir Tom Cowie's
decision to retire as chairman and his elevation to life president announced
last week.
Mr Robert Wood, chief executive of Henlys, said he had not felt threatened
by Cowie's stake but was pleased to 'see the matter brought to a
conclusion'. He said the stake had been placed by SG Warburg with five
institutions. It is thought that some are new investors while others are
already Henlys shareholders.
In the closing stages of the bid Cowie bought the stake paying an average of
73p a share. After the bid failed Henlys shares fell and Cowie wrote the
stake down to 60p a share.
Since then, though, Henlys shares have risen sharply, closing yesterday at
191p, up 2p. Cowie sold the 3.78m shares to Warburg at 181 1/2 p each,
raising Pounds 6.86m. Warburg is thought to have placed them at 183p each.
One analyst said yesterday that the share price performance since the bid
failed showed that Cowie had spotted that Henlys' shares had been
undervalued. There has also been a surge in the motors sector as car sales
have revived in recent months.
Cowie shares, which were 126p on the day the bid for Henlys failed, were
unchanged yesterday at 248p.
