FT  06 MAR 93 / Towers of strength at a time of disaster: Three of New
York's finest
Disasters have a knack of catapulting individuals into the limelight - and
the blast which rocked New York's World Trade Center complex last week was
no exception.
Three men have captured both the city's and the nation's attention: Stanley
Brezenoff, the burly, 55-year-old executive director of the Port Authority
of New York and New Jersey, which owns and operates the World Trade Center
complex; Raymond Kelly, the veteran New York city policeman who became the
city's 37th police commissioner in October; and James Fox, head of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's New York office.
These three spearheaded an emergency response which has been widely viewed
as efficient, humane and relatively free of strife between different public
agencies. Whether such commendation would have persisted had investigations
flagged or further incidents occurred is open to question. In the event,
Thursday's arrest of Mohammed Salameh, a Moslem fundamentalist, placated
most critics.
The division of responsibilities quickly became clear. After an inter-agency
meeting at Mayor David Dinkins's offices last Sunday morning, Brezenoff,
crumpled and in a cardigan, emerged to handle questions about the safety of
the seven-building complex and the tenants' fate.
Visitors to New York usually associate the Port Authority with a notoriously
sleazy bus terminal on 8th Avenue. Even New Yorkers think of it principally
in terms of the PATH (Port Authority Trans Hudson) train system which
connects New Jersey with Manhattan. But the PA is a massive agency, with a
Dollars 2.7bn annual budget and jurisdiction over the region's airports,
tunnels, bridges and harbour operations, as well as five industrial parks
and the WTC.
Brezenoff himself was on the 67th floor of One World Trade Center, one of
the twin towers which dominate Manhattan's skyline, when the blast occurred.
He directed staff off the floor and helped carry a wheelchair-bound
colleague down dozens of flights of stairs.
He reached the ground about five hours after the explosion, by which time
the mayor's Office of Emergency Management, which co-ordinates the city's
rescue efforts during disasters, had begun to act. Brezenoff went straight
to the makeshift command centre set up in the devastated Vista hotel's
ballroom.
Over the weekend, Brezenoff set up temporary headquarters in a nearby
Marriott hotel and helped arrange for New York's futures exchanges, which
share a trading floor at Four World Trade Center, to open on Monday.
Many of the WTC's largest tenants are big financial firms with other office
locations nearby and so able to fend for themselves. For example, Deloitte &amp;
Touche, the accountancy firm, which had 1,200 people working on seven floors
of one WTC tower, relocated them without the help of the Port Authority. New
York state set up a Dollars 5m assistance scheme, providing interest-free
loans for small businesses displaced by the disaster.
However, Brezenoff has found himself deflecting charges that the Port
Authority ignored reports in the mid-1980s and 1991 which highlighted safety
flaws at the WTC. Lawsuits were filed within days of the blast, and
Brezenoff expects 'these will multiply. We carry property damage and
liability insurance which I believe will cover everything for which we may
be liable.'
Over the longer term, Brezenoff may face a harder task. There is a question
mark over future confidence in the centre, particularly if it acquires a
reputation as a terrorists' target. By Thursday, the New York Times was
reporting that three tenants or potential tenants of the WTC - Rollins Hudig
Hall, an insurance company, Bank of America and Fiduciary Trust, an
investment bank - were reconsidering leasing space or extending their leases
in the downtown location. Brezenoff responded quickly, arranging for
Fiduciary Trust's chairman to lead Thursday's daily press briefing with a
declaration that the company was concluding negotiations for a second
20-year lease on its offices and had no intention of leaving the WTC. In
addition, Brezenoff said the Port Authority signed a new lease within days
of the blast for a 7,000 sq ft restaurant in the centre.
Public wariness may also have been allayed by the fact that the
investigation into the bombing is being handled jointly by the FBI and the
New York Police Department's bomb squad, one of the oldest and largest US
municipal forces.
The NYPD has emerged with its reputation enhanced over the past week, thanks
largely to Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly. The Irish-American grew up on
Manhattan's West Side, once worked as a stock-boy at Macy's department
store, and has been with the police department for three decades.
Nevertheless, his appointment as commissioner came at a delicate time. Last
autumn, police corruption was dominating the local tabloid press, and public
confidence in the NYPD was at low ebb. Vocal sections of the police force
claimed that their work was being undermined by city officials - in
particular, by Mayor Dinkins - who appeared more anxious to support the
city's many racial minorities than back the force.
The bombing is the first serious incident with which Kelly has had to
grapple as commissioner, and it has neatly deflected attention from these
thorny local issues. Kelly's public image as no-nonsense and
straight-talking has been polished by his daily TV appearances, and for once
the city is confronting an event on which public opinion is united.
James Fox, the FBI director, has remained a more enigmatic figure. Fox
appears in the public eye during times of local crisis - most recently in
February when a hijacked Lufthansa jet landed at Kennedy Airport - only to
slip back into the shadows once the emergency has passed. In New York, Fox
is best known for his comments after mafia boss John Gotti was convicted on
murder and racketeering charges in April: 'The Teflon is gone. The don is
covered with Velcro, and all the charges stuck.'
In spite of the apparent goodwill among the agencies, by yesterday, strains
between city and federal law enforcement bodies were starting to show. There
were recriminations that news leaks by federal officials had forced a
premature arrest of Mr Salameh, and hampered investigations.
Nevertheless, co-operation between New York's public agencies this week
reflects their cool professionalism under fire and may pave the way for
closer relations in future.
