FT  17 SEP 93 / Survey of International Mergers &amp; Acquisitions (13): Power
to a UK-US elbow - Judy Dempsey examines a deal in eastern Germany's
utilities sector
AFTER nearly 18 months of negotiations, an Anglo-American consortium headed
by Britain's PowerGen, NRG of Massachusetts, and Morrison-Knudsen of Idaho
will soon sign an important contract which will give it a foothold in
eastern Germany's highly regulated utilities sector.
The consortium will buy Mitteldeutschen Braunkohle AG (Mibrag), the giant
brown coal fields which straddle the eastern German state of Saxony-Anhalt.
These fields are expected to produce between 15m and 20m metric tons of
lignite a year.
The Anglo-Americans are also buying a 44 per cent stake in a power
generating plant at Schkopau, near Halle, Saxony-Anhalt's second largest
city. The Schkopau plant has a capacity of 900MW. The consortium will buy
the equivalent of 400MW.
Outsiders may well ask why the Anglo-Americans should at all be interested
in acquiring notoriously dirty brown coal fields, as well as a power plant -
particularly since eastern German industry has almost collapsed, with the
inevitable consequence of a sharp drop in energy consumption.
The answer is that by acquiring Mibrag and Schkopau, the consortium will tap
into eastern Germany's utility sector, and will be well placed to expand
eastwards, into eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Reaching this stage of the negotiations was extremely difficult. From the
beginning, the consortium was restricted in its activities in eastern
Germany by the Stromvertrag, or Electricity Contract. This contract was
signed in August 1990 between Vereinigte Energiewerke AG, or Veag, eastern
Germany's major utility, and western Germany's eight main major utility
companies.
Under the terms of the Stromvertrag, the latter gained a monopoly over Veag,
which also controls the high voltage grid throughout eastern Germany. At the
same time, the contract insisted that eastern Germany's own 15 utility
companies must buy 70 per cent of its energy from Veag as a means of
underwriting the massive investments which western Germany's utilities would
undertake in eastern Germany. These include building, upgrading, or
modernising the region's power generating blocks; by the year 2010 these
will have a capacity of over 12,000MW.
The consortium tried to find a way round the Stromvertrag through the
Treuhand, the agency charged with privatising and restructuring eastern
German industry. Because the Anglo-Americans could not buy directly into
power generation in eastern Germany (it could not - at least in the early
stages - be guaranteed any access to the grid, without which it could not
sell its energy), it decided to bid for Mibrag in return for gaining some
access to power generation.
This suited the Treuhand. It wanted an investor which would save Mibrag,
guarantee several thousand jobs and commit large investments. The consortium
is expected to pay about DM700m for Mibrag. For its part, the consortium was
determined to link its purchase of Mibrag with access to power generation.
After long and protracted negotiations in Berlin, the Anglo-Americans are
set to sign a mining contract, and to pay DM800m for its 44 per cent stake
in a power generating plant.
The success of these acquisitions, however, depends on two crucial factors:
the development of the east German economy; and the willingness by Veag, or
any of the eight west German utilities, to give the consortium greater
access to power generation. After all, the interests of PowerGen and NRG do
not rest with mining. They are concentrated on power generation. Initially,
the consortium had wanted access to 900MW of generation in eastern Germany.
It has had to settle for Schkopau's 400MW - for the moment.
Mibrag has guaranteed coal contracts in place already. Over the next 40
years it will supply about 10m tons of coal to Lippendorf, a large power
generation plant in Saxony-Anhalt, and to nearby Schkopau, thus giving the
mines a secure economic base.
Schkopau's energy will be sold to the railways, local domestic heating
systems, and Buna, the large chemical plant which the Treuhand plans to
privatise. However, increased profitability and turnover of both Mibrag and
Schkopau will partly depend on the future development of Buna, and Leuna, an
oil refinery plant partly owned by Elf Acquitaine, the French petro-chemical
company.
If the Treuhand comes up with a viable plan for Buna, and if Leuna will
expand, it is expected that both will require more energy. The consortium is
thus well placed to meet these needs, through producing more coal at Mibrag,
building an additional plant at Schkopau, or building a power generation
plant near Leuna.
In addition, if the Mibrag fields can be shown to be run efficiently and
profitably, there is every likelihood that the consortium will be in a
strong position to sell a share to any of western Germany's eight utilities.
In other words, if Mibrag was opened up to west German participation, there
is every likelihood that this would increase the consortium's access to Veag
and the high voltage grid which is monopolised by these eight utility
companies.
The acquisition by PowerGen and NRG of Mibrag and Schkopau represents the
beginning of the consortium's activities, not only in eastern Germany, but
in eastern Europe as well. The battle to open up eastern Germany's utilities
sector might have been long and difficult. But the prize, over the next
decade, is expected to compensate - more than compensate - for those tough
negotiations.
