FT  09 DEC 93 / Survey of Global Custody (1): A period of adjustment -
Growing competition and increasing client sophistication are placing a
greater burden upon the profitability of custodial services. But changes in
investment patterns are opening up new opportunities for perceptive
custodians
There was a time, within recent memory, when no self-respecting
international banker would have listed global custody as an integral part of
his long-range business strategy.
In 1993, it is difficult to find one who does not, and the glut of services
available to customers world-wide is leading to price competition so intense
that leading bankers are beginning privately to ask why they wished to
pursue the business in the first place.
'In spite of predictions that no new participants would come into the
market, new and rejuvenated ones have done so, and this means that margins
are shrinking,' Ms Jean Pelligrini, vice-president and head of sales at JP
Morgan's securities and trust information services division, says. 'This is
good for the customer but bad for the industry.'
Mr Michael Borkan, vice-president at Bank of New York's global custody
operations, believes the business is passing through a period of flux. 'As
some competitors drop out of the race, others are stepping in to expand the
ranks of global custodians. Those that are leaving have found the technology
costs too expensive, while those that are entering believe the enticing fees
obtainable from global custody offset the expense of state-of-the-art
systems.'
In the UK, non-bank institutions, particularly Morgan Grenfell and S G
Warburg, have begun to compete aggressively for the custody mandates of
investors who are not their own fund management clients. Mr Gordon Lindsey,
head of securities services at S G Warburg, says that in addition to the
Dollars 80bn of assets managed by Mercury Asset Management - the fund
manager 75 per cent owned by Warburg - Pounds 2bn is now that of independent
clients.
Throughout Europe, new entities are bidding for the traditional custody
business of banks. Among these are multinational companies, such as
Euroclear, Cedel and Reuters, all of which already have significant
securities processing capabilities.
Broadly. global custody encompasses the securities transactions processing
activities of investors of all types around the world. It includes not only
the basic master trust business in which securities are held for
safekeeping, but far more sophisticated information and record-keeping
services as well. In recent years, too, global custodians have found ways to
expand the services they offer clients to include foreign exchange, cash
management, handling of corporate actions, dividend repatriation, and other
services requiring sophisticated information systems.
Dramatic changes in the investment patterns of leading institutional
investors have created new demands - and new business opportunities - for
those custodians shrewd enough to see the new trends emerging, and large
enough to have cash to invest in systems capable of servicing them. Central
to these trends is the growing internationalisation of investment.
According to InterSec Research Corp, a London-based research group
specialising in pension fund analysis, in the first six months of 1993 there
was a minor tidal wave of US pension fund money seeking a home abroad.
InterSec, in a piece of unpublished research, concluded that the total
market value of US tax-exempt assets with international and global mandates
rose nearly Dollars 50bn in the first half of 1993 to almost Dollars 200bn.
In 1992, by contrast, overseas assets of US institutions rose by Dollars
30bn. Moreover, the study found that there has been nearly an additional
Dollars 2bn invested in equities in so-called emerging markets.
It is this latter trend which has been exciting global custodians who see
the opportunity to exploit their banking presence in some of the world's
more arcane markets into a new business. Indeed, the emerging markets sector
offers global custodians some of the widest margins available, not only on
master custody but on foreign exchange and cash management services.
Also, global investors are becoming far more adept in their use of
derivatives, with regulators in highly developed markets in the US and
Europe increasingly giving the nod to their use for retail products. Mutual
funds in the US and insurance contracts in the UK could well find
derivatives a mainstream investment tool, with bespoke hedging products such
as swaps, caps, collars and equity derivatives creating new demands upon
custodians.
Meanwhile, other regulatory changes - the product of a growing desire by
banking authorities to minimise systemic risk - are exerting new demands
upon custodians. Mr Borkan notes that the US Federal Reserve Bank plans to
eliminate the so-called daylight overdrafts which have effectively exposed
counterparties to several hours, during which funds have been expended by a
custodian upon a customer's instruction, even though the funds have not been
received from him.
How custodians will respond to the end of this free float remains to be
seen, but it is indicative of the constant demands for improvements in
systems technology which custodians are called upon to implement.
The scale of investment necessary to stay abreast of regulatory and market
changes is unclear, but Mr Robert Binney, business executive at Chase
Manhattan's Global Securities Services, estimates that his bank spends
roughly Dollars 40m per year updating its technology.
But, while client needs are becoming more sophisticated, so is client
awareness of the pricing of the custody product. Mr Ross Whitehill,
vice-president in charge or Morgan Stanley's European custody businesses,
says the basic master custody service has been reduced to a commodity
product, and it is simply not worth his firm's efforts to pursue clients
with few other requirements.
While that service commanded 20 to 25 basis points in fees as recently as
six years ago, banks can no longer charge more than five basis points, and,
depending on what other services the client wants, can be had in some
instances for as little as two basis points.
Partly prompted by the role of US pension fund consultants, leading
institutional investors are taking a close look at the cost components of
their custody charges. The net effect has been a move to unbundle services,
spinning out some of those such as foreign exchange which have proved the
most profitable elements of a custodian's business.
Indeed, a survey last year by management consultants, Booz Allen, found that
no more than 50 to 60 per cent of a custodian's revenues are to be earned in
the headline fee. The remainder comes from forex dealing, cash balances,
stock lending and other services where only a portion of the profits to be
made are passed on to the customer.
In the UK, the National Association of Pension Funds earlier this year
issued a study on fee transparency which highlighted custody fees as those
which are among the most opaque to pension fund clients. Growing concern
among trustees about fees has stimulated the role of the UK pension
consultants who see fertile ground in developing their own custody advisory
services.
'Unbundling is a trend driven by best practice,' according to Mr Binney. 'If
there is a small foreign exchange transaction, say in an emerging market,
the client may regard it as a nuisance deal and be prepared to pay a fee.
But if it is a larger deal, say Dollars 50,000 or more, it is up to the
client to try to get the best forex quote he can.'
Growing competition and increasing client sophistication are clearly placing
an increasing burden upon the profitability of custodial services.
At the same time, rapid changes in investment patterns are opening up new
opportunities for those custodians quick enough to seize the advantage - and
who have the resources to invest in building the kind of systems customers
badly need.
