FT  29 MAR 93 / Personal View: The unwritten code of lasting business
Why is it that, when data transmission has become instantaneous and cheap,
world financial centres are still concentrated in tiny areas of Manhattan
and central London? Why is entertainment such a central element in Japanese
business culture? Why is it that the way to revive the British motor
industry is to shut down most of its traditional plants and re-start on
greenfield sites? Why are the most successful parts of Italian industry
based on local networks of small, co-operating companies? And how did banks
manage to lose quite so much money in the past two decades?
The answers to all these questions are to be found in the different styles
of business contracts and relationships that companies employ, and in the
ways these depend on history and social environment. Long-term contracts are
needed when parties need to make a substantive commitment to the
relationship. A company needs to fit out an office to its specific needs; a
sub-contractor needs to tool up for a particular component; an effective
professional adviser needs to invest in knowing his client. No one will make
these commitments on the basis of spot contacts alone.
One possibility is to make a classical contract - a binding agreement which
specifies what will happen in every foreseeable contingency. That is how we
rent property. But is has disadvantages. Not all contingencies are
foreseeable. And there are aspects of a commercial relationship which the
courts cannot, or will not, enforce. No contract can effectively prescribe
for the full exchange of information or for flexibility in response.
There is a difference between the degree of co-operation which can be
enforced by rules and the wholeheartedly concerted action of two individuals
or two companies. It is the difference between a relationship with the local
telephone company and the relationship with a marriage partner. We make a
classical contract with the former, we have a relational contract with the
other. The relational contract will have a legal form (as the marriage
contract does), but (as with the marriage contract) it does not incorporate
the essential elements of the relationship. These elements are implicit, and
are enforced, not by any legal process, but by the need of the parties to go
on doing business together.
Relational contracts are important in business too. They are necessary in
areas where information exchange is important and where quick and flexible
responses are necessary. That is why they matter in the financial services
industry, in fashion businesses and in industries which assemble the
products of a wide range of independent companies. They are the key to the
competitive advantages of such companies as JP Morgan and Cazenove, Benetton
and Christian Dior, Toyota and Marks and Spencer.
Relational contracts involve risks as well as rewards. Each party is exposed
to the risk of opportunistic behaviour by the other and the only protection
they have is the reputation of the other and the shared need for a
continuing relationship. The ability to make relational contracts
effectively depends on the environment in which the company is placed. It is
easier to make relational contracts when the relational style is the norm,
safer to do it with someone who has made many other relational contracts.
The Japanese business culture is naturally supportive of relational
contracting and the familiar pillars of Japanese management systems, with
their emphasis on seniority, their practices of lifetime employment and
their networks of sub-contractors, are all part of that. The American
environment, in which the penalties for opportunistic behaviour are very low
and everyone has an attorney at his shoulder, is naturally hostile to it.
Italy is at one European end of this spectrum and Britain at the other.
Geographical concentration and linking of social activities with commercial
ones is important. Opportunistic behaviour is more costly if it damages your
social as well as commercial reputation.
Relational contracting is not all good. The features of Japanese and Italian
life which make these types of business behaviour possible are also
reflected in nepotism and political corruption. Life run by unwritten rules
can be constraining on talent and inhibiting on innovation.
The US - an individualistic society founded on immigrants who had discarded
many traditional values - provides the most innovative technical and
commercial environment in the world. It is also the most litigious society,
and competitive advantages based on design and style, or on the sustained
co-operation of a disciplined labour force, are mostly found elsewhere.
There are business areas where relational contracting is appropriate, and
others where classical contracting performs better; we need to know which is
which.
Yet we may not have a choice. It is easier to move away from relational
contracts than towards them. UK banks were ready to discard such contracts
with their customers and employees in the pursuit of a more commercial,
performance-oriented transactional style of business. They paid a high
price, but they cannot now put these relationships together again. Nor could
Longbridge and Cowley substitute the co-operative history of Toyota's plants
for their own.
For many people relational contracts seem an old-fashioned way of doing
business. In reality it is a style of commercial relationship which we
discard at our peril.
The author is professor of economics at the London Business School. His
book, Foundations of Corporate Success, has just been published by Oxford
University Press, price Pounds 19.95
