FT  07 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Maxwell - keeping the issue in sight
JUST THREE of the 55 charges for which Invesco MIM was fined last week by
its regulator, the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation, related to
the scandal of the Mirror Group Pension Scheme. Imro gave no details of
these breaches of regulations. Nor did it say how seriously it viewed these
lapses compared with, say, pricing errors in unit trusts or defective
record-keeping. Meanwhile, it appears that the Securities and Investments
Board intends never to publish its own report into the failure of Imro to
prevent the Maxwell disaster.
Somehow, the main issue - the failure of law and regulation to stop the
multi-million pound Maxwell thefts - seems to have slipped from sight.
Maxwell pensioners might well view this with dismay. Millions of others are
left to worry about the security of their own pensions.
Imro can argue that it has performed its latest regulatory task with
diligence, and that its ability to complete disciplinary proceedings within
a morning shows up the wastefulness of formal legal proceedings through the
courts.
But Imro has been acting here in conjunction with the Securities and
Investments Board, and it is SIB's responsibilities which raise the more
interesting issues. Only two weeks ago, after all, SIB chairman Mr Andrew
Large published his formal review of the regulatory system for the financial
services industry, a review stimulated precisely by the Maxwell affair.
Vigorous enforcement
Mr Large concluded that, in general, standards of regulation had to be laid
down and enforced more vigorously by SIB. In particular, the board ought to
be more prepared to use its own powers, including the banning of individuals
from the financial services industry under Section 59 of the Financial
Services Act, and its ability publicly to criticise authorised persons under
Section 60. Neither of these sections has been used before. There is also
Section 61 which covers restitution on behalf of investors.
Whether immediate action under these headings is likely is not clear. On
Section 59, for instance, it is understood that SIB will seek to publish a
policy paper before selecting its first victim. In his review Mr Large said
that Section 59 had previously been thought impractical to use, but a way of
implementing it had recently been worked out. He expected SIB to be seen to
make use of Section 59 in future.
With the disciplinary process by Imro over Invesco MIM complete, the
opportunity for SIB action is now available. Indeed, Mr Large's brave words
could be viewed as empty if SIB were to fail to respond to by far its
biggest disciplinary case so far.
Broader canvas
SIB has to work, however, on a broader canvas. Legal actions by the Mirror
Pension Scheme Trustees against Invesco MIM for the recovery of lost assets
are under way. Criminal charges are pending against Mr Robert Maxwell's
sons. These legal cases make matters more complicated. Clearly, however, SIB
cannot afford to wait for years until the courts have finished their job.
There are also problems of jurisdiction. For instance, pension fund trustees
and, in some cases, even custodians do not fall within the boundaries of the
Financial Services Act. The hope is that the Goode Committee on pension law
will come up with some answers, but it will not now report until the end of
September, with legislation further off.
In the meantime the welfare of the Maxwell pensioners becomes pressing. The
question is whether Section 61 would be the best way of claiming
compensation from companies and advisers connected with Maxwell, or whether
SIB should use that potential weapon to encourage a general voluntary
settlement.
SIB appears to be using its influence to encourage a settlement through the
charitable trust headed by Sir John Cuckney. Perhaps this is the only way to
ensure that reasonable sums are raised soon enough to help old-age
pensioners. Such a solution would, however, serve to emphasise the frailty
and pragmatism of the system. What is really needed is a demonstration that
investors, and certainly the vulnerable members of pension schemes, can look
for powerful and reliable protection.
