FT  10 DEC 93 / The untouchables in the spotlight: Recent cases and an
independent review are putting pressure on the UK's Serious Fraud Office
The outcry over the community service order imposed on Mr Roger Levitt, the
self-confessed City of London fraudster, has thrown the credibility of the
UK's Serious Fraud Office back under an uncomfortable spotlight.
This is not the first bad publicity for the SFO. However, the latest
criticism has come at a sensitive time, as the first independent review of
the SFO's operations, expected to lead to a widespread shake-up, gets under
way.
The inquiry, by a senior Treasury official, will assess the performance and
'value for money' of both the SFO and the division of the Crown Prosecution
Service which also handles fraud cases. At stake is whether the scale of the
SFO's work and budget should be extended by taking over some fraud cases now
handled by the CPS - a move that would appeal to some ministers.
After the review, the SFO could be turned into an executive agency with the
CPS, along the lines of the Benefits Agency or the Employment Service. This
might increase the flexibility of its management, but could raise a question
over the lack of direct parliamentary accountability through the
attorney-general.
At issue in the current review is the SFO's ability to prosecute
successfully the largest cases of fraud and to maintain effective internal
management controls.
Recent adverse media comment over failed prosecutions has struck at its
reputation. 'It is important from the point of view of the City and the
general public that people believe that fraudsters are convicted and
punished appropriately. I suspect that is not the public perception at the
moment,' says Mr Paul Phippen, a partner with City law firm Macfarlanes, who
has experience of dealing with the SFO.
One important episode that tainted its image was its admission that it
mishandled legally privileged documents belonging to the former chairman of
Polly Peck, Mr Asil Nadir, which ended up in the hands of his prosecutors.
The discovery was not only embarrassing to the SFO, but could compromise any
trial of the fugitive businessman.
Whether the Nadir case reflects administrative error or worse is being
investigated by the SFO internally. However, such incidents cause unease. Is
the SFO, set up five years ago by the government to tackle fraud cases that
had proved impenetrable for the police or Department of Trade and Industry,
achieving its aims?
The office, with an annual budget of Pounds 21m, was given unique powers to
investigate fraud under Section Two of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. A
multi-disciplinary internal structure was put in place, intended to bring
lawyers, accountants and police officers together as a team, pooling their
talents.
But disappointment followed initial high expectations. At the heart of the
SFO's difficulties lies its inability to find a general strategy that works
in court - a central part of its original brief. Its conviction rate has
risen steadily to 71 per cent. However, this has resulted largely from a
tactical switch to an increasing use of plea-bargaining. This stems from an
SFO desire, first, to emulate the swift and pragmatic practices of America's
financial securities industry watchdog, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, and second, to minimise damage to the office's public face.
So there have been more guilty pleas to lesser offences, where a conviction
is more likely but where sentences have been lighter. Several offenders,
such as Mr Terry Ramsden, the former City dealer in Japanese stocks, have
received suspended sentences, after pleading to reduced charges.
Mr Levitt pleaded guilty to a charge that represented only a small part of
the SFO's case. The SFO was thus left open to the criticism that, as one
involved lawyer said, it had 'bottled out' - a charge that has proved
particularly wounding. Some observers believe it would be better for the
office to be seen to fight and lose than to appear to cave in.
But plea bargaining has not been the only flaw in the SFO's approach. It
foundered at first by mounting prosecutions that were too large, notably the
1991 Blue Arrow trial of seven prominent City advisers accused of
manipulating the stock market. Overturning four convictions, the Court of
Appeal attacked the year-long trial.
Keeping proceedings short and sharp, as commentators urged, did not prove
more successful. The final Guinness trial, of US lawyer Mr Thomas Ward,
which lasted just three weeks and never touched upon the share-support
operation at the centre of the 1986 Distillers takeover scandal, was a
failure for the SFO. Mr Ward was acquitted.
Mr Phippen, commenting on such cases, said: 'The SFO appears to be left in
an uncertain state as to its strategy.' The loss of authority has had
damaging consequences, he added. 'Defence lawyers need to feel that there
are serious risks for their clients in fighting SFO prosecutions. At the
moment, most defence lawyers are optimistic that, if they keep fighting,
they will get a result in the end.'
However, many barristers agree that the SFO faces several problems not of
its own making. Few High Court judges have enough experience of criminal
trials and juries to try complex fraud cases properly, they argue. Lawyers
support the growing calls from the bar for a formal plea-bargaining system
to be set up to ensure fairer - at times less lenient - sentencing.
Despite their partial support, many lawyers join some police in pointing to
the weakness of the SFO's multi-disciplinary structure. In the Polly Peck
case, for instance, complaints about a breakdown of teamwork were
vociferous. 'The atmosphere became so bad that lawyers weren't talking to
the police and there were no regular conferences,' says one insider. 'We
were facing a 'them and us' atmosphere when we were meant to be working on
the same teams.'
Mr George Staple, the SFO director, acknowledges that 'in some cases
teamwork does work better than in others', and remains convinced that the
basic principle is sound.
One constant criticism levelled by outsiders concerns the quality of the
SFO's permanent staff of 20 senior lawyers - 'the talent problem', as one
criminal solicitor in private practice puts it. 'George has a problem,' he
says. 'If we hire someone who turns out to be no good, we can fire them. All
George can do is resort to the traditional civil service solution of
sidelining them.'
Mr Staple insists the general level of ability inside the Office is high.
Those inside the SFO point out that the accountants and barristers called in
to advise include some undeniably heavyweight names.
The SFO can point to some successes. First, the three-pronged organisation
appears to work effectively in its use of accountants, as the investigations
into the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International and Mr Ramsden
indicate. City of London police admit that, before the SFO was set up,
budget constraints would have meant far fewer accountants being used.
Without such back-up, investigations would have been less intensive and
prosecutions on a smaller scale.
Second, the removal of a suspect's right to silence under Section Two of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988 has led to more guilty pleas at an early stage,
prosecution and defence lawyers agree. Parallel powers enabling the SFO to
seize documents have also permitted banks to co-operate with investigators
because their obligations to respect client confidentiality have been
overridden.
Despite its far-reaching legal weapons, only the expansion of the SFO would
give it the 'critical mass' needed to carry out its tasks efficiently, Mr
Staple believes. He would probably welcome a recommendation by the review
that the SFO take over the largest Crown Prosecution Service cases.
The other main option under review is to bring the SFO into the CPS to
operate as a 'discrete unit' - thus avoiding the administrative problems of
having two bodies.
Whether either development would alleviate public worries is unclear. What
is certain is that the final report, to be passed to the attorney-general in
February, will not be published, so there will be little opportunity to
debate its findings. Nor will its contents have any impact on the SFO's
greatest public test - the trial of Robert Maxwell's two sons and four
others over the disappearance of millions of pounds in pension funds,
scheduled for next autumn.
