FT  14 JUL 93 / Business and the Environment: Battle for the heartland of
South America - Plans to create a 3,400km waterway
The rivers of South America have been largely untravelled since they were
used by conquistadores, explorers and traders to settle the continent's
heartland. Now, once again, the peace may be about to be disrupted.
Plans are under way to transform the Paraguay and Parana rivers into a
3,400km waterway that would link the often impoverished interior with
seaports at the River Plate estuary. The waterway would be quick, easy and
cheap to create.
The governments of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, whose
territory the rivers flow through, are seeking international finance to set
up the waterway, known as the Hidrovia. It could become one of the region's
biggest development projects since the construction of the Itaipu dam in the
1980s.
Predictably, the project has met with hostility from environmentalists.
Argentine and US scientists said in a recently published study that the
Hidrovia could threaten the environment. They also doubted its economic
viability. The report, produced by Wetlands for the Americas, a conservation
group, and supported by the prestigious Woods Hole Research Institute in the
US, warns of water pollution from spills of oil and chemical cargoes.
River life, wildlife and the surrounding land would be affected by the
increased river traffic and the civil engineering projects required to make
the rivers navigable.
The main threat, says the report, is to Brazil's vast Pantanal marshland.
The 200,000 sq km Pantanal not only supports a rich diversity of wildlife,
but acts as a gigantic sponge, regulating water levels in the Paraguay
river. Damaging the Pantanal's sponge function 'may result in an overlap of
the peak flooding period in both the Parana and Paraguay rivers, which can
increase the risk of both catastrophic rises and extreme lows in water level
along the middle and lower Parana River'.
Changes in the region's hydrology would exacerbate alterations already
caused by the large Itaipu dam and add to potential impacts caused by other
dams under construction on the Paraguay and Parana Rivers.
The Hidrovia could also cause further problems. 'It is very likely that the
greatest environmental impacts caused by the Hidrovia will be indirect,
given the rapid development process that may follow the starting of the
operations in the waterway,' the report says.
Better transport would inevitably increase human occupation and bring
environmental disruption. This could also lead to an expansion of diseases
such as malaria, dengue and yellow fever and the spread of water-borne
diseases.
The Hidrovia would help bring vast new areas of land under cultivation in
the heart of the continent, replacing native vegetation. This could increase
soil erosion and the silting of rivers. Increased use of agrochemicals would
damage river life. Industrial mining and gold wildcatting, which already
threaten the Pantanal, could also increase.
The authors attack as superficial a previous economic feasibility study
carried out by Brazilian consultants which estimated the Hidrovia's rate of
return at 16-23 per cent. This report has been used by governments to
support the Hidrovia's viability. But Wetlands for the Americas claims that
the benefits are overstated and environmental costs are not taken into
consideration.
Without attempting a detailed estimate of these costs, the Wetlands report
says the economic benefits are probably significantly less than claimed and
could even be negative.
However, Jesus Gonzalez, the Argentine government official on the Hidrovia's
executive committee, recently promised a full-scale environmental impact
study, and said the project would be shelved if the potential damage were
too high. This is in keeping with greater government sensitivity to the
environment throughout the region. Governments are under pressure from
industrial countries, lending agencies and to some extent their own
populations to protect the environment. The Inter-American Development Bank
is financing environmental consultants to carry out impact studies.
However, experience in Latin America has shown that government assurances to
safeguard the environment must be treated with scepticism.
The Wetlands' report is only an opening shot in a battle between
environmentalists and a powerful development lobby of farmers, international
lending agencies, big business and governments that is likely to become
increasingly bitter.
