FT  29 OCT 93 / Pounds 200m funding shortage may delay Channel link
A Pounds 200m funding shortage could delay further work on preparing the
high-speed rail link between London and the Channel tunnel, the government
will be told today.
Union Railways, the company set up to develop the link, will today present
the results of a six-month public consultation exercise to the Department of
Transport. It held hundreds of meetings with residents' groups and others to
hear views on the government's proposed route into a north London terminus
at King's Cross or St Pancras.
The report includes requests from residents for a doubling of the length of
tunnels on the line to reduce the environmental impact. Such a move would
add Pounds 350m to the Pounds 2.6bn cost.
The report also contains an evaluation of an overground terminus at St
Pancras compared with the original proposal for an underground station at
King's Cross, and proposals for three extra intermediate stations. It says
that a terminus at St Pancras would be several hundred million pounds
cheaper than one at King's Cross. The approach to St Pancras would be
overground along existing track and fewer alterations to the existing
station would be needed.
Union Railways calculates that it will need Pounds 200m to finance the
passage of legislation through parliament, complete detailed design work and
buy land over the next two years. Private contractors and banks are thought
unlikely to want to commit themselves before the legislation has been
passed.
Union Railways has made detailed forecasts of the likely costs of the
project but has little firm information on likely revenues. It is unclear to
what extent the tunnel will create new traffic or take it from airlines or
ferry companies. More information on revenues will be available when trains
start running from Waterloo Station on existing British Rail track from next
May.
The government is expected to announce a decision on the route by the end of
the year and the project is due for completion by 2001.
Editorial comment, Page 17
