FT  22 JAN 93 / Technology: Boost for Aids drugs
Shares in Wellcome, the UK drugs group marketing Retrovir, presently the
principal therapy for Aids and HIV-positive patients, jumped sharply last
week on reports of a positive trial for the treatment.
The trial, conducted by the US-based National Institutes of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, compared Wellcome's Retrovir, also called AZT, with
Bristol Myers Squibb's didanosine, also known as ddI, in HIV-positive
patients with ad-vanced disease.
Details of the study showed that AZT was more effective in slowing the
progress of Aids among patients who had not previously used the drug. The
trial ran from October 1989 until May 1992 and involved 617 HIV-infected
patients.
Among 380 sufferers who had not taken AZT before, 18 per cent dev-eloped a
new, previously undiag-nosed Aids-defining condition or died within a year.
That compared with 31 per cent on a ddI dose of 750mg, and 29 per cent on a
500mg dose.
However, for those who had used AZT for eight to 16 weeks previously, ddI
proved more effective. For this group, 33 per cent on AZT developed a new
Aids-defining condition or died within a year, compared with 11 per cent on
500mg of ddI, and 17 per cent on 750mg.
Aids-defining events included yeast infections of the mouth, unexplained
fever or diarrhoea, recurrent herpes outbreaks and the loss of weight.
The two drugs had mixed side-effect profiles, according to the study. Those
on AZT were more likely than those on ddI to suffer lowered blood cell
counts. Those on a 750mg dose of ddI were more likely to develop
pancreatitis than those on a 500mg dose or AZT.
The investigators made no recommendation about changing current therapy. AZT
remains the front-line treatment. However, the trial does show that
combination therapy will play an increasingly critical role in the
management of HIV-related disease.
This year, the US Food and Drug Administration recommended a third
anti-viral agent, Roche's ddC, but only in combination with other agents
such as AZT and ddI.
