FT  04 NOV 93 / Clinton plays down Republican wins
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday put a brave face on election results which
saw Republicans sweep Democrats from office in New York City Hall and in the
governor's mansions in New Jersey and Virginia.
White House officials rejected suggestions that Tuesday's results would make
it more difficult for the president to obtain approval for the North
American Free Trade Agreement, on which the House of Representatives is due
to vote on November 17.
The administration yesterday sent to Congress the formal Nafta legislation.
Senator Robert Dole, Republican leader, who described the results as 'a big,
big defeat for the White House', said he was still confident that at least
110 of the 175 House Republicans would support the treaty.
Mr Clinton said broad conclusions from the Democratic losses should not be
drawn because 'voters are extremely discriminating, making judgments for
their own reason'. He added: 'I think what you can say is that the American
people want change and want results', and he was intent on delivering both.
The most disappointing loss for the president was in New Jersey where
Governor James Florio, the incumbent Democrat, went down by 50-48 per cent
to Mrs Christine Todd Whitman. Mr Clinton and his wife had campaigned for Mr
Florio, whose policies in raising taxes and seeking more stringent gun
control much resemble the president's.
In New York, Mr Rudolph Giuliani, former federal prosecutor, became the
city's first Republican mayor since John Lindsay left office 20 years ago,
ousting Mr David Dinkins, the black incumbent, by 51-48 per cent an almost
exact reversal of four years ago.
This result was not unexpected, given city discontent with the record of Mr
Dinkins, for whom Mr Clinton had campaigned. Voting patterns, very much on
racial and ethnic lines, were similar to 1989, but Mr Giuliani secured
enough defections from liberal whites and Hispanics, both traditionally
Democratic, to win.
Presidential involvement in Virginia had been minimal. Mr George Allen, son
of a famous football coach, trounced Ms Mary Sue Terry, a former Democratic
state attorney-general, 58-41 per cent to become the first Republican
governor in 12 years.
His running-mate, Mr Michael Farris, a favourite of the religious right, was
defeated.
Mixed message, Page 4
Abrasive Giuliani, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page
19
