FT  25 NOV 93 / Arts: Bravo Bartoli] - Recital
For the second time in a fortnight the Royal Festival Hall has sold out for
a solo singer. At least it seems unlikely that the capacity audience on
Tuesday had turned up to hear Schubert's Fifth Symphony and Respighi's The
Pines of Rome, the remainder of the Philharmonia's programme.
The star was Cecilia Bartoli - still a recent arrival in the operatic
firmament, but her position there is undisputed. Her diary for this year and
next reads like an inventory of the world's top musical venues, though the
Royal Opera House is sadly not among them. As yet, the young Italian mezzo
has not appeared in opera in Britain, which makes her celebrity the more
remarkable. Such is the power of television and records.
This was the first time that I had heard her live, as on the previous
occasions she had cancelled. (Perhaps nobody told her I was coming.) Heard
in the flesh, the voice may not be large, but it is firm and agile, now
radiant, now impish, now witty, now defiant, a darting butterfly of a voice,
always on the point of metamorphosis to some new persona.
In Mozart's Exsultate, jubilate it was striking how Italian through and
through her singing is. This piece has become a favourite with light
sopranos who show off their scales in the outer portions and waft
disinterestedly through the slow central section. Bartoli's starting point
is the words (an exciting thrust on 'jublilate') and the changing emotions
were vividly dramatised. With an Italian upbringing music is always theatre.
Among Italian composers Rossini is her natural choice and she sang three
arias from his operas. Pamira's Prayer from Le Siege de Corinthe started
with the most affecting pure tone, set in relief beautifully in duet with a
solo harp. When the main theme returned, accompanied by the full orchestra,
she was only just loud enough in this hall, despite Giuseppe Sinopoli's
considerate conducting.
Then came the famous arias from La Cenerentola and Il barbiere di Siviglia,
each bubbling over with brilliance and personality. Bartoli sings her own
decorations, which is wholly in character. Nothing this singer does is a
mere echo of anybody else. With luck she will persuade opera managements to
put on rare Rossini revivals for her in the future - perhaps with period
orchestras, which would best match her scale.
Concert sponsored by AFG
