FT  22 FEB 93 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (12): Head-on collisions
 -In spring, Britain's Big Four launch a free-for-all
THIS YEAR promises to be critical for Britain's vehicle fleets. Three of the
four domestic car manufacturers which dominate the sector will launch models
in the mid-range categories that are most favoured by operators. The fourth
will weigh in with a small hatchback. The outcome of these moves is
uncertain, but they seem set to alter the shape of the business.
Ford starts the spring collections in March, when it unveils the eagerly
awaited Mondeo. That event will be quickly followed by the launches of the
Peugeot 306, Rover 600 and Vauxhall Corsa.
There is a buzz whenever one of these companies puts a new model on the
market. When all four do so within three months, there is bound to be a
substantial impact on fleets - the business defined by the Society of Motor
Manufacturers and Traders as orders of 25 or more. Together, Ford, Vauxhall,
Rover and Peugeot account for four out of five fleet car sales, compared
with three out of five sales for the market as a whole.
Fleet operators seem to have weathered recent economic setbacks better than
retail or private buyers, statistics suggest. As overall car sales went into
steep decline in the 1990s, fleets have gained in importance. They grew from
around a third of all sales at the end of the 1980s to about 41 per cent
last year. While total car demand went down marginally last year, fleet
sales rose nearly 6 per cent. Britain's Big Four are hoping their imminent
new models will continue that growth.
The introduction which will have most impact is Mondeo, the replacement for
the decade-old Sierra. As long-time market leader, Ford does not like the
idea of the Vauxhall Cavalier as fleet best-seller. Its answer is to adopt
front-wheel-drive for Mondeo (like Cavalier, unlike Sierra) and what it
promises is a sophisticated specification.
Mr Ian McAllister, Ford of Britain's chairman and managing director, says of
Mondeo: 'It's a very impressive piece of machinery. I think it will do a
tremendous lot for Ford's position in the market place.'
He is convinced this year will be a good one for Ford. It will certainly be
busy. Mondeo will make up for flagging Sierra sales. It arrives shortly
after the company relaunched the Escort - No 2 on fleet buyers' shopping
lists - with a fresh look and modern engines. Furthermore, Mr McAllister has
two more niche models to lob into the market towards the end of this year:
the Maverick off-roader (built by Nissan in Spain) and Probe coupe (built by
Mazda in the US).
All that should help arrest Ford's declining lead in the fleet market. It
lost around 4 percentage points to finish the year on approximately 29 per
cent. By contrast, Vauxhall, the nearest challenger, crept up to nearly 27
per cent.
Fleets are vital to Vauxhall which, more than any other company, achieved
its climb in the British market through fleet sales. The General
Motors-owned company's business at the retail end is static at best.
This year, however, Vauxhall's main new model is in a category less popular
with fleet buyers, small hatchbacks. Nova will be replaced in April by the
new Corsa, a name used in the past only for cars sold in the rest of Europe.
But the newish Astra continues to sell well, and GM's new, Ellesmere
Port-built V6 engine will be offered as an option on the Cavalier this
spring. That will put it ahead of Mondeo, which will have V6 engines
(imported from America) only from the end of 1994.
Rover's big event will be in May, when it will present a true competitor for
Mondeo and Cavalier. It is much-needed, for the Montego, which was supposed
to do the job, never gained wide acceptance among fleet or private buyers.
The newcomer is the 600, a saloon to be made at Cowley. It will fit between
the 400 and 800. Like them, it is based on a design by Honda, which owns 20
per cent of Rover. Indeed, Honda's version, the Accord, is already in
production at Swindon and on sale in mainland Europe. It will be sold in
Britain from around the same time as its Rover twin.
By that time, Peugeot will have introduced the 306, the replacement for the
309 and a rival for the Escort and Astra. The car, a close cousin of the
Citroen ZX, will be made at Ryton alongside the recently updated 405. The
development should strengthen Peugeot's standing in the fleet business.
Mr Geoffrey Whalen, Peugeot's managing director, recalls: 'A decade ago we
were predominantly a retail company. We had nothing in the Sierra category
until we started building the 405 at the start of 1988. That was the key.'
The model allowed the company to create a fleet presence from practically
nothing. It now ranks fourth behind Ford, Vauxhall and Rover, and well ahead
of fifth place Renault. The 405 is expected to be replaced by an entirely
new model in the autumn of next year.
Of course, the Big Four will not be the only companies with new models this
year. From the volume producers there will be replacements for the Citroen
BX, Fiat Cinquecento and Uno and Renault 21. At the more expensive end there
will be new versions of the Mercedes-Benz 190 and Saab 900. The Jaguar
saloon will get a V12 version, and the Volvo 850 will be offered as an
estate. And last month Chrysler returned to the UK after an absence of 14
years with a couple of Jeeps.
The unknown is to what extent those new British makers - Nissan in Tyne &amp;
Wear and Toyota in Derbyshire - will pursue fleet buyers. Their models, the
Primera and Carina E, would slot perfectly into any fleet. So would Honda's
British-built Accord, though that company regards itself as more of a
competitor to BMW than Ford.
