FT  30 JUN 93 / UK Company News: British Bio-technology Pounds 13m loss
'within budget'
BRITISH Bio-technology, the pharmaceuticals group that floated last year
with a market capitalisation of Pounds 150m, yesterday reported losses of
Pounds 13.1m, 'well within budget'.
More importantly for a lossmaking start-up company that is investing across
a number of development projects, British Bio-technology said it had limited
the cash outflow to Pounds 14.5m and still had about Pounds 50m of cash in
the bank.
The pre-tax loss rose from Pounds 11.6m and cash outflow increased from
Pounds 11.8m in the year ending April 30 1992. Losses per share were 37.5p
(44.9p).
The group also said it had agreed in principle to sell British
Bio-technology Products, its research reagent and assays subsidiary, to
Techne Corp of the US for Dollars 2.3m (Pounds 1.53m) in cash.
Techne is also to make research payments of Dollars 5m over four years in
exchange for diagnostic product rights.
Mr Keith McCullagh, chief executive, said the group had taken the view it
was a drugs company and would prefer to sell its products business rather
than spend more to expand it.
He said the group had passed the milestones it said it would pass at
flotation. From two drugs in clinical trials, the group now had five in
trial. Three of these were in Phase II clinical trials.
Mr McCullagh said that historically the biggest capital value increases for
successful US companies had been enjoyed when their drugs were going through
the Phase II clinical trial phase. 'We are well past the maximum risk
point,' he said.
COMMENT
With another tranche of development capital almost certainly required in the
next two years - long before any profits become visible - one wonders
whether British Bio-technology shouldn't still be financed by venture
capital. Granted the company has hit the targets for pushing drugs into
phase II clinical trials. And it has the highest reputation for research and
can boast alliances with the likes of SmithKline Beecham and Glaxo. But
British Bio-tech's research programme remains tiny by pharmaceutical
industry standards, however novel some of the underlying science. The
research may simply not pay off and investors could be left with few other
eggs in few other baskets. Or perhaps not. The trouble with the emerging
bio-science sector in the UK is that, unlike in the US, stock analysts and
institutional investors with real knowledge of bio-science are all too
scarce. Investing in the sector will undoubtedly have its thrills - but for
some time will resemble a visit to the gaming table.
