FT  12 JUL 93 / World Bank to sharpen its focus on cutting poverty
THE WORLD Bank will today unveil a strategy to overhaul its management
priorities and halt an alarming decline in the quality of projects in its
loan portfolio.
The move is in response to a growing debate over the effectiveness of the
world's multilateral development banks, the US in particular pressing for
more effective use of its contributions.
Executive directors representing the Bank's shareholder countries agreed
last week on a programme, entitled Next Steps, to remedy some of the
problems highlighted last year by an investigative taskforce chaired by Mr
Willi Wapenhans, a former senior Bank official.
Representatives from the Group of Seven leading industrial nations rejected
an earlier draft of the programme as inadequate. But during three days of
board meetings last week the directors agreed that the document was now 'as
close as we are going to get', in the words of one official.
The programme, coupled with moves to improve the transparency of the World
Bank's operations by increasing disclosure and instituting an independent
inspection panel, could have far-reaching effects on the way the
Washington-based development institution does business. Next Steps attempts
to shift the World Bank's focus away from how much money it lends each year
towards its mission to reduce poverty in the developing world, through
changes in review processes and career incentives.
There will in future be more emphasis on detailed country reviews which will
provide a framework for individual project loans. Promotions will also be
based on how well projects perform, and not, as in the past, on the number
and size of loans negotiated by staff.
'While commitment levels and the size of resource transfers cannot be
ignored, the ultimate test of the Bank's operations is the actual
performance of Bank-financed programmes, including their long-term
development impact on our clients and particularly on the poorest segments
of their populations,' the Next Steps document says.
The Wapenhans report revealed alarming problems with the Bank's
follow-through on loans: the proportion of projects in the World Bank's
Dollars 138bn (Pounds 92bn) portfolio showing big problems nearly doubled
from 11 per cent in 1981 to 20 per cent a decade later. Projects were taking
an average of 2 1/2 years longer to complete than Bank staff estimated at
the outset.
Environmental groups have already criticised the Next Steps programme for
focusing too much on financial accountability and too little on improving
the actual development impact of the Bank's lending.
Discussions on disclosure during last week's board meetings also made
considerable progress, and a final document will be prepared over the
summer. The creation of an inspection panel has proved more controversial,
but a final paper is expected to be drafted by the World Bank's annual
meeting in September.
Executive directors are leaning towards an appeals commission to respond to
complaints from local citizens and environmental and human rights groups,
but insist the commission must be answerable to the board. This is likely to
disappoint outside critics of the bank, who have argued that a wholly
independent panel is needed.
However, the measures are expected to satisfy the US government, which has
played a critical role in prodding the Bank towards new policies on
disclosure and appeals. The administration has been backed by the threat of
Congress withholding authorisation for the US's Dollars 3.75bn contribution
to the International Development Association, the World Bank unit which
provides low interest rate loans to the very poorest countries.
