FT  16 JAN 93 / Sport: Lone vote against England - As the five nations
battle starts, one backbencher speaks against the majority / Rugby Union
NEIL KINNOCK was at his most talkative. He had rung twice during the day
without getting through. Now the former leader of the opposition was in full
flow. He wanted to talk about rugby and specifically the international
championship, which begins this afternoon.
Whatever you might feel about his political views, Kinnock's thoughts on
rugby are worth paying attention to. He attended the same school as John
Dawes, the brilliant captain of the all-conquering British Lions of 1971. He
has dabbled in refereeing and when his constituency duties permit he has
coached mini rugby at London Welsh.
'Where would I put my tenner?' he mused aloud, and even on the other end of
the telephone you could detect the smile of pleasure on his face as he
considered the question. He, a patriot, was between a rock and a hard place,
forced to express too much admiration for England, anxious not to write off
Wales.
'England's backs are terrific footballers' said Kinnock. 'If Rory Underwood
played in the centre I would be very frightened. He has been under-exploited
on the wing and he is such a great defender. Carling is so creative and
courageous, Guscott is just magic to watch and Rob Andrew can do anything.'
In the end, though, Kinnock said he would not risk his money on England,
suggesting there were too many imponderables for Will Carling's team to be a
good bet for an unprecedented third grand slam in as many years. In this he
is almost alone.
Man for man England are far better than any other side. If you doubt this,
compare each England player with his opposite number in the other countries.
There are no Irishmen who are better, only one Welshman - Robert Jones is a
more accomplished scrum-half than Dewi Morris - and only a couple of Scots
and French.
Furthermore, I would back England against a side chosen from the best of the
four other countries, such is the hegemony and commitment they have built up
these past few years. If selection is based on talent alone, and nationalism
is kept out of it, then England should provide a record total of players for
the British Lions party to tour New Zealand this summer.
The French at Twickenham this afternoon are one of the two serious threats
to England even though they have lost the past five games against England.
Pierre Berbizier, the French coach, talks about this game as one in which
the quality of France's play is more important than the outcome. The French
are anxious to forget the bad-tempered games against England in the World
Cup in 1991 and the championship last February. Two Frenchmen were sent off
during this latter game and later suffered a large measure of humbug and
sanctimoniousness came from English officials.
The French are not saints. They have a tendency to kick, which to the
British smacks of cowardice because the victim is defenceless on the ground.
But England are not angels either and Kinnock is not the only person who
believes that the English forwards know how to antagonise their rivals and
have exploited this dubious tactic to their advantage in the past.
The new-look French team includes Jean-Francois Tordo, a flanker at hooker,
which seems a dangerous, though typically French, idea. Furthermore, the
French dislike Twickenham. They call it le cathedral and speak of it as one
might of a haunted building, as if shivers are running down their spines as
they do so.
'France on the right day might do it if everything goes their way,' said Bob
Dwyer, coach of the world champions, Australia. 'On such a day France have
the game to win though they have not developed much these past few years.
But as long as England are right, I can't see them losing.'
It will be no picnic for England against Wales at Cardiff where they lost,
surprisingly, in 1989. Wales are moving ahead slowly. They need regular
doses of dirty realism to puncture the sort of misguided optimism that burst
out after they had beaten Ireland last season.
It was hardly a convincing win - by one point and Tony Copsey was lucky not
to be sent off for landing a punch on Neil Francis that would have done
credit to Frank Bruno, if that is not being unfair to Copsey. It is true
that it was Wales's first championship win since 1989 but it hardly
justified the excitement that surrounded it. At the end of the game former
internationals such as Brian Price, J J Williams, Barry John were
cock-a-hoop. I heard one of them say: 'It's the triple crown now.'
Alan Davies and Bob Norster, as coach and manager respectively, have brought
some realism to the national team. Their off-the-field organisation is
almost as good as that of England and one cannot say fairer than that. The
problem that Wales have is they do not have enough good players in the front
and second rows nor do they have a stand-off. Most of all, they need an
on-the-field general in the way Dawes was when he captained Wales in the
seventies.
'If Wales are not psyched out in Cardiff' said Kinnock. 'If they get the
share of line-out ball that they got against Australia and if they can make
an tactical change ten minutes into the second half if things are not going
their way then they can beat England. I know those are a lot of ifs but it
can be done.'
My prediction is that England will top the table with four victories, France
will be second, Wales third, Scotland fourth and Ireland, who scored only
three tries last season, will be bottom again. I am seriously tempted to
place a tenner of my own on England. The white tornadoes have one more title
in them. If they win it for me, I will donate my winnings to a charity - of
Kinnock's choosing
