FT  08 JAN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Falklands squid fears cloud
Hurd's Argentine visit
THE ACRIMONIOUS dispute over fishing around the Falkland Islands loomed
large as Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, made a five-day visit
to Argentina this week, the first by a senior UK politician since the
Falklands war.
Despite defeat in the 1982 conflict, Argentina never surrendered its claim
to the islands. Today, it is continuing the struggle by economic warfare,
rather than by force of arms. Just before Christmas, after fishing talks
with Britain, Argentina said it would start selling fishing licences of its
own, breaking the islands' lucrative fishing monopoly.
The Falklands began issuing licences in 1987, mainly to squid-fishing ships
from Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. After knowing only hardship and
austerity, the islanders were soon taking in more than Pounds 20m a year in
licence fees, making them some of the wealthiest people on earth.
The illex squid, prized by gourmets in the Far East, is the South Atlantic's
most lucrative species. Already, Argentina has attracted most of the
Falklands' best customers by offering 45 cut-price, three-year licences,
valid for an extended fishing season.
Mr John Barton, the Falklands' director of fisheries, says that 'the impact
is pretty dramatic'. Last year, he sold between 140 and 150 licences, half
of them to Japanese vessels. Argentina has however sold all its licences to
Japanese ships that used to fish in Falklands waters.
The islanders always knew that Argentina would eventually break their
monopoly. The only surprise was the time it took. For years after the war,
Argentina would not even negotiate with Britain. As it was, nationalistic
laws banned foreigners from fishing in its waters, even though the small
local industry showed little interest in the South Atlantic.
All this changed with the resumption of diplomatic relations in 1990.
Argentina recognised the Falklands' fishery conservation zones and the two
sides started swapping data and controlling illegal fishing. Last October,
Argentina changed its laws to allow foreign ships into its waters, as
required under a USDollars 1bn five-year fishing agreement with the European
Community.
From there, it was only a short step to selling squid licences, which had
the attraction of depriving the islands of revenue while increasing
Argentina's. Mr Guido di Tella, Argentina's Foreign Minister, says: 'The
bonanza is over. The islanders can look back to the past wistfully, but the
future will be different'.
He says Argentina will press its rights to the full in future negotiations
about a medium and long term fishery arrangement. If the talks become
deadlocked, he will appeal to international arbitration, which he says will
favour Argentina.
Mr Barton fears Argentina could allow over-fishing in its waters to cut the
islands' income instead of co-operating to conserve the illex. 'I am not
terribly optimistic,' he says.
'If everyone was working on a conservation basis, it would be relatively
straightforward to ensure long-term sustainability.' He says that
Argentina's political stance makes 'it very difficult to see eye to eye on
very simple things'.
Mr Hurd underlined the Falklanders fears this week and warned Argentina
against using the illex as a 'political toy'.
British officials doubt, moreover, that Argentina can police its waters or
monitor fish stocks adequately. The illex has a one-year life cycle, so
overfishing could wipe it out forever.
Mr Barton says the Falklands have an outstanding record on conservation. He
has restricted licence sales to prevent overfishing - and to avoid glutting
the squid market, which would eventually lower the Falklands' licence
revenues. He even hints that a 'squid war' could be in the offing. 'We will
have to look at how to make things more attractive for ships to fish in the
Falklands,' he says. 'But we see no long term winners. If we take the moral
high ground, Argentina could devastate the resource and we would not even
see any revenue.'
Argentine diplomats dismiss the Falklands' conservation policies. One
official accused them of 'depredation' and presenting 'data that is just not
serious'. He said Argentina was only taking its fair share of a common
resource.
The claims and counter-claims are part of the cut and thrust of negotiations
and the Argentines are bound to use the squid dispute to press for
compromises on issues such as oil exploration. Argentina's ultimate
objective is to negotiate the islands' sovereignty - which London refuses
even to discuss.
Argentina says it wants to 'recover' the Falklands by winning over the
islanders' hearts and minds. Distrust of the Argentines runs deep, and
Argentina's squid strategy will do nothing to persuade the islanders of its
good intentions.
