FT  13 JAN 93 / Business and the Environment: Unsung heroes of the sea -
When a shipping disaster strikes, the salvors step in. Deborah Hargreaves on
how they limit the damage
First light over the Shetland Islands yesterday finally dashed the salvage
experts' hopes of saving some of the oil from the stricken tanker Braer
before it leaked into the sea. Early flights over the tanker showed it had
broken into four sections after being pounded by mountainous waves on
Sumburgh Head where it ran aground a week ago.
Most of its cargo of 85,000 tonnes of Norwegian crude oil has now been
discharged into the sea. Geert Koffeman from the Dutch company Smit Tak,
which is handling the salvage operation, said there could still be some oil
on board, 'but we are no longer talking of thousands of tonnes  - just
hundreds'.
Until Monday, Smit Tak, the world's largest salvage company, remained
sanguine about being able to pump out oil from the stricken tanker's cargo
hold. But some of the worst weather ever experienced in the Shetland Islands
hampered the operation so that salvors could not even board the ship.
'The first thing to do is to get on board so that you can at least assess
the state of the tanker and the amount of oil left,' said Net Lindquist at
Smit Tak. But in hurricane-force winds which have battered the islands in
the past week, attempting to board the tanker has proved hazardous.
Smit Tak has had two teams of six salvage experts in the Shetland Islands
since late last week accompanied by two tugs. The company sent out a special
salvage barge from Rotterdam on Friday which could be used for storing the
oil if it is pumped off the broken tanker.
Salvage companies have strong financial incentives to rescue as much oil as
they can, thereby keeping pollution to a minimum. Revisions to salvage
contracts which took place in 1989 mean a company is now paid for limiting
environmental damage even if it cannot save the ship.
The salvors are the unsung heroes of many a shipping disaster. Shipowners
can have a tendency to regard them as vultures since they position their
salvage tugs at strategic points around the globe so they can be on hand in
case of a disaster. But if they move in swiftly, they can often preempt
great environmental damage by removing dangerous cargoes quickly.
The difficulties experienced by Smit Tak in the Shetland Islands highlight
the dangers and frustrations of a salvage operation which is always
performed in the worst conditions. In the same way that Red Adair and other
US companies hasten to raging oil well fires, salvors are at the sharp end
of the international shipping industry.
The salvage industry is one dominated by a few important international
companies which has found itself under increasing financial pressure in
recent years. It can cost up to Pounds 1m a year to keep a fully-equipped
salvage tug on call to attend a disaster at hours' notice, but the rewards
paid for a salvage operation are declining amid fierce competition.
Some countries such as France, Spain and Italy fund salvage tugs from
government money, but these cannot prevent tanker disasters and are not even
a guarantee against widespread environmental pollution.
Although all disasters are different, salvors will attempt at first to
assess the state of a tanker's cargo tanks in the hope they can bring in
pumping equipment to pump out the oil either on to land or to an
accompanying barge.
Smit Tak was hoping to pump out the oil from the Braer to an awaiting barge.
But salvage operations must usually begin within hours or, at the very
least, days of a disaster, otherwise fuel tanks rupture and much of the oil
escapes.
Once the cargo has been pumped from a stricken tanker, salvage crews will
try to lift the ship up and tow it to port where it can either be repaired
or scrapped. Smit Tak is now considering towing sections of the Braer out to
sea and sinking them or saving parts of the vessel for their salvage value.
Under previous international conventions, Smit Tak would have risked
receiving no pay at all if the ship went under. But new contracts prepared
by Lloyd's, the insurance market, reward the companies for expenses incurred
in trying to minimise environmental damage even if the ship sinks.
As salvors have assumed more responsibility for pollution, and tanker design
has become more complex, the industry has complained that its resources to
respond are limited. The International Salvage Union - a group of the chief
companies - commissioned a report into the industry which it said was 'in a
perilous state'.
The report published in April last year by the consulting group, Tecnitas,
pointed to a decline in the availability of salvage services worldwide. This
is chiefly because the increasing safety of tankers has given few
opportunities for salvage companies to make money.
However, the consultants pointed out that, although the number of serious
shipping disasters had declined from 938 in 1981 to 712 in 1991, the number
of incidents rose by 30 per cent in 1991. It raises the concern that the
industry may become so run down that it will be unable to cope with a rise
in demand for its services in future.
The tanker industry itself is also strapped for cash and does not have the
funds to renew its ageing fleet. With salvors facing financial pressures and
the UK so far unwilling to fund its own salvage tugs, another disaster of
the scale of the Braer could prove even more problematic to clean up.
