FT  04 MAR 93 / Clark will not be prosecuted over arms-to-Iraq evidence
MR ALAN CLARK, the former defence minister, will not be prosecuted over
evidence he gave to the Matrix Churchill trial at the Old Bailey in
November, the Crown Prosecution Service announced yesterday.
The announcement led to accusations last night by Mr Robin Cook, Labour's
trade and industry spokesman, that the government had deliberately
engineered the decision because it was afraid Mr Clark would have revealed
more details of ministerial involvement in the affair.
He said: 'Alan Clark knows a lot about ministers' involvement in the
arms-to-Iraq scandal. The government appears to have backed off from
prosecution because they were scared that he might have continued to tell
the truth in the court room.'
The Matrix Churchill affair provoked a political storm last November with Mr
John Major forced to defend the government against accusations that
ministers had misled the Commons. The outcry led to the setting up of an
inquiry into trade with Iraq headed by Lord Justice Scott.
Three former Matrix Churchill executives were cleared of illegally exporting
military related goods to Iraq.
The Pounds 3m trial collapsed when the prosecution said Mr Clark's evidence
in court had not been consistent with earlier statements to the Customs and
Excise.
Scotland Yard was asked to investigate apparent inconsistences in Mr Clark's
evidence but the CPS said yesterday the police had been 'unable to establish
with sufficient certainty which of the inconsistent statements made by Mr
Clark was not true'.
Mr Clark said he had not at any stage been interviewed by police after the
trial. When it was suggested that this might seem surprising, given that an
investigation was being held, he said: 'I would agree with you.'
Asked why Mr Clarke had not been interviewed, Scotland Yard said:
'Presumably it wasn't considered necessary.'
During the trial Mr Clark told the court he had advised Matrix Churchill
executives to be 'economical with the actualite' by agreeing a specification
which emphasised the peaceful use of machine tools which they wanted to
export to Iraq. Trade sanctions against Iraq prevented exports intended for
military use.
In his evidence Mr Clark described the trade sanctions guidelines as
'tiresome and intrusive' and suggested they were intended to ban only
weapons of mass destruction. He said the sanctions were deliberately elastic
and could be the subject of 'interpretation and argument'.
Mr Paul Henderson, Matrix Churchill's former managing director and one of
those acquitted at the trail, said he was not surprised by the CPS decision.
