FT  21 JUN 93 / Korean president attacks Hyundai labour disputes
SOUTH Korean President Kim Young-sam has criticised labour disputes at
Hyundai, the nation's largest conglomerate, that threatened to derail his
economic recovery programme.
Work slowdowns began last week at Hyundai Motor, South Korea's largest car
maker, and several other Hyundai subsidiaries, while a 14-day industrial
action has affected Hyundai Precision, a container and jeep manufacturer.
Mr Kim said he was concerned that Hyundai workers may be 'going too far in
pursuit of their interests,' explaining that 'the wages at Hyundai are high
when compared with other industrial companies.'
However, the president also took a swipe at Hyundai, reflecting his
political feud with its founder, Mr Chung Ju-yung. 'Labour disputes have
occurred almost every year at Hyundai affiliates, so there seem to be
problems with the management's sincerity,' Mr Kim said.
Government officials are worried about the threat of widespread industrial
action at Hyundai for two reasons.
One is that strikes at Hyundai could spread to other industrial groups and
end the government's attempt to curb wage growth this year.
Sharp rises in wages over the past five years, which have averaged 20 per
cent annually, have seriously harmed the country's international
competitiveness.
The prospects for wage moderation initially appeared encouraging. In an
unprecedented accord this spring, the Korea Employers' Federation and the
Korea Federation of Trade Unions agreed to limit wage growth to 4.7-8.9 per
cent this year against 16 per cent in 1992.
This coincided with a dramatic fall in labour disputes during the first five
months of 1993. But industrial action has risen sharply during the first
half of June, breaking the unusual period of labour peace.
The other concern is that disruption of production at Hyundai Motor could
seriously affect the nation's exports just as South Korean industry is
gaining an advantage over Japanese competitors due to the appreciation of
the yen.
Vehicles are one of Korea's leading exports, with Hyundai Motors normally
accounting for two-thirds of vehicle shipments abroad.
The walkouts during two shifts at Hyundai Motor, which began last week, have
shortened production by eight hours and caused losses of 1,600 cars per day
valued at Dollars 15m.
Hyundai Motor workers are demanding a pay rise of 16.45 per cent, rejecting
the company's offer of 5 per cent.
Production at Hyundai Motor was also halted for 10 days last month by a
strike at Apollo Industrial, its exclusive supplier of bumpers.
Partial walkouts have also spread this week to Hyundai Electrical
Engineering, Hyundai Construction Equipment and Hyundai Metal over work
conditions.
The government is examining the legality of the industrial action at
Hyundai.
