FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (1): A
taste of its own medicine - Although the world pharmaceutical industry is
facing an unprecedented examination of its prices and profits, investment in
drugs research and development remains inviolate. This year the sector will
spend Dollars 26.5bn on R&amp;D
THE pharmaceuticals industry is under attack. Around the globe, governments
and health providers are struggling to control their healthcare budgets.
Although drugs represent only a small element of overall spending - in the
US the figure is 7 per cent of the Dollars 800bn spent annually on
healthcare - the industry has suffered the brunt of attacks. The Japanese,
German and Italian governments have all implemented measures against
medicine prices, or use, over the past 18 months. Now, in the US, the
world's largest market, the new administration is considering measures to
control the drugs bill.
The medicines industry's profits and prices are under pressure. For the
first time, the sector is facing serious cost-cutting. All aspects of the
drugs group's business are under the microscope. Manufacturing is being
rationalised, and sales forces cut.
But investment in research and development remains inviolate. Indeed,
expenditure continues to increase. The UK-based Centre for Medicines
Research estimates investment in pharmaceuticals research and development
has increased from Dollars 15.26bn in 1988 to Dollars 26.5bn this year. The
reason for this extraordinary increase is that successful R&amp;D has become
critical for pharmaceuticals companies individually and for the industry as
a whole.
The sector can justify its prices and profits only by arguing it needs them
to develop medicines for poorly-treated or untreatable diseases. Only the
drugs industry can offer remedies for Alzheimer's or Aids. More than 90 per
cent of medicine discoveries are developed by the drugs industry, according
to the US Pharmaceuticals Manufacturers' Association.
Mr Henry Wendt, chairman of SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group, is
calling for the sector to negotiate a new social contract between the
industry and society. He believes the contract would be based on showing
customers - governments and patients - that medicines are good value for
money, demonstrating they were not only safe and effective but also
cost-effective.
'Balance is required,' says Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo.
'Society needs cost-effective healthcare, but we also need money for R&amp;D.
Finally we also have shareholders who are not altruists and need a return on
their investment,' he argues.
'The industry has cried wolf in the past,' admits Dr Jurgen Drews, president
of international pharmaceuticals R&amp;D at Roche. 'But it has gone on to even
greater profits. The industry will be successful as long as it produces
innovative products that make financial sense. But we will have to be more
efficient and productive,' he explains.
Some members of the industry are doomed, however. With prices of existing
medicines frozen or falling in most countries, only those groups capable of
discovering and rapidly developing innovative drugs will survive.
The burden, then, is on R&amp;D directors to come up with innovative compounds.
Although R&amp;D budgets have escaped the cuts elsewhere in the industry,
company boards are demanding that the ever-increasing sums spent on R&amp;D are
employed more productively.
The cost of developing a new compound is increasing. The Centre for
Medicines Research estimates the cost of bringing a compound to market had
increased from about Dollars 50m in the late 1960s to more than Dollars 250m
by the mid 1980s. Dr Peter Ringrose, senior vice-president of medicinal R&amp;D
at Pfizer Europe, reckons the true figure for the late 1980s is closer to
Dollars 400m.
Admittedly, such high figures include issues such as opportunity cost and
the cost of compounds that fail to reach the market. In Japan, where
development procedures are different, Professor Stuart Walker of the CMR
estimates the cost is between Dollars 70m and Dollars 100m. And even after
R&amp;D expenditure most drug companies are still making substantial profits.
Nevertheless, an increasing regulatory burden, combined with new, expensive
technologies such as biotechnology and gene therapy, have undoubtedly
increased the costs of developing drugs. So, too, has the need to
internationalise research and, in particular, development so a compound can
be launched as quickly as possible.
To cope with falling prices and rising costs, the industry will need to
manage R&amp;D more efficiently, says Dr Tom McKillop, of Imperial Chemical
Industries' bioscience subsidiary Zeneca. He questions whether all groups
are capable of managing the change.
Industry consultants argue a management revolution is taking place within
pharmaceuticals R&amp;D. The revolution's aim is to increase the odds for the
companies playing the molecular roulette of the drug development.
The issues concerning R&amp;D directors include:
Where to find innovative compounds. Some companies are dedicated to using
their own research molecules. Pfizer, for example, reckons 90 per cent of
the compounds in development are from internal research. 'You have to keep
bureaucracy down to create a free-wheeling atmosphere. The paradox is that
to be a world player you need a certain size, but size leads to bureaucracy.
The big question is: how to maintain an appropriate climate to keep your
scientists productive?' says Dr Frank-Joachim Morich, director of
pharmaceuticals R&amp;D at Bayer.
A number of companies have proved anxious to gain access to molecules
discovered outside their own organisation, in particular from the
rapidly-growing biotechnology industry. Some, such as Roche, have taken
majority stakes in large biotech groups. Others, such as Merck and Glaxo,
prefer to set up agreements with biotech companies on individual projects.
How to select which therapeutic areas and compounds to develop. A critical
challenge confronting R&amp;D directors is the problem of which molecules to
invest in. How to accelerate the time it takes to bring a drug to market.
For a blockbuster compound, every day's delay can cost a company Dollars 1m.
R&amp;D directors must use every trick at their disposal to accelerate the
development process, while simultaneously ensuring a compound is safe and
effective.
They must also co-ordinate the development of compounds in the US, Japan and
Europe, to ensure the group receives a return on its investment as soon as
possible. The CMR reckons during the 1970s it took eight years on average to
roll out a product in Japan, the US and three European countries. It now
take four years.
How to incorporate health economics studies into clinical trials. Trials
have traditionally demonstrated drugs are safe and effective. Now they must
also show they are cost-effective, reducing time in hospital or time away
from work. How to use new computer technology efficiently. Collecting data
during clinical trials by computer should be able to cut months off
development schedules. By submitting dossiers on optical disk rather than on
the tonnes of paper traditionally used, R&amp;D directors can save space and
time. How to manage scientists around the world. Most significant groups
have research and development in the US, Europe and Japan. This presents
considerable logistical difficulties.
As each company tries to use such measures to shorten the odds in its own
game of molecular roulette, the odds for the industry as a whole appear to
be lengthening. The rate of increase in R&amp;D expenditure is clearly
unsustainable. And whether existing investment can be justified by the
eventual returns is far from clear.
Governments and health providers are already struggling to pay for existing
therapies. The danger is that medical technology may well be outstripping
the ability of society to pay it.
 -------------------------------------------------------
LEADING COMPANIES BY NOMINAL PHARMACEUTICAL R&amp;D SPENDING
 -------------------------------------------------------
                   R&amp;D spend         Sales      R&amp;D as %
Company          (Dollars m)   (Dollars m)      of sales
 -------------------------------------------------------
Glaxo                1,052.7       7,247.0          14.5
Merck                  987.8       8,019.5          12.3
Roche                  953.3       4,119.9          23.1
BMS                    845.0       5,908.0          14.3
Hoechst               785.8*       6,263.9          12.5
Bayer                688.8**       5,306.4          13.0
Ciba-Geigy          677.8***       4,052.3          16.7
Sandoz                 675.0       4,440.7          15.2
SmithKline Beecham     654.6       4,370.1          15.0
Johnson &amp; Johnson      569.0       3,795.0          15.0
 -------------------------------------------------------
* Health division, including cosmetics
** Healthcare division, including diagnostics
*** Relates to prescription pharmaceuticals
 -------------------------------------------------------
Source: Scrip Review
 -------------------------------------------------------
