FT  28 JUL 93 / Survey of Resource Management - Buying-in Services (2): Big
boost for bought-in services - The progress of the UK government's  market
testing programme
THE UK government's market-testing programme, launched last November, has
provided a massive boost to Britain's market for bought-in services.
In the first year of the programme alone, almost Pounds 1.5bn of services
has been put out to tender, involving work currently done by 44,000 civil
servants.
Even larger amounts are expected to follow over the next three years, with
as much as half the civil service annual running costs of Pounds 20bn likely
to have been exposed to market-testing by the time of the next election.
Progress on the first year's programme has been slow, with a sizeable part
unlikely to be completed by the end of September as originally planned.
While it is too soon to predict the final outcome, it appears that around
half the work on tenders already completed has gone to the private sector,
with the in-house team winning the remainder.
No data is yet available about the likely savings which will come from the
first round of market-testing. When Mr William Waldegrave, the public
services minister launched the programme last year, he said that savings of
up to 25 per cent might be possible.
The experience of compulsory competitive tendering in local government
suggests that this may be an ambitious target.
Research by the Department of the Environment shows average savings of 6.5
per cent, while the Audit Commission, the local government watchdog,
estimated a reduction in costs of 7 per cent from contracting-out.
However, Mr Waldegrave emphasises that cutting costs is not the only
objective: market-testing should contribute to improving the quality of
public services.
Writing the specification for work that is to be put out to tender forces
managers to define the outputs they wish to achieve from the activity. Even
if the contract goes to the in-house team, they will in future be working to
agreed standards, with penalties if they do not achieve their targets.
And on the principle that the people already doing the job may be best
placed to know how to do it better, departments have provided advice and
resources to help the in-house teams in drawing up their bids.
Giving the in-house team the opportunity to bid has not been universally
popular among private sector bidders. There is widely-held fear that the
contracts are structured to favour the in-house team. There are also
suspicions that managers in charge of the market-testing programme in
departments may be biased towards their colleagues' bids.
Accusations of 'tilted playing fields' are equally common among in-house
teams, however. They fear that the ministers who will make the final
decisions have a bias towards private sector bidders. They also accuse
contractors of sweeping away the good employment practices of the civil
service to cut costs.
Only the final results of the first round will show whether the
market-testing progress has been fair, according to one civil servant
involved in driving the programme forward - 'providing both private sector
bidders and the in-house teams have won a reasonable share of contracts,
then neither side will be able to cry foul.'
The work being put out to tender covers a wide range of functions, including
the traditional support services such as cleaning, catering, security and
reprographics. But the programme has also invited contractors to bid for
more mainstream activities, such as information technology services, audit
and accountancy, legal services, payroll, typing and secretarial services.
And some government functions which might be described as core civil service
work have been included in the programme, including the collection of
official statistics, naval surveillance operations for Customs &amp; Excise and
ship radio licensing.
The first round has not been entirely free of hitches. Perhaps the most
embarrassing was the series of escapes of prisoners in the care of Group 4,
which won the contract for prison escort services in the East Midlands,
Humberside and Yorkshire.
The company said that many of the escapes were attributable to the faults of
others. But the 'leakage' proved highly damaging to the credibility of the
market-testing programme.
The Prison Service Agency and the Home Secretary staunchly resisted calls to
terminate the contract and the contracting-out of prison escort services.
And after three months of the contract, Group 4 now says that it has lost
less than half the number of prisoners who escaped from the police or prison
service during the same period last year. However, their much-publicised
problems may have slowed up further progress on contracting out such
high-profile work.
Another embarrassing hitch came when Inland Revenue mailings to employers at
the start of this tax year, handled for the first time by private
contractors, went awry with information on individual taxpayers sent to the
wrong addresses.
This situation rekindled doubts among MPs over whether the standards of the
private sector in handling confidential information matched those of the
civil service.
The first months of the programme were also dogged by uncertainty over the
employment rights of public sector employees whose work was contracted out
to the private sector.
There was disagreement - even among the government's legal advisers - over
whether the Acquired Rights Directive applied to market-testing. If it did,
successful bidders would have to take over the existing staff and their
civil service terms and conditions.
The uncertainty led to some departments suspending their market-testing
activities, while others had to retender for contracts when it became clear
that the directive applied to them.
It was several months before the law officers issued a definitive ruling
that the directive could apply to market-testing, requiring each contract to
be examined to see whether it applied to it.
But despite these setbacks, the programme is now forging ahead. Already
departments are drawing up lists of activities to be market-tested next year
and planning for the two following years. Pressure to expand their
programmes is being applied to departments which have under-achieved this
year in comparison with other departments.
Ministers remain committed to the market-testing process, as a stimulus to
improving value for money in the civil service. With a Pounds 50bn deficit
in the government's finances, there is little choice but to use every weapon
in the armoury to promote efficiency in central government services.
