FT  04 JUN 93 / Burundi's Tutsi elite feel the winds of democracy: Michael
Holman on changes in a country which once murdered its citizens at the rate
of 1,000 a day
AFRICA'S longest dominating ethnic minority is bowing to the winds of
change.
Nearly 500 years after establishing their hegemony, and 30-odd years after
Harold Macmillan warned white South Africa that the days of apartheid were
numbered, Burundi's Tutsi elite seem set to surrender power to the country's
Hutu majority.
On Wednesday the first democratic elections in the central African nation's
history marked a watershed in a country scarred by tribal genocide.
Mr Melchior Ndadaye, a 40-year old banker and leader of the Burundi
Democracy Front, won 60 per cent of the vote to defeat Major Pierre Buyoya,
the military president, The presidential poll is to be followed by
legislative elections on June 29, ending a two-year transition to democratic
rule.
'Mr Ndadaye needs to win both (elections) to have real control of the
country,' cautioned one western election monitor quoted by Reuters in
Bujumbura, but the Tutsi's ancient hold on the country appears to have been
broken.
Major Buyoya, a former army officer who came to power in a bloodless coup in
1987, has presided over a transition as difficult as any in Africa,
overcoming a bloody history.
Poor, remote, heavily dependent on coffee exports, and of little strategic
interest to the superpowers, Burundi has been able to keep out of the
spotlight directed on southern African minority regimes.
The Tutsi minority, an unusually tall race making up 14 per cent of the 5.6m
population, have dominated the Hutu majority (85 per cent) since the 16th
century. The colonial era saw little change in a near feudal relationship.
In 1899, along with neighbouring Rwanda, Burundi became part of German East
Africa. After the first world war German rule was replaced by a Belgian
mandate which ended with independence in 1962.
The Tutsi hold on power was reinforced by discrimination in the education
system, civil service and army. A Hutu-led coup attempt in 1965 was
ruthlessly suppressed, with many leading members of the Hutu tribe losing
their lives. Worse was to come.
In April 1972 began one of the worst slaughters the continent has known.
What started the bloodshed is unclear. Michel Micombero, a young Tutsi army
officer who seized power in a coup in 1966, claimed to have discovered a
Hutu plot aimed at exterminating Tutsi.
Whatever the cause, what transpired amounted to 'the systematic killing of
as many as a quarter of a million people . . . over a four-month period men,
women and children were savagely murdered at a rate of more than a thousand
a day,' concluded an investigation funded by the Washington-based Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.
By mid-May, the US embassy in Bujumbura 'started getting disturbing reports
that the government was not just mopping up the rebels but trying to punish
the whole Hutu tribe', the report recounted, drawing on embassy material:
'They tried to skim off the cream of the Hutu tribe, to kill every possible
Hutu male of distinction over the age of 14.'
The four Hutu members of cabinet, nearly all officers and soldiers in armed
forces, half the primary school teachers, bank clerks, businessmen and civil
servants perished in a selective slaughter.
The genocide that followed was largely ignored outside the country. The UN
helped to assist the 150,000 refugees who sought refuge in neighbouring
states, but otherwise stood aside.
The Organisation for African Unity characteristically declined to act.
During a June summit, the council of ministers sent a formal note to Mr
Micombero: 'Thanks to your saving action, peace will be rapidly
re-established, national unity will be consolidated and territorial
integrity will be preserved.'
International concern was ineffectual and short-lived, and Burundi returned
to obscurity. Micombero was replaced in a bloodless coup by his cousin, Col
Jean-Baptiste Bagaza in 1976, himself deposed by Major Buyoya.
His first act of reconciliation was to share cabinet posts between the two
tribes, giving Hutu their first real voice in government in 20 years and
naming the first Hutu premier since 1965. But a further bout of ethnic
slaughter in 1988 killed at least 5,000 people, giving renewed urgency to
reform. Like the minority leaders in southern Africa, Burundi's president
had set in train a process of change he can no longer control.
