FT  02 DEC 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Home, sweet hotel
home - The US is going to new lengths to attract tourists
If you wake up in a hotel where the television news is reported in Japanese,
the breakfast menu features miso soup and green tea and your concierge slips
the Japan Times under the door, you could be forgiven for thinking that you
were in one of Tokyo's finest resorts.
But you are just as likely to be in America. With 19.5m overseas visitors
expected to flood into the US this year, hotels are going to new lengths to
attract foreign travellers.
'The whole point is to make your guests feel as at home as possible,' says
Jo-Anne Cavanaugh, international sales director for Marriott Hotels. 'If
they enjoy their experience with you, they will come back again.'
Although many tourists travel abroad to sample alternative cultures, hotel
sales managers in the US are finding that by adopting some of the services
and customs exercised in other countries, their guests feel less
disorientated and return to the same destination time and again.
For this reason Gary Zodrow, executive vice-president of HBR Hotels, based
in San Francisco, California, makes special arrangements for foreign
visitors, who make up 55 per cent of his clientele.
'If we have French guests, we order softer croissants, special breakfast
rolls and jams,' says Zodrow. 'If we are hosting Germans, we make sure
German beer is stocked in the bar.'
Other hotels go to greater lengths, particularly for the Japanese. According
to the US Travel and Tourism Administration, they are expected to comprise
21 per cent of all overseas visitors to the US in 1993.
For example, many hotel chains now offer Jan (Japan Assistant Network),
which provides translation services for business travellers, plus
information for holiday makers about local restaurants, shopping facilities
and tourist attractions.
Some hotels also subscribe to Scola, a 24-hour international news channel on
cable television that tunes into news desks worldwide to cover events
directly from source.
Hotel Nikko, in San Francisco, owned by Japan Air Lines, not only offers its
Japanese guests news from home and coverage of the Nikkei stock index, but
also caters for international conferencing through Photo &amp; Sound, an
in-house audio visual company that provides real-time translation of
business meetings.
Hotels have also initiated finer modifications for specific foreign
visitors.
The Marriott, for example, provides longer length bath robes for Japanese
guests. 'The Japanese are very modest people, they appreciate a little more
coverage,' explains Cavanaugh. Meanwhile, the Westin St Francis Hotel
researches the status of its guest list prior to check-in and accommodates
higher ranking individuals on higher floors than their subordinates - in
line with traditional Japanese protocol.
But despite these attempts to draw foreign trade, many leading chains are
reporting decreased custom from certain nationalities, including the
Japanese.
Alain Ane, assistant general manager at the Hotel Nikko, claims Japanese
tourists make up 25 per cent of the hotel's guest list.
But that figure is 10 per cent down on last year - and falling. Partly due
to the recession in Japan, Ane believes that declining Japanese patronage is
also attributable to recent negative press about the US.
Shootings of German and British tourists in Florida, the slaying of a
Japanese student in October last year and the Los Angeles riots following
the Rodney King incident, have done a great deal to engender fear and
apprehension in travellers to the US.
'It's embarrassing,' says Zodrow. 'America used to provide such a wonderful
and safe environment for travellers. Now we give a third-world impression of
safety.'
At least those willing to brave the streets of America, for business or
pleasure, may rest assured their visit will be home from home.
