FT  23 DEC 93 / Tidal wave of beer from France hits UK drinks industry
More beer is now pouring across the Channel from Calais than total French
beer exports worldwide through conventional trade channels, industry
estimates say.
UK retail beer sales worth about Pounds 260m a year have been lost, and the
cost to the government in excise duty and value added tax amounts to about
Pounds 150m a year.
When personal imports of wine and spirits are added, drinks retailers in the
UK are estimated to have lost business worth Pounds 700m. Government revenue
has declined by at least Pounds 350m.
The amount of beer brought into the UK this year by cross-Channel shoppers
is equivalent to the total annual sales of 4,000 tenanted pubs or the
production of two larger regional brewers.
Since allowances of personal duty-paid imports were increased in January to
110 litres - the average yearly UK consumption per head - the Brewers'
Society reckons more than 256m pints have been brought into the UK.
Differences between UK and French rates of beer taxation offer consumers
huge savings. Excise duty on beer in the UK is 30p a pint compared with 4p a
pint in France.
Legal imports, on which duty has been paid in France, have been swollen by
higher duty-free allowances bought aboard the cross-Channel ferries.
Personal imports now account for 9 to 11 per cent of the UK take-home beer
trade. Brewers estimate that illegal imports for resale take another 4 per
cent.
With more cheap drink available at home, the pub trade is also beginning to
suffer, the brewers argue. Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, seemed to
recognise the threat both to the industry and to the government's pocket
when he left beer duty unchanged in the Budget.
But Customs and Excise maintains that industry estimates of personal imports
are exaggerated. Sir John Cope, paymaster-general, stands by official
forecasts made early this year of a total loss of revenue of Pounds 250m
from imports of beer, wine, spirits and tobacco. Mr Bernard Windsor,
chairman of the Wine and Spirit Association, says its monitoring of
cross-Channel purchases since personal import allowances were raised
suggests that Pounds 264m of revenue will be lost on wines and spirits
alone.
Duty-free spree, Page 7
Dedicated team, Page 8
