FT  11 SEP 93 / Markets: P&amp;O steers a cautious course - The Bottom Line
PENINSULAR and Oriental Steam Navigation Company could have a lesson for the
market as a whole. Like many UK companies which have reported results in the
past few weeks, the cautious tone of its trading statement appeared at odds
with the gathering confidence that economic recovery is under way.
The City was disappointed with P&amp;O's 11 per cent decline in net pre-tax
profits to Pounds 80.1m and marked the shares down by 49p. They closed
yesterday at 611p.
An indignant Lord Sterling, the chairman, said that anyone who bothered to
read the annual report would have known that the UK economic upturn was
taking longer than expected and would not have allowed their expectations to
race away.
'It is a delusion to think we can surge ahead while Germany and France
remain deep in recession,' he declared.
P&amp;O mirrors many aspects of the UK economy with its house-building,
construction and property operations, while its passenger ferries also are
exposed to consumer trends. Sterling's message that the recovery is patchy
is, therefore, worrying news for shareholders.
The only significant benefit derived from the end of the recession has been
in terms of increased volumes, not in pre-tax profits before disposals.
Investors are being wooed with the prospect of a big dividend. This cannot
be justified by the decline in net profits but, instead, in terms of the
ambitious investment programme which, over the past six years, has totalled
around Pounds 4bn.
Half of the spending has been used to expand the company's operations in
transport and shipping. P&amp;O hopes to increase significantly its 8.5 per cent
return on capital employed.
There is, however, unlikely to be any big return from the new shipping fleet
until well into the next century.
That might be good news in the long term but it is not balancing the
short-term needs demanded by the City. Ian Wild, transport analyst at
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said: 'The market wants short-term performance and
long-term growth. P&amp;O is delivering on the latter but not the former.'
To be fair to P&amp;O, it has shored up the balance sheet since it most felt the
strain from the capital spending programme back in August 1991. At that
stage it chose to ask investors for Pounds 604m through a rights issue to
cut gearing which started that year at 80 per cent but rose by the halfway
stage to nearly 100 per cent.
After the sale of Sutcliffe, the contract caterer, borrowings fell from
Pounds 1.89bn at the end of December 1992 to Pounds 1.73bn at the end of
June, representing gearing of 70 per cent.
Further disposals are expected to follow this week's announcement of the
sale of Buck and Hickman, a distributor of engineers' supplies, to Charles
Baynes for Pounds 32.5m.
A scrip dividend further eases the pressure on the balance sheet since it
effectively works as a minor rights issue. If all shareholders take up the
scrip dividend alternative the group would retain cash of Pounds 163m.
This represents a saving on the 1993 dividend of Pounds 128m and a further
Pounds 35m of advance corporation tax. Sterling says he would have been
'daft' to have thrown away the chance of conserving cash.
The scrip dividend could, however, only defer financial problems. If taken
up fully, it will expand P&amp;O's equity by about 6 per cent - which will prove
expensive to finance given the stock's yield of 6.5 per cent.
P&amp;O could accelerate its disposal programme to generate more cash, or embark
on a more radical solution by demerging its property and construction
interests. The problem with both options is that they would deprive the
company of more of its stable earning contributions.
A more robust economic recovery would help. But as Sterling said earlier
this week, that is unlikely.
The company's investment could pay off in the long term but, for the
immediate future, its performance is unlikely to recommend it to investors.
