FT  28 MAY 93 / Survey of UK Relocation (25): China is new priority - The
German approach
FOLLOWING an extravagant foreign investment drive in the late 1980s, powered
mainly by the approach of the European single market, German industry has
re-focused its approach to relocation .
Between 1986 and 1991, almost DM130bn of productive capital flowed out of
the country compared with DM60bn in the first half of the decade. By 1991,
two-thirds of the DM29bn total was still being invested within the
boundaries of the European Community.
The EC with its 320m-strong consumer market is still the favoured target for
most German companies. All 11 partner countries offer the attraction of
lower wage rates. Britain's relatively modest corporate taxation and better
employee relations provide extra pull. Absenteeism rates in manufacturing
are 50 per cent lower than in western Germany.
But investment decisions are increasingly being conditioned by a potent mix
of old and new factors and constraints - some of which were either ignored
or neglected in the past.
The most obvious new elements are the opportunities opened up by the
collapse of European communism. German industry, with traditional strengths
in transportation, production equipment, telecommunications, environmental
engineering and other infrastructural sectors, is well- equipped to benefit.
Experience in the economic and infrastructural wasteland of the former GDR
will further enhance Germany's qualifications.
However, movement eastwards has been slowed by the inability of the
potential new customers to pay, the urgent need to invest elsewhere, and,
not least, by the crushing recession which cut west German economic output
by about 3.5 per cent in the first quarter of this year and sliced into
companies' profits and their ability to invest.
According to the corporate consensus, current priorities for German foreign
investment include China and the neglected US, which attracted only 11 per
cent of spending in 1991. According to one senior executive, the size of the
fast-growing Chinese market is only one of the factors at work: 'We simply
cannot sit back and let the Japanese take over another market unchallenged.'
Volkswagen, battered in its mainstream European markets by recession and
self-confessed mismanagement, provides an indication of the scale of German
ambitions. China will provide it with its third-biggest market after Germany
and Italy by 1996, the company claims. Its first Chinese factory, one of the
few group projects not to suffer from a current investment clamp, last year
increased output 86 per cent to just 65,000 cars.
Daimler-Benz is discussing building a Mercedes bus factory in Shanghai and
at the same time its AEG subsidiary is in talks on a joint venture to build
rail rolling stock nearby.
Investment in the US and Mexico reflects in part a determination to avoid
any risk of losing more ground within the North American Free Trade Area.
Volkswagen has less than 1 per cent of the US car market. But VW's Mexico
has already won more than a 30 per cent share of the local automobile
market. BMW's first non-German factory now under construction in North
Carolina and a recent decision by Mercedes-Benz to open its first US car
works, are belated recognitions that closeness to markets and competitive
pricing count for more than a Made in Germany label.
While the pull-effect of open global markets is drawing German investors
from their homeland fortress, they are being forced out by pressures within
 -the highest hourly labour costs in the world (DM42 last year compared with
DM30 in Japan, DM27.75 in neighbouring France and DM23 in Britain), the
highest environmental charges and corporate taxes, and the shortest working
times.
That explains why foreign investors find Germany one of the least attractive
sites for relocation. According to the IMF, Germany drew just 2 per cent or
Dollars 19bn of the Dollars 1,000bn of total global foreign direct
investments in the 10 years to 1991. The US, attracting almost 40 per cent,
was the most popular choice, followed by the UK with Dollars 153bn.
