FT  15 DEC 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Cuban oil production set to
soar 45%
In an effort to ease a severe energy shortage that is crippling its battered
economy, Cuba's domestic oil industry has lifted output to 1.1m tonnes in
the year to November and is anticipating 1.2m tonnes for the full year, 45
per cent more than 1992 output.
The industry's hopes for even higher production have been raised by the
decision of a foreign consortium, led by Total of France, to drill
exploratory wells off the island's north coast early next year.
The domestic oil industry is being given more attention following a severe
reduction in oil imports after the break-up of the Soviet Union, which was
Cuba's main supplier. Imports once averaged 13m tonnes per year, of which
11.5m tonnes were consumed and the rest re-exported to western markets.
Imports last year fell to 6.1m tonnes, and will be less this year.
It was once cheaper for Cuba to import Soviet oil than to exploit its own
high sulphur deposits, mainly along the north coast.
The shortage has led to power cuts on the island, increased rationing of
petroleum products and has adversely affected transportation in the key
agriculture sector.
This year's output by the domestic industry will be the highest ever,
surpassing the 938,000 tonnes of 1986. The locally-produced crude is used in
some of the island's electricity generating plants, but these are running
below rated capacity.
The consortium led by Total includes Compagnie Europeanee des Petroles of
France, and Fortuna Petroleum of Canada. It was granted a six year contract
24 months ago by Comercial Cupet, a subsidiary of Cubapetroleo (Cupet), the
Cuban state company.
The consortium has been doing seismological surveys in a 1,800 sq km
concession in the Santa Clara region and the decision to drill the
exploratory wells is being interpretted in Cuba as an indication that the
deposits in the concession are commercially exploitable.
The Cuban authorities are hoping to attract more foreign companies to the
oil industry, following its invitation earlier this year to Canadian and
European companies to bid for concessions covering 11 blocks of between
1,400 and 6,000 sq km. Seven of the blocks are onshore, three are offshore
and one is both offshore and onshore.
US companies cannot be involved because of Washington's 30 year-old economic
embargo on Cuba. The island's government is offering 25 year contracts and
production sharing arrangements, while the foreign companies are expected to
provide their own capital and equipment.
