FT  08 DEC 93 / World Trade News: Balladur sidesteps Uruguay Round trap
Mr Edouard Balladur, France's prime minister, saw the Gatt negotiations as
'a trap between international isolation and a domestic political crisis' for
himself and France.
He brought the world trade talks to the brink of collapse to win an
agreement with the US, particularly on agriculture, which may yet provoke
the wrath of his backbenchers and the farm lobby. But Mr Balladur may be in
the process of wriggling out of his trap.
His ministers, however, were yesterday saying that France was still not
satisfied on several aspects of the Gatt negotiations.
Mr Balladur's moment of truth will not come until the French parliament
pronounces probably next week on what the talks in Brussels and Geneva
produce. The opposition parties - Socialists, Communists and National Front
 -were yesterday quick to denounce the tentative trade agreement.
But it is hard to believe that Mr Balladur will go before the National
Assembly without first squaring the ruling coalition parties.
In this task, he is getting a helping hand from President Francois
Mitterrand, a Socialist. Mr Mitterrand was last night consulting leaders
including Mr Balladur's fellow gaullist Mr Jacques Chirac, whose cultivation
of the farm vote in his bid for the presidency has worried the prime
minister. Mr Mitterrand is due to see farmers' leaders today before he and
Mr Balladur set off for the EU summit in Brussels on Friday.
In Brussels, the French leaders will drive home their country's demands that
the Gatt deal will not force French farmers to take any more land out of
production, or leave Europe without the same instruments of commercial
defence against dumping or unfair trade as the US has.
By throwing these intra-EU demands into Europe's negotiations with the US,
the French government has irritated its partners but also, in Paris' view,
widened the scope for trade-offs, allowing France to get compensation from
Brussels for concessions it could not wring from Washington.
But underlying all this has been the way that Mr Balladur has sought to use
his political weakness over Gatt as his strongest bargaining card. It is,
after all, conceivable that an unsatisfactory Gatt deal could topple him
from power.
In the agricultural area, Mr Balladur has at least staved off the sharpest
cuts in French subsidised farm exports until the later 1990s. This would
postpone any pain until after the 1995 presidential election, on which he
still has his options open.
