FT  16 MAR 93 / Business and the Law: Selection process for Commission jobs
attacked - European Law
The appointments of two directors to the European Commission
Directorate-General for Fisheries have been annulled by the European Court
of First Instance, because the successful applicants were chosen by the
Commission not because of their qualifications but because the EC countries
from which they came were 'owed' the jobs.
The case was brought by two of the unsuccessful applicants for the posts,
who were rejected on the grounds that they were insufficiently qualified in
spite of both having worked on EC fisheries policy. The two successful
applicants were economists from Spain and Italy.
The Court found that the two previous holders of the posts had been Spanish
and Italian and that, in spite of advertising the jobs openly, the
Commission had already decided who the new directors would be before the
applications of the other candidates had been considered properly.
The case brings into the open the political nature of the selection
procedure for Commission jobs. It is hoped the Court's judgment will lead to
greater transparency in Commission appointments.
T-58/91: Booss and Fischer v Commission, CFI 4CH, March 3 1993.
Luxembourg birth and maternity allowances discriminatory
The European Court last week upheld an action brought by the Commission
against Luxembourg for imposing discriminatory rules for the grant of birth
and maternity allowances.
Under Luxembourg law, ante-natal allowances were payable to pregnant women
on condition that they were legally domiciled in Luxembourg and post-natal
allowances were payable on condition that one of the parents of the child
had been legally domiciled in Luxembourg for at least one year at the time
of the birth. Maternity allowances were also available for any pregnant
woman or mother legally domiciled in Luxembourg.
The Court ruled both types of allowance were social security benefits under
EC law and thus should be capable of being enjoyed by both migrant as well
as purely national workers.
The Luxembourg government argued that the rules were not discriminatory
because they applied to both Luxembourg nationals and nationals from other
EC states. The Court rejected that argument, as it found that the conditions
were more easily fulfilled by a Luxembourg national than a national from
another member state.
C-111/91: Commission v Luxembourg, ECJ FC, March 10 1993.
Belgian environmental legislation in breach of EC law
The European Court has ruled Belgium in breach of EC environmental laws on
air quality norms for nitrogen dioxide.
The EC legislation sets certain limits for the amount of nitrogen dioxide in
the air. These limits can be reduced by individual Community countries, but
only after consultation with bordering states which may be affected by lower
limits.
The legislation also obliges member states to consult one another in the
event of a pollution incident which results, or is likely to result, in the
limits being ex-ceeded; to keep the Commission informed of any
consultations; and to give it the opportunity to participate.
Belgium implemented all the legislation except for the provisions relating
to the consultations. The Belgian government submitted that these provisions
did not need to be implemented as Belgium did not envisage taking any action
which would lead to the consultation procedure being opened.
The Court rejected that argument. The provisions relating to the
consultation procedure were an indispensable element of the legislation.
Failure to implement such provisions constituted a breach of Community law,
in that Belgium had failed to implement fully the EC legislation as
requested.
C-186/91: Commission v Belgium, ECJ FC, March 10 1993.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
