FT  05 JAN 93 / Tough task ahead: US revival will be weaker than many expect
 -Forecast 1993
The year 1993 should be a good one for the US economy: low inflation,
declining unemployment, and legislative progress to reduce future budget
deficits. It should be good, but it is not guaranteed to be. The unusually
weak character of the recovery that began 21 months ago raises doubts about
its robustness and even its sustainability. And although President-elect
Bill Clinton's rhetoric has been reassuring since the election, the hard
task of legislating for tough deficit-reduction policies still lies ahead.
Consider first the economic recovery. The strong upturn of demand and
production that began in September and October has induced most private
forecasters to predict that real gross domestic product will increase at
least 3 per cent this year, more than enough to assure that the unemployment
rate will continue its decline. From a peak of 7.7 per cent in June 1992,
the unemployment rate has already fallen to 7.2 per cent.
Three per cent GDP growth in 1993 would bring the unemployment rate by
year-end to less than 7 per cent, reinforcing consumer confidence but
leaving enough slack in the economy to keep the recent 3 per cent rate of
consumer price inflation from rising.
A big reason for the recent cyclical acceleration has been the increase in
retail sales provoked by the recovery of consumer confidence that began in
October. Retailers reported strong Christmas sales, suggesting that the
decline in inventories that began in September has continued and will
stimulate increased production in the new year.
The decline in intermediate and long-term interest rates that began in early
December could continue as financial markets grow confident that the Federal
Reserve will maintain its anti-inflationary policy and that the new
president will succeed in enacting legislation to cut the deficit. Such
declines in interest rates would stimulate housing and other investment and,
by reducing the value of the dollar, would increase net exports.
While a mild upturn is more likely than not, there are three reasons why the
recovery will be weaker than the consensus forecast and might run out of
steam completely.
First, consumers lack the incomes to sustain their recent rate of growth of
spending. Real disposable income rose only 1 per cent during the five
quarters from the start of the recovery until the third quarter of 1992 and
declined in the most recent month. The primary reason for the slow growth of
incomes is that payroll employment is lower now than when the recovery
began. And with the personal saving rate down to only 4.2 per cent of
disposable personal income - lower than any year for at least three decades
 -there is little prospect for increased spending without a rise in
employment and incomes.
Second, there is no external driving force of the sort that stimulated and
sustained past upturns. Although short-term interest rates are depressed,
the low inflation rate and the steep yield curve imply significant real
interest rates for longer-term credits. With the broad M2 monetary aggregate
up at a rate of only 2 per cent over the past six months, only a very
unusual rise in velocity would lead to the projected 6 per cent rate of
increase of nominal GDP during the next six months.
Third, despite the large federal deficit, the behaviour of the combined
federal and state-local budgets is likely to be slightly contractionary in
1993 on a cyclically adjusted basis. And the higher international value of
the dollar, combined with the weakness of other in-dustrial economies, is
likely to reverse the rise of US exports that began in September.
The recovery's strength is also endangered by unusual transition factors:
defence cuts, banks' reluctance to lend while they try to conform to higher
capital ratio guidelines, and the freeze on commercial construction in
response to high office vacancy rates.
In short, while there are reasons to be optimistic about 1993, there are
also substantial uncertainties. The same is true for longer-run policy
decisions.
The most important long-run problem remains the budget deficit and the
resulting low rate of national saving. Households, corporations and
state-local governments now save only 5 per cent of GDP after providing for
depreciation. The federal government must borrow two-thirds of that saving
to finance its cyclically adjusted structural deficit. Net national saving
has thus been reduced to only 2 per cent of GDP. With the inflow of foreign
capital at only about 1 per cent of GDP, total funds available for business
investment and housing construction are only 3 per cent of GDP.
During the election campaign, Mr Clinton generally ignored the budget
deficit. He issued a campaign budget proposal that called for a middle-class
tax cut and a variety of spending increases. His budget only limited the
structural deficit to an unchanged 3 per cent of GDP for the next four years
by a variety of wishful-thinking improvements in government efficiency. The
Clinton plan to provide health insurance to 37m uninsured Americans was
omitted from his budget. In addition, top advisers called for a big
supplementary deficit increase in 1993 to stimulate the economy.
Fortunately, since the election Mr Clinton has emphasised his determination
to reduce future budget deficits. He has indicated that the middle-class tax
cut may be postponed. He has talked about limiting the favourable tax
treatment of health insurance premiums paid by employers and taxing social
security benefits. Some in the Clinton camp have advocated significant
increases in gasoline taxes.
Nevertheless, talking about deficit-reduction strategies is easier than
getting the congressional votes. President Reagan sought to cut social
security benefits and limit health insurance tax breaks but could find no
support in Congress. Although the Democrats' control of Congress may allow
Mr Clinton to achieve certain things more easily, Republicans are unlikely
to vote for politically unpopular benefit cuts or tax increases, and
Democrats will not be eager to do so on their own.
The opportunity to reduce future budget deficits, like the prospect of
accelerating economic activity, may look better now than it has for years.
But uncertainty will remain at least until the cherry blossoms bloom in
Washington.
The author is professor of economics at Harvard University and president of
the National Bureau of Economic Research
