FT  24 DEC 93 / Peace hopes hit as IRA limits truce to three days: Sinn Fein
official hints at future action against troops
A top Sinn Fein official dealt a blow to Anglo-Irish efforts to bring peace
to Northern Ireland, as the IRA announced last night that its traditional
Christmas ceasefire would last only the usual 72 hours.
Mr Martin McGuinness, a key figure in the Republican leadership, used a
newspaper interview to hint that last week's Downing Street declaration
would not be enough to persuade the IRA to end its 25-year armed struggle.
The political situation had not 'developed to a position where Sinn Fein can
use its influence to end attacks on the British Crown forces', Mr McGuinness
said.
His remarks came as nearly 450 prisoners - many convicted of terrorist
offences and 100 serving life sentences - were let out of the province's
jails to spend Christmas with their families.
Coming just a week after the Major-Reynolds declaration, the traditional
Christmas exodus is expected to fuel debate over whether to embrace the
peace process.
Senior IRA men released yesterday at the same time as loyalist prisoners are
expected to be involved in talks with Sinn Fein leaders about their response
to the joint declaration.
That may add to pressure on Republican leaders to demand an amnesty for IRA
prisoners as part of any peace deal. Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein
president, called this week for all IRA prisoners to be released as part of
a negotiated settlement - a position echoed by Mr McGuinness.
Meanwhile, the acquittal of two Royal Marines charged with attempting to
murder two Roman Catholic brothers in a checkpoint shooting added to tension
in the province.
Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the mainly Roman Catholic SDLP, said he
was 'very depressed' by the verdict, which was also condemned by Mr Tom
Hartley, Sinn Fein's national chairman.
Interviewed in the Derry Journal, Mr McGuinness - who played an important
role in this year's secret contacts between Sinn Fein and the British
government - said that last week's declaration had to be 'backed by
actions'. Taken alone, 'for all its grand phraseology', it was 'not going to
solve the problems'.
He warned that any reintroduction of internment would be 'a recipe for
disaster' leading to another 25 years of violence.
Downing Street responded to Mr McGuinness's comments by reiterating that it
was interested only in a permanent cessation of violence leading to a
lasting peace. Mr McGuinness's statement coincided with an announcement by
the IRA of a 'temporary suspension' of their campaign for 72 hours, starting
at midnight.
The IRA announces a three-day ceasefire every Christmas, but hopes had been
raised that a longer ceasefire would be announced this year to give scope
for the peace initiative to gather further momentum.
The prisoners, selected from the 1,845 in custody in the province, are due
to return to the Maze, Maghaberry and other prisons by December 30.
Some 20 IRA prisoners were let out of jails in the Irish Republic yesterday
under similar arrangements.
The UK release scheme was introduced in 1948 and is confined to Northern
Ireland. It was extended five years ago to include 'lifers' who have served
at least 11 years of their sentence.
