FT  11 DEC 93 / How To Spend It: The delicate art of selecting creative
presents - Sculptures, paintings and cartoons all make ideal gifts. Lucia
Van Der Post looks at what is on offer
Of all the presents I have been given over the years I suppose the ones that
have given the most lasting pleasure are the pictures and sculptures with
which our house is over-supplied. Never mind that for years we were short of
comfortable chairs, that serious grown-up furniture was thin on the ground
or that we entirely lacked the sort of gadgetry that others cannot live
without - our walls looked smashing and our shelves were full of interest.
Not that I am alone in my predilections. There are plenty more like me. We
are the ones who would rather have a new drawing than a designer frock any
day of the week.
The key to giving art as presents, though, is a certain acquaintance (or
better still, a deep knowledge) of the loved-one's tastes. Not that this is
easy - many people's tastes are confusingly eclectic.
Works of art that have meaning nearly always make wonderful presents - into
this category, come drawings or sculptures of the beloved or the family as
well as scenes from special places.
This Christmas you are almost spoiled for choice. Many of the galleries have
had a hard time of it and special Christmas exhibitions give a fillip to end
of year sales. Here, are a few suggestions.
Edinburgh seems to have one of the highest proportions of picture galleries
of any city in Britain. Wandering down Dundas Street is a treat for anybody
wanting to get their eye in. The Scottish Gallery at no 16 in particular is
always filled with interesting contemporary work.
In less well-known William Street is Flying Colours Gallery, owned and run
by Jane Houldsworth, which in the run-up to Christmas has a solo show by
Ethel Walker as well as a sale of more than 100 framed works by about 30
different contemporary Scottish artists.
Prices range from Pounds 50 to Pounds 5,000 and there are established
artists such as John Cunningham, James Fullerton, I. Lesley Main as well as
newer talent such as Shona Barr, Lorna Robertson and Selina Thorp.
The sale runs until December 23, there are oils, water-colours, pastels,
landscapes, still lifes - the range is big but it is mostly representational
with a few near-abstracts. The picture photographed here, '10 Umbrellas', a
mixed media (acrylic/gouache) by James Fullerton, measures 8ins by 10ins and
sells for Pounds 565.
Flying Colours Gallery is at 35 William Street, Edinburgh, EH3 7 LW.
031-225-6776.
Cartoonists are a specialist taste - either they appeal to you or they do
not. The best collection I have seen recently is in Mark Birley's Bath &amp;
Racquets Club in London's Brook's Mews where he has accumulated a quite
stunning group of Pont's drawings - beautifully drawn, often very funny,
they wittily recall a vanished era and make quite an impact as they do so.
As Mark Birley got there first the rest of us will have to look elsewhere -
possibly to H. M. Bateman, Punch's classic cartoonist. King's Court
Galleries specialises in antique and reproduction prints and for this
Christmas is offering a series of over a hundred hand-coloured Bateman
lithographs.
Subjects range from golf, cricket and fishing to dentistry, the law and
banking. Each framed print (proper presents really ought, in my view, to
come ready-framed) costs Pounds 50.
Besides the Bateman cartoons, King's Court Galleries has a wonderful
collection of antique maps and prints, lots of rare 18th and 19th century
prints - most of them are original prints, usually hand-coloured, but there
are also, for those with less to spend, some limited edition reproductions
starting from as little as Pounds 10 (unframed).
The original branch is at 54 West Street, Dorking, Surrey (telephone:
0306-881757) but a later one has recently been opened at 951-953 Fulham
Road, London SW6. (Telephone: 071-610-6939).
Agnews, one of the grand, old established galleries which is used to dealing
in very grand names ('The Holy Family with the Infant John the Baptist' by
Rubens was in its summer exhibition) has decided to offer a selection of
works for Christmas.
This used to be an Agnews' tradition but in the heady boom years, when
nobody needed Christmas as an excuse to buy and price was no object, it was
discontinued. Here it is, back again and very welcome, too.
Works will include watercolours by Philip Sutton, whose prices range from
Pounds 850 to Pounds 1,500; lithographs by the late Dame Elisabeth Frink
('Owl' at Pounds 900, 'Man and Horse' at Pounds 850); etchings and aquatints
by Patrick Proktor; 'Chauvres Souris' by Graham Sutherland for Pounds 1,000.
For those whose tastes are more traditional there are 18th and 19th century
watercolours: 'Portrait of a Lady' by George Richmond (Pounds 1,100), 'The
Market Place' by Thomas Rowlandson (Pounds 750) and 'Rochester' by Alfred
Vickers (Pounds 650).
Pictured here is a print of Bernard Dunstan's watercolour of 'The Gabrielle
Quartet at Stourhead 1987' (Pounds 150).
Everything in the Christmas exhibition is under Pounds 2,000. It is on at
Angew's, 43, Old Bond Street, London W1 from now until December 23.
All the readers who ply their way home via Waterloo might like to know about
the Llewellyn Alexander gallery which is close to Waterloo and at the moment
is holding a lively, varied and well-priced exhibition specially aimed at
those looking for Christmas presents.
The theme of the exhibition is 'Feast of Food in Art' and the styles vary
enormously - there is Judy Joel and Linda Benton's naif paintings. There is
Edna Bizon's still-life which in its use of light and colour seems to refer
back to the 17th century Dutch painters. Then there is Kristina Jardel's
almost surrealistic disposition of the components of her still-life while
Robert Chandler's formal, restrained 'Still Life on a table' is almost
abstract. Something, as you see, for everybody.
Prices range from Pounds 200 to Pounds 3,500 but the vast majority are under
Pounds 1,000.
The picture photographed left - a still-life of fruit on a table and in a
bowl is sumptuously coloured with a rich dark background and beautifully
framed - is 'Harmony' by Kristina Jardel and it is Pounds 850. The Llewellyn
Alexander gallery is at 124-126 The Cut, Waterloo, London SE1 8 LN.
(Telephone: 071-620-1322).
While in the area it is worth noting that the Bankside Gallery at 48 Hopton
Street, Blackfriars, London SE1 9JH (Telephone: 071-928-7521) has a special
Christmas Show 'Art Off The Walls' with works by members of the Royal
Watercolour Society and the Royal Society of Painter-Printmakers -
everything can be bought and taken away on the spot and prices start at
Pounds 50.
For longer term planning (perhaps for next Christmas, a birthday or
anniversary?) it is a good opportunity to take a good look at the work of
all the artists on show - almost all of them will also take on commissions
to paint a particular house, landscape or portrait.
