FT  17 DEC 93 / Management (Marketing &amp; Advertising): New just in time zone
 -A plan by US supermarkets to integrate the supply chain
When Taiichi Ohno, then Toyota's chief engineer, visited the US in the late
1940s, he was more impressed by the country's supermarkets than its car
industry. Their organisation and expertise, he said, inspired the
just-in-time production system pioneered by Toyota and since adopted by
manufacturers worldwide.
Today, it is the supermarkets which are scrambling to catch up. Beset by
mounting competition, shrinking market share and meagre profit margins, they
have launched an ambitious joint project to modernise their business by
adopting the latest just-in-time techniques.
Known as Efficient Consumer Response, the project aims to squeeze Dollars
30bn (Pounds 20.1bn) in costs out of the Dollars 360bn-a-year US grocery
trade through co-ordinated action by retailers and suppliers to slash stocks
and speed up distribution.
If all goes to plan, the efficiency gains will not only enable supermarkets
to cut prices by as much as 11 per cent; ECR will also transform their
relations with suppliers and may hasten restructuring by consumer goods
manufacturers.
Although supermarkets in much of Europe - notably the UK - are more
efficient than in the US, the project is arousing interest across the
Atlantic. Several large supermarket groups, such as Ahold of the
Netherlands, Delhaize of Belgium and Britain's J. Sainsbury, own north
American chains.
ECR was hatched earlier this year by five retailing and manufacturing
associations. It is backed by supermarkets including Kroger, Safeway and
Shaw's, and suppliers including Coca-Cola, Kraft General Foods and Procter &amp;
Gamble.
The driving force is the US supermarkets' growing alarm at losing business
to discount chains such as Wal-Mart and warehouse clubs such as Costco,
which charge 10-15 per cent less for many grocery lines.
Their lower costs reflect superior productivity. At Wal-Mart, for instance,
tight links with suppliers and extensive investment in computerised
technology allow sales to be monitored continuously and ensure that products
are made and delivered when they are needed.
While US supermarkets installed electronic point-of-sale scanners more than
20 years ago, they have used them mainly to speed up check-out transactions,
rather than to generate information about their business or manage it
better.
Furthermore, their relations with suppliers remain antagonistic, partly
because US food and household goods manufacturers have not faced the
competitive spur of cheap imports which prompted makers of textiles, toys
and consumer electronics goods to co-operate closely with chains such as
Wal-Mart.
Things have been made worse by a uniquely American system of short-term
promotional discounts on manufacturers' list prices. This encourages
bargain-hunting supermarkets to purchase as much as three months' stock at a
time and store it in warehouses.
So common is the practice that more than 80 per cent of some grocery lines
are bought in this way. As well as undermining producers' pricing policies,
it has led to uneven distribution flows and a costly build-up of finished
products, while draining funds from advertising and marketing.
Although manufacturers originally launched promotional deals to drum up
sales, many have grown disenchanted. Some, such as P&amp;G, have recently tried
unilaterally to restore price stability. But such efforts have been patchy
and yielded mixed results.
ECR aims to end this anarchy through an industry-wide effort by retailers,
wholesalers and manufacturers to integrate the supply chain by installing
advanced electronic systems and sharing detailed information about sales,
orders, production schedules and payments.
Kurt Salmon, an industry consultancy, estimates ECR could cut stock levels
by 37 per cent and reduce the time taken by a typical grocery product to
move from factory gate to check-out counter from 104 days to 61.
Industry co-operation would also improve supermarkets' use of sales space,
speed stock replenishment and enhance the quality of product innovation and
marketing by freeing suppliers and retailers to concentrate on consumers
instead of fighting each other.
'We have to move from a 'push' approach, which relied on putting products in
a warehouse and hoping they would sell, to one where the industry is pulled
forward by consumer demand,' says Phil Marineau, president of Quaker Oats.
Quaker began applying some principles of ECR in the late 1980s, shaking up
its sales and marketing effort and working with supermarkets to eliminate
surplus stocks and streamline distribution. It has been rewarded with
increased margins and market share.
ECR's sponsors have set a tight timetable. Trials of the techniques and
information systems involved are already under way.
The aim is to have the project operating throughout the industry by the end
of 1996.
But some observers think the really tough issues have yet to be tackled.
'Everyone is still just picking the low-hanging fruit,' says Douglas Adams,
an ECR expert with Nielsen, the market research firm. 'From now on, progress
will be more difficult,' says Winston Taylor, a vice president of Campbell's
Soup.
The biggest obstacle is not the technology, which is already widely used in
other industries, but getting supermarkets and suppliers to behave as
partners, not adversaries.
Even ECR's most enthusiastic backers admit they will need extensive
reorganisation and staff training to overcome ingrained mutual mistrust and
the urge to seek short-term advantage at each other's expense.
Further hurdles are uncertainty among wholesalers about their future role
and manufacturers' anxiety about the impact of the planned elimination of
surplus stocks from the supply chain.
David Rabinowitz, of stockbrokers Kidder Peabody in New York, estimates that
adjustment could cut food manufacturers' production by 40 per cent in a
single quarter. Even if phased in over two years, it could still depress
manufacturers' sales growth during that period.
Yet the supermarkets' continuing loss of market share provides a powerful
incentive to press ahead, as does manufacturers' concern that if they miss
the bandwagon, they may lose to competitors.
Those with the most to fear are manufacturers of weak brands. Many have
survived largely because US supermarkets lacked the tools to measure the
performance of individual grocery lines.
Once ECR provides that information, it seems certain to add to the pressures
for a further shake-out of products which are failing to earn their keep on
supermarket shelves.
