FT  31 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Electronics side behind 14% rise to Pounds
16.6m at TT
TT GROUP, the fast growing electronics and industrial holding company,
yesterday reported a 14 per cent increase in profits to Pounds 16.6m pre-tax
for the 12 months ended December 26.
The figures were helped, in particular, by an improving performance from the
Crystalate subsidiary, which makes electronic components.
The group also signalled that before making further acquisitions it would
ensure the profitable turnround of AB Electronic, acquired in January.
Turnover improved 8 per cent to Pounds 171m (Pounds 158m). Interest charges
declined from Pounds 3.23m to Pounds 2.8m reflecting the downward trend in
rates.
Earnings per share increased 11 per cent to 16.8p (15.1p); to beat Budget
changes on advance corporation tax the group is paying a second interim
dividend of 3.6p in lieu of a final, making a 6p (5.5p) total.
Mr Timothy Reed, chairman, noted that the group managed to achieve further
growth in both pre-tax profits and earnings 'despite one of the most
difficult economic periods of the last few decades.'
During the year, the core electronics and industrial division showed the
strongest growth with profits rising from Pounds 7.83m to Pounds 10.3m,
mainly as a result of the improved showing from Crystalate, acquired in
August 1990.
The acquisition of AB Electronic reinforced the group's focus on the
electronics sector. As a result of the purchase, about 80 per cent of group
turnover during the current year was expected to come from electronics
activities.
AB, with turnover of Pounds 180m a year, remains unprofitable although Mr
John Newman, TT executive director, said many cost savings have already been
achieved and the priority is to return it to profitability 'as soon as
possible.'
The acquisition was not expected to dilute group earnings this year and
should make 'a significant contribution' in future years.
Elsewhere, packaging showed a slight decline with profits of Pounds 8.07m
(Pounds 8.36m) while profits in the building services division dipped to
Pounds 1.12m (Pounds 1.67m).
COMMENT
TT's profits have risen for six consecutive years, no mean achievement given
the fact that more than 70 per cent of its business is UK-based. Over the
past two years the management team has made a number of key acquisitions in
the electronics sector culminating in the purchase of AB in January. Last
year's profits were boosted by the Crystalate business acquired two years
ago, and the management is confident that it can do the same for AB at least
as quickly. For the moment, however, further acquisitions are ruled out. The
share price has jumped from a low of 178p in December to 254p yesterday.
With pre-tax profits of Pounds 19m possible this year and earnings of about
18.2p per share, the shares are trading on a reasonable prospective p/e of
just under 14.
