FT  23 JAN 93 / Money Markets: Excitement on rates
THE BANK OF ENGLAND signalled no change in UK base rates yesterday, although
some money market dealers believe there is now a good chance of policy being
eased in the UK in the immediate future, writes James Blitz.
The last two days have seen a remarkable change of sentiment in the sterling
cash and futures market. Last Friday week, the feeling in the market was
that a base rate cut would not come before the budget on March 16, and
3-month money closed at around 7 1/16 per cent.
Thursday's extremely poor figures for unemployment and manufacturing output
have raised expectations in some quarters of an immediate rate cut.
Three-month money yesterday closed at 6 13/16 per cent, a  1/4 percentage
point down on the week.
The March short sterling contract was yesterday trading some 35 basis points
up on the week at 93.73, before falling back to close at 93.62.
At that closing level, it assumes that 3-month money in March will be at
6.38 per cent.
Yesterday's Treasury Bill tender was also seen by one dealer as a sign of
how bullish the market has become about rate cuts. The Bank of England
offered Pounds 100m of 6 month bills at an average discounted rate of 5.9663
per cent.
The Bank of England's operations will be scrutinised in minute detail next
week for any sign they give on interest rate policy.
Yesterday's shortage of Pounds 750m was seen as a conveniently neutral
figure behind which the Bank could conceal its innermost thoughts, and there
was no need for it to offer an early round.
Most of the early bids for cash were almost certainly at levels below base
rate, and only Pounds 10m of bills were bought by the Bank at 12 o'clock.
Again, conditions were a little difficult and there was late assistance of
Pounds 190m.
One money market dealer yesterday circled February 4th in his diary as a
date when the next policy easing could come. That is the day on which the
Bundesbank council is meeting, and a cut in rates then might be followed by
an easing in the UK.
However, he was bracing himself for a few days of intense speculation next
week. 'The trouble with this government,' he said, 'is that - in this sort
of situation - they have a tendency to panic.'
