FT  19 JAN 93 / Industry is accused over R&amp;D investment
MANUFACTURERS are obsessed with cutting costs and fail to invest
sufficiently in research and development, a survey of more than 200 managing
directors and technical directors says today.
It warns that Britain is in danger of squandering improvements in
productivity and quality by not paying enough attention to product
development.
Computervision, the manufacturing design company that conducted the survey
of companies with more than 300 employees, said that most manufacturers
identified research and development as a cost rather than an investment.
A third of those questioned said that cutting costs was the most important
issue facing their business. Only 6 per cent saw customers' needs as the
most important issue.
Many manufacturers also had poor relations with the City.
More than 40 per cent of listed companies and 84 per cent of unlisted
companies questioned had no regular contact with the City.
Mr Garreth Evans, Computervision's managing director, said: 'Manufacturing
needs to improve relations with the City, move customer needs up the agenda
and raise its sights from an obsession with cost-cutting if it is to become
world-class.'
Lack of investment was the biggest obstacle facing UK manufacturers, he
said. 'Firms see themselves as vulnerable on research and development and
the use of advanced manufacturing technology relative to Germany's
performance.'
British manufacturers, however, had made substantial improvements in
productivity and quality. More than 75 per cent of companies identified
product quality as an investment priority.
Almost 70 per cent of companies were working towards or had achieved the
'total quality' management objectives established by the British Standards
Institution.
Relations with employees also had improved with 91 per cent of companies
meeting the workforce regularly, mostly through Japanese-style team
briefings.
Almost 75 per cent of manufacturers declared themselves fully prepared for
the single European market, with 89 per cent of companies already selling or
planning to sell goods in other EC markets.
1993 Manufacturing Attitudes Survey, Computervision, Argent Court, Sir
William Lyons Road, Coventry, CV4 7EZ. Pounds 25.
