FT  11 JAN 93 / Radio 3's false response to Classic FM
Consumer choice is a subtle matter. Where products are fairly standardised,
then a modest number of rival companies and models is usually enough to meet
it, so long as markets are contestable - that is, newcomers can enter to
stir them up.
But when it comes to complex, compound products such as television and radio
channels, the matter is different. Each channel is a unique product.
Consumer choice is further limited when for technical reasons the number of
channels is restricted and we are concerned with minority tastes, such as
that for 'classical' music (which, of course, includes romantic, baroque and
much else).
In these circumstances, public policy has a role. If I could insert a credit
card in a slot to obtain a music station of my choice, I would gladly do so.
But under present technology, radio transmission of music of high
reproductive quality has to be financed by taxation (ie the licence fee) or
by advertising.
The UK music listener now has a choice between the BBC's Radio 3 and the
new, private enterprise Classic FM. On balance, the change is for the
better. The challenge of Classic FM has livened up Radio 3, persuaded its
announcers to adopt a less funereal tone and above all given listeners a
choice if they do not like Radio 3's offering at a particular time.
Nevertheless the results are not as good as they could have been; and there
have been some unnecessary losses. It is well known in other spheres that a
duopoly can acquire many of the features of a monopoly. When there are only
two producers, each tends to acquire most of the features of the other, as
consumers of soap powder know only too well.
The problem has been the quality of the Radio 3 response, which fits all too
neatly with the soap powder model. Classic FM has made no secret of its
popular bias. In the mornings especially, pieces are usually short, single
movements; there are many interruptions, not only for advertisements and
news bulletins, but for telephone calls from listeners, competitions and so
on. The result is better than this recipe suggests; and new recruits have
been won for serious music. Moreover, at evening peak hours, there are full
concerts without such breaks, consisting of classic performances of works by
Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms and many others, which Radio 3 would have found
beneath its dignity to provide so frequently.
Nevertheless, if the listener is to have a real choice in the mornings,
Radio 3 should concentrate on providing something different from Classic FM.
This is not a time of day for very esoteric programmes or avant-garde music.
But at least the listener who is not in the mood for chat and bitty pieces
should be able to hear continuous works of music without the interruption of
the spoken voice. There are many other spoken-word channels from which he
can get his fill of that.
Instead, however, Radio 3 has gone from the esoteric to the populist
extreme. Its morning offering of weather reports, plugs for BBC programmes,
interviews and fragmented music is hardly to be distinguished from Classic
FM's. Indeed, the BBC change began before the new station started, no doubt
as a pre-emptive effort. Thus the listener is deprived of genuine choice and
the BBC is deprived of its justification for using tax finance.
Above all, there is no escape from the incessant news bulletins. I do not
know what is worse: to hear identical repetitions of identical news
bulletins or to hear items reshuffled and reworded to create a false
impression of novelty.
The moral is quite simple, and it applies too to the rethinking of BBC
television services, where much greater sums are at stake. This is that the
job of publicly financed channels is neither to provide what the commercial
networks can perfectly well provide, nor to cater for very tiny groups of
high-minded people, but to cater for the choices of sizeable minorities
whose tastes cannot yet be supplied through normal market forces. This is a
difficult doctrine for public servants to comprehend, but do so they must.
