FT  17 DEC 93 / The Sino-British Impasse: 150 years of confrontation
1839
China, in move to suppress opium trade, blockades foreign merchants in
Guangzhou and forces them to surrender 1,400 tons of opium stocks. Merchants
withdraw to Hong Kong harbour under naval protection.
1840
Britain sends expeditionary force to open Chinese ports to trade, demand
apology and compensation for lost opium. Lord Palmerston, foreign secretary,
demands 'satisfaction for the past and security for the future'.
1841
Agreement between British and Chinese officials, later rejected by both
governments, cedes Hong Kong to Britain - which had not been demanded by
London - but fails to open Chinese ports. Before rejection of deal is known,
British naval force occupies Hong Kong island on January 26 and raises flag.
Jardine Matheson begins building first warehouse. Sir Henry Pottinger sent
to take charge of expeditionary force and secure full British demands.
1842
Lord Aberdeen, new foreign secretary, instructs that islands acquired in
course of war are 'not to be regarded in the light of a permanent conquest'.
Pottinger replies that 'this settlement (Hong Kong) has already advanced too
far to admit of its being restored to the authority of the (Chinese) Emperor
consistently with the honour ..of Her Majesty's Crown'. In Treaty of
Nanjing, later ratified by both governments, Pottinger secures opening of
ports of Xiamen, Fuzhou, Ningbo and Shanghai, Dollars 21m compensation for
the lost opium and cession of Hong Kong island in perpetuity because the
British needed 'a port whereat they may careen and refit their ships'.
Pottinger becomes first governor.
1860
Kowloon peninsula ceded to Britain under Convention of Beijing
1898
New Territories leased to Britain for 99 years. Lease expires June 30, 1997
* * * *
1979
China's leader Deng Xiaoping meets governor Sir Murray MacLehose, tells him
investors in Hong Kong should 'set their hearts at ease'. Says China has
sovereignty over Hong Kong but that Hong Kong would have a 'special
position' as part of China. A negotiated settlement should be based on these
principles. Hong Kong would continue to practise its capitalist system for a
considerable time.
1982
Deng meets UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in Beijing, rejects her
proposal of continued British administration of Hong Kong after 1997 but
agrees to begin negotiations. Says China will take back the whole area of
Hong Kong in 1997 but will adopt special policies to ensure its continued
prosperity.
1983
Thatcher, in message to Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, says in March she would
accept transfer of sovereignty if an acceptable settlement was reached. In
October, after four fruitless rounds of talks, Thatcher, UK ministers,
governor Edward Youde and Hong Kong Executive Council members agree in
London to shelve Britain's insistence on administering Hong Kong after 1997.
Britain will explore China's blueprint for Hong Kong.
1984
China urges in February adoption of protocol giving it a substantial role in
Hong Kong in the transition period before 1997. Jardine Matheson says in
March it will move its domicile to Bermuda. In meetings with Deng in April
and July, Sir Geoffrey Howe, UK foreign secretary, persuades him treaty
should be detailed document and that the Joint Liaison Group proposed by
China for pre-1997 period should play less prominent role. On September 26,
after 22 rounds of formal talks, Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong
is initialled. On December 19, Thatcher and Zhao sign Joint Declaration in
the Great Hall of the People. Hong Kong is to become a Special
Administrative Region of China in 1997, enjoying a 'high degree of autonomy,
except in foreign and defence affairs'. Hong Kong to keep its economic
system, separate customs status and independent finances. Rights and
freedoms, including those of speech, press and assembly, to be ensured by
SAR's own laws. China's polices to be enshrined in Basic Law for the SAR and
'will remain unchanged for 50 years'.
* * * *
1989
Hundreds of thousands march in Hong Kong on June 4 in protest at killings in
Beijing's Tiananmen Square. Sino-British relations worsen. Hong Kong people
demand faster democracy. In October, governor David Wilson announces Hong
Kong will build a new airport. Britain says it will give passports to some
Hong Kong residents and Hong Kong will have Bill of Rights.
1990
After negotiations in Beijing, Britain accepts pace of democracy slower than
demanded by Hong Kong campaigners. Legislative Council (LegCo) to have 18
out of 60 seats directly elected in 1991, 20 in 1995, 24 in 1999 and 30 in
2003. China promulgates post-1997 Basic Law for Hong Kong.
1991
After long dispute over Chinese objections to airport plan, Britain and
China reach agreement allowing it to proceed. UK Prime Minister John Major
visits Beijing in September to sign memorandum of understanding on airport.
Airport financing plans subsequently stalled again by Chinese refusal to
endorse them.
1992
Governor Chris Patten announces in October plan to broaden franchise of
indirectly-elected LegCo seats and make local government all directly
elected. He seeks discussions with Beijing. China refuses and promises to
reverse Patten reforms if enacted.
1993
After failure of 'talks about talks', Patten 'gazettes' reform bill in March
but does not submit it to LegCo. Talks begin in April, then break down in
November after 17 rounds. Patten submits partial reform bill to LegCo on
December 15.
Sources: A History of Hong Kong by GB Endacott; The End of Hong Kong by
Robert Cottrell; Financial Times
