FT  07 JUL 93 / Management: A Catholic view of business ethics
The aristocracy of the pre-capitalist era had well-defined ideals, which
provided the basis for codes of ethics that guided their behaviour. But
modern businesspeople still lack ideals, a good 200 years after the birth of
capitalism.
That is the view of Michael Novak, the US neo-conservative Catholic
philosopher. In last month's Hayek memorial lecture, hosted by the Institute
of Economic Affairs, the London free-market think tank, he set out to remedy
this deficiency.
According to Novak, much of what goes by the name of business ethics is
abstract and uninspiring because it does not address the ideals and
principles that relate specifically to business as a form of human activity.
What he calls 'kitchen-variety' moral standards, such as honesty, fairness
and sensitivity - which apply to other walks of human life as much as to
business - command most of the attention.
One consequence is a lack of confidence among businesspeople when it comes
to singing the praises of their way of life. 'We tend to think that business
lacks ideals, is merely utilitarian, concerned mainly with vulgar profit and
ranks considerably below a humanistic or Christian vocation. Businessmen do
not have the language to talk about the ideals of business.'
Novak aims to fill this gap by identifying not so much a code of business
ethics as an ethic for business. 'What way of life do I wish to choose for
myself, as I commit the larger part of my waking hours to this specific
practical vocation? What are the ideals inherent in this vocation?'
His answer is that the business vocation has two ideals: creativity and
community. For Novak, businesspeople are motivated not merely by a desire to
make profits but by the 'romance and risk of enterprise'. He says: 'Most
academic writers seem never to have imagined the sheer fun and creative
pleasure involved in bringing a new business to birth. Such creativity has
the stamp of a distinctive personality all over it.'
He argues that business creativity is the fundamental source of wealth
creation. This, he says, explains why nations as rich in natural resources
such as Brazil remain poor, while others with almost no natural resources -
such as Japan - become among the richest in the world.
Novak's second ideal for business - community - seems on the surface rather
odd, given the widespread perception that capitalism rests on individualism.
But Novak rejects this: 'Capitalism is not about individualism. It is about
a creative form of community.'
The form of community particular to capitalism is the private business
corporation, which Novak argues is capitalism's main institutional
contribution to the human race. It is a community, one of whose main social
purposes is to 'make a profit, that is, to create new wealth beyond the
wealth that existed before it came into being'.
Novak dubs his approach to business 'the Catholic ethic and the spirit of
capitalism', contrasting the approach taken by Max Weber in his book, The
Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Where Weber saw the roots of
capitalism in the Protestants' self-denial, asceticism and sense of the
depravity of natural man, Novak stresses 'invention, serendipity, surprise
and the sort of romance that leads many to risk their shirts'. These, he
says, are characteristic of the Catholic approach to creation.
Novak's ideal of creative community addresses essential aspects of human
psychology left out by the crude picture of economic man as concerned about
nothing more than how to maximise profits.
The argument's main weakness is that it slides over the real difficulties in
marrying creativity and community, which often pull in opposite directions.
Many creative individuals give little attention to their communities, while
many communities - such as the large institutional bureaucracies of the
modern world - stifle creativity.
Novak says that a free society must 'examine all its institutions to see
whether they are promoting or repressing human creativity'. Perhaps one
should not expect more practical answers from a philosopher. Finding them is
the challenge of today's businesspeople.
