FT  04 OCT 93 / Whitehall misses market-testing deadlines
AT LEAST a third of the planned programme for opening up government services
to bids from the private sector had not been completed by the deadline last
week.
Officials admitted that departments had failed to finish the exercise of
testing government activities against the private sector in the case of
about Pounds 500m-worth of Whitehall functions in a programme intended to
cover Pounds 1.5bn of services.
Mr William Waldegrave, the public services minister, is due to announce the
next tranche of the market-testing programme on Wednesday in his speech to
the Tory conference.
Details of the departmental results are still being compiled by the Cabinet
Office, but Mr Waldegrave's officials emphasise that departments which have
not completed the allotted share of the programme by the deadline will have
to finish them in the coming weeks, as well as pressing ahead with the
second tranche.
The delays are attributed to the procedures to be followed rather than a
lack of enthusiasm in Whitehall. There are already signs, however, that the
second tranche of the market-testing programme has been scaled back.
Originally the second tranche was intended to affect up to Pounds 2bn of
services, but the signals now are that it will be closer to Pounds 1bn.
The first year's programme has suffered from a lack of momentum, although it
represents a significant increase in private sector options to compete for
government activities.
Earlier this summer Mr Waldegrave had to call on Mr John Major, the prime
minister, to put pressure on up to a dozen departments that were falling
behind, and confusion over the impact of regulations designed to protect the
rights of workers in takeovers and mergers has also bedevilled progress.
To mark the deadline for the first tranche of the programme Ms Majorie
Mowlam, shadow public services minister, said that information from the
Civil and Public Services Association showed that only a fraction of the
exercises originally in the programme for the first tranche had been
completed.
She said that, for example, both the benefits agency and the Department of
the Environment had yet to complete any market testing exercise.
Labour is also likely to highlight the costs of the programme. By the end of
June the Department of Social Security had spent Pounds 3.2m, the Home
Office Pounds 1.4m and the Department of Health Pounds 870,000.
