FT  06 DEC 93 / Italy offers discount in bank sell-off
The Italian government is to offer a substantial discount on the shares of
Credito Italiano, the country's seventh-largest bank, to launch a
substantial programme of privatising industrial and financial assets over
the next two years.
Today, IRI, the state holding company, will be offering its controlling 64
per cent stake in Credito to institutional and private investors at L2,075
(Dollars 1.24) per ordinary share. This is a discount of 9.6 per cent on
Friday's close of L2,299 but considerably more on the previous six month's
average price of L2,450.
The discount is further sweetened by a bonus share offer. Credito is
promising a 1-for-10 bonus (with a ceiling of 1,500 new shares) to all those
who take up this week's offer and retain their shares for three years.
IRI is offering 17 per cent of savings shares at L1,707. With the payment of
L160 per share these can be converted into ordinary shares. The whole
operation is expected to raise L1,830bn towards relieving IRI's financial
problems.
Bank officials predicted on Saturday, when the pricing decision was
unveiled, the shares would be oversubscribed between five and six times.
Among the around 400 foreign institutions contacted, several said they would
bid for the maximum 2 per cent permitted.
Mr Romano Prodi, head of IRI, said the pricing policy had been based on the
advice of Goldman Sachs, global co-ordinator for the Credito privatisation.
The valuation had been carried out by JP Morgan.
'The sale of Credito will change the history of our country: the state will
no longer be the owner of Italy's biggest banks,' he said.
'This will accelerate the creation of a proper economic democracy in Italy.'
Credito is one of three leading financial institutions controlled by IRI,
while, over all, the state still controls almost two-thirds of the banking
sector.
Mr Giuseppe Bruno, Credito's chief executive, said the bank was hoping to
pick up 100,000 new shareholders as a result of the privatisation.
Bank employees are being offered saving shares at L1,707 each. The minimum
purchase has been fixed at 2,500 shares. Private Italian savers are expected
to be allocated at least 40 per cent of the shares.
Over the weekend, Italian analysts were quoted as being satisfied with the
pricing. They said the market had been expecting a figure between L2,000 and
L2,100. However, foreign brokers said they felt the government might have
discounted further to underwrite a successful first public offer of state
assets.
