FT  29 JAN 93 / Arts: Berlin art reunited / A collection torn apart and
bound together by politics
The artist Max Beckmann once said: 'In my paintings I accuse God of
everything he has done wrong'. Beckmann is one of the stars of the Berlin
exhibition Art in Germany 1905-37, which at once celebrates the reuniting of
works from museums in the east and west of the city and documents the
extraordinary story of political evil and misunderstanding which from the
1930s to the 1980s destroyed, dispersed and kept divided one of the most
magnificent collections of modern art in Europe.
Nowhere is art more bound up with politics than in Berlin. In 1919 the Crown
Prince Palace gallery on Unter den Lindenbegan amassing a sensational
collection of modern German pictures, including those by Klee, Kirchner,
Kokoschka, Beckmann, Liebermann and Franz Marc. In 1936 the Nazis closed it,
confiscated the works and drove the artists into exile. Some paintings went
to Munich for the 'Degenerate Art' show - aimed at convincing the public of
'Bolshevik-Jewish' decadence by hanging the works badly on walls daubed with
racist graffiti - and were then sold at auction. Some were kept as
'internationally saleable goods' to be exchanged for foreign currency. Many
were burnt, a few hidden, some stacked into bunkers in Berlin or the
Thuringen mountains.
After the war, works stored in the east were often filched by the Red Army
and turned up later at the Hermitage in Leningrad; through the 1950s they
came back to east Berlin's National Gallery. Those in allied territory went
to an International Art Collecting Point in west Germany and gradually
returned to West Berlin's New National Gallery. The communists accused the
west of holding these illegally, and for decades communication between the
two national galleries, a few miles apart and each holding parts of the once
glorious collection, was forbidden. In the east, there was little money or
inclination to supplement the collection, while west Berlin could afford
plums on the international art market.
Only now do the two collections join up at the National Gallery in the
former east Berlin. This historic venture dovetails a show of some of the
best Expressionist and Neue Sachlichkeit paintings, plus details of their
anarchic provenances, with an exhibition in an enclave at the heart of the
gallery recording what was lost and how. Photos, letters, newspaper
headlines illustrate the frenzy and fury, the ideological importance,
attached to art by repressive regimes; sales figures show the Nazi's
throwaway attitude to modern German art - a Beckmann self-portrait, now at
Harvard, bought by the Crown Prince Palace for RM7,000 in 1928, was for
example sold to an American collector for RM150 in 1941.
Beyond history, the exhibition is of course a celebration of the most
vibrant and exciting period in German art, and the images here of the big
city and human isolation in it, the biting satire, the psychic bewilderment,
have a freshness and individuality which still thrill: the luminosity, the
sensuous ecstasy of Nolde; the nervous, angular mask-like figures in a
Kirchner cityscape; Dix's bloated grotesques from jazzband and cabaret.
The famous - Grosz's satire 'Pillars of Society', Beckmann's 'Death' - are
here trumpetted along with much that is unfamiliar, since paintings from
east Berlin were rarely lent to international exhibitions. The early
Expressionist Lesser Ury, little known outside Berlin, is represented with a
dreamy view, 'Nollendorfplatz by Night'. Among the most moving pictures are
two agonisingly sympathetic portraits of down-and-outs in Wedding, a poor
Berlin suburb, by Otto Nagel, one of the great German realists from the
1920s, whom the DDR favoured when much German art from this period was
decried as decadent.
Every work here tells a political and an individual story. Among the
Kokoschkas, for example, there is the famous portrait of Adolf Loos, and one
of Bessie Loos which vanished from a Berlin bunker in 1945, surfaced at New
York's Parke Bernet gallery in 1971, and was bought by west Berlin. New to
me were a portrait of Jewish businessman, Wilhelm Hirsch, whom Kokoschka
regarded as a typical client, socially insecure and therefore wanting the
status of a portrait, and a whirling cityscape from the 1920s of Berlin's
Pariser Platz. Both were snatched by the Red Army and returned to east
Berlin in 1958. Most personally significant is 'Man with Doll', a portrait
of the lifesize replica of Alma Mahler which Kokoschka made after their love
affair turned sour. It is a delight that paintings not hung under the same
roof since Hitler can now be seen together in a show which sensitively yet
unobtrusively records their historical significance.
At the Nationalgalerie, Berlin
