FT  15 APR 93 / Economic Viewpoint: The green shoots sprout again
One reason for the UK Treasury's premature diagnosis of 'green shoots'
recovery was that it took too much notice of surveys which reflected not
hard data such as output, orders or sales, but businessmen's expectations or
their state of confidence. Business expectations are just as much economic
forecasts as computer printouts from the Treasury and have just as large a
chance of being false.
Commentators who have been proved repeatedly wrong about the duration of the
recession and the advent of recovery can grasp at a less ambitious
alternative. This is to recognise the limits of economic prediction and
concentrate on what is happening.
The best procedure is to focus one's attention on a comprehensive aggregate
covering a reasonable period. In the UK context, this is non-oil real gross
domestic product in the first quarter of this year.
The CBI March monthly survey gave a strong hint of an upturn in first
quarter GDP by showing an improvement in reported orders, both overall and
for exports. Even this was far from conclusive because the question is posed
subjectively in terms of whether order books are above or below normal. They
are still below normal but much less so than at any time for over two years.
But the figure I have been waiting for has been the February Index of
Industrial Production which came out yesterday. Here I would concentrate not
on total industrial production, which reflects the vagaries of North Sea oil
output, but on the manufacturing component.
Taking the three months to February, manufacturing output is now estimated
to be 1.2 per cent above both the previous quarter and 1.5 per cent above
the same quarter a year ago. The chart suggests that the year-on-year
movement of the manufacturing index is a good guide to what will afterwards
be reported for GDP, excluding oil and gas, even though the movement in
either direction is often magnified in manufacturing compared with the whole
economy.
Demand indicators give a similar impression. Retail sales have for sometime
been increasing at a moderate rate. The car market has also picked up,
admittedly from a very low level. Construction is probably no longer
declining, although it will take time for the improvement in the housing
market to work its way through to the building sites.
The next question usually asked is whether the recovery can be sustained.
This is wrongly posed. For the tendency in modern capitalist economies is
for output to grow in most years - which enables the governing political
party to make the fatuous boast of record output.
The appropriate question is whether anything is likely to go wrong to derail
or slow down the recovery. The most vulnerable spot is overseas markets. The
world recession came later to Continental Europe than to the US or Japan but
is now quite virulent. The absence of trade figures, while EC recording
methods are overhauled, is no help. Survey data suggests that devaluation
has cushioned it quite a lot. But big feats of export-led growth are
unlikely.
There is another possible leakage. Rising real incomes have been providing
most of the motor for consumer spending, as is normal. But forecasters such
as Gavyn Davies of Goldman Sachs expect growth in real personal disposable
incomes to dwindle away under the influence of low pay settlements, rising
unemployment and (next year) higher taxes.
They are looking, however, for a falling savings ratio to sustain consumer
spending. The high personal sector debt ratio, which has been acting as a
drag, shows no sign of declining. On the other hand mortgage interest
payments are at their lowest for nearly a decade as a proportion of income.
Too much is probably made of debt deflation and negative equity on the part
of home buyers suffering from price falls. As time moves on the effect of
low interest payments and comparatively low house prices on new buyers will
begin to outweigh the cautionary influence of those who bought their homes
near the top of the boom.
The pain of these earlier buyers will be eased now that house prices have
stopped falling and have risen slightly in the past month. Indeed, looking
ahead, there is more danger of the upturn being threatened by rising house
prices than by any weakness in that sector.
The winter Budget would be a good time to reduce further the fiscal
privileges enjoyed by home buyers. Nothing would do more to stabilise the
economy by 2000 than a new type of housing market, where renting was normal
and an owner-occupied house became a place to live rather than a
speculation.
The most usual reason for pessimism is different; that the British economy
will run into the balance of payments buffers. In fact a so-called payments
deficit can only stop growth if it leads to a run on sterling, which the
government has to counter by a steep increase in interest rates.
So far, on the contrary, sterling has been quite strong and recovered a
little of the ground it lost after leaving the exchange rate mechanism in
September. I would not be surprised if within a year we saw a repeat of the
1987 dilemma in which the government had to choose between letting sterling
rise too far and letting interest rates fall too much.
In the likely circumstances I would let interest rates fall. The recovery of
sterling is welcome as far - or a little further - as it has gone. It should
do something to dampen the impact of rising import prices on inflation and
also discourage the impression now widespread on the Continent that the UK
has embarked on a policy of competitive depreciation. Given a stable pound,
there is enough slack in the economy to take quite a substantial rise in
home demand and still leave room for an increase in exports when the world
economy recovers. Any required real depreciation can be brought about in
slow motion through a lower inflation rate in Britain than in competitive
countries.
This is not a pipe dream. UK unit costs are now falling relative to
competitors - helped not only by low pay settlements but by a rate of
productivity increase in manufacturing substantially exceeding that achieved
at the corresponding stages of previous recoveries from recession.
The straw in the wind about which I do puzzle is the expectation shown in
the Dun and Bradstreet survey that business will take on more workers. Does
this mean that the unexpected fall in unemployment in February was not quite
the freak indicator it seemed? If there really is to be an employment
recovery at such an unusually early stage of the business cycle it may mean
that productivity cannot go on increasing at recent rates. But it may mean
that the upturn is more vigorous than generally supposed. Why back the more
pessimistic alternative while waiting for more evidence?
