FT  25 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Troops may test out future weapons
THE MINISTRY of Defence is likely in future to let soldiers try out weapons
before production of them is started, the Commons defence committee
suggested yesterday.
A report by the committee related the troubled tale of the Army's new SA80
rifle, which has been through 32 modifications at a cost of Pounds 24m.
'The lesson the ministry (has) learned is that the general usage of the
weapon should be tested in the hands of soldiers during the design and
development phase,' the committee said.
'We have to express some surprise that it has taken over 300 years of
personal weapon usage by the British army to discover this fact.'
The 'catalogue of faults' included early-production weapons that could fire
spontaneously if dropped on their muzzles; safety catches that could break:
firing pins that did break; magazines that could fall off; a bayonet that
not only could fall off but which broke at the tip and was difficult to
sharpen; and triggers that had to be manually flicked back into position
after firing.
The committee was particularly damning about the 'shoddy' cleaning kit,
which included a leaky oil bottle and poor brushes. It said it was
astonished that the MoD could have accepted such equipment into service.
It would be an outrage, it added, if the ministry found itself liable for
changing the cleaning kits after paying Pounds 9m for them.
Incorrect cleaning drill was blamed for snags during the army's Gulf
deployment in 1990-91, which the committee said 'could have had disastrous
consequences'.
Evidence to the committee by British Aerospace, whose Royal Ordnance
subsidiary makes the rifle, acknowledged that 'adverse publicity'
surrounding the SA80 had deterred foreign customers.
Future export prospects appeared to be small, although a few had been sold
to Mozambique and Jamaica. The rifle's reputation was 'unreasonably
tarnished' by early troubles, it said.
The committee agreed that the rifle was a significant improvement on the
weapons it replaced. Although it could not be fired from the left shoulder,
it was 'a highly accurate weapon and sound when properly maintained'.
Defence Committee, Third Report, The SA80 Rifle and Light Support Weapon.
HMSO. Pounds 13.25.
