FT  29 MAR 93 / Waterloo terminal may be obsolete in six years
THE Pounds 130m international rail terminal being built at London's Waterloo
station - Britain's biggest station project since the Victorian era - could
become redundant six years after it opens if the Channel tunnel rail link is
built as planned.
Union Railways, the British Rail subsidiary in charge of the Channel tunnel
rail link project, has acknowledged that its plans assume most or all
international train services will switch to a new terminal at St Pancras or
King's Cross when the line opens around the end of the decade.
A small number of trains may continue to run into Waterloo to see if any
demand for them remains, but most passengers are expected to prefer the St
Pancras or King's Cross terminal because it will offer significantly faster
journey times and much better connections with BR and London Underground
services.
Waterloo International station, now nearing completion, has been acclaimed
for its architectural design. Its five platforms, each a quarter of a mile
long, are covered with a canopy incorporating 2 1/2 acres of glass, 2 acres
of stainless steel cladding and 1,000 tonnes of steelwork.
For the first years of Channel tunnel operations, while continental trains
run along Network SouthEast tracks between London and the coast, the station
will be the sole London terminus for international expresses.
At the time the station was planned, it was expected that the new high-speed
link connecting London with the tunnel would approach London from the south
and make equal use of Waterloo and a second terminal to be built at King's
Cross. But those plans have been overtaken by the drastically revised route
published last week by the government, which approaches London from
the east. Under the new plans, trains using the high-speed link will only be
able to reach Waterloo by turning off the line near Gravesend in Kent and
reverting to congested Network SouthEast tracks for the last 22 miles of the
journey. This means the journey to Waterloo will take 17 minutes longer than
the journey to St Pancras or King's Cross, even if the trains have a clear
path.
Mr John Prideaux, Union Railways' chairman, said it was inevitable that
Waterloo would be the loser once the eastern approach to the capital had
been chosen. The benefits would go to north and north-east Kent. 'If you
take the trains into Waterloo, the savings over the old journey times will
be negligible,' Mr Prideaux said. 'We would not say that we will not take
any trains there, but there will be a preference for the majority to go to
King's Cross or St Pancras because it will be quicker.'
A limited service could provide only a temporary reprieve from closure for
Waterloo's international terminal because traffic levels would be too low to
justify continued operation of the airport-style building with arrival and
immigration halls, customs facilities and departure lounges.
Channel tunnel picture, Page 9
Too many bodies, Page 16
