FT  14 JAN 93 / Shake-up faces charity accounts
BRITISH charities are likely to face a radical restructuring of the way they
present their accounts, under a statement of practice to be issued by the
Charity Commission next month.
It will move away from the conventional profit-and-loss account, which
focuses on profits, towards a statement showing charities' activities more
clearly.
The accounts of many more branches of charities - such as local shops or
fund-raising groups - will be consolidated in the figures published by the
national organisation.
The new statement of recommended practice for charities, Sorp 2, is expected
to form the basis of mandatory regulations to accompany the 1992 Charities
Act, to be published by the Home Office this year.
The Charity Commission is deciding on the final format of a 'statement of
activities' to replace the profit-and-loss account and to be published in
Sorp 2, said Mr Pesh Framjee, head of the charities unit at accountants BDO
Binder Hamlyn and a member of the working party created by the commission.
The statement will be consistent with a similar format for non-profit
organisations by the Financial Accounting Standards Board in the USA,
reflecting the fact that charities have no single indicator of performance
comparable to profit for companies.
It will distinguish between capital and revenue expenditure, and provide
more details of the way money is spent. It will show any changes in net
assets, and distinguish between unrestricted and restricted funds - those
used only for specific purposes.
It will separately list resources received by the charity, and split items
such as legacies, endowments, grants, trading results and income from local
branches.
Mr Framjee said Sorp 2 would also reduce the number of charity branches not
consolidated in a charity's main accounts. Branches will be required to
consolidate even if they are autonomous and carry out business in the name
of a charity.
That means showing their assets and liabilities on the parent charity's
balance sheet, clearly showing all income and expenditure, rather than
showing only a contribution net of expenses in the main accounts.
The Charity Commission plans to circulate the Sorp 2 discussion document
during February for public consultation. It will update the original version
produced by the Accounting Standards Committee in 1988.
In the past five years the commission has taken a far more active role in
improving financial reporting among charities.
