FT  13 JUL 93 / UN arms expert heads for Baghdad
MR ROLF EKEUS, head of the United Nations special commission into Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction, said he would leave today for Baghdad in a
further attempt to resolve peacefully the latest stand-off between Iraqi
officials and UN weapons inspectors.
Mr Ekeus made the announcement in New York last night after briefing the UN
Security Council. The impasse follows the departure from Iraq on Sunday of a
UN weapons inspection team after it failed to win Iraq's agreement to seal
monitoring equipment at two missile testing sites.
Mr Ekeus, who said he wanted to talk to Iraqi officials at the 'highest
level',has visited Iraq before to defuse similar stand-offs. He expects to
arrive in Baghdad on Thursday.
One UN diplomat said a trip this week would enable the Security Council 'not
to act precipitately, but show that it was serious' about forcing Iraqi
compliance with Gulf war ceasefire resolutions.
Iraqi newspapers yesterday suggested Mr Ekeus would find little warmth in
Baghdad. The official al-Jumhuriya decried attempts to monitor the test
sites as 'evidence of the wicked and malicious intentions of Ekeus and the
criminal designs of those standing behind him'.
The Security Council has already warned in a June 18 statement of 'serious
consequences' should Iraq continue to resist UN attempts to monitor the
sites at al-Rafah and Yam al-Azim, respectively 70km west and south-west of
Baghdad. An earlier UN team failed to persuade Iraqi authorities to install
video monitors to prevent testing of missiles with a range of more than
150km, prohibited under ceasefire resolutions.
Diplomats in New York consider that no further warning to Iraq or UN
resolution would formally be required before a strike on the two sites, but
last night they were playing down any prospect of immediate action.
China, one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, yesterday
distanced itself from talk of a strike, with Foreign Ministry officials in
Beijing saying the confrontation should be resolved 'through consultation
and dialogue'. Some officials in New York said they were inclined to apply
more pressure, but wait and see if Iraq would back down.
Nevertheless, an attack remains a clear option, one which was raised
immediately by Mr Al Gore, the US vice-president, who warned Iraq not to
'trifle' with the world community.
The two sites are understood to be in industrial zones where there would be
far less risk of 'collateral' damage and civilian casualties than in last
month's US cruise missile raid on Iraqi intelligence headquarters in central
Baghdad.
Each site comprises a small cluster of buildings, with a test stand at each
to allow the monitored firing of missile engines - with liquid fuel at
al-Rafah and solid fuel at Yam al-Azim. The housing for these stands would
offer a natural target in any raid. It was at these that UN teams sought to
install cameras and later to seal and lock monitoring sensors.
Editorial comment, Page 15
