FT  25 MAY 93 / Inquiry wants overhaul of EBRD loans
THE audit committee of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
yesterday urged the bank to achieve 'greater efficiency', in response to the
slower than expected rate of loans and investment being made.
It urged the bank, which was set up to stimulate the growth of the private
sector in eastern Eur-ope, to introduce new budget disciplines, so
executives cannot offset overspending in some areas by underspending in
others.
The question of whether budgetary allocations should be transferable was the
focus of a meeting yesterday of the bank's directors, who are officials
representing the banks and agencies that own the bank.
The board meeting also confirmed the appointment of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the
accountants, to assist the audit committee in its investigation into whether
the Pounds 55.5m spent on furnishing the bank's City of London headquarters
was excessive. It emerged yesterday that the Swedish finance minister, Ms
Anne Wibble, has called a meeting of finance officials of the leading
industrial countries to review the audit committee's investigation into the
bank's cost controls.
Ms Wibble called the meeting in her capacity as chair of the bank's board of
governors. It is being hosted in London today by the UK Treasury and will be
chaired by Mr Claes de Neergaard, chairman of the EBRD's audit committee. Mr
Jacques Attali, the bank's president, has not been invited.
A Treasury official said yesterday the British government was pleased with
the way the audit committee had 'got stuck into' the task of reviewing
financial controls at the bank.
Mr de Neergaard presented to the board meeting a report on the audit
committee's work on improving budget controls and reviewing the spending of
the Pounds 55.5m.
The report noted that Mr Cedric du Monceau has taken over on a temporary
basis as director of the budget from Mr Pierre Pissaloux, who remains the
director in charge of Mr Attali's cabinet. The bank is looking for a new
permanent budget director.
Mr de Neergaard's report said the audit committee was concerned at the 'very
low' level of commitments and disbursements of loans and investments by the
bank in the first quarter of 1993. It 'requested management's opinion as to
whether it would be possible to reach even the lower end of the targeted
commitments (of Ecu 2bn - Pounds 1.7bn) for the year as a whole'.
As a result of this 'low output', Mr de Neergaard urged the bank to place
'particular emphasis . . . on achievement of greater efficiency in merchant
banking and development banking operations; the scrutiny of non-operational
expenditure; the reduction of the ratio of consultants to permanent staff .
. . and the high proportion of centrally managed overheads'.
Before the board meeting there had been discussion between the audit
committee and the bank's finance department on whether the department should
give a commitment to restrict the bank's ability to use underspending in
some areas to offset overspending elsewhere without seeking board approval.
Some bank executives have been concerned that a reduction in their ability
to transfer budget allocations would place excessive constraints on them.
But Mr de Neergaard's report says: 'Committee members believed that, whilst
there had been a need for considerable flexibility in the bank's early
stages, this need was now less.'
