FT  14 JUN 93 / Directors cool to plea on contracts: Appeal to FTSE-100
companies
MANY COMPANIES facing criticism from opponents of rolling contracts for
directors are reluctant to switch to less secure one-year contracts.
Twenty of the big companies in the FTSE-100 share index have directors with
rolling contracts of three years or more, according to Pensions Investment
Research Consultants, an organisation which advises shareholders on
corporate governance matters.
Such contracts, unlike fixed-year contracts, are always assumed to have
three years left before expiry. Shareholders find the contracts expensive
and complain that they lead to complacency.
Postel, Britain's largest pension fund, earlier this month told the
managements of the largest companies in which it invests that it would vote
against long-term contracts for directors.
Mr Alastair Ross Goobey, the former Treasury adviser who is Postel's chief
executive, has written to the chairmen of all the FTSE-100 companies - in
each of which Postel has about a 2 per cent stake - telling them that he is
'minded' to vote against three-year rolling contracts for directors whenever
they occurred.
But the chief executive of one leading retailer, himself on a long-term
contract, said: 'You can't recruit executives unless you offer long-term
contracts.'
The 20 FTSE-100 companies identified by Pensions Investment Research include
Tesco, Kingfisher, Reuters and United Biscuits. Five of those named are
themselves institutional investors - BAT Industries (parent of Eagle Star
Insurance), National Westminster Bank, Prudential Corporation, Royal
Insurance Holdings and Sun Alliance.
Prudential, whose chief executive Mr Mick Newmarch has been outspoken on
corporate governance matters, said the company had no intention of amending
its contract to suit Mr Ross Goobey's objections.
It said: 'We believe that we as a plc should act in the way that companies
we invest in should act. But we don't think this is something which would
give us cause for concern.'
Mr John Hogan, chief operating officer at oil services group Lasmo, also on
a three-year rolling contract, said the terms were justified because 'there
is more security for the employee and the employer'. If corporate directors
were forced by their shareholders to sign shorter contracts they would
inevitably seek more generous remuneration, he said.
Mr Hogan said he would be willing to take on a shorter-term contract in
exchange for a more generous performance-related element. 'Doubtless some
companies will change their contract terms,' he said.
Lasmo was criticised earlier this year for a Pounds 2.2m payoff to Mr Chris
Greentree, its former chief executive. Under his three-year rolling contract
he received a settlement worth 2 1/2 years' pay. Several shareholders
recorded their objection by voting against the appointment of directors at
the annual general meeting earlier this year.
Mr Ross Goobey said so far responses to his approach to FTSE-100 chairmen
had not been hostile.
'Most of these have been 'holding' letters saying they thought the point was
interesting and they would like to discuss it further,' he said.
Hanson softens, Page 18
