FT  31 MAR 93 / Survey of Guernsey (16): Fish farming may have greater role
 -Static prices are making it harder for skippers to remain within the
industry,  / The fishing industry
ATTEMPTS may be made by Guernsey's fishing industry to claim compensation
for sales lost because of action by French fishermen to prevent imports to
France.
The financial implications of the French protests are serious for the island
because as much as 20 per cent of all shellfish landed in Europe is caught
by Guernsey's small but highly efficient fishing fleet.
The industry employs 480 people directly and indirectly and was responsible
for nearly 1 per cent of the island's economy in 1991.
'We are currently investigating with the Home Office the possibilities of
claims for compensation to be made against the French government for any
financial losses incurred by local fishermen,' says Mr Ron Le Moignan,
president of the Sea Fisheries Committee.
Static prices in Europe generally, caused by the recession, are making it
harder for skippers to remain within the industry. Mr Steve Ozanne, sea
fisheries officer, says that prices for brown crab and spider crab - the
bulk of the island's 2,000-tonne annual landings - have remained unchanged
or fallen from their 1987 levels, although those for lobsters are holding
up.
'There's no doubt about it, the fleet are finding it hard going but it is a
very efficient industry and they are waiting for an upturn,' he says.
There are 285 registered fishing boats but only 64 work out of Guernsey on a
full-time basis. Poor prices have driven a handful of the larger vessels to
the west coast of Scotland where there are better catch rates.
A similar number of Guernsey-registered vessels operate from the northern
island of Alderney, fishing off the Casquets reef and in mid-Channel,
exporting their catches directly through the French port of Cherbourg. The
Guernsey catch is sent live in special tankers to French wholesalers who
re-export most of the catch to Spain by road.
'We estimate that the industry was worth a total of Pounds 6m in 1992. Of
that, Pounds 3.75m comes from exports, Pounds l25m from the home market and
Pounds lm from the Alderney operation,' said Mr Ozanne.
About 180 tonnes of high quality wet fish is landed annually and much of
this is sold through London's Billingsgate Market.
Fisheries receive minimal support from the States (Parliament) of Guernsey
with just Pounds 108,000 being provided in services in 1991.
'Our industry has developed without financial injections. It is reasonably
fit and lean and in a good position to take advantage of any upturn in the
European Community,' says Mr Le Moignan.
'We see a much greater role to be played in the development of fish farming
in the future - possibly under cover using redundant greenhouses and
vineries.'
The island is already an important oyster hatchery while one former
fisherman is poised to start exports of ormers (H. tuberculata, a northern
variety of abalone) to Britain's Chinese community.
Mr Dick Tostevin's hatchery overlooks the west coast bay Rocquaine, where he
is fattening the molluscs in huge underwater cages on a steady diet of
hand-cut seaweed. He came up with the idea 10 years ago.
'Fishing was getting increasingly difficult and I felt I was too old to move
out mid-Channel so we thought we'd farm ormers instead.'
It has been an uphill struggle. 'We are the only commercial hatchery in
Europe at the moment, although they are experimenting in France, so we have
had to find it all out for ourselves', he says.
Professor Michael Cully of Portsmouth Polytechnic provided the initial
start-up advice in 1983 and the Tostevins began producing seed which was
used in trials in sea-lochs in Carna, Ireland.
The trials were part-funded by Guernsey's Sea Fisheries Committee.
After three years, the Irish dropped the ormer in favour of a Japanese
variety. 'That was it. No more orders,' says Mr Tostevin. He and his wife,
Pam, had also been growing-on a small quantity of ormers, a prized local
delicacy, for local consumption.
'The Irish thing meant we were faced with either closing down the hatchery
or growing our own ormers - and I've always kind of believed in farming
ormers,' says Mr Tostevin.
Mr and Mrs Tostevin will know this October whether their faith has paid off;
that's when the first commercial harvesting is scheduled to take place.
After supplying the local market - the Guernsey recipe calls for ormers to
be shelled, beaten, fried and then slowly stewed - the Tostevins will export
the rest.
'It is the most expensive sea food in the world and the Chinese love it,' Mr
Tostevin says. 'They want live abalone and can only get poor quality black
market stuff through Billingsgate.' The project has provoked interest in New
Zealand, South Africa, Japan and Israel, where a laboratory is exploring the
possibility of feeding ormers on extensive beds of sea lettuce.
Guernsey Sea Farms operates Britain's only other commercial oyster hatchery
from a disused and flooded quarry on the island's north-east coast.
Mr Giles Greenhough, nursery manager, says that the quarry, connected to the
sea through a sluice and containing 45m gallons of sea water, produces 20
tonnes of seed a year.
'We mainly supply southern Ireland and Scotland with the Pacific, or Gigas,
oyster,' he says, 'and we are the second-biggest producer in Britain.'
A new customer is the National Rivers Authority which takes special sets of
oysters and uses them to test for pollution in coastal waters.
'The quicker they die, the more sewage pollution there Is in the water,'
says Mr Greenhough.
Brittany-born Mr Hugo Vajk has achieved a remarkable success selling
Guernsey oysters to the French. He farms eight acres of seabed off Herm and
last year produced 50 tonnes of oysters which were exported for further
on-growing to Scotland, Ireland and St Malo.
'l never thought I'd be selling to France,' he says, 'but the pound is so
low that you can now get quite a good return.' He believes, however, that
the chief reason for his success is the quality of his oysters.
