FT  09 SEP 93 / 'Arafat bond' to target expatriates
THE DAY of the Arafat bond may be nigh. Mr Yassir Arafat's embryonic
Palestinian authority in the West Bank and Gaza could tap wealthy expatriate
Palestinian businessmen for financial support, and may finance public sector
investment through a Palestinian bond, according to a confidential World
Bank report.
The report, being drafted by World Bank economists in consultation with the
Israeli government and potential donor countries, says a Palestinian
government - to be established under the proposed Israeli-PLO peace deal -
will need external financing of Dollars 1.5bn to Dollars 1.75bn in the five
years of interim self-rule.
It expects at least Dollars 750m more in private capital inflows from
Palestinian expatriates.
The money will be needed, the bank says, to fund public-sector
infrastructure investments worth about Dollars 1.35bn over five years,
predominantly on water supply, sewerage, waste disposal, roads, electricity,
education and health.
In the longer term, the report adds, the 'Palestinian entity' - code for
what most observers expect to be a state - will have to invest a further
Dollars 1.65bn in power generation (preferably as part of a regional power
grid), expansion of road, health and education systems, and construction of
airport facilities.
The report is intended as a framework for the international aid effort to
underpin the expected peace agreement. Its recommendations will be discussed
at a meeting at World Bank headquarters in Washington later this month.
The Bank also expects Palestinians to finance public sector development
through external borrowing - which would be sustainable since unlike most
developing countries, the Palestinian entity will not inherit a crushing
external debt.
It estimates there are about 200,000 Palestinian workers and businessmen
living in the Gulf states and industrial countries. They include some of the
largest engineering and construction magnates in the Arab world, many of
whom have close affiliations with the PLO.
'Given the strong community ties among the Palestinians, it is likely that,
in the wake of a peace agreement, a good fraction of these businessmen and
professionals would wish to strengthen their links with the occupied
territories through increased remittances, as well as direct investment in
productive ventures,' the report says.
The bank adds that the entity will benefit from their high-quality workforce
 -Gaza and the West Bank have the highest proportion of graduates of any
Arab country - and from tourism to the area.
But it warns the future government against economic mistakes and issues some
policy prescriptions, including suggestions it establish a free-trade area
with Israel and liberal trading links with other Arab countries. It also
recommends harnessing the energies of private entrepreneurs rather than
relying excessively on the public sector.
'Political settlement and peace is a necessary, but not a sufficient,
condition for economic development in the occupied territories,' it says.
'Much will also depend on the quality of economic management in the
post-peace period.'
