FT  16 OCT 93 / Otis shrugs off Russia's ups and downs: How the
multinational liftmaker is coping with uncertainty
FOR any western company with business in Russia, recent weeks have been a
time of great uncertainty and anxiety. But there is more at stake for Otis
Elevator International than for most foreign manufacturers.
'We're pretty simple people. We just want to get on with the business of
manufacturing and maintaining lifts and looking after our people,' says Mr
George Channin, area director for eastern Europe at Otis.
Mr Channin was talking about the four joint ventures which the world's
largest lift producer has set up in Russia in the past three years.
Otis, part of United Technologies, has spent Dollars 40m-Dollars 50m (Pounds
26m-Pounds 33m) since 1990 on equity stakes in the Russian ventures and one
in Ukraine. It was one of the first US companies to spot the potential of
manufacturing and selling in the former Soviet Union.
The message from the frontline has been 'business as usual'. In the tense
few days before President Boris Yeltsin acted two weeks ago to quell a
revolt by Russia's hardline parliamentarians, Mr Channin was receiving a
stream of phone calls at his Paris office.
They came from expatriates working for Otis in Russia. 'They were almost
going out of their way to call me on routine matters, to let me know that
they were working at usual, and that life goes on,' he says.
For Otis, the rationale for the investment is the same as it always has
been, says Mr Rudolf Kunert, senior vice-president. Whatever happens at the
Kremlin or the Russian parliament, there is a huge need for new or
refurbished lifts in apartment blocks, hospitals and offices.
But the upheavals of the past two years have inevitably affected Otis and
its new partners. Local authorities' tax revenues have failed to keep up
with rampant inflation, so capital spending on equipment such as lifts has
been reduced.
Inflation has also forced Otis to raise its prices, says Mr Kunert, and
taken up a lot of management time. Privatisation in the construction
industry, at least in the big cities, is changing the face of the customer
base for new lifts.
Mr Channin admits that the pace of the reforms in Russia may sometimes have
been slower than Otis originally expected. 'But we have never had any
concrete examples of a reversal,' he says.
Mr Kunert says the company is even a little ahead of where it expected to be
in its Russian business, at any rate in terms of the volume of activity and
the extent of its service network. Some of the ventures are making an
operating profit, at least in roubles.
This month, the denouement of the Russian constitutional crisis has
coincided with a turning point for the US company in Russia. After what Mr
Kunert calls 'two years of hard work', the first Russian-built lift was
being delivered in Moscow.
Now the victory for Mr Yeltsin promises to end some of the uncertainty that
Otis and other western companies have been grappling with in recent months.
'We are relieved to have a result, and we are hopeful that some of the
gridlock on important issues will now be lifted,' says Mr Channin.
'One day there would be an interview with a parliamentarian and things would
seem to be going one way, then there would be an interview with the other
side and they would say the opposite.'
But Otis, in any case, is sticking to its long-term Russian strategy. Mr
Kunert even hints that it could extend its presence, plugging gaps in Rus
Otis, which maintains some 40,000 lifts.
