FT  05 JUN 93 / Collecting: Fair time for buyers - Antony Thorncroft
previews an exciting season for collectors
JUNE IS the month when, fleetingly, London reclaims its old position as the
centre of the international art market.
The important general antiques fairs - the splendiferous Grosvenor House
(starting on Wednesday) and the frenzied Olympia (already under way); the
specialist fairs, like those devoted to ceramics (Park Lane Hotel from next
Friday) and antiquarian books (same site from June 23); the special
exhibitions at the big galleries, and the attempt by the auction houses to
put on mouthwatering sales, combine to lure the foreign as well as the
domestic collector to the capital. The fact that Wimbledon, the Derby, and
Ascot also clog the calendar helps. For the very rich, if it's June it must
be London.
For many antique dealers their very future depends upon sales this month.
Like the economy as a whole the revival in business has been tentative, with
few signs of an entrenched recovery. The renewed interest in art and
antiques by some British buyers (and, perhaps more vitally, sellers) has to
be set against concern for the future finances of those Italian, Spanish and
German dealers whose buying trips to the UK have become so crucial in the
last few years.
A still convalescent market ensures that prices this summer are below or at
a rough level with those prevailing a year ago, and most dealers, their
optimism by now severely tested, will be prepared to bargain down. They are
still being hounded by their bank managers. The litany of the past year
continues: this is an excellent time to buy - if you can find decent goods.
For many dealers this is the key sales month. Some of the 370-odd exhibitors
currently cramming Olympia expect to achieve half their annual turnover
during the 11 days.
This Fair, the largest in the land, has been criticised for its overwhelming
size: it is exhausting just to look at the two jam-packed levels, with an
elite gold section upstairs while at ground level the silver section
dealers, now extended to embrace 'antiques' made before 1940 (up until 1960
for jewellery), fight for the wallet of the casual collector with Pounds 100
(or up to Pounds 50,000) to spend.
To make things easier for the anticipated 35,000 plus visitors ESP (Data) is
introducing a search system which allows time-pressed collectors to locate
particular types of antique. If you are only interested in Staffordshire
figures the computer should pinpoint the stands you need visit.
In the good years dealers from Grosvenor House would rush down to Olympia
for antiques to re-stock their depleted stands. Not any more. Even though
there is a special bus service to transport you from one to the other the
gap between the two fairs seems to be increasing.
Olympia embraces every conceivable type of antique and is for the affluent
general collector and foreign dealer: Grosvenor House maintains a bias
towards furniture and is for the seriously rich. A stand here can cost
Pounds 40,000 and there are always a few Pounds 1m-plus objects on offer.
The 90 exhibitors represent the best that the British trade, and
increasingly a few privileged foreign dealers, has to offer. Sales are
naturally important but for many exhibitors meeting old clients and new
contacts and negotiating later back at the shop are just as vital.
It should be an exceptionally good show. The crisis at Lloyd's has forced
some Names to dispose of antiques to meet their liabilities and they have
preferred to off-load discreetly through dealers rather than face the glare
of the salerooms.
Agnews usually has an expensive picture on display and this year it is
Constable's 'The Wheatfield', a re-discovery which is priced at Dollars 6m.
Another Pounds 1m-plus painting is on offer at the stand of New York dealer
Otto Nauman, Jan Steen's 'The Proposal'. Richard Green is always a strong
exhibitor at fairs and has a still life of flowers by Jan Brueghel the Elder
and a Henri Lebasque of women washing in the Seine.
Among the furniture dealers Norman Adams is showing a pair of George IV
writing tables supplied by the Royal cabinet makers Banting, France, to
furnish Ickworth around 1825, while Mallett has a pair of Chippendale period
mahogany bombe commodes.
Anyone whose taste has moved on into the 19th century will find rarities at
the stand of Country Seat, including a Gothic octagonal library table made
by Gillow after a design by Pugin.
This year Grosvenor House is attempting to portray itself as a shopping
place for the common man and although prices may still seem steep the
quality shines forth.
The Ceramics and Antiquarian Book Fairs mainly appeal to connoisseurs, who
are reappearing now that investors have burned their fingers and prices are
falling back to more reasonable levels. The Ceramics Fair in particular is
enhanced by the learned lectures which transform it from a market place into
a scholarly forum.
Undoubtedly the recession has bolstered the position of the dealers. Of
course they have seen their turnover and profits fall but they have the
great virtue of discretion. The well-publicised failure of major items to
sell at auction, and the glare of publicity that such transactions involve,
has sent many vendors back to dealers.
This is especially true in fields such as Old Master paintings where dealers
anyway account for 90 per cent of the buyers in the saleroom. Why not try
and deal direct with the main protagonists?
This is currently obvious on the walls of Agnews in Bond Street where the
176th Summer Exhibition offers Old Masters and British pictures of
comparable if not higher quality to anything available at Sotheby's and
Christie's. There is a major Rubens of the Holy Family with Saint John, an
important Turner view of Walton Bridge, and a charming Gainsborough
portrait. All are priced well into the millions but all have attracted
buying interest, especially from museums.
The important dealer shows in oriental works of art - at the new Oriental
Art Gallery; the old Eskenazi in new premises; and the exhibition at the
Christie's-acquired Spinks are mentioned elsewhere, but other current London
highlights are the Matisse aquatints, etchings and linocuts at the William
Weston Gallery; the Dutch and Flemish Old Masters at Noortman; and a St Ives
show at the Montpelier Studio to coincide with the opening of the new St
Ives Museum on the beach at the Cornish resort.
After some very quiet months Sotheby's moves up a gear in June with some
attractive auctions. Among the Victorian paintings on Tuesday there are four
interpretations of the awakening of physical love by Sir Edward Burne Jones
which could reach Pounds 900,000, plus a Rosetti beauty, 'La Ghirlandata', a
drawing estimated at around Pounds 500,000. A large painting of a bear fight
in the Coliseum which took Alma Tadema two years to paint has a top estimate
of Pounds 1.2m. Another large Alma Tadema recently made a record Dollars 2m
(Pounds 1.2m) in New York so this seems a reasonable forecast.
On Friday 1,200 Japanese prints of the Kabuki theatre collected by the late
Professor Kunhe should clear Pounds 650,000, but the really big money will
be splashed out on June 22 at the major summer Impressionist auction when
the most important oil by Honore Daumier to appear on the market in years
might make Pounds 2m.
Christie's also has an important Alma-Tadema, 'Roses of Heliogabalus', for
sale on Friday. It cost the enormous sum of Pounds 4,000 in 1888 but by 1935
its value had slumped to 460 guineas. Todays market estimate is up to Pounds
900,000.
Another June highlight at Christie's includes the first book printed in
English, 'The Recuyell of the Histories of Troy', which Caxton printed in
Bruges in 1476 and which is forecast at around Pounds 500,000, but the
really important items are reserved for July 6 when a Michelangelo drawing
of the Holy Family on the Flight to Egypt should make Pounds 3m.
However, there is a substantial fly, not to say spider, in this agreeable
ointment. On Monday the new chancellor Kenneth Clarke joins his fellow
finance ministers in Brussels to sign some important documents. One imposes
for the first time VAT of around 4 per cent on imports of antiques into the
UK from non-EC sources. In itself it does not seem too damaging. But the
trade and the auction houses are well aware that once a tax is levied it
will probably be increased, and could quickly sound the death knell of
London's eminence as an art centre.
The auction houses and the main dealers will move their business to
low-taxed Geneva, or New York, or the Far East. The paperwork and the hassle
will deter both buyers and sellers, and the open market which has been the
making of London, and the UK, will be no more.
The trade is united in urging Clarke to stand his ground and to persuade the
rest of Europe to follow the good old British practice of free trade. A good
result here is worth any number of sales at Olympia or Grosvenor House.
