FT  25 MAR 93 / MPs demand big shake-up for forestry
RADICAL REFORM of forestry policy was urged yesterday by the Commons
environment committee.
More than 50 recommendations are made in its report on forestry and the
environment, including a shake-up in the structure of ministerial
responsibility.
'We did not take evidence specifically on a combined ministry for
environment, agriculture and rural affairs, but we believe that the creation
of such a body should be one of the options examined,' says the committee,
which is concerned that divisions of responsibility create barriers to
effective policymaking.
The lead ministry at present is the Scottish Office, which shares control
with the Welsh Office and the agriculture ministry. The committee calls for
a national forestry strategy reflecting the 'very different situations in
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland'. The strategy should set out
what kind of forests are needed and why, as well as how existing forests
should be protected and managed.
As the UK imports nearly 90 per cent of its timber, the strategy should also
take into account the international aspects of forestry, the timber trade
and agricultural and land use policies.
In particular, the report urges the government to keep pressure on the
European Community to allow tree planting on land set aside from other crops
under the EC's Common Agricultural Policy.
'It is essential that the UK develops a coherent national strategy that
delivers good quality forestry for a variety of different purposes,' Mr
Robert Jones, committee chairman, said yesterday. 'These objectives must be
set within an international framework to ensure that forests play their
integral role in helping combat the problems caused by greenhouse gases.'
The concept of 'multi-purpose' forestry to satisfy environmental and social
as well as economic demands will also require a complete overhaul of the
existing plethora of grants. The report suggests that the role of all
interested public bodies should be reviewed in order to reduce duplication
of effort.
Witnesses commented at length that the government had been not been specific
on plans to privatise the Forestry Commission. The general feeling was that
the recent division of the commission - into a regulatory Forest Authority
and Forest Enterprise to manage plantations  - should be given time to work.
The committee says Forest Enterprise should be redirected away from its
domination by commercial forestry towards 'a more dynamic role in creating,
buying and managing multi-purpose forestry'.
Forestry and the Environment. Commons Paper 257. HMSO, Pounds 18.15.
