FT  01 NOV 93 / Unionists pressed by Dublin to back peace initiative: Major
condemns 'act of butchery' after seven die in pub massacre
THE IRISH government stepped up pressure on Unionist leaders yesterday to
join round table talks on the province's future in the wake of Saturday's
murder of seven people by the Loyalist Ulster Freedom Fighters.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said he was determined not to
allow the process to be derailed by the killings in a bar in Greysteel, Co
Derry.
But the peace initiative launched by the British and Irish governments was
rejected yesterday by Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the hardline
Democratic Unionist party, who warned that Northern Ireland was close to
civil war.
Terrorists from both sides have killed 23 people in the past nine days in a
cycle of violence provoked by last weekend's bombing of a shop in Belfast,
which killed 10 people. The violence continued yesterday when an RUC officer
was shot by the IRA in Newry.
Mr Reynolds said Unionists had 'nothing to fear' from the initiative. 'As
long as a majority of the people of Northern Ireland wish the present status
to remain, that's the way it will be.'
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said he hoped to arrange a
series of meetings with Unionist leaders, probably lasting up to 12 months.
But Mr Robinson said the joint statement issued by Mr John Major and Mr
Reynolds in Brussels on Friday was 'an endorsement of the six-point plan for
a united Ireland laid out last week by Mr Spring. Whoever it was aimed at,
it was not aimed at Unionists because it is adopting a nationalist agenda'.
However, UK ministers were heartened by the restrained reaction of Mr James
Molyneaux, leader of the official Ulster Unionist party (UUP), who has made
no public comment.
The British government believes that constitutional guarantees and changes
to parliamentary procedures for Northern Ireland legislation may persuade Mr
Molyneaux to join the talks. The government is moving to set up a Commons
committee on Ulster and may also end the use of non-amendable orders in
council for Northern Ireland legislation.
Other UUP leaders remained wary. Mr David Trimble, the party's home affairs
spokesman, said Mr Spring was guilty of 'self-deception'.
Mr Major, who is expected to make a statement on the peace initiative in the
Commons today, said the killings were 'another evil act of butchery in which
members of both communities were mown down'. He said: 'I appeal to all the
people of Northern Ireland to show no tolerance to the gunmen and the
bombers.' Mr Major is expected to distance the Anglo-Irish initiative from
the proposals produced by Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist SDLP, and
Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing.
Mr Hume said yesterday that the SDLP-Sinn Fein proposals remained the best
prospect for peace. He said it was 'difficult to accept' that the Hume-Adams
proposals had been dismissed by the London and Dublin. Mr Hume accused Mr
Major of being unwilling to discuss the proposals.
Downing Street said Mr Hume had not requested a meeting with Mr Major.
However, the prime minister has said before that he is willing to meet party
leaders, including Mr Hume, at any time.
The British government is determined not to be seen to be talking to the IRA
through Mr Hume, but is also keen not to undermine Mr Hume's position as a
leader of constitutional nationalism in Northern Ireland.
The prospects for the Anglo-Irish initiative will become clearer this week
when Mr Spring meets Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, in
Belfast.
Page 10
Leaders ready to pay price for peace
Loyalists plot demise of consensus
Hume call to government
