FT  03 AUG 93 / Technology: Speed is of the essence - A look at companies
which have flourished with the help of instant data
If you want to shop with comfort in the US these days, just pick up the
telephone and talk to Tootie. She will take your order, agree on the method
of payment, and tell the warehouse to send off your product.
Tootie is not human. She is the recorded voice that answers consumers
contacting Home Shopping Network, the main player in the Dollars 2bn (Pounds
1.3bn) business of electronic shopping, while watching one of the company's
television sales promotions.
Not everyone, however, likes dealing with a recorded voice, even one whose
responses have been programmed to match the goods on offer. A live operator
will come on if the caller does not speak to Tootie within five seconds.
Florida-based HSN, which collects a massive array of near-instant
computerised data on its sales and financial performance, is a prime example
of how information technology can make life easier for companies and
organisations, as well as their customers. With IT costs falling rapidly and
hard-pressed computer companies pushing deeper into the services and
software market, users can take their pick of technology to suit their
needs, though they may not always make the appropriate choice.
Not only can this lead to faster and more reliable service for consumers and
in public services, it also provides information of strategic value for
enhancing efficiency, giving businesses new insights about their performance
or lack of it, and streamlining their marketing activities.
Whether people like the idea of shopping from home or not, electronic
retailing is an impressive demonstration of what can be achieved with IT.
But there are plenty of more mundane ones. In the Netherlands, for example,
the telephone company (Royal Dutch PTT Telecom) is refining the process of
ordering a line connection to a minimum.
In one short visit to a Dutch PTT office, the customer can obtain a new
number, a telephone contract, and the precise time of a connection within
two days instead of the two weeks this used to take; by 1995, connections
should be instantaneous.
What the Dutch PTT did was channel the information from its mainframe
computers - including equipment from IBM, Digital Equipment, Unisys and
Olivetti - to individual terminals in the sales offices. Thus sales staff
have all necessary operational details about debtors, lines, payment
methods, and other aspects of the business at their fingertips.
Modern IT methods have enabled the privatised Dutch PTT, most of whose
exchanges are computerised, to put this data from several different systems
together instead of requiring employees to switch between software programs
on the same screen. This has cut errors and speeded up service. A big
stimulus to its technological push was the need to raise efficiency ahead of
the time when its monopoly status is reconsidered in two years.
The technology for this and other applications is not brand new, says Merlin
Stone, visiting professor at Kingston University in the UK and a partner in
Avanti Consultancy Services. But it has become much cheaper and better
understood as computer companies have been forced by fierce competitive
pressures to concentrate more on finding solutions for customers' needs and
less on selling their own hardware.
'In some areas, the technology enables companies to do things they couldn't
do before,' explains Stone. Advanced software and computer networks mean
that HSN, whose smaller rival QVC Network has proposed a merger, can not
only process orders rapidly and automatically, but also provide an
immediate, accurate and comprehensive picture of how goods are selling.
HSN's data is updated every 10 seconds so the hosts of its TV 'infomercials'
can see on a computer screen exactly how well the products on offer are
selling. If they are moving slower than usual for the time of day or type of
product, the host and producer can switch immediately to another line or
promotional pitch. They are also kept up to date with inventory levels and
told whether products are running out. Thus HSN, which developed its own
software, can monitor its sales progress in 'dollars per minute', says
Stella Tavilla, executive vice-president for management information systems.
At management level, this volume of product-tracking data is used to
influence reordering and assist in marketing strategies, since HSN has full
details of purchasers' names and addresses. 'There's no doubt,' adds Stone,
'that in the direct marketing area, the ability to build a database on
millions of customers, and process the information on-line and respond to
it, has made a difference to what they can do.'
This is a result of the sheer processing power and speed of today's computer
equipment. A new study, initial results of which were presented at a
conference in Nice, southern France, says companies are increasingly keen to
use IT to improve service, and thus their competitive and financial
position, while public service bodies want to respond more effectively to
people's needs, sometimes under legislative pressures.
'Perhaps the most striking conclusion is that most large organisations are
now seeing IT as one of the most important bridges to enhancing customer
service,' the report's authors, headed by Stone, state. 'They now rarely see
customer service as having separate components, such as marketing, selling,
after-sales service and invoicing, each with their own system.'
At the conference, organised by Unisys, the US computer group which
sponsored the study, Stone said the UK was often 10 years behind the US in
marketing. Companies like HSN, with its single-minded focus on a few
performance indicators and its attention on 'dollars per minute', showed
what could be achieved with effective use of IT.
Nowhere is speed of service more important than in the fast-food industry.
The UK operation of McDonald's, the US hamburger chain, is applying IT to
improve and accelerate information flows between its restaurants and the
London head office. As it upgrades point-of-sale equipment in its outlets,
it can use POS data to pinpoint exactly where delays have been occurring, at
what times of day, and why.
Previously, the UK company's performance indicators were based on averages
for each store. 'The fact that we serve one customer very well, or maybe
even 10 customers very well, and one very poorly could be masked in that
average,' says Dan Fishman, assistant vice-president, information services.
We need to be able to get away from that.'
Fishman sees exciting possibilities in drive-in restaurants, more of which
are being built in Britain, and remote ordering of fast-food meals. Queues
in drive-ins can cause havoc at busy times. So, with the help of detailed
data from its IT installations, McDonald's will track transactions to find
the source of delays and decide how to tackle these.
Eventually, he hopes, customers will be able to order meals from office
computers, using cheap software, or tap in their request at a special
machine before entering, say, a shopping mall containing a McDonald's.
Not everyone likes McDonald's food, and shopping HSN-style in front of the
TV is still only a minority form of retailing in the US. But, the activities
of these and other companies show the extent to which the intelligent
application of computer technology is changing both business and customer
attitudes.
The IT companies are certainly being swept along by the change. With
economic growth in western economies expected to be plodding rather than
brisk in the next few years, users are increasingly calling the tune. By
1997, when the world IT market is expected to reach around Dollars 700bn,
services and software are forecast to account for 60 per cent against just
over half at present.
Customers now want more than the promise of ever faster and more powerful
equipment, says John Perry, head of Unisys in the UK. They expect to be
helped to use their IT systems more effectively, and that means more
business in consultancy and less in hardware. 'We think it's going to be a
decade of battling for the customer.'
