FT  11 JAN 93 / Monday Interview: Inside job will make a change - Derek
Lewis, director-general of the UK prison service, speaks to Raymond Snoddy
and John Willman
When Derek Lewis, chairman of the UK Gold satellite television channel, was
chosen as new director-general of the prison service, no one could resist
referring to Porridge, the classic prison comedy, as the link between two
worlds.
For Lewis was the man who had set up the channel, which is based on repeats
of BBC and Thames Television programmes, including Porridge.
The appointment sounded like fiction itself. Could a television executive be
taking on one of Britain's most intractable social problems without having
visited a court or a prison; a man whose only knowledge of the subject came
from the media?
In fact, Lewis had only been a television executive for a few months -
successfully taking on the job of raising Pounds 35m for UK Gold and getting
it on air two months ago, before planning to move on.
For 14 years he was a senior executive at the Ford motor company, then in
charge of planning at the Imperial Group in pre-Hanson days, before becoming
finance director and later chief executive of the Granada Group in charge of
motorway services, television rental, computer services and Granada
Television.
But even so, how did someone who knew about cars, motorway service stations,
rental, computer services and television, but not prisons, become
director-general of the prison service and the home secretary's chief
adviser on prison matters?
The call came in August, when Lewis was still struggling to raise the
finance for the new television channel. It came from Saxton Bamfylde, the
headhunter which specialises in persuading private-sector executives to take
large pay cuts to work in the public sector. 'More clout, less dosh,' is how
the company puts it.
He was asked the usual question: did he know anyone, 'and by the way, you
wouldn't be interested yourself?'
'My initial reaction was that I wasn't sure if it was the right job at all.
It sounded like the proverbial bed of nails. But I was persuaded to go and
have a talk to them,' says Lewis, 46, who will be paid Pounds 125,000 a
year, plus a performance-related bonus said to be 35 per cent of his salary.
It is vastly more than the salary of his predecessor, the much admired Joe
Pilling, but still represents a significant pay cut.
The main question that preoccupied him was why he should want a job that, no
matter what he did, would probably leave everyone unhappy - prisoners and
prison officers; the public, which alternates between concern about security
and inhuman treatment of prisoners; and the politicians, who wish the
problem did not exist.
'What persuaded me was that there was an opportunity to effect real change -
not to get everybody absolutely happy with what the prison service is doing,
but to persuade the majority of those constituencies that it was much better
than it had been a few years before,' he says.
The television executive has been portrayed as the privatiser of the prison
service - the hired hit man of Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, who met
Lewis twice before the appointment. 'I think that is the way many people are
likely to see me. It would be a misjudgment. I came to this job without a
brief to implement large-scale privatisation,' he says.
'My brief is to effect the sort of quality of improvements in the service
demanded by the Woolf inquiry, which followed the 1990 Strangeways prison
riot, and to deliver better value for money.'
At least the new director-general of the prison service - and the future
chief executive, when it becomes the Prison Service Agency in April - in
England and Wales has now been been in jail. Four jails to be precise. He
was struck less by the banging of doors and the turning of keys than by
their complexity as social institutions and the relatively positive
atmosphere.
His diverse industry experience will be necessary to run a system with an
annual budget of Pounds 1.5bn, responsibility for 41,000 inmates and staff
of 36,000. He will be able, for example, to draw on his experience in
managing operations such as motorway catering and TV rental shops, where
standards of service have to be set and maintained across a geographically
dispersed network.
In such circumstances, managerial autonomy within an agreed framework is the
key to service quality, according to Lewis. He plans to continue the moves
towards autonomy in the prison service, giving the people running the
prisons more responsibility. Greater autonomy over recruitment and purchase
of catering produce are likely.
He will also be in charge of the programme to contract out aspects of prison
management - two establishments are already managed by private companies,
and bids have been sought for the management of the reconstructed
Strangeways. He sees this as a tool for improving the service rather than an
end in itself. He notes that this has already produced improvements in the
difficult industrial relations environment.
The 'nothing can be done' argument about prisons and prisoners, he believes,
is giving way to a feeling that quite a bit can be achieved, particularly in
tackling drug addiction and easing the difficult transition from captivity
to freedom.
Much can be done, he believes, to alleviate prisoners' main concerns, such
as improving visiting arrangements and facilities, allowing them to serve
sentences closer to families, ending slopping out (in the prisons where
there are currently no proper toilets) and providing more varied menus
within tight budgets.
His priorities will include encouraging greater responsibility and
accountability, determining the role of the private sector and, in answer to
one of the findings of the Woolf report, providing more visible leadership.
At the end of his three-year term, which could be extended to five years, he
would like to have implemented the main recommendations of the Woolf report,
and have done something to reduce reoffending rates from the current 70 per
cent. He also hopes to have changed the prison service to such an extent
that people will visit the UK to see how prisons should be run.
His success will depend as much on his function as policy adviser to the
home secretary - who will inevitably be looking for results - as on his
management skills. He acknowledges that there are severe political and
financial pressures on the service. But he says that steering through those
will the same as managing a public company through external events such as
takeovers, new legislation and changes in the marketplace.
Challenges are important to Lewis: he left Ford because he did not want to
be on a 'single track in a single industry'. He left Granada because he had
little choice: he became what many saw as a scapegoat for the anxiety over
the future of the group caused by worries over its investment in British Sky
Broadcasting and the loss-making move into computer services, both now seen
as money spinners for the company.
He sees his departure from Granada as one of the vicissitudes of business
life. (His compensation, at Pounds 590,000, was the sort of sum his new
charges would rob a bank for.)
As a result of the Granada setback, Lewis has had 'one very exciting job
running a TV station and, second, the opportunity to do this (run the prison
service)'.
And, yes, he does like watching Porridge.
In real life, however, he will not only have to deal with Fletcher, the
prisoner, and Mr McKay, the prison officer. There is also Mr Clarke, the
politician, and dealing with him could be the most difficult task of all.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
                        PERSONAL FILE
 --------------------------------------------------------------
1946 Born Nottingham.
     Educated Wrekin College, Wellington, Queen's College,
     Cambridge, and London Business School.
1968 Ford Motor Co.
1978 Director of finance, Ford Europe.
1982 Director of corporate development, the Imperial Group.
1984 Granada finance director.
1988 Granada chief executive.
1991 Resigned from Granada.
1992 Developed and launched UK Gold. In December, appointed
     director-general of the prison service.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
