FT  26 OCT 93 / Germany and US to link up in VW probe
THE WAY has been cleared for US and German criminal authorities to exchange
evidence gathered in their parallel investigations of alleged theft and
industrial espionage by Volkswagen executives.
The US Federal Bureau of Investigation has been granted access to German
public prosecutors' files and it is understood that FBI data may be made
available to Ms Dorothea Holland, head of the German probe.
The link is the first significant development in the case involving VW
production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, and several
associates, all former General Motors employees, since Ms Holland led a raid
on VW's headquarters in August.
Mr Lopez and his colleagues are suspected of systematically collecting vast
quantities of industrial data while employed at GM and its German
subsidiary, Adam Opel. He has admitted having ordered the destruction of
'possibly sensitive' GM material at VW.
The German authorities granted the FBI access to Ms Holland's findings after
top-level negotiations between Washington and Bonn and the Hesse regional
government. Mr Georg Nauth, for the Darmstadt prosecutors' office, confirmed
the move yesterday.
Ms Holland was still sifting data from 25 computers and 250 diskettes seized
in the VW raid, in an 'enormously complex' exercise, Mr Nauth added. Asked
if new evidence had been found, he replied: 'I don't want to say.'
While the German investigation has slowed, the US probe has gained momentum
with the summoning of a grand jury which will decide whether the evidence
justifies indictment.
The FBI has had access to all General Motors' material and affidavits
involved in the case, and is also believed to have questioned officials from
Volkswagen of America, VW's US subsidiary.
Possible charges against Mr Lopez, his colleagues and the company include
wire or mail fraud, which carry possible penalties of imprisonment or fines.
US law prohibits the use of postal or telecommunications services for
illegal purposes which include 'violations of obligations of loyal and
fruitful service' to an employer.
