FT  11 JUN 93 / International Company News: Brazil puts its foot on the
accelerator - The government's efforts to get its citizens on the road
Brazil's car market is booming. Despite the country's economic and political
turmoil, the Brazilian car industry is on its way to reclaiming from Mexico
the title of Latin America's leading car producer.
During the first five months of 1993, production rose 33.8 per cent compared
with 1992. Output reached an all-time high of 124,000 vehicles in May,
beating the previous monthly high - October, 1980 - of 121,000. The industry
looks capable of reaching its production goal of 1.2m this year.
The buoyant market is providing a rare bright spot for Fiat, the Italian
carmaker. Fiat do Brasil has been fast mopping up market share, capturing 21
per cent of domestic sales last year, up from 12 per cent in 1989. Having
passed the long-standing number three manufacturer, Ford, Fiat is now
closing in on number two, General Motors do Brasil.
Fiat appears to be carving a substantial niche in lower priced small cars.
Its compact Uno is now the second leading seller, trailing only the Gol
hatchback, Volkswagen's long popular model sold exclusively in Brazil.
This performance is leading to suggestions that Fiat do Brasil could soon
become the sole producer of a new economy model, based on the Uno. The new
model would be exported to Europe.
The company, which shipped Dollars 842m of vehicles last year, was Brazil's
leading private sector exporter. The Fiorino pick-up truck is already
produced exclusively in Brazil.
Some industry analysts nevertheless believe that Fiat's Brazilian push is
related to the loss of market share in Italy and Europe. 'Fiat do Brasil is
not going to be able to maintain its high levels of exports to Italy,'
predicts one analyst. 'It has to depend on Brazil.'
Fiat is meeting the increase in demand without large new investments, said
Mr Pacifico Paoli who runs the car division of Fiat do Brasil. He plans to
increase daily output from 900 vehicles in December 1992 to 1,400 by June
1994.
However, investment in added capacity seems likely only if the main Fiat
board in Turin decides to produce their new economy model there. A new model
can only be manufactured in Brazil if the company is also confident of
domestic demand.
Despite the recent growth in market share in Brazil, Mr Paoli admits that
Fiat do Brasil's chances of substantial parent company investment hinge
largely on developments within the economy, not least a monthly inflation
rate running close to 30 per cent.
Nonetheless Mr Paoli sees better things to come: 'Brazil has to come out of
its 10 year period of stagnation.' Already Brazilians are buying cars like
never before.
The industry got a jump start from February's tripartite accord between
management, labour and government. The government has reduced taxes,
industry has promised to squeeze margins, and the unions will hold wage
demands to 6.3 per cent a year even though shop floor workers earn just
Dollars 2.79 an hour.
Coming on top of last year's pioneering union agreement, the pact means that
for-sale sticker prices are effectively one third lower than they would
otherwise be.
Tax breaks are also helping to underpin demand. The idea is to get more
Brazilians behind the wheel and help revive a sluggish economy. Last year
the economy contracted by 1 per cent.
According to the National Association of Automotive Vehicle Manufacturers,
40 jobs are created in other industries by every new car industry job. The
motor industry already accounts for 8 per cent of Brazil's gross domestic
product.
It is the bottom end of the market that appears to be most price sensitive.
'Car ownership in Brazil is even more concentrated than income,' says Mr
Paoli. There is one car for every 11.4 Brazilians, compared to one for every
5.7 Argentines and one for 1.3 Americans.
The most recent decree provides for a reduction of the federal value added
tax from 14 per cent to 0.1 per cent. This is expected to result in
wholesale price reductions of between 10 and 13 per cent for eligible
models. Most of those models have 1,000cc engines.
All Brazil's leading manufacturers - Autolatina (the joint venture between
Volkswagen and Ford), General Motors and Fiat - have models eligible for the
tax break. Small wonder perhaps that production of the Volkswagen Beetle,
which ceased production in 1986, is scheduled to restart in Brazil in
August.
Although it has a 1,600cc engine, the Beetle will benefit from tax
concessions. VW has already begun to predict that original production
figures of 20,000 units a year may have to be increased.
