FT  19 APR 93 / Survey of Business Air Travel 15): Aeroflot break-up fails
to halt chaos - Air travel in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union
One endured flights with Aeroflot, the all-purpose airline of the former
Soviet Union, which treated everyone with equal contempt.
By comparison, flying with eastern European airlines such as Poland's LOT,
Czechoslovakia's CSA and Hungary's Malev was an eye-opener. Although hobbled
by the command economy, they often managed to provide excellent service and
food while being forced to use inefficient Soviet-built aircraft.
These east European airlines, at least, have benefited enormously from the
transition to the market economy. Aeroflot's unlamented break-up might have
been expected to raise a cheer among its domestic and foreign victims. But
anyone attempting to book flights within present-day Russia and the other
CIS states soon discovers that air travel has become even more chaotic than
in the Soviet era.
Although Aeroflot was hacked up into more than 100 successor airlines in
Russia and the CIS, only a few of them such as Estonian Air are much of an
improvement on the old monopoly carrier. Passengers still wait for flights
in austere nakopitel, the quaint Russian word for waiting room which
translates as accumulator.
Passengers lucky enough to corner a round-trip flight from Moscow to Kiev
may well discover in the Ukrainian capital that all flights to Moscow have
been cancelled because of an acute shortage of aviation fuel. As a rule of
thumb the reliability of local fuel supplies and their cost often determines
whether one will get back to Moscow from any CIS destination.
Aviation fuel which costs Dollars 200 a ton in Moscow may cost Dollars 320
in Kiev and Dollars 600 a ton in Alma Ata in Kazakhstan and is unlikely to
be available because of Russia's reluctance to sell at subsidised prices.
In the old days, westerners flying Aeroflot could at least be assured a
ticket for a fixed price in hard currency and therefore enjoyed automatic
priority over Soviet passengers who were dumped at will. Now the price of a
ticket for an internal Russian or CIS flight is determined by what the
market will bear and is often sold by scalpers at many times the stated
fare.
Last February the Russian government slashed subsidies to airlines and
allowed them to raise prices. But an eight-hour flight from Moscow to
Khabarovsk was still recently quoted at 40,000 roubles - about Dollars 50
for Russians - although it cost many times this by the time it reached the
end user.
Settled into their aircraft seats after testing the often dicey toilets,
travellers find themselves confronted with the same insolence they
encountered from flight attendants who flew the skies with Aeroflot. Now,
though, stewardesses peddle everything from western magazines to cosmetics
and even lottery tickets which they buy for resale on their own account.
A nucleus of the old Aeroflot continues in the form of Aeroflot Russian
International Airlines which maintains air links between Russia and the rest
of the world with just over 100 aircraft, including five leased Airbus A310s
on routes to south-east Asia and other long-haul destinations. Plans exist
to lease three or four additional Airbuses and Aeroflot has ordered five
Boeing 737s. Aeroflot RIA was to have been privatised last October but has
become the object of many conflicting interests seeking to place it under
their control. Small wonder that Air Russia, a joint venture with British
Airways which is expected to become operational before the end of this year,
is viewed as having far greater potential than the rump of Aeroflot.
The most lucrative routes for Aeroflot RIA are those connecting Moscow and
St Petersburg with Germany, according to Mr Nikolai Lebedev, head of the
Aeroflot RIA office in Berlin. He points out that western passengers make
the difference because they fork out DM1,000 for a ticket from Berlin to
Moscow - many times what Russians pay to fly to Berlin. Not surprisingly,
the airlines of eastern Europe have made enormous progress in improving
their efficiency by slashing personnel levels and buying or leasing
fuel-efficient western aircraft while maintaining and improving standards of
service.
All three east European carriers have made a special pitch toward
business-class passengers, offering reduced fares, special gifts and a whiff
of old-fashioned, pre-war-style gentility. So far they have attracted two
western airlines to invest in their future.
A 32.20 per cent share of CSA Czechoslovak Airlines, which had net profits
of Kcs8.4m last year, is now held by Air France and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. Alitalia gained a 30 per cent stake in Malev
Hungarian Airlines which earned Dollars 8.1m last year before taxes and
prides itself on being the east European carrier with the highest
productivity.
LOT is to be partly privatised in the next two years by linking forces with
a western carrier while the Polish state wants to retain a 51 per cent share
in the airline.
LOT was quick off the mark to sell most of its lumbering Soviet-built
aircraft and now operates three Boeing 767s, with a fourth to be leased and
five more on order, as well as seven Boeing 737s and five ATR-72 turboprops
together with its remaining Tupolevs. Unprofitable domestic destinations
were dropped and emphasis placed on lucrative western routes, especially to
Germany.
CSA, which for the time being still bears the Czechoslovak Airlines label
despite the split into Czech and Slovak Republics, has two Airbus A310-300s,
five Boeing 737-500s and four ATR 72s but retains several solidly-built
Ilyushin 62s, Tupolev 134s and Tupolev-154s. As with LOT, Frankfurt is the
most frequent foreign destination for CSA passengers followed by Paris,
London and New York. Malev has also held on to its TU-134s and 154s while
acquiring six Boeing 737s and ordering two B767-200s for the inauguration
next month of service to New York. LOT was a pioneer in catering to ethnic
Poles in North America for its North American flights and was therefore
spared some of the most ruinous competition across the Atlantic.
The author was Financial Times Eastern Europe Correspondent from 1972 to
1992
