FT  31 DEC 93 / Soldier killed in Ulster: Unionist discontent at prime
ministers' peace accord grows
A British soldier shot yesterday in the Northern Ireland border town of
Crossmaglen died in hospital later. It was the first terrorist murder in the
province since a blueprint for a peace accord was agreed more than a
fortnight ago by Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds.
The 23-year-old soldier was the ninth member of the security forces killed
by IRA snipers in the border areas of south Armagh and County Fermanagh in
the past two years.
The shooting underlined the increasingly hardline tone of republican
paramilitary groups towards the document from the two premiers. Mr John Fee,
a Social Democratic and Labour party councillor who lives near Crossmaglen,
said of the shooting: 'There are many throughout the nationalist and
republican community who will be saying this should not have happened.'
The shooting came amid growing discontent in the Ulster Unionist party, the
largest unionist party. UUP support is seen by the two governments as
essential to the success of the peace initiative.
Sir John Wheeler, security minister at the Northern Ireland Office,
condemned the shooting as a 'wicked crime', but he stopped short of
threatening a security clampdown.
The hardening of attitudes among republicans has prompted calls from
unionist leaders for immediate tougher government security measures. It has
also fuelled doubts about the peace process among some UUP members.
UUP leaders said that yesterday's shooting would not be allowed to derail
the peace process. Although the leadership's cautious endorsement of the
premiers' declaration appears to have wide support, the tactics have also
provoked anger. One UUP councillor said: 'There's a lot of people here who
are very unhappy with the declaration.'
Mr Ken Maginnis, UUP MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone, said dissenters were
a minority in the party.
The Rev Roy Magee, a Belfast minister who has had talks with loyalist
paramilitary groups, said they had been prepared to give the peace process a
chance. But yesterday's shooting of the soldier might threaten that.
