FT  15 JUN 93 / BET reduces dividend after Pounds 9.8m loss
BET, the business services company, yesterday cut its final dividend after
reporting another year of losses and continuing downward price pressure in
its main markets.
Pre-tax losses in the year to the end of March were Pounds 9.8m on sales of
Pounds 2.18bn.
The figure was struck after further provisions for the cost of stripping out
all management layers between the profit centres and head office and also to
cover further asset value write-downs.
Mr John Clark, chief executive, said that in spite of the losses, the group
had now put its balance sheet on a sound footing after the repayment of all
its auction market preferred stock.
The way was now clear for a return to profitable growth.
He warned, however, that BET still needed to cut costs at the operating
level - where margins have continued to slide - as the group still faced
falling prices and pressure from competitors, who were prepared to sell
purely on price.
BET would still need the last year of its self-imposed three-year
'turnaround programme' to establish the right mix of businesses and to bring
profitability up to that which some competitors were achieving.
As expected by the market, BET chose to cut the final dividend.
The final payment will be 1.25p, bringing the total for the year down to
3.25p from 6.5p.
The loss per share was 4p compared with a 63.3p loss last year.
The pre-tax loss for 1991-2 of Pounds 448.4m included nearly Pounds 600m of
provisions for goodwill write-offs and losses on disposal or termination of
underperforming operations.
This year Pounds 33m of provisions covered reorganisation of management and
installation of management control systems.
Combined with a unified reporting and accounting procedure introduced last
year, head office now had a clear picture of what was going on at its 80
profit centres.
In addition BET wrote off Pounds 42m from the value of assets, including
Pounds 10m off the value of property to be sold imminently.
BET said these provisions completed 'the major retrenchment activity'.
The group also chose to write off Pounds 21m of advance corporation tax,
raising the tax charge to Pounds 15.5m, in a move which will give the group
a normal tax charge in the years to come.
BET shares rose 3p to 111p.
Lex, Page 20;
Details, Page 22
