FT  03 MAR 93 / Money Markets: Repo rate surprises
TO THE surprise of many market participants, the prospects for an immediate
easing in German monetary policy dimmed yesterday after the Bundesbank
announced that it would be offering some wholesale funds to commercial banks
at unchanged rates this week, writes James Blitz.
The German central bank stated that it would be offering a fixed rate repo
for 14-day bills in its weekly securities repurchase tender at 8.49 per
cent.
A variable rate repo will be offered for 28-day bills, and
some dealers felt that the rates for these funds might come down by as much
as 15 basis points. Nevertheless, futures dealers scaled back expect-ations
of an easing in German monetary policy this week.
Some dealers suggested that the Bundesbank council might still cut the
discount rate following its deliberations on Thursday. They claimed that the
Bundesbank was keeping its powder dry by not tampering with the repo early
in the week.
A more likely reason for the central bank's caution may have been another
sharp fall in the German call money rate yesterday, to 8.61 per cent.
This week's reduction in the minimum reserve require-ments for commercial
banks by DM32bn has brought the cost of overnight lending down. The
Bundesbank may be waiting to see how liquidity behaves in the next few days
before moving the repo.
The March Euromark con-tract consequently fell back 7 basis points to close
at 91.95, at which level it is targeting three-month money in less than two
weeks' time at 8.05 per cent.
The March short sterling contract was down 6 basis points on the day to
94.00, although this was partly due to the Governor of the Bank of England's
comment on Monday night that Britain would raise interest rates if it felt a
falling pound imperilled its goal of low inflation.
Three-month sterling cash closed  1/16 percentage point higher at 6 1/16 per
cent, because of difficulties removing a Pounds 650m shortage in the
discount market.
Thursday is increasingly looking like a critical day. If the Bundesbank
leaves policy unchanged, the reserve requirement changes might still allow
three-month money to converge with the current price of the March Euromark
contract. Even so, some dealers would not exclude a backlash.
