FT  30 NOV 93 / Survey of Vietnam (1): Too much, too soon - Free market
reforms have led to a rush of business activity with Hanoi aiming to double
GDP in the current decade. But with growth comes the threat of corruption,
environmental destruction and a widening gap between rich and poor
The Vietnamese are enjoying themselves. After half a century of warfare and
dour communist rule, the country's 70m inhabitants - urban and rural - have
responded enthusiastically to the free market policies progressively
introduced by the government over the past seven years.
With an average per capita gross domestic product of Dollars 220 a year,
Vietnam is still one of the world's poorest countries, but the traits of a
modern consumer society are emerging everywhere from the trading towns on
the Chinese border in the north to the beach resort of Vung Tau in the
south. In the once sleepy capital Hanoi, foreigners and Vietnamese are
building hotels, office blocks and private houses, replicating the
construction and business boom which is already well under way in Ho Chi
Minh City, the southern commercial centre previously known as Saigon.
The public tennis courts in the central port city of Danang are packed with
eager if inexpert players; in nearby Hue, students are contentedly drinking
beer in bars which opened only months ago.
In Ho Chi Minh City, a new supermarket was forced to close its doors after
only four days because it could not meet the demands of its customers: the
check-out queues were one and a half hours long.
There is, as Vietnamese officials admit, an ugly side to Vietnam's
transformation. Corruption, greed and prostitution have flourished in the
liberal economic climate. But the incipient urban prosperity that allows the
wealthier Vietnamese to buy new motorcycles and build new homes is
underpinned by solid and nationwide economic achievements since the
communist government launched its policy of doi moi (renovation).
Ruthless restriction of the money supply has forced inflation down from more
than 700 per cent in 1986 to less than 10 per cent today. Foreign investors
have proposed Dollars 6.8bn of projects in the five years since the first
foreign investment law was enacted. Exports - including rice, textiles and
seafood - have been growing at an average 30 per cent a year in the same
period. The economy grew by 8.3 per cent last year, a performance which will
almost be matched in 1993.
Vietnam reacted nimbly to the collapse of communism in eastern Europe,
shifting the focus of its trade away from the former Soviet bloc countries
to new partners in Asia and the west.
According to the trade ministry, all of Vietnam's light industrial exports
went to the east bloc in 1988. Last year the figure was 4 per cent.
Most remarkable of all, the first stage of Vietnam's shift from central
planning to the export-oriented industrialisation policies that have been so
successful elsewhere in Asia was achieved with hardly any assistance from
foreign donors.
It was only in July that the US withdrew its objections to multilateral aid
for Vietnam from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
Asian Development Bank.
The US bilateral economic embargo dating back to the communist Vietnam War
victory in 1975 remains in force, but the boycott is now at least as
frustrating for American companies as it is for Vietnam.
So much foreign aid money will flood into the country - Vietnam was promised
Dollars 1.86bn at its first donors' conference in Paris this month - that
the management skills of the government's Soviet-educated ministers and
bureaucrats will be severely tested.
The government has set a target of doubling Vietnam's GDP in the current
decade, and it estimates that success will require a total investment of
about Dollars 40bn - of which half is supposed to come from domestic sources
and the remainder from foreign direct investment and foreign aid.
Vo Van Kiet, the prime minister, readily acknowledges the enormity of the
task that lies ahead. In an introduction to the Vietnamese document prepared
for the donor conference, he lamented the decline of social services and the
severity of unemployment.
He also emphasised the importance of repairing the country's battered
infrastructure and spoke of the need to strengthen the legal system in order
to allow the market economy to work properly.
'There is still much for us to do and there remain many difficulties to
overcome in order to carry on with our renovation programme and to realise
our socio-economic goals,' he wrote.
Mr Kiet and his reformist allies are operating in a difficult political
environment. Advocates of reform say social services were already declining
under the bankrupt policies of the past and that the switch to a market
economy - bringing with it the benefits of foreign aid and investment - was
made only just in time. The World Bank, for example, estimates that half of
Vietnamese children under six are malnourished.
The inevitability of reform, however, has not prevented many Vietnamese from
resenting the rampant corruption that has accompanied economic growth or
from complaining that the good aspects of communism - free education for
example - have been thrown out with the bad.
Bereft of a coherent ideology, now that it has abandoned the command
economy, the Communist Party of Vietnam is likely to find it increasingly
difficult in the years ahead to justify its monopoly of power.
Indeed, the central government is already being challenged by Buddhist monks
in Hue demanding greater freedom of religion, and by local governments
around the country eager to exercise their own authority and to keep for
their own fiefdoms a share of the money generated by investment and economic
reform.
One of the hardest tasks for Hanoi on the domestic front will be to nurture
the emerging Vietnamese private sector when both local and central
government agencies are accustomed to supporting the state enterprises which
fall under their control.
The privatisation programme has stalled. Returning Vietnamese exiles, a
potential source of capital and business skills, are often surprised after
many years abroad to find that they are greeted with suspicion by long-lost
acquaintances.
The banking system is in urgent need of reform and a series of draft laws
relating to business - including those on bankruptcy, the resolution of
contract disputes and the promotion of domestic investment - are queueing up
to be passed by the National Assembly at its next meeting in December.
Several will have to wait until the subsequent session in June 1994,
according to parliamentary officials.
With so many basic tasks still needing to be performed, talk of establishing
a stock market in Ho Chi Minh City is being dismissed by the government and
by foreign bankers as premature.
On the foreign policy front, Vietnam continues to have a difficult
relationship with its powerful neighbour China. Beijing periodically sends
ships into areas that Vietnam says are in its territorial waters, including
zones set aside for oil exploration.
This is one reason why Vietnam is anxious to restore full diplomatic ties
with Washington. The US is regarded as the only plausible counterweight to
Chinese expansionism in the region.
Given the difficulties Vietnam faces, it is enough to hope that the country
will be able to emulate east Asia's 'dragons' and achieve sustained economic
growth into the next century.
To expect Vietnam to go further and avoid the worst tendencies of its
fast-growing neighbours - including corruption, environmental destruction
and a widening gap between rich and poor - would probably be over-ambitious.
'Some people talk about the dragon,' says Do Duc Dinh, a Vietnamese
economist, 'but I think it may take three or four decades to come to that,
and it depends on our efforts.'
In the eyes of some of the country's more thoughtful citizens, the
Vietnamese are enjoying themselves too much, too soon.
