FT  06 DEC 93 / IMF near special aid relaunch
The International Monetary Fund has almost enough money to relaunch its
special loan fund to help the world's poorest countries restructure their
economies, but the fund is facing an uphill struggle to win the final
commitments it needs.
Donor countries have promised about 80 per cent of the funds the IMF is
seeking for its Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, which lends money
at 0.5 per cent interest to low-income developing countries, mostly in
sub-Saharan Africa. But many donor countries have made their pledges
conditional on other rich countries playing their part. Negotiations are now
at a critical stage, if the ESAF is to be relaunched by the end of this year
as originally planned.
The IMF needs 5bn special drawing rights (Pounds 5.35bn) in capital to be
loaned to developing countries over the next three or four years. This money
is deposited by government financial institutions, such as Japan's Eximbank,
and earns interest, and so is less difficult to raise.
But the IMF also needs about SDR1.5bn of contributions to subsidise the ESAF
interest rate at 0.5 per cent.
Although falling world interest rates have reduced the gap between this
subsidised rate and market rates, the IMF still faces great difficulties
obtaining all the money that it needs for this subsidy account.
National aid budgets around the world have come under severe pressure, and
aid agencies in each donor country have been reluctant to hand over more of
their shrinking resources to a multilateral programme such as ESAF, despite
generally positive views of its results.
Japan and France, the two biggest contributors to the first ESAF, were among
the first to commit themselves to the new facility. At the same time, the
IMF has cast its net more widely and has obtained commitments from a number
of countries in Asia, Latin America and the Gulf.
Many of the promises now on the table could be withdrawn, however, if the US
cannot be persuaded to contribute something. Although the ESAF avoids any
strict burden-sharing formula, countries watch each other in order to spot
any government avoiding its responsibilities.
The US, the largest economy in the world, contributed only SDR105m to the
SDR2.5bn subsidy fund for the last ESAF - less than Sweden or Switzerland.
The original ESAF, whose life has been extended to the end of this month,
has made loan commitments totalling SDR3.2bn to 29 countries. Although about
SDR2bn remains unspent, this money could be taken up quickly if agreements
were to be reached, as expected, with Pakistan and possibly India.
