FT  07 SEP 93 / Smith rules out deal on voting reforms
MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, is refusing to compromise over the
introduction of one member, one vote in the selection of parliamentary
candidates although he still faces defeat over the issue at the his party's
annual conference in three weeks' time.
According to his aides he is in a 'take-it-or-leave-it' mood on an issue
that threatens the authority of his leader-ship.
Although he will not speak directly on the question in his speech at the
Trades Union Congress in Brighton today, Mr Smith is expected to tell union
leaders privately that while he has no wish to break the party's links with
the unions he has gone far enough to meet their concerns that one member,
one vote will weaken their position in the party.
Mr Smith remains confident that opinion in a number of key unions will move
in his direction on the selection issue once they realise that a defeat for
the party's national executive would plunge Labour into a bitter internal
conflict.
Mr Smith will point out that he has moved some way to meet union anxieties.
One member, one vote will not apply for the election of the Labour party's
leader. That will continue to be carried out through an electoral college in
which the unions will con-tinue to have a substantial voice.
He will be keen to convince unions that if they want to achieve their aims
they need the election of a Labour government at the next general election.
Mr Smith is expected to face criticism over the direction of Labour's
economic policy tonight at a fringe meeting. It is to be attended by Mr
Bryan Gould , the former shadow cabinet member and Mr John Edmonds, the
GMB's general secretary.
Some union leaders dislike the decision by shadow chancellor Gordon Brown to
drop the party's tax-and-spend commitments made before the last election,
and they fear that it has left a policy vacuum.
However, other union leaders are keen to avoid any further commitments by
the party on tax. They succeeded in watering down last week's TUC submission
to the government on its autumn Budget by removing any suggestion that taxes
needed to be raised.
