FT  07 OCT 93 / Big ideas that may bridge the gap: John Willman on
suggestions to smooth the UK private sector's involvement in public projects
Private investment in large public sector projects such as new roads and
railways is seen by UK ministers as the big idea for the 1990s, as
significant as privatisation was for the 1980s.
Later this morning, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will tell the
Conservative party conference of his determination to sweep away obstacles
to involving private finance in public projects. In addition to reducing the
burden on the exchequer, he will say, private sector involvement introduces
fresh thinking and a more commercial approach into public sector investment.
Yet a report published today by the Chartered Institute of Transport says
that efforts to attract private investment into transport projects are
doomed to fail unless the government adopts a new approach.
The authors, who include builders, financiers and transport consultants, say
private sector companies see little hope of a reasonable return on financing
transport projects under Treasury rules for such projects.
'The government's approach simply won't work,' according to Professor Tony
Ridley, chairman of the group that produced the report. 'My fear is the
Treasury has simply invented a new mechanism for proving all sorts of
infrastructure projects can't be financed.'
The government's plans for involving private capital go beyond transport
projects. Ministers responsible for the health service, education, urban
development and the prison service are all searching for innovative ways to
use the private sector to provide for needs traditionally met by the public
sector.
But the biggest impact could be made in transport. While much of the
transport department's Pounds 3bn annual capital budget goes into road and
rail schemes, there is a large backlog of desirable projects the taxpayer
cannot finance. These include most of the Pounds 20bn roads programme
published in 1989, the modernisation of British Rail lines such as the west
coast line between London and Glasgow, and urban light rail projects.
According to the institute's report, only a handful of private finance
projects have got off the ground. Most have been bridges such as the
Dartford bridge across the Thames which can be completely financed in the
private sector using tolls for repayments.
However, the number of such projects is limited - mainly to estuarial
crossings where users will pay tolls to save themselves a lengthy detour. If
private finance is to be more widely used for infrastructure, the report
says, it must be drawn into projects which cannot be wholly financed in the
private sector.
That means joint ventures or co-investment, in which the government
contributes either some or most of the finance with the rest being raised
privately. The return for the private sector partner will come from payments
made for using the new road or railway. These may be raised through tolls,
track charges, fares or perhaps even shadow tolling - a payment from the
transport department for each vehicle that uses a new road.
Treasury rules make such joint ventures hard to establish, according to Prof
Ridley, because of an unwillingness to recognise that the private sector has
a choice about where it invests. Potential investors in transport projects
want the risk and uncertainty to be no greater than on alternative
investments such as power stations or new industrial plant.
Yet transport projects have characteristics that increase risk and
uncertainty. Roads and railways are fixed assets, and particularly
vulnerable to errors in forecasting demand. Demand cannot be tested with
small experiments, only by completing the project. And since use builds up
over the years, the new road or line is not immediately used at full
capacity.
'Roads are the type of infrastructure to which the private sector can bring
least added value,' says Mr Roger Sainsbury, a director of John Mowlem, the
construction company, who has worked on several transport projects. 'The
success or failure of a road is largely outside the control of the operator,
and depends more on factors such as economic performance.'
These characteristics mean that the payback period for the initial
investment is both uncertain and lengthy. Project cash flows are likely to
show low debt coverage ratios and little hope of dividends in the early
years.
To these inherent uncertainties in transport projects must be added the
risks created by the political pressures around new roads and railway lines
and the delays created by the planning process. Yet the Treasury appears to
want the private sector to assume all these risks and uncertainties, says
Prof Ridley.
'Total risk transfer scares everyone away,' he says. 'The government will
frighten off the private sector if it is too ideological about private
finance.'
The public sector's contribution to joint ventures might be lower if the
government takes responsibility for some of the elements of risk which it
can most easily control, according to Mr Richard Haycocks, a partner in the
corporate finance department of Ernst &amp; Young, the accountants. He says that
the government needs to act as the promoter of infrastructure schemes,
rather than putting the whole process out to tender and accepting the lowest
bid.
'Unlike the private sector, the government has skills in road and rail
planning,' he says. 'It also has the power to reduce risks without
significant detriment to the public interest - for example by guaranteeing
that no competing project will be built for a specified period.'
The government should also be prepared to consider some element of
indemnity, he says. For example it could underwrite a new toll road by
guaranteeing a minimum level of toll income if use falls considerably below
estimates during the first few years.
In return, the cost of private sector participation could fall
significantly, according to Mr Sainsbury.
'It would be better for the taxpayer if the government carried the ball part
of the way and eliminated some of the risks before handing it over to the
private sector,' he says. 'Ministers must recognise that there is an optimum
point at which risk can be transferred.'
A further element of uncertainty is introduced by the government's
reluctance to commit itself to transport projects, says Prof Ridley.
'Companies that devote resources to putting together their bids find that
the project does not go ahead because none of the bids is high enough to
bridge the gap between what the government is prepared to contribute and the
total cost,' he says.
This creates a no-prize competition which makes companies unwilling to bid.
'Contractors are prepared to lose competitions, but not if everybody loses.
It would be far better to decide to go ahead with a project and then find
the private sector partner best able to make a contribution.'
Mr Haycocks agrees. He says that the government needs to identify two or
three projects that it will fund as necessary and take them forward to the
point where private sector finance can be raised.
Meanwhile, the chancellor should bear in mind the advice of Mowlem's Mr
Sainsbury. If the government is serious about the private finance
initiative, it must address the private sector's principal concerns: is
there a project worth bidding for and is there a chance of winning it.
'Ministers can write the rules and mark out the pitch,' he says. 'But if the
private sector doesn't want to play, the game won't happen.'
Transport Infrastructure: Mobilising Private Investment. Chartered Institute
of Transport, 80 Portland Place, London W1N 4DP.
