FT  27 FEB 93 / Disaster threatens a natural wonder: Olga Speranskaya on the
pollution of Lake Baikal
RUSSIA HAS paid a terrible price for the Soviet tradition of 'storming
nature' - the idea that air, water and abundant natural resources were there
for man to assault violently without thought for the human and economic
cost, or the ecological consequences. Starting with Stalin's decision to
build the White Sea canal with slave labour in the 1920s, the communists
showed an irresistible urge to throw millions of people and vast resources
at projects that were nothing but propaganda.
These were designed to impress the Soviet people and the world with the
regime's implacable will and its ability to accomplish monumental schemes
and gravity-defying feats. For decades, huge dams were built which flooded
rich agricultural land to produce electricity for non-existent factories or
to irrigate, for example, the mono-culture of cotton in the central Asian
republics, desiccating the Aral sea in the process.
Partly to repair this damage, the planners then proposed to create another
ecological disaster by diverting the mighty Siberian rivers from their
natural courses. Nature has them flowing northwards into the Arctic ocean,
draining the Siberian swamps. Instead, they were to be channeled south for
thousands of kilometres, raising water levels and leaching salt and minerals
from soils as they went. Again, the aim was to irrigate central Asia.
Cost-benefit analyses along capitalist lines were unknown in such projects.
Only as the power of the Communist party dwindled in the 1980s did it become
possible to question seriously either the economic rationale, or the
ecological consequences, of projects which had drained resources for decades
and contributed to the grotesque deformations of the economic system.
The collapse of the Soviet Union, and the economy, put paid to the Siberian
rivers scheme. But it came too late to prevent the outlay of billions of
roubles on one of the world's most improbable railways: the
Baikal-Amur-Mainline (BAM).
This runs for more than 2,000 km (1,250 miles) through what was once a world
of virgin forest, crystal rivers and forbidding mountains. The politburo
decided to build the railway deep inside the permafrost zone where metals
snap like twigs, buildings sink, and motors have to be kept running 24 hours
a day or they freeze up within minutes.
Like so many Soviet schemes, the idea of driving a railway through some of
the world's harshest and least inhabited terrain was dreamed up by Stalin,
only to be abandoned hastily when the second world war began. It was
resurrected by Stalin's spiritual heir, Leonid Brezhnev, in the 1970s when
the idea of building a line through Siberia north of Lake Baikal reflected
military concern at the vulnerability of the existing trans-Siberian railway
at a time of tension with China.
The launch of the so-called 'project of the century' was also accompanied by
much loose talk of 'unlocking the Siberian treasure chest' and opening up a
vast area of Siberia to human habitation. Above all, its proponents argued,
the railway would help to exploit the mineral wealth locked up in the
mountain ranges through which the heroic tunnel drillers, bridge-builders
and track-layers made their difficult and expensive way.
Twenty years later, the railway is still not operating fully and only one of
the projected pits, the Japanese-financed and equipped Neryungri hard coal
mine, has been built. Some 13m tons a year now flows down a
specially-constructed spur of the BAM to be hauled over mountains and steep
gradients nearly 1,000 km (625 miles) from Neryungri to the Pacific coast,
from where it is exported to Japan. It must be the most expensive coal in
the world.
Building the railway - with its nine tunnels, 139 large bridges and
viaducts, and 3,760 smaller bridges and culverts over and under fast-flowing
rivers and steep ravines - also opened up a vast area for logging and other
operations. But logging dislodged thin soils and polluted the rivers,
including those which flow into Baikal. The lake is one of the world's
wonders and the fight to prevent it being spoiled is among the main concerns
of the ecological movement in Russia.
Baikal is unique in several respects. It is the most ancient lake on earth.
Whereas the average lake lives 'only' 10,000 years, Baikal is 25m years old.
Even the stars looked different when its waters began to fill a giant rift
in the earth's surface which is still the heart of tectonic activity in the
region. Because of shifts in the planet's crust, the lake gains two
centimetres in width every year. Now, it extends 636 km (400 miles) from
south to north, and is up to 80 km (50 miles) wide.
With a maximum depth of 1,742 metres (5,714 ft), Baikal is, above all, the
deepest lake in the world. In surface area it is smaller than the US Great
Lakes but, because of its depth, it has 20 per cent of the earth's surface
fresh water.
As a closed ecological system, Baikal is famous for its wealth of plants and
animals. So far, about 2,600 different species have been identified, of
which 85 per cent are endemic to the lake. But Baikal today is not only a
collection of natural superlatives - it is a tight tangle of problems and
emotions.
The trans-Siberian railway, built at the beginning of the century, runs
along its southern shore past Irkutsk, one of many heavily-polluted
industrial cities in ecologically-vulnerable Siberia. The construction of
the BAM, and the new town of Severobaikalsk more than 600 km to the north,
threatened to repeat the degenerative processes in the lake's northern area.
Baikal's purity was first infringed on a significant scale by Moscow's
decision to build the Baikalsk cellulose paper combine near the southern end
in 1966. Its construction became a catalyst for the fledgling Green movement
in Russia, and the debate over the plant developed into the the first legal
battle between the communist system and ordinary people.
Among the first to protest was academician Grigori Galazy, now the director
of the Lake Baikal museum. But he remains pessimistic about the possibility
of effective protective measures. 'None of the many decrees and orders to
protect the lake were fully implemented,' he says. 'Every day, the combine
discharges up to 250,000 litres of supposedly clean waters into the lake.
But these waters, even after the treatment they receive, need to be diluted
at least 10,000 times to be considered clean.'
Mikhail Grachev, director of the Limnological Institute in Irkutsk, adds:
'The main value of Lake Baikal is its fresh, clean water and its value will
only grow with time. We must elaborate a concept towards Lake Baikal and
strictly follow it. The lake can be used as a fishery resource and treasured
as beautiful place for tourism and rest. But, above all, it should be seen
and treasured as the planet's well, with crystal-clean waters. We have no
right to take any risk and we must preserve it.'
Baikal has proved to have a unique and highly-effective ability to clean
itself, something that makes it different from other sources of fresh waters
on earth. If its eco-system is not overloaded, this process will continue.
But building new towns with inadequate sewerage and drainage, and the effect
of de-forestation along the banks of the rivers feeding into it, have
increased pressure on its self-purification capacity.
One indicator of the pollution is that Baikal's best-known fish, the omul,
now begins to spawn at around seven or eight years when it weighs around
180-200 grammes. Before the combine was built, the fish began to spawn at
three to four years at a weight of 500 grammes.
The Baikalsk combine is not the only source of pollution, though. The Selnge
river, the main tributary of Baikal, rises in Mongolia and gathers wastes
along its way to the lake. Last year alone, industry in the Ulan-Ude region
to the east of the lake dumped 39,000 tons of pollutants into the river.
Sewage treatment in settlements in this area is either too little or
non-existent. Only 31 new water-treatment units, out of of 83 planned, have
been built and shortage of money means many lack crucial engineering work.
Meanwhile, heavy industry along the Angara river, which flows out of the
lake, and scores of antiquated thermal power stations burning bad-quality
coal add their sulphur and nitrogen oxides to the air pollution.
To supply industry with electricity, the Soviet authorities also built power
stations on the Angara. This had unpredicted ecological side-effects on the
lake. Dr Olga Kozhova, director of the biology institute at Irkutsk
university, explains. 'For millions of years, dozens of species lived in
shallow waters and evolved in accord with natural changes in the lake's
water level.
'Construction of the Irkutsk hydro-electric power station on the Angara
river in 1958 changed the situation dramatically. It raised the water level
by a metre and water levels are now regulated artificially, depending on the
needs of industry. As a result, inshore fishes such as the yellow-fin Baikal
sculpin - a kind of miller's thumb fish - have lost their spawning grounds.
Their numbers have dropped sharply.'
Faced with growing popular protests, the Soviet government decided in 1987
to convert the Baikalsk combine into a furniture factory by 1993. That will
help. But Grachev believes the best way to exploit Baikal in an ecologically
acceptable way is to extract, bottle and sell its contents as premium
mineral water. The Limnological institute is trying to raise money to build
a plant to produce 20m bottles a year, plus ice cubes. 'It would would cost
Dollars 5-10m,' he says. 'The main problem is plastic bottle production - to
ensure they are chemically neutral and safe.'
Grachev's plan is one thing. But the real ambition of the Russian Greens is
to remove all other industrial plants from around the lake. This, they say,
would make Baikal the symbol of the nation's struggle to repair the damage
caused by seven decades of profligacy.
Dr Olga Speranskaya, a Moscow ecologist, was the winner of the 1992 David
Thomas Prize set up in memory of David Thomas, a Financial Times journalist
killed on assignment in Kuwait in 1991. This article is part of her research
into Lake Baikal, undertaken with the prize money.
