FT  24 MAR 93 / Clinton pledges US support for Russian reforms: G7 nations
consider emergency summit as EC proposes trade liberalisation talks
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yester-day promised 'an aggressive, quite specific
plan for American partnership' in Russia's economic reforms, amid
preparations for a possible emergency summit of the Group of Seven leading
industrial nations to consider the political crisis in Russia.
In Brussels, the European Commission is expected to agree today on a
proposal to negotiate a broad-based trade liberalisation pact with Russia in
a bid to underpin the country's economic reforms and political stability.
A senior EC delegation of foreign ministers and foreign affairs
commissioners is due in Moscow to express solidarity with the Russian reform
process which President Boris Yeltsin is trying to salvage.
The US government has become convinced of the need for an emergency G7
summit on aid to Russia. Japan, which as host of the next regular summit in
Tokyo in July has until now been seen as reluctant to convene an earlier
special meeting, may now consider plans to bring G7 leaders together in May.
It is also proposing to bring forward a special meeting of foreign and
finance ministers to April 13 and 14, after Mr Clinton's scheduled summit
with Mr Yeltsin in Vancouver on April 3 and 4. The Russian government has
dropped the idea of moving the Clinton-Yeltsin meeting to Moscow.
The White House said earlier it would look favourably on a request to shift
the summit, but Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister, said there
would be no change of venue. After meeting Mr Warren Christopher, the US
secretary of state, Mr Kozyrev said their talks were aimed at preparing a
'good stage' for a 'productive summit'.
Mr Clinton endorsed Mr Yeltsin as 'the only person who has been elected to
run that country in a thousand years'. Mr Clinton said it was important 'to
understand the unique character' of the events unfolding in Russia. He
doubted the US, together with its allies, could determine what happens next,
but it was obliged to help the reform process 'at every step along the way,
with or without Yeltsin'.
He said he had not talked to the Russian president in the past few days but
had written him two letters, one of condolence on the death of Mr Yeltsin's
mother.
He commended Mr Yeltsin's determination to ask the Russian people for its
confidence in a plebiscite on April 25. This, Mr Clinton said, was
'appropriate' for a democracy.
He ducked questions on what he might do if Mr Yeltsin were unseated, on the
grounds that he did not want to say anything that might 'undermine or
rigidify' the situation in Moscow. 'We have to let it play out,' he added.
In Brussels, the European Commission wants a mandate from EC member states
to widen current negotiations with Moscow on a so-called 'partnership'
agreement. This is in response to requests from the Russian government for
an accord more like those the Community now has with Hungary, Poland, the
Czech and Slovak republics, Romania and Bulgaria - the so-called 'Europe
agreements'.
A confidential Commission document refers to the Russian government's
request for inclusion in the EC's proposed agreement with Russia of 'an
evolutionary clause opening the possibility at a future stage for free trade
in goods, and for national treatment for the establishment of companies and
cross-border trade in services'.
The document, prepared by Sir Leon Brittan, external economic affairs
commissioner, with Mr Hans van den Broek, external political affairs
commissioner, was largely agreed by senior Commission officials on Monday.
The central idea is to work towards a common free trade zone with Russia -
and possibly other former Soviet republics - along with strengthened
technical and financial assistance to make this possible.
The EC and its member states, mainly Germany, already provide some
two-thirds of total financial aid to the former Soviet Union and central and
eastern Europe.
The Commission is looking for endorsement of the 'enlarged mandate' when EC
foreign ministers meet in Luxembourg on April 5.
Page 2
Reformers play last economic card
US wants Russian summit
Press and TV fear congress more than Yeltsin
Page 20
A race against time
