FT  17 MAY 93 / IBM chief halts plans to break up computer group
MR LOU Gerstner, International Business Machines' newly appointed chairman
and chief executive, has stopped plans to break up the world's largest
computer company.
Mr John Akers, who last month stepped aside as IBM chairman and chief
executive in the wake of 1992 losses of almost Dollars 5bn, had planned to
sell interests in large parts of the business, which last year generated
sales of Dollars 64.5 bn (Pounds 41.8bn).
Mr Gerstner has told the group's managers that 'the whole of IBM is greater
than the sum of the parts', and that he had reversed the strategy.
Mr Akers had spoken of plans for 'variable IBM ownership across the range of
businesses . . . from wholly owned, to majority-owned, and minority-owned,
or none at all,' when he announced the planned restructuring 17 months ago.
The strategy had been proposed to find alternative ownership for Adstar,
IBM's data storage products business, with sales of Dollars 6.1bn; Pennant
Systems, the company's Dollars 2.3bn printer subsidiary; and IBM Personal
Computers, a Dollars 9.8bn business.
As recently as last December, Mr Frank Metz, former IBM chief financial
officer, said the company was moving fast in gathering the separate
financial data needed to complete the restructuring.
Although officials now discourage any speculation about spin-offs or
divestment, Mr Akers' goal of decentralising IBM's management has survived.
Mr Jack Kuehler, IBM's vice-chairman, said the group was determined to
decentralise decision-making and establish sound financial objectives for
business unit managers. 'Corporate management is trying to create the
environment and remove the impediments to enable our people to take
advantage of our technology leadership,' he said
Mr Gerstner's determination to keep IBM intact appears to have been a factor
in his selection as the first company 'outsider' to head the world's largest
computer manufacturer. Some of the other potential candidates for the post,
including John Sculley, Apple Computer chairman and chief executive, had
more radical ideas.
Mr Sculley, who confirmed that he had proposed a merger of Apple and IBM to
members of IBM's management committee earlier this year, is also believed to
have suggested that IBM sell off its Dollars 12.7bn mainframe computer
business.
Mr Gerstner's rejection of a wholesale break-up of IBM may not signal
complete reluctance to take drastic action. IBM executives now acknowledge
that the company may need to shed far more workers than the 'more than
25,000' already estimated.
