FT  23 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Rebellion looms over allocation of
new EC seats
THE GOVERNMENT is set to face a Euro-sceptic rebellion over legislation to
create six extra UK seats for the European parliament.
Debate on the legislation was originally planned for this week, but was
delayed because ministers feared a coalition involving almost all the
opposition parties and the Tory rebels might stop the bill in its tracks. It
is now provisionally scheduled for next week.
Under the planned arrangements five of the six extra seats will go to
England and one will go to Wales.
The boundaries of the new seats will be drawn up by committees appointed by
the home secretary.
Labour will put down an amendment refusing to allow the bill to proceed
because there is no provision for an extra seat for Scotland. A similar
tactic is planned by the Scottish National party.
Unless the amendment is framed in broader terms, however, it is unlikely to
attract the full range of potential opposition to the proposals, scuppering
the bill itself.
Instead, the most likely common strand of argument seems to be that the
seats should be allocated by the independent Boundary Commission - a demand
that is shared by some Tory Euro-rebels as well as opposition parties.
If the revolt resulted in the loss of the bill it would cause severe
diplomatic difficulties for the UK. The expansion of the European
parliament, in which the unified Germany will get an extra 18
representatives, was agreed at the Edinburgh summit last December. It was
decided that if any European Community country failed to make the necessary
arrangements then none of the new seats would be created.
Detailed discussion of the legislation is likely to take place in the
Commons as a whole, and will be difficult to guillotine. The elections will
take place in June next year.
Government business managers are cheered by the fairly limited scope for
amending the bill. In particular, planned amendments from the Liberal
Democrats to bring an element of proportional representation into the
elections seem likely to be ruled out of order.
