FT  15 DEC 93 / Business and the Environment: Japan divided as Thorp waits -
Tokyo's green lobby claims Britain will become a dump for nuclear waste
It may not be the most palatable of messages, but it is one that Tadatoshi
Akiba, a member of the Japanese parliament's environmental lobby, is keen to
spell out. 'I think we have the obligation to tell the British people that
it is inevitable for the UK to become the storage place for Japan's nuclear
waste and plutonium,' he warns.
Akiba is one of nine parliamentary members urging the review of Japan's
contracts to reprocess used nuclear fuel at the Pounds 2.8bn thermal oxide
reprocessing plant (Thorp) in Sellafield, north-west England. The group
claims the global surplus of plutonium and the international trend away from
fast breeder development will eventually force Japan to curtail its nuclear
policy. They warn that under the current contract, British Nuclear Fuels,
the plant's owner, may end up holding stockpiles of unprocessed nuclear fuel
and plutonium if Japan decides to curb plutonium use.
Ahead of the British government's imminent decision on the future of Thorp -
it is expected to give the go-ahead - there have been claims and counter
claims about the project's viability from Japan, Thorp's largest foreign
client. The official line of the Tokyo government over its commitment to
Thorp and to its plutonium reprocessing programme, remains unchanged. But
the environmental lobby is using Thorp as a chance to highlight the
complications facing Japan's nuclear policy.
Japan's electric power utilities have already shipped 2,300 tonnes of used
nuclear fuel to Sellafield to be processed. According to Akiba, BNFL is
required to check whether Japan can actually use the processed plutonium
before it is shipped back. Hence, if Japan ends up with too much supply or
decides to curb its nuclear energy policy, Thorp will end up with unwanted
plutonium. He also says the contract stipulates that BNFL will lose its
right to send back the plutonium to Japan after 25 years. However, BNFL says
there is no time limit on the return of plutonium.
Some questions surrounding Japan's stance will be answered at the end of the
year by the country's Atomic Energy Commission, when it ends its sixth
mid-term reassessment discussions on Japan's long-term nuclear policy.
Meanwhile, the electric power utilities refute the environmentalists'
claims. Kohji Kaneko, general manager of the Federation of Electric Power
Companies' nuclear power department, says BNFL would have the right to
decide how to dispose of the unprocessed used nuclear fuel, plutonium, and
nuclear waste: this could include sending it back to Japan. 'It's
unthinkable that BNFL would sign such an one-sided contract,' he says.
Yasutaka Moriguchi, the director in charge of Japan's nuclear fuel policy at
the Science and Technology Agency, strongly denies the possibility of a
change in the country's nuclear programme in the future. The country's
plutonium policy was drawn up by officials in the late 1950s when they
discovered it as a 'dream energy source' which was ideal for a country
lacking energy resources and dependent on imported fuels.
Japan's goal of becoming completely self-sufficient in energy was reinforced
by the oil crises of the 1970s; the country relies on oil and uranium
imports for more than half of its electrical power. Since then, the
government has introduced nuclear power aggressively, allowing 42 nuclear
power plants to be built over the last 20 years, and has stood by its
plutonium policy on the assumption that uranium would be scarce and
expensive in the future.
However, uranium prices have plunged following discoveries in Canada and
Australia and a decline in demand for uranium. Some analysts believe the
world's uranium supply will last for another 130 to 150 years. Uranium and
plutonium from the deactivated nuclear weapons of Russia and the former
Soviet republics have added to the glut of nuclear fuel.
Japan currently has 4.5 tonnes of plutonium, of which the environmental
lobby claims that there is no planned use for three tonnes. The government
denies any possibility that Japan's nuclear policy will be altered. It also
claims that it does not have a plutonium surplus and the demand and supply
situation match up. By 2010, Japan will have 85 tonnes of plutonium of which
22 to 33 tonnes will be used in fast breeder reactors, 10 tonnes in added
thermal reactors and 50 tonnes in light water reactors.
Moriguchi says critics of Japan's nuclear programme are short-sighted. 'Of
course, we can't use the whole 4.5 tonnes now because we haven't built all
the plants yet. But it takes more than 20 years to build one nuclear power
plant.'
He argues that the current global oversupply of uranium and plutonium is
temporary: 'Some 1,000 tonnes of uranium is only four to five years worth of
global demand.'
Fears of Japan making nuclear weapons with the plutonium are unfounded, he
says, since its nuclear programme is closely examined by international
inspectors.
Kaneko also expects a sharp rise in demand from developing countries which
are increasing their reliance on nuclear energy in the near future. 'Since
Japan's goal is to be completely self-sufficient, Japan wouldn't buy from
outside even if there is a glut,' says Moriguchi.
He points out that Japan will not drop its plutonium development plan as
other leading western countries, with energy resources, have done. 'We're
not like the US or UK which have energy resources like oil and coal in their
own countries.'
Critics counter such arguments that the plutonium cycle cannot be sustained
with additional uranium to create the fuel. Atsushi Sakurai, a physics
researcher, says Japan cannot free itself totally from having to import
uranium. For instance, if Japan - for any conceivable reason  - broke off
ties with the US, its main supplier of uranium, nuclear power stations using
plutonium would only run for five years.
Meanwhile, there is evidence that the electric utility companies have
started to drag their feet due to the cost of building new nuclear plants.
The chairman of the Federation of Electric Power Companies recently
announced the delay of construction of the demonstration fast breeder
reactor planned for the late 1990s. Analysts expect this in turn to delay
commercial use of fast breeder reactors until after 2020.
The companies are spending more than Y1,200bn (Pounds 7.5bn) for the
construction of Rokkasho, a complex in northern Japan, which includes
nuclear waste storage, enrichment facilities, and a planned reprocessing
plant.
So what are the chances of Japan shifting its nuclear energy policy? The
environment lobby says that due to mounting international fears of nuclear
proliferation, a logical conclusion would be for Japan to scale down its
plans. Under the new coalition government, including leftist parties which
formerly opposed nuclear power, Japan could well shift its policy.
However, the administrators will probably try to avoid the embarrassment of
announcing a complete change in stance and, at best, will officially
postpone the current schedule.
One indication of what could happen may be gleaned from Mutsu, Japan's first
nuclear-powered vessel, mothballed after a radiation leak on its maiden
voyage in 1974. After strong public opposition to a further test voyage, the
decision to scrap the project last year forced the government to admit to
failure on reaching a national consensus on nuclear energy.
