FT  15 JUN 93 / BIS Annual Report: Warning for central bankers  - A look at
the annual report of the Bank for International Settlements
THE world's central banks will have to improve their strategies for exchange
rate management if they are to avoid further spells of currency turbulence,
according to Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, the BIS's general manager.
Writing in the annual report, Mr Lamfalussy says monetary authorities in
industrial countries need to back up efforts to manage currencies by buying
and selling them with interest rate changes.
However, such exercises can only work if they do not run foul of sentiment
on the world's financial markets, which have increasing powers to force
exchange rate adjustments. The BIS general manager says: 'The authorities
cannot therefore afford to ignore the crucial role of expectations (in
financial markets). If they want to meet exchange rate targets they will
have to influence these expectations, or at least avoid giving rise to
adverse ones.'
Elsewhere in the report, the BIS suggests governments were guilty of a
'piecemeal approach' to managing the turbulence in the European exchange
rate mechanism last year. Instead of arranging a general realignment of the
currencies in the system, they allowed financial markets to force events,
with the result that individual currencies had to be devalued one by one,
or, in the case of the Italian lira and sterling, pushed out of the
mechanism. With about Dollars 1,000bn (Pounds 649bn) a day traded on the
world's currency markets, the power of investors to influence events is such
that 'even in the face of an attack on a currency whose fundamentals are
sound, intervention (by central banks to buy or sell currencies) now had to
be greater than in the past'.
On a similar theme, Mr Lamfalussy says an additional reason for governments'
reduced ability to control exchange rate movements has been the 'emergence
of an activist asset and liability management culture, encouraged by the
successive waves of financial innovation and accelerating advances in
information systems and communications technology'.
Turning to the economic outlook, Mr Lamfalussy is moderately optimistic
about the possibilities of a sustained upturn across the industrial world.
He says investment has generally been resilient, savings have increased and
productivity growth is increasing in many countries, not only in
manufacturing but in services.
