FT  13 JUL 93 / Government Bonds: French debt prices hold the line amid
currency battle
MILITARY analogies were back in fashion yesterday as the European bond
markets watched the French franc smash down through key support levels
against the D-Mark.
But while the currency appeared to retreat in tatters, French government
debt prices held the line and even advanced throughout the day.
Speculators sold the French currency down to FFr3.4150 against the D-Mark
yesterday morning, backed off and then returned in the afternoon to take it
down to within a centime of its floor in the European exchange rate
mechanism.
In the meantime, the German finance minister Mr Theo Waigel had offered
verbal support and the Bundesbank said it had intervened to support the
franc.
The Banque de France was conspicuous by its silence but it did attempt to
stem the tide by draining liquidity from the system at its weekly repo.
The central bank only provided the commercial banks with FFr10bn against
their demand for FFr70bn. The rationale according to one economist was that
the banks would have to use their available funds to deal with their daily
commitments and would have less spare cash to sell in the international
currency markets.
'The big guns are in place, the trenches have been dug and if it can hold on
until the summer recess, France should be clear until the autumn,' said one
bond trader yesterday.
That view found support in the bond market, which held firm throughout the
day. The September futures contract traded on the Matif slipped a little in
early trading but recovered its losses to close firmer at 119.78.
There was support also from consumer prices data for June, showing a
year-on-year rise of between 1.9 per cent and 2 per cent, while the
oversubscription for the Balladur privatisation bond was interpreted as
allowing the government more funds to stimulate the flagging economy.
Also, overseas investors had already piled out of the French market at the
end of last week and domestic bonds received some support from short
covering.
Finally, there was a feeling that the government was committed to lower
interest rates and to maintaining at the very least a dual central role
within the ERM.
GERMAN government bonds performed against initial expectations, sliding
gently on low volume as the D-Mark remained under pressure against the
dollar.
Traders said that, as with the franc, foreign investors had already adjusted
their funds by the end of last week and there was nothing to focus on.
The market is now concentrating on the possibility of an easing at
Wednesday's repo, which was carried out last week at 7.3 per cent.
More importantly, they are looking towards Thursday's Bundesbank council
meeting and the prospect of a further cut in the floor lending rate, the
discount rate, which is at 6.75 per cent, parity with the French
intervention rate.
THE rise and rise of UK gilts continued to surprise and astonish the London
market yesterday.
Apart from slightly encouraging data on inflation there was nothing to
galvanise the market but maturities at the long end of the yield curve
powered ahead again with 25-year maturities up half a point on Friday's
close.
SWEDISH government bond investors were diverted by an SKr6.5bn auction of
10-year and six-year government bonds.
The 10-year bond was relatively well covered at 1.62 times achieving an
average accepted bid price of 112.02 and a yield of 8.39 per cent. The
six-year maturity was also tightly bid but traders said the cover of 1.45
times was disappointing.
US Treasury prices firmed slightly at the long end of the maturity range
yesterday as the market traded quietly before this week's important
inflation data.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  7/32 at 106
1/2 , yielding 6.618 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was unchanged at 100 9/32 , to yield 3.957 per cent.
Business was subdued throughout the day for two reasons. First, many traders
were absent, attending the annual Public Securities Association golf event
in New Jersey. Second, participants were reluctant to commit funds to the
market ahead of today's release of the June producer prices data and
tomorrow's release of the consumer prices figures. Analysts expect the data
to be bullish for bonds.
