FT  17 JUL 93 / Tricky feats at the top: Allegations of industrial espionage
are flying from GM to VW in a long and twisted tale
The story of Volkswagen and Adam Opel has taken on all the characteristics
of tales in the life of a circus: a rich mix of escapology, vanishing acts
and fire-eaters among the side-shows. On Thursday this week the waiting
audience was offered a tantalising glimpse of the show when a handful of the
players appeared in a Hamburg courtroom.
The occasion was a bid by the weekly magazine Der Spiegel to extricate
itself from a muzzle fitted by the court at Volkswagen's request. This was
to stop it publishing further allegations of industrial espionage against
the company's new production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua,
and some of his colleagues who followed him to VW from GM.
Mr Lopez was out of Germany. He, his colleagues and VW were represented by a
single lawyer. The magazine was backed by more than 20 witnesses, four from
the US, all of them from General Motors, prepared to back allegations and
their affidavits with testimony.
GM and Adam Opel, its German subsidiary, which have initiated criminal
investigations in Germany and the US on the basis of their suspicions that
Mr Lopez and his team stole confidential information before defecting to VW
in March, were not directly involved. The witnesses had come voluntarily,
officials stressed.
The effect was that of a hall of mirrors, the GM troupe flashed in and out
of view in the courthouse corridors, for once with nothing to say to the
media. There were glimpses of Volkswagen's case: extracts from affidavits
muttered by the company's lawyer. From the outset, VW has steadfastly
refused to answer questions on the accusations of industrial espionage. But
the Hamburg hearing, a sideshow to the main event - the direct clash between
VW and GM - offered startling insights into the core of the US group's legal
case, and uncomfortable reflections on Mr Lopez.
Ms Toni Simonetti, formerly an aide to Mr Lopez, testified he had dictated
to her a fulsome speech - a proclamation of 'love' for GM and its
people,intended as his explanation for staying in Detroit despite the lures
of Wolfsburg, where VW has it headquarters. Mr Lopez has repeatedly and
formally denied he had anything to do with the speech. Ms Simonetti picked
her way through her notebook: ' 'When I communicated position to leave to my
staff they cried. That broke my health',' she read. 'He meant heart . . .
this was broken English.'
Ms Simonetti may have noted 'overheard' comments, Mr Lopez's lawyer offered
on his behalf. No, said Ms Simonetti. Mr Lopez had made final adjustments to
the speech on the morning of March 15. But he was not there to read it, as
planned, that afternoon. He had disappeared only to turn up the next day as
production and purchasing director of Volkswagen.
The circus stopped in Hamburg this week after a journey which has so far
lasted almost 16 months. It started last spring in a small way as Mr Carl
Hahn, then-chairman of Volkswagen, Europe's biggest car maker, began
searching for his successor. He was to retire in December at what was to
prove a grim moment in his career.
Having taken over SEAT in Spain, Skoda in Czechoslovakia, and setting up an
assembly plant in China, all during the 1980s, he had built an
impressive-looking international group. But the structure was rickety.
Earnings evaporated. In the first quarter of this year, after an 87 per cent
profits plunge in 1992, the Volkswagen group showed a DM1.25bn ( deficit.
In March last year, Mr Hahn approached Mr Louis Hughes, then-chairman of
arch-rival Adam Opel, offering him the top VW job. Mr Hughes refused then
and again a month later. Shortly afterwards, he was appointed head of GM
Europe.
The job of VW chairman fell to Mr Ferdinand Piech, head of the luxury car
division, Audi. Although not at the time a member of the group's main board,
he was respected for his technical skills and building the Audi brand into a
fitting, though still small, rival to BMW and Mercedes-Benz. A grandson of
Ferdinand Porsche, the man who developed the VW Beetle, he had, they say,
'petrol in his blood'.
Even before he took charge at VW, Mr Piech was in talks with Mr Lopez. He
had found a soul mate. Like him, Mr Lopez was a brilliant engineer who
wanted a robust European motor industry, led by VW, able to repel Japanese.
But while Mr Piech was a cool Austrian, and vastly rich through his Porsche
family links, Mr Lopez was a volatile Basque of more humble origins, driven
by ambitions for political influence in his homeland. At the time, the only
apparent difficulty was that Mr Lopez worked for General Motors. In tribute
to his achievements in cutting costs at Adam Opel, mainly by squeezing price
cuts out of parts suppliers, that he had been moved to Detroit to work his
restorative magic on the ailing GM parent last year.
The circus, an overlapping succession of bizarre events, was about the
start. The two men had met secretly before Christmas, then again in the new
year. They deny anything was agreed then, although they have since agreed on
how they came together: through an intermediary, not, as Mr Piech told this
newspaper last month, through a direct approach from Mr Lopez.
In late February, officials of the Lower Saxony government, VW's largest
shareholder, let it be known that Mr Lopez was formally to be inducted as a
VW director on March 16. GM, meanwhile, which had already tried to 'buy' him
back by promoting him to group vice-president and global purchasing chief,
confidently announced: 'He is happy here and is staying here.'
On March 7 he flew to Frankfurt for a two-day meeting of GM's international
strategy board, where, according to Mr Jack Smith, group president, all
future products were to be discussed. These include a new Astra, Opel's
rival to the Golf, and a top-secret cheap mini-car. Some of the new models,
as emerged in Hamburg on Thursday, were on display, including the successor
to the Opel Vectra. Mr Smith: 'This was major stuff.'
Mr John Howell, director of business planning at GM Europe, told the Hamburg
court that on March 8, the first day of the meeting, after two long
presentations, Mr Lopez and other directors asked for copies of the papers
presented there. Mr Howell said he 'specifically remembered' giving Mr Lopez
a sheaf about 2cm thick. Mr Lopez has formally declared that he remembered
asking only for four or five charts - all relating to a secret new plant
project for GM, known as Plateau 6, on which he had worked for 18 months.
None of the documents has since been found, GM says.
It was at this strategy meeting that Mr Lopez learnt that Plateau 6 had been
earmarked for Hungary - if it was to be built - not his native Basque
country, even though it is understood he had arranged a deal with a local
consortium to pay for and construct the building.
It was also at the meeting, he said last month, that he lost his enthusiasm
for GM. He resigned two days later, on Thursday March 11. The next Sunday,
he was back on board at GM. Press officials announced he would give a press
conference at 1pm on Monday March 15.
According to Ms Simonetti's testimony, he dictated the outlines of his
'hello again' speech to her on the Saturday evening. According to her notes:
'One of the issues was the (Plateau 6) advanced manfacturing concept . . .
we're confident it can work . . . compensation was never an issue . . .
stronger level of commitment with regard to the plant in Spain . . . we must
match very good offer from VW.'
After amending a final draft on the Monday morning, he vanished and was
appointed to the VW board the next day.
Alarm bells rang in Detroit. An immediate search of his office failed to
turn up secret documents, including the 2cm wad Mr Howell said he had handed
over to him. A search on March 17 of offices occupied by Mr Jose Manuel
Gutierrez, Mr Lopez's closest colleague, for details of a top-secret diesel
engine allegedly in his possession (formally denied by Mr Gutierrez) was
also fruitless. Mr Gutierrez, on a GM business trip to Japan on that day,
also failed to return to Detroit.
But it was not until March 24 that GM revealed the scale of VW's coup: as
well as Mr Gutierrez, in charge of machinery buying, Mr Hugo van der Auwera,
metals purchasing, Mr Francisco Garcia, electrical parts buyer, and Mr Andre
Versteeg, a more junior buyer, had flown the coop. Two Adam Opel staff, Mr
Jose Alvarez and Mr Ramon Piazza, had also elected to join their former boss
in Wolfsburg. The searching began again.
On April 2 Opel won a court order barring VW from trying to lure more of its
key German staff. The company claimed that about 40 had been approached.
Some had been called by Mr Lopez and offered doubled salaries to defect.
However, Opel later failed in a bid to win an injunction preventing its
former employees for working at VW for a year. The court ruled that Mr
Lopez's 'charisma' had been responsible for their leaving.
On April 30, German prosecutors began investigating GM claims of industrial
espionage, despite claims from VW that none of its new employees made off
with secrets. Mr David Herman, new head of Opel: 'All we know is they had
them. We don't have them. If they don't have them, then where the hell are
they?'
A partial answer emerged earlier this month when state prosecution officials
discovered four large boxes of papers - including details of the top-secret
O-car, the vehicle to be built in the projected Plateau 6 plant - in a
Wiesbaden apartment with the names J Alvarez and R Piazza on the doorbell.
VW remains inscrutable, insisting none of its new employees have any GM
documents. Last Thursday, after the Hamburg judge said he would issue a
ruling on the Der Spiegel case, VW's lawyer challenged the confidentiality
of the disputed documents, although he has not seen them. He asked why it
should be unusual for senior executives to have secret information.
Yet there is no mistaking the mounting anticipation in the GM team. They are
convinced that investigating prosecutors at last have something in to which
to sink their teeth. Moreover, they feel it is nearly time for the
ringmaster to bring out the lions.
