FT  02 DEC 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Estonia's hot rock industry
shows its age - The republic's oil shale sector faces severe cost problems
Large black mounds dot the flat landscape along the southern Gulf of Finland
coast. These mountains of ash are sombre monuments to Estonia's oil shale
industry and the environmental damage it has inflicted on the area over the
past 70 years.
Ecological questions are less peripheral than they were under Soviet rule,
but the newly independent state is being forced to restructure its energy
sector in the face of mounting economic costs.
Thanks to oil shale, Estonia enjoys a measure of self-sufficiency rare among
former Soviet republics. The fossil fuel covers half the country's energy
needs, including all electricity demand, according to the International
Monetary Fund. Worryingly, however, output has been falling - from the
equivalent of 5m tonnes of oil in 1990 to 4.22m tonnes in 1992. The drop
would be even more marked but for sustained electricity exports to Latvia.
Age and inefficiency are the chief culprits at all three levels of
production: mining, retorting and upgrading.
Estonia's only natural resource, the oil-bearing rock, is mined at three
open pits and two underground mines near Kohtla Jarve, an hour's drive east
of Tallinn, the capital. Since the 1920s, plants have turned the fossil fuel
source into liquid fuel and electricity by retorting, or heating, and then
upgrading.
Because of high costs, the mines are not extracting fast enough to meet
demand. Imported explosives are too expensive, accounting for a full third
of all costs associated with oil shale production. Little can be done about
that, but the consultancy Arthur D. Little said in a recent study that costs
could be reduced by buying new machinery and selecting mining sites more
wisely.
The retorting operations, using ancient gas-generators, also desperately
need new equipment to improve efficiency. Normally, state-owed enterprises
would be privatised to do this, but the retorts are not hot items. 'They're
awful. Nobody will buy it,' says Mr Jaan Uustalu, of the Estonian ministry
of economics.
Instead the government plans to sell off subsidised divisions at two of the
three chemical factories, such as the ammonia and urea producing operations,
and keep profitable production of shale oil, the fuel product, in state
hands for another ten to 15 years. Shale oil production at present fails to
meet its profit potential, reckoned at around Dollars 60m a year, because
the other divisions eat the money.
Kivioli and Kohtla Jarve, the two plants, also face staff reductions. The
larger Kohtla Jarve plant, with 3,500 employees, would ideally have to lay
off half the employees to be profitable, according to Mr Uustalu.
Kivioli is starting to move into the black after recently cutting its
workforce from 2,500 to 1,100. The small plant's advantages are
illustrative: it operates 400 tonne retorts, rather than the 1,000 tonne
units used at Kohtla Jarve, to get better yields and higher quality of shale
oil and to use less energy.
The broader economic question, hotly debated in Estonia, revolves around
price. Since spring producers have pressed for a rise in the state-set lump
oil shale price, which is below cash flow minimums needed by the mines. The
government did raise the price from EKr36 to EKr45 a tonne on October 21,
but only after pressure from Eesti Energia, the state electricity company.
Mr Uustalu estimates that, to reflect true cost, the price must go up to
EKr65 per tonne. But the government fears this might stoke inflation. The
latest increase electricity raised costs by some 27 per cent, compared with
an inflation rate of just 5.6 per cent.
The processing factories are also worried. Arthur D Little found Kivioli
could afford to buy oil shale at prices up to EKr110.5 a tonne but Kohtla
Jarve would be forced into bankruptcy if the price was set at EKr65 a tonne.
At current low prices, however, the industry as a whole suffers. Declining
output hurts lucrative exports: on the world market, shale oil fetches
Dollars 75 a tonne, raised to Dollars 105 a tonne in Rotterdam by the
inclusion of transport costs.
More importantly, if mined and processed correctly, oil shale could help
make up for the drop in Russian oil imports by supplying at least a quarter
of domestic fuel needs, up from below 20 per cent today. Last year Finland
helped the country through the tough winter with a 100,000-tonne delivery of
heating oil, but Estonia needs a more fecund domestic fuel industry.
Western governments are equally, if not more, worried about the high
environmental cost. Oil shale mining has left a legacy of pollution around
Kohtla Jarve with an estimated 350m tonnes of untreated water pumped out of
the mines annually. The Purtse River is biologically dead and local bathers
recount coming out of area streams covered with black ash.
The large ash mounds are another a problem: they have a 10 per cent organic
content, which slowly leaks out.
Finland allotted FMr37.4m (Dollars 6.5m) last year to help ease
environmental problems in Estonia, oil shale pollution chief among them. But
no active cleaning operation is under way. 'Everyone's there looking at it
and thinking about it. The hotels are happy", comments an Estonian
government official.
The last, less discussed, alternative would leave the oil shale in the
ground until the price went up or a less costly way was found to develop
Estonia's unique resource. But few in Tallinn can afford such patience.
