FT  20 FEB 93 / Finance and the Family: The Week Ahead
IMPERIAL Chemical Industries, the UK's largest manufacturer, reports its
preliminary year-end results on Thursday and grim reading they will make.
Hoare Govett expects ICI to report fourth-quarter pre-tax profits of only
Pounds 27m, making a total of Pounds 550m for the year. That compares with
Pounds 843m in 1991 and the peak of Pounds 1.5bn in 1989. But the poor
results will be immaterial compared with the announcement of the board's
decision whether to split ICI in two. The aim is to make Zeneca, the
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and specialities subsidiaries, into a
separately quoted company.
SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American drugs and consumer products company,
reports preliminary year-end results on Tuesday. Analysts expect pre-tax
profits to increase up to 13 per cent to between Pounds 1.11bn and Pounds
1.125bn, against Pounds 1bn a year earlier.
British Aerospace expects to see a revival in 1993 following a year in which
its performance was undermined by Pounds 1bn of provisions. Hopes for a
return to profit, however, will do nothing to soften the impact of its
preliminary results on Wednesday. These are likely to show losses of about
Pounds 1.1bn compared with losses of Pounds 81m a year earlier.
Restructuring charges of Pounds 950m in the regional aircraft division have
been blamed largely for the hole, although prospects look brighter following
last month's Saudi order for Tornadoes.
The mild weather and new regulatory regime imposed by Ofgas is likely to be
reflected in the final results for British Gas. The company is expected to
announce on Thursday that profits have slipped to around Pounds 900m
compared with a Pounds 1.16bn last time.
Increased competition and lower prices for domestic gas sales may also
reduce the company's scope for a substantial increase in dividend. A pay-out
of about 14p is expected, against 13.4p last year. The company's shares,
meanwhile, are likely to remain under pressure while the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission carries out a wide-ranging review of its business.
Royal Dutch Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil company, will report its preliminary
year-end results on Thursday when a small increase in profits is expected of
up to Pounds 3bn compared with Pounds 2.89bn for 1991. The company is likely
to raise its dividend in line with inflation to about 22p from 20.9p last
time.
Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch food and consumer products group, is expected to
report on Tuesday that pre-tax profits for the full year burst through the
Pounds 2bn barrier, an improvement of about 13 per cent on the previous
year's Pounds 1.79bn. Although flattered by the impact of sterling's
devaluation in the final quarter, the results are likely also to reflect
strong progress in south east Asia and parts of Latin America, and a
recovery in North America after a poor performance the previous year.
