FT  24 MAR 93 / Survey of Czech Republic (3): Architect of economic reform -
Vaclav Klaus
VACLAV KLAUS, the Czech prime minister, is the only political survivor among
the trio of central European finance ministers who emerged from academic
obscurity after the collapse of communism in 1989 to become the architects
of radical, market-based economic reform.
Poland's Leszek Balcerowicz, exhausted by the strain of piloting his
pioneering crash reform programme through the uncharted shoals of transition
politics, has returned to academic life. Mihaly Kupa, the Hungarian finance
minister, has just been replaced by a more overtly political figure. Only Mr
Klaus remains at the helm, but with greater powers and wider
responsibilities.
Beneath the tan of a weekend's skiing in the mountains close to Prague,
however, the strain of masterminding Czechoslovakia's economic reform,
followed by months of gruelling political divorce negotiations with Vladimir
Meciar, his Slovak counterpart, have deepened the lines on his face and
turned his hair silver-grey.
Increasingly exasperated by what the punctilious economist saw as the
sentimental vagueness and intellectual inconsistency of many post-communist
politicians, his rise to the pinnacle of Czech politics began in October
1990 when he became chairman of the Democratic Forum, the anti-communist
umbrella movement which emerged from the November 1989 'velvet revolution'.
Four months later the Forum split into its various ideological components,
marking the end of Czechoslovakia's brief, post-revolutionary romantic
period. Mr Klaus emerged from the split as leader of the newly-formed Civic
Democratic Party (ODS) with his reputation as an irascible opponent of
perestroika-type muddled thinking reinforced. The clear and unambiguous goal
of his new party was to make market reform irreversible and provide a
political home for the aspirant middle class.
For months Mr Klaus barnstormed the country, also appearing regularly on
television and writing a weekly column which explained the basic principles
of market economics and their relevance to the Czechoslovak situation. He
threw his weight behind the privatisation process and made a special effort
to gain support from the young.
Nearly 8.5m Czechs and Slovaks went into the June 1992 elections owning
privatisation vouchers bearing his signature as finance minister. Not all
voucher holders voted for Mr Klaus. But enough did to make the ODS the
biggest party in the Czech republic.
Significantly Mr Klaus, whose wife is a Slovak, was the only political
leader, apart from Miroslav Sladek, the neo-fascist republican party leader,
to canvass support in both halves of the then Czechoslovak federal republic.
But the ODS picked up few votes in Slovakia where the lion's share went to
Vladimir Meciar and his nationalist Movement for a Democratic Slovakia
(HSZD).
From that moment the Slovak question dominated politics in both halves of
the federal state originally founded after the post-1918 dissolution of the
Habsburg empire.
Sitting in his large, sparsely furnished office in the former federal
government headquarters Mr Klaus angrily rejects accusations that the
divorce creating two independent republics on January 1 was essentially the
product of secret diplomacy between the two leaders whose potential
long-term effects had never been thought through.
'It was the result of dozens of meetings at various levels, involving at
times the whole government or parts of government. The process was un-secret
and un-private. All the decisions - about separate currencies, monetary
reform and dozens of other issues - were made at government level, ratified
by the parliaments and contained in 35 treaties covering all eventualities,'
he says.
'The most important issue now is to complete a split which was not initiated
by us or in our interests,' he adds to deflect any suggestion that the
Slovaks were manoeuvred into a divorce which will be costly for both sides,
but particularly for the Slovaks who are losing an indirect subsidy of
around Dollars 700m annually from Prague.
'The real issue now is to maintain the level of trade. Everything else,
disputes over property and the like, is a trifle,' he adds. More than 40 per
cent of Slovakia's trade is with the Czech Republic, and until now
Bratislava has run an estimated CzK20bn annual deficit. 'Now this deficit
has to be financed or eliminated. But every 10 per cent drop in trade
translates into a 1 per cent fall in Czech GDP and twice that for the
Slovaks with their smaller economy. We hope they will be able to prevent a
vicious circle developing, but trade could fall by 30-40 per cent,' Mr Klaus
warns.
Meanwhile, the slowdown in the German economy causes further concern given
the importance of trade and proximity to the Czech Republic. These negative
factors to the east and west of the new state place a question mark over
hopes for GNP growth this year and prospects for achieving a balanced
budget.
Mr Klaus insists, however, that a slowdown in economic development will not
affect ongoing reforms designed to make Czech laws and institutions fully
compatible with European Community standards. 'Within two or three years the
Czech Republic will be like a standard EC country. We already have a
multi-party, parliamentary democracy and an economy which will then be
comparable in a systemic way and more liberalised than many European
countries.'
Ideally, Mr Klaus would like to be admitted into the EC club at that point.
But, with a shrug and a wry smile, he acknowledges: 'We will be prepared for
entry before the EC is ready to accept us.'
