FT  13 APR 93 / Pleas to curb South African violence
SOUTH AFRICAN political leaders yesterday struggled to contain violent
reaction to the assassination of prominent black activist Mr Chris Hani.
Condemnation of the killing from across the political spectrum, coupled with
pleas for restraint from black political leaders, helped to limit the
violence.
Mr Eugene Terre'blanche, leader of the right-wing Afrikaner Weerstands
Beweging (AWB), while confirming that the alleged assassin was an AWB
member, condemned the killing as 'atrocious' over the weekend.
Meanwhile, the African National Congress attempted to channel black anger
into an organised campaign of mass protest action, due to begin today. But
the danger that activists will fail to heed their call was illustrated
yesterday when black gunmen opened fire on police and journalists during a
rally in the Katlehong black township east of Johannesburg, one of several
gatherings held to protest at the assassination of Mr Hani.
The mass action campaign is due to culminate with the funeral of Mr Hani,
which is likely to be one of the largest political events in South African
history. No date has yet been set for the funeral.
ANC leaders made clear that negotiations would continue in spite of the
murder. They issued a statement urging respect for whites and condemning
racial attacks. 'It is true that the person who pulled the trigger that
killed Hani is white . . . equally true is that a white person informed the
police of the registration and the colour of the car that his murderer used
and led to his arrest. Therefore colour does not play a role in this
instance,' the statement said.
Several townships near Johannesburg were reported tense yesterday, with
looting and cars burned, but protests appeared to be under control by
evening.
The worst incident of apparent reaction came when blacks in a township near
Cape Town burned to death three white men who had visited an illegal
drinking establishment on Sunday. Attackers cut off part of the tongue of
one of the men. Police said there was no evidence that the killings were
directly connected to the Hani assassination, but they probably reflect
worsening racial tensions.
ANC Youth League officials called for armed attacks on whites at one
township rally but ANC headquarters deplored the call. Mass protests begin
today with a picket at the Boksburg magistrate's court, where the alleged
assassin, Mr Janusz Walus, is due to appear. Police said they will charge Mr
Walus, a Polish immigrant to South Africa, with Mr Hani's murder.
Mr Walus appears to have links with organised white extremist groups, though
no such group has claimed responsibility. He had a hit-list of 'eight or
nine' assassination targets, including leaders of the ANC, the ruling
National party and Hani's South African Communist party. The weapon used in
the murder was stolen by white-supremacist Piet Rudolf three years ago from
Air Force headquarters in Pretoria.
Signs of resilience in a fragile society, Page 14
