FT  03 DEC 93 / Survey of Japanese Industry (12): Fresh approach to
automation - Construction Industry
Japan's general contractors have earned a lot of recognition in recent years
with the development of construction site robots. These mechanical wonders
can roam construction sites spraying fireproofing and finishing concrete
floors. There is only one problem.
'They have not proven very cost effective,' says Mr Yasuo Fujinami, deputy
general manager for technology at Taisei Corporation.
Undaunted by a false start, the industry is taking a new approach to
mechanising construction sites. Rather than automate individual tasks, the
focus is now on systems that attempt to turn construction sites into
factories for the assembly of prefabricated components. Rather than showcase
the latest in robots, the systems are designed to optimise the mix of
computer control, automation, mechanical innovations and plain old manual
labour.
Shimizu's Smart System, for example, is now in use for the first time on a
20-story, 20,665 sq m office building in Nagoya. After completing the
foundations, what will become the top floor and roof of the building were
erected on top of four jacking towers. Suspended from this structure is a
network of rail cranes and trolley hoists that can deliver a load to any
point on the floor below. The hoists also travel on a vertical lift erected
alongside the building to bring material from ground level.
A computer housed on the top floor controls all these hoists and cranes and
can place steel beams and columns, precast floor sections, wall panels and
other building components following programmed instructions. As the building
is erected, the four jacking towers push up the top floor and then lift
their own bases from floor to floor.
Rather than rely on sensors for precise positioning, joints have ingeniously
detailed slots and plates that mechanically guide beams and columns into
final position. Once in place, clamps on the hoist cables release
automatically. This all means that once a human rigger attaches the cables
to a steel member at ground level, the system can erect it without further
human help. In actual practice, however, a control room operator using video
monitors and a spotter on the working level watch the hoists as they
position their loads.
The closest thing to an actual robot is a welding machine, but even this is
not fully automated. An operator must set it in place and start it manually.
But then it uses sensors and programmed instructions to make the correct
weld. Shimizu figures that one operator can tend two machines.
Yasuyoshi Miyatake, who led the development of the system for Shimizu, says
the system allowed them to cut their erection crew from 20 to 13. With
additional labour savings from prefabrication, they figure a 30 per cent
reduction in the man hours needed to complete the building. 'Eventually, we
think we can make that 50 per cent,' Mr Miyatake says.
Virtually all of Japan's leading contractors have their own systems, either
in their first use or under development. They all follow the same theme but
have individual variations. In Taisei's T-Up system, the staging platform
surrounds and hangs from the steel for the central core of the building. Two
cranes on top of the platform erect the core steel while two cranes
suspended beneath the platform erect the surrounding steel. Taisei figures
running four cranes simultaneously will allow them to cut the construction
period of a 33-story 111,000 sq m office tower it is building in Yokohama
from 30 to 24 months.
The increased productivity and shorter construction periods have not shown
up on the bottom line. Shimizu and Taisei both say use of the systems did
not result in lower contract prices for owners. For one thing they have to
recover their development costs. Shimizu figures the hardware alone,
developed in co-operation with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, cost Y1,000m.
More importantly, the focus of the industry's automation efforts is not
reducing costs but cutting labour requirements. Although less of a crisis
with the current recession, the industry still faces a labour shortage, with
young workers, especially, avoiding the construction trades.
The industry first attempted to counter this by automating hard or dangerous
tasks. Mr Yukio Hasegawa, who heads a construction robot research programme
at Waseda University, says the industry was naive, dreaming up robots far
more sophisticated than anything developed for manufacturing. He says
contractors and equipment makers have developed more than 100 types of
construction robots. 'But very few of them are actually used,' he says. They
have proven difficult to adapt to the variety of conditions on construction
sites.
A similar challenge faces the new systems. So far, the systems have only
been applied to buildings that are tall and relatively square in plan. To be
practical, the gains from the increased productivity and speed have to
offset the time and effort required to set the systems in place.
Mr Takanobu Kumano, a manager in Taisei's technology division, says the
lower limit for their system is probably about 30 stories. This means that
out of the hundreds of buildings the company takes on each year, there are
only seven or eight that could use their system.
Despite present limitations, Roozbeh Kangari, associate professor of civil
engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology, believes the industry is now
taking the right approach: looking at the overall process to see where
mechanisation makes sense and where it doesn't. Mr Kangari spent a year in
Japan studying Shimizu's mechanisation efforts.
Mr Takayoshi Sato, a general manager for Tokyo-based Futaba Quantity
Surveying, says that rather than concentrating high-tech systems on a few
projects, greater gains could come from spreading the use of standardised
and prefabricated components throughout the industry. Mr Sato says the
widespread use of such components in the US and Europe makes site labour
there more productive, despite generally higher wage rates.
The contractors recognise the need to extend the systems to a wider range of
buildings. Shimizu's Mr Miyatake says their next challenge is to apply the
concept to low-rise offices. And in typical Japanese fashion, they are
already improving system performance. After erecting a couple of floors of
steel, they modified the control software, cutting from 400 seconds to 200
seconds the time it takes for a hoist to traverse the rail crane network.
