FT  27 JAN 93 / Parliament and Politics: MPs divided over fate of coal pits
THE FATE of the 31 threatened coal pits was still in the balance last night
as MPs preparing a cross-party report on the industry battled behind closed
doors to agree a rescue.
Amid rising tension between some Tory and Labour members, the Commons trade
and industry committee was still struggling late last night towards a
compromise package that could save between 15 and 20 pits.
Last night's hard bargaining focused on the size of the extra market for
domestic coal that could be justified and details of the restructuring
measures that should be recommended to achieve it. The committee aims to
publish its final report on Friday.
Labour MPs were holding out for a blueprint that would allow an extra 20m
tonnes - equivalent to saving 20 or 21 pits - to be produced above a planned
output of 40m in the year beginning in April this year. That would probably
require a first-year subsidy of Pounds 380m, or more than Pounds 6 a tonne.
Some of the Labour group, reluctant to be associated with a report that
sealed the fate of any pits, were also pressing for the remaining 10 to 11
mines to be kept going in the short term on a 'rape and pillage' basis,
under which accessible seams would be plundered as cheaply as possible
without worrying about long-term prospects.
The Conservative camp, meanwhile, was arguing that a case could be made for
an additional market of only 15m tonnes - equivalent to 15 pits. This, it is
widely suggested, would be enough to satisfy sufficient prospective Tory
rebels to protect the government's 21-strong Commons majority.
Though the future of the pits does not rest with the committee alone, its
findings - if it can agree a unanimous report - will be a strong influence
on Mr Michael Heseltine as he prepares his own solution to the controversy
which began with the announcement of the closures last October.
The trade and industry secretary used an appearance on BBC television
yesterday to emphasise that subsidies to British Coal would fall in the year
ahead no matter how the UK energy market was re-organised.
'We are subsidising British Coal today to the tune of Pounds 1bn a year,' Mr
Heseltine said.
'If they are to find a larger market there will need to be some form of
subsidy, but it would be a smaller subsidy than that which we are paying
today; the issue is how much smaller and over what period.'
In the Commons, Mr John Smith chose coal as his theme for prime minister's
questions. He said it was 'little short of astonishing that even now
ministers do not accept the crisis arises from the botched privatisation of
the electricity industry and not from any weakness in the British mining
industry'.
Roared on by backbenchers, the Labour leader said coal's crisis arose
directly from the 'rigging' of the energy market and urged the government to
accept that reform of the market to allow coal to compete fairly was 'the
crucial and overriding issue'.
'What both the industry and the nation needs is not some short-term fix to
save the government's face, but reform of the electricity market to allow
British miners to compete fairly,' Mr Smith said.
Standing in for prime minister John Major, Mr Tony Newton, leader of the
Commons, retorted that the coal sector's problems stemmed rather from a
long-term decline in demand for its products.
Mr Doug Hoyle, Labour MP for Warrington North, said that any energy review
should not look at short term market forces but at future demand for coal,
which would become increasingly competitive.
Mr Newton said Mr Heseltine's review would be 'very thorough' and would not
simply look at the short term.
'It is taking account of reports by committees of the House and wide ranging
reports by independent consultants.' The results would be announced 'in due
course as appropriate'.
