FT  24 JUN 93 / Survey of Istanbul and the Olympics (6): The stuff films are
made of - Champion weightlifter may be too old to compete in 2000
POUND for pound, Naim Suleymanoglu is almost certainly the strongest man in
the world. The 'Pocket Hercules', as the Turks affectionately have dubbed
him, is unofficial mascot for Turkey's bid to host the 2000 Games.
Suleymanoglu, the world champion weightlifter, is a great favourite in
Turkey. A two times Olympic gold medallist and currently the world record
holder in all three categories at his weight - 'snatch', 'jerk' and the
'combined lifts', Suley- manoglu stands, metaphor- ically at least, 'head
and shoulders' above his rivals in the sport.
Today he enjoys the sort of hero status that Turks normally reserve for
their football idols. And if Turkish newspapers are to be believed, he has
adopted the glitzy lifestyle of football stars, too.
'Whatever they say, he came back in 1992 and in my book that's what makes
him such a great champion,' says Cuneyt Koryurek, Turkey's leading sports
writer.
Suleymanoglu is only 1.53m (5 foot) tall, and weighs 60kg (9st 6lb), or at
least that was his weight at the last Olympics in Barcelona. 'The strange
thing about this sport, is that unlike other events you lose weight when you
lay off competing,' he says during an interview in the garden of the sports
writers' club in Ankara.
His story should be the stuff films are made of. A Bulgarian by birth, he
was a member of the country's troubled Turkish minority, from Ptichar, a
mountainous area populated by ethnic Turks.
His father worked down the mines. He was also just 5 foot tall, his mother
who worked in a greenhouse was only 4 feet 7 1/2 inches.
Naim Suleimanov, to use the Bulgarian spelling of his name, was in some ways
a classic product of East Bloc sporting culture. As a boy, he was spotted by
the Bulgarian sports authorities, and was later favoured with his own
apartment and a monthly allowance. He was quick to reveal his class, winning
his first international competition at the age of 14, when he came to within
5 1/2 pounds of beating the adult world record for combined lifts.
But his arrival as a sportsman in the early 1980s coincided with an
unpleasant government campaign aimed at forcibly assimilating his community.
Mosques were closed down. Religious holidays were outlawed and the use of
Turkish banned and religious clothing forbidden.
Suleymanoglu himself had his passport withdrawn and his name changed to Naum
Shalamanov. After criticising the government while competing in a tournament
in Vienna, he was forced to recant on national television.
Having already been approached on earlier trips abroad by Bulgarian
defectors, his own eventual defection was only a matter of time.
While attending a team banquet in Melbourne, Australia, after the World Cup
competition, he slipped out to the washroom and did not return, holing up
for four days before presenting himself at the Turkish consulate to ask for
asylum.
If there was little international comment, in Turkey he became a cause
celebre. Turgut Ozal, then prime minister, sent his private jet to London to
collect the weightlifter. On arrival in Turkey, Suleymanoglu knelt down and
kissed the tarmac.
Ozal was 'more like a father to me,' Suleymanoglu now says of the former
Turkish president who died in April.
Suleymanoglu did not disappoint his new patron. Two years after defecting,
he competed at the Seoul Olympics and broke the snatch world record with
just his second lift, breaking it again with his third. According to the
authoritative Complete Book of the Olympics, 'his combined total was larger
than that of the winner in the lightweight division and his best lifts in
both the snatch and jerk were greater than those of Paul Anderson when he
won the heavyweight division in 1956. At that time, Anderson weighed 303
pounds. Suleymanoglu in 1988 weighed 132.'
There are rules which state that an athlete who changes his nationality
cannot compete at international level for his new country for three years,
unless permission is secured from his former country. Sofia eventually
granted a waiver after the Turkish government paid over Dollars 1m.
Suleymanoglu also undertook to refrain from criticising the Zhivkov
administration.
For all that, this world champion sportsman still cannot return to Bulgaria,
despite the overthrow of the hated Zhivkov regime, and despite the financial
settlement. Two months ago he applied for a visa to compete in Sofia and was
told he would have have to wait 15 years before the authorities would lift
the ban. The Bulgarian Sports Writers Association is now taking up his case
in the courts in Sofia.
Asked today why he chooses to live in Ankara, not Istanbul, Suleymanoglu's
reply is diplomatic: 'One loses a grip on oneself in Istanbul, so I try to
keep away from the place.'
When not working out, he is completing his studies at the Gazi University in
Ankara, doing a volleyball course - perhaps an odd choice for someone of his
Lilliputian proportions.
Now 26, he will probably be too old to compete, should Istanbul get the
Games in 2000, although nothing is ruled out.
'Of course if Istanbul did get it, it would be out of this world. But I'm a
sportsman and it's not my business to promote the Games,' he says, although
he does admit to having signed a few pairs of shorts for the cause.
