FT  26 MAR 93 / Britain moves to attract GM engine plant
GENERAL MOTORS, the US-based vehicle maker, is considering the UK as the
location for a diesel engine plant in an investment that could total more
than Pounds 200m.
But Britain is facing stiff competition from several other potential
European sites for one of the largest inward investment projects planned in
the west European automotive industry. As part of a campaign to have the
plant built in the UK, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
held talks earlier this week in London with Mr Louis Hughes, president of
General Motors Europe and GM's executive vice-president for international
operations.
Earlier this year a team of officials from the department of trade and
industry visited GM Europe's headquarters in Zurich to press the UK's case.
Mr William Ebbert, chairman and managing director of Vauxhall, the UK
subsidiary of GM, said yesterday the attractiveness of the UK was being
hampered by its uncompetitive grant aid regime.
'Current UK grants do not compete with the kind of support being offered by
our European neighbours,' he said. 'We want to see a stronger UK
manufacturing base and the government could help to attract inward
investment through a more liberal approach to the grant system.'
The government has told GM that the UK has significant advantages compared
with the rest of western Europe, including lower labour costs, favourable
corporate taxation, an expanding components supply base and more flexible
labour practices outside the proposed social chapter of the Maastricht
Treaty.
Mr Hughes said GM was planning investments in new capacity for diesel
engines and multi-valve petrol engines in the mid to late 1990s. 'We must
find the most efficient way of making these investments. We are looking now
where is the most cost-efficient place,' he said.
It is expected that the diesel engine plant would have a capacity to produce
200,000-300,000 engines a year.
GM has already started to invest more heavily in the UK and last year
started production at its new Pounds 193m engine plant at Ellesmere Port,
where it will have capacity to produce 135,000 V6 engines a year. Ellesmere
Port would also be the likely location for the diesel engine plant.
Vauxhall said yesterday it had failed to gain UK grant aid for the V6 engine
plant through a misunderstanding of the UK aid regime, which had cost it as
much as Pounds 30m.
Vauxhall results, Page 22
