FT  14 DEC 93 / UK Company News: SB wins UK approval for anti-viral drug
SmithKline Beecham has launched itself into a new and potentially lucrative
healthcare field with the approval in the UK of famciclovir, its anti-viral
drug.
It has been granted a licence from the UK Department of Health to market the
compound under the trade name Famvir for the treatment of herpes zoster,
better known as shingles.
It will allow SmithKline Beecham to challenge the effective monopoly in
anti-viral drugs held by Wellcome, its UK rival.
The business is currently dominated by Zovirax, Wellcome's best selling drug
with annual sales of more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m).
Famvir would go on sale to doctors 'early next year', said SmithKline.
The company would not comment on the pricing of the drug, which has to
secure approvals in all the world's main drug markets to ensure its ultimate
success.
It has submitted famciclovir in more than 20 countries, with US approval
likely next year. About 40 per cent of world sales of Zovirax are in the US;
the UK accounts for about 5 per cent.
SmithKline Beecham is also seeking approval for the use of famciclovir in
treating conditions other than shingles.
Less than one third of Zovirax sales are used in the treatment of shingles;
the rest goes on herpes of the face and trunk, genital herpes and chicken
pox.
Although Zovirax has effectively had a monopoly in the anti-viral market,
this is about to change.
Patents on the drug begin to expire this year, although they remain in force
until 1997 in the US, which accountsfor almost half of total sales.
Wellcome has already launched over-the-counter versions of Zovirax as part
of an attempt to forestall the effect of competition from generic
competition.
Glaxo and Warner-Lambert of the US yesterday confirmed that they have signed
agreements under which they will form a joint venture to develop and market
over-the-counter versions of Glaxo's prescription drugs.
The joint venture will initially concentrate on developing Zantac, the ulcer
treatment that has been the world's best selling drug for several years, for
the non-prescription market.
OTC Zantac would probably be sold as a treatment for stomach upsets and will
be submitted in 1995 to the US Food and Drug Administration for approval.
