FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (2): On the way to
unmanned check-outs / A look at the latest information technology available
to supermarkets
CUSTOMERS passing through a check-out at most big supermarkets spark off a
chain of stock-taking, ordering, invoicing and payment activities in which
they and the check-out operator are the only human elements. Many retail
industry specialists believe that in the next decade the human element could
be reduced to the customers. Ultimately even their physical involvement
could be eliminated.
Computer technology and the trading information it provides have helped make
some of the most advanced users - Marks and Spencer, J Sainsbury, Tesco and
Safeway - the top four retailers in terms of operating profit per square
foot of shop floor space.
Tesco, for example, captures data about sales of individual items as those
sales are made. Scanners at check-outs and other sales points record the
data from bar codes. Overnight a central computer telephones each store
computer to collect the day's data. This brings stock files up to date and
computer programs then decide whether new orders are needed. Programs also
work out the deliveries needed the next day by each store.
All the leading chains now use electronic data interchange (EDI): the
exchange of business documents such as orders and invoices over
telecommunications lines between computers.
Tesco, an EDI pioneer, now trades electronically with more than 1,200
companies of all sizes, representing more than 95 per cent of products on
its shelves. Half these suppliers send their invoices to Tesco by EDI. Tesco
has also used EDI to forge close business relationships with a quarter of
them, sending 13-week sales forecasts to help them schedule production and
reduce stocks - thus keeping their own costs and prices down.
The benefits over the past six years have been so great that Tesco no longer
measures them against the costs.
'We've reduced stock levels yet improved stock availability and sales; cut
lead times on orders; cut administration; and improved communication with
our suppliers,' says Mr Dave MacInnis, stock management director.
'The EDI costs are absolutely negligible. They are covered by our savings on
the phone, fax and mail. That means we have all the business benefits for
nothing.'
The daily gathering of sales data on each store means orders can be placed
on Tesco's eight warehouses as close as possible to the time the items will
be sold. Supermarkets therefore need only minimal stocks, so they have more
space for sales shelves.
All this is made possible by the simple gathering of data at the check-out.
The next step for retailers could be to eliminate the people who operate the
bar code scanners and let the customers unwittingly become unpaid data entry
operators.
This is already happening in unmanned petrol filling stations in parts of
the US and Scandinavia. The system accepts a card and switches on the pump.
It records the account details and the amount of fuel taken, thus capturing
both payment and stock control data.
Such schemes have raised interest in the idea of unmanned check-outs in
supermarkets, with customers inserting money or payment cards in a machine
and passing their purchases through a scanner.
Unmanned check-outs are still very much in their infancy, with only a
handful of pilot trials in the US.
The ultimate step would be to remove not only the check-out operators from
the shops but also the customers. They would shop from home using computer
terminals, typically based on the family television set equipped with a
keyboard and connected over the domestic telephone line to a retailer's
computer. Systems based on videotex systems such as the UK's Prestel have
been set up but they have not had mass audiences.
Neither shoppers nor retailers really want home shopping, according to Tony
Naudi, a consultant at Martec International, a retail industry research,
consultancy and training firm based in Taunton.
'The technology is there but trials have never got anywhere,' he says.
'People like going to the shops and handling the goods. More important,
retailers want them in the shops: a large percentage of items are bought on
impulse, so the more a retailer can get customers to handle his goods, the
more chance he has of selling them.
'In addition, the proportion of older people is increasing and for many
going shopping and mixing with other people is one of their few sources of
companionship.'
A compromise between going shopping and using home shopping technology is
starting to emerge.
The development of multimedia systems, combining text, video and sound on a
personal computer, has seen the introduction of units which customers use
themselves, typically by touching the screen to call up information. This
might include details of products on show in the store or which can be
ordered, or information about warranties, special offers and credit
facilities.
The Sears chain is a pioneer in this field in the UK. Seven of its nine new
Pride &amp; Joy stores for expectant mothers are equipped with IBM PS/2 personal
computers with touch-sensitive screens which act as electronic catalogues.
Many products are physically on display, so customers can see and handle
them, but the multimedia catalogues enable stores to show and describe big
items such as nursery furniture in strongly promotional ways without needing
expensive floor space: each store is no more than 2,000 square feet. The
terminals also advise on things such as what to take to hospital and how to
decorate a nursery.
The technology is available today for all these possibilities. But there is
no clear picture yet of what - if anything - will replace the daily social
visit to the corner shop, the weekly trip to the supermarket or the family
outing to the furniture superstore.
'There are many projects going on and retailers are interested in anything
that helps part consumers from their money,' says Tony Naudi at Martec
International. 'But retailers are very hard-nosed business people: unless
something increases sales, they will not take it up, no matter how clever
the technology might be.'
