FT  13 FEB 93 / Spain cuts rates by a quarter point
THE BANK of Spain yesterday cut its benchmark intervention rate by a
quarter-point from 13.25 per cent to 13 per cent in a cautious response to
last week's reduction in German interest rates.
There was disappointment in the market, which had hoped for a cut of 40
basis points in the rate at the repurchase tender of the bank's
certificates.
The bank's caution reflected its view that there could be tension in the
monetary system in the run-up to next month's elections in France. 'There
are imponderables ahead and we are keeping our powder dry,' a bank spokesman
said.
'It is quite clear that the bank's policy is to protect the peseta against
even the slightest risk,' said Mr Jose Luis Feito, chief economist at the
Madrid securities firm Asesores Bursatiles.
Other analysts also said the authorities were reluctant to move too quickly
while the peseta remained potentially vulnerable to speculators. They said
the move was probably a way of testing the water on cuts and their impact on
the peseta, noting interest rates are still well above desireable levels.
The bank's wariness, particularly in the light of the German reduction,
contrasted with its more positive mood three weeks ago when it implemented a
half-point cut at the repurchase tender, bringing the key rate down from its
13.75 per cent high in late November. The bank justified that cut by
claiming 'the progressive normalisation of the currency markets'.
The cut yesterday brought the key interest rate back to the level before the
Bank of Spain lifted the rate by 75 basis points to 13.75 per cent, a day
after the peseta was devalued six per cent on November 22.
Analysts believe that there could be a far more significant cut in Spain
next month if the money markets remain steady and the Bundesbank once more
eases its rates. There is considerable room for such a reduction as the
differential between the peseta and other EMS currencies remains very high.
Fuelling this speculation is the belief that Spain's inflation rate, which
stood at 5.4 per cent in December, is poised to register a sharp fall when
figures for January and February are published next month. The January
inflation figure has been held over until March because weighting of the
different components in the inflation index is being adjusted by the
statistics authorities.
