FT  10 MAY 93 / Indian scandal blamed on lax bank management
THE RESERVE Bank of India, the country's central bank, in a final report on
last year's Rs40.2bn (Pounds 806m) securities market scandal blames lax bank
management for the affair.
Inadequate internal audits and inspections allowed irregular links to
develop between banks and stockbrokers in the securities market, says the
report, which was published in two parts at the weekend. Those responsible
for controlling business operations chose not to probe too deeply, says the
central bank.
The report says that while the Reserve Bank checked banks for asset quality
and bad debt provisions, it perhaps paid too little attention to the
activities of bank treasuries, the units primarily responsible for
securities market investments.
The scandal, which erupted in April last year, prompted the resignation of a
cabinet minister, the arrest of about 20 people, and big losses for some
banks, including Standard Chartered of the UK.
The latest Reserve Bank report mostly concerns facts already made public in
four previous reports and in evidence given to a parliamentary committee
which has separately been probing the affair. However, the report adds
several new names to the list of banks accused of carrying out irregular
transactions, including Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. The
report alleges that Hongkong Bank in its portfolio management services -
investment accounts which were used to invest funds in securities on behalf
of clients - infringed the rules under which such accounts were to be
operated.
The report makes recommendations on future regulation, saying tighter
supervision is needed in the interbank securities market, especially of
forward transactions and of the use of bankers' receipts, which are
instruments issued by banks representing securities which they hold. It also
recommends stricter supervision of brokers permitted to enter the interbank
market and higher standards of book-keeping, audit and inspection.
