FT  08 OCT 93 / International Company News: Roche sees profits growth as
9-month sales rise 11%
ROCHE, which has just surpassed Merck of the US to become the world's most
highly valued pharmaceutical group, has reported an 11 per cent rise in
sales in the first nine months of the year, to SFr10.7bn (Dollars 7.1bn).
The figures reflected an 18 per cent increase in sales in the third quarter,
more than double the growth rates achieved in the first and second quarters.
The Basle-based group said it expected a further good increase in sales in
the fourth quarter and added: 'Barring extraordinary circumstances, another
significant increase in group profit is expected for the current business
year.'
Roche shares, both the widely held genussschein or dividend right
certificates and the more closely held bearers, have more than doubled in
value in the past year, bucking the general trend of investors losing
enthusiasm in pharmaceutical shares because of increased political pressure
on drug prices.
Yesterday's midday prices valued Roche at SFr52.3bn. At Wednesday's close in
New York, Merck, the largest US drug group, was valued at Dollars 34.35bn or
SFr48.9bn. Glaxo of the UK stands at Pounds 19.9bn (Dollars 30bn).
Roche said all its divisions contributed to the growth in sales. Revenues of
the pharmaceutical division, which accounts for just over half the total,
soared 29 per cent to SFr1.9bn in the quarter.
The group said its drug sales had not been affected as much as those of some
competitors by political action against high prices in some countries.
Its products were heavily oriented to the hospital sector, where competitive
forces have long been strong in the US. In Germany, another country where
government pressure on drug prices has been stepped up, the emphasis has
been on doctors' prescriptions rather than hospital purchases.
Roche pointed out that its sales figures were flattered in the third quarter
by the weakening of the dollar against the Swiss franc.
It said its new products; Aurorix, the anti-depressant; Inhibace, for
treating high blood pressure and Neupogen for preventing chemotherapy
related disorders, showed particularly high growth rates.
The diagnostics division had a 19 per cent jump in sales in the third
quarter to SFr432m mainly due to the good performances of its US service
laboratories.
Sandoz, the Swiss pharmaceutical group, is hoping for double-digit profit
growth in 1993.
'Double-digit growth is likely, but certainly not on the same scale as we
had last year,' Mr Daniel Wagniere, the new chief operating officer, said.
