FT  23 FEB 93 / Number of long-term jobless set to exceed 1m
THE number of people out of work for longer than one year is expected to
cross the 1m mark today.
The total of 956,000 long-term unemployed in October is expected to increase
for the ninth consecutive quarter when the figures for the three months to
January are published by the Department of Employment.
The long-term unemployment total was last over 1m in the summer of 1988. The
new figures will be released less than a week after the jobless total went
over 3m for the first time in almost six years.
Mr Frank Dobson, shadow employment secretary, said yesterday: 'Anyone losing
their job is a victim of unemployment, but those out of work for longer than
a year are the super-victims. It is an insult to them to talk about forcing
them to work. Most of them want nothing more in life than the opportunity of
a job, but that opportunity is being denied them.'
Long-term unemployment will continue to rise after unemployment has peaked.
Forecasts for the timing of the peak vary from the end of this year to early
1996.
The government, which is considering new initiatives for the jobless, is
particularly concerned to address the needs of the long-term unemployed.
Official figures show that there is a sharp drop in employment opportunities
for people registered as unemployed for more than six months.
Around a fifth of the long-term unemployed at present are aged between 18
and 24, many of whom have never worked. It is understood that the government
would like to target this group for some form of compulsory temporary work
or training. It believes that many such individuals could be lost
permanently from the labour market.
Several models are being considered by the government including one
submitted by the Employment Policy Institute, an independent think tank, for
a temporary job scheme offering part-time work with a wage for up to 200,000
18-to-24-year-olds.
The scheme would involve the private, public and voluntary sectors in
organising temporary work for an age group the government sees as a priority
for action to bring them back into the world of work. The net cost would be
Pounds 257bn, said the institute.
The government is considering how best to provide further help to the
unemployed. It is likely that temporary work schemes offering benefit plus
Pounds 10 a week will be expanded.
