FT  03 DEC 93 / IRA 'set to step up military campaign'
The IRA plans to step up its military campaign if the Dublin talks do not
produce acceptance by London of the principle of self-determination for the
people of all Ireland.
According to republican sources the IRA has been carefully weighing up its
military and political options in the approach to the meeting of the two
prime ministers today.
The IRA is convinced that any ceasefire in the present circumstances -
whether official or not - risks undermining the efficiency of the
organisation.
A republican source said: 'Like in any army the fear is that a period of
inactivity undermines morale. It also provides the space for an examination
of conscience.'
It is widely suspected in the IRA that previous extended ceasefires were
used by the security forces to infiltrate the organisation.
The IRA is still officially backing the peace process and Sinn Fein, its
political wing, has been stepping up its distribution of posters backing the
Hume-Adams initiative.
Although details of this have not been released, the initiative aims to
bring about a permanent cessation of IRA activities as part of a
comprehensive political settlement for Northern Ireland, including a
constitutional shift of the kind for which Dublin appears to be pressing.
The IRA had scaled down its operations until this week to facilitate the
possibility that the heart of the Hume-Adams proposals might be absorbed by
the Anglo-Irish peace talks.
With the resumption of attacks on soft targets - yesterday's murder of a
British soldier, a failed bomb attack on an army patrol and a bomb attack on
an RUC policeman - the IRA has signalled an internal decision to keep up the
pressure on the British government as it attempts to appease Unionist
opinion.
The resumption of still relatively low-scale IRA military operations has
come against a background of outrage by the republican movement at the
government's claim that the IRA had come to it declaring that the conflict
was over and asking for advice on how to give up its military campaign.
Another republican source said: 'Anyone who knows the IRA and those close to
it knows that the suggestion that Martin McGuinness would send such a
message to the government is prepos-terous.'
Supporters of the IRA in the Catholic community admit that in the aftermath
of the Shankill and Derry killings last month a feeling of war-weariness is
setting in. But there is no indication that they expect the IRA leadership
unilaterally to declare a ceasefire in the absence of any palpable political
gains.
The IRA's own military 'volunteers' are strongly resistant to any deal with
the British government that might smack of surrender.
So far there is no evidence of any substantial division between hawks and
doves in the republican movement over the suitability of conducting contacts
with the government either directly or through intermediaries.
In the approach to Christmas, however, a continuing political debate over
tactics and strategy is likely to intensify in the IRA and Sinn Fein.
In recent years the IRA's traditional three-to-four-day ceasefire
immediately before and after Christmas Day has become a matter of routine,
with terrorist activity resuming almost immediately afterwards.
But in the charged and complex current circumstances, with much at stake,
any decision on a ceasefire by the IRA is likely to have considerable
political significance.
The only certainty to emerge from the affair over the documents is that the
IRA regards its mix of politics and violence as entirely legitimate and
effective in focusing the minds of governments.
