FT  16 OCT 93 / Poles turn to a quiet and homely figure: Christopher
Bobinski assesses the farmers' leader likely to be Poland's next prime
minister
NONE of Poland's four post-communist prime ministers had any experience of
government before taking office, and Waldemar Pawlak, the 34-year-old Polish
Peasant party (PSL) leader set to be designated next week for the post, is
no exception.
The fresh-faced Mr Pawlak, who owns a 20ha (50-acre) farm in Plock province
180km north of Warsaw, differs from Ms Hanna Suchocka, his immediate
predecessor, in that he is better known than she was when she became prime
minister 15 months ago.
Mr Pawlak sprang from obscurity in June 1991 when the PSL, a party scarred
by years of abject collaboration with the communists, chose him as their
leader in a sign of a new beginning. Mr Pawlak fitted the role perfectly. He
had no past to speak of and the party's warring factions were able to
coalesce around him.
He came to the post after joining the party in 1984 as a graduate from
Warsaw Polytechnic's mechanical faculty. Four years later he found himself
heading the local council in Pacyna, the district where he was born.
He was elected on the PSL ticket to parliament in 1989, in the elections
which Solidarity won but which gave the 'ancien regime' parties, including
the communists, their seats under a pre-ballot deal with the then opposition
movement.
In parliament, the soft-spoken and taciturn young deputy attracted the
attention of his colleagues through a passion for back-room political
manoeuvring and an ability to go for the jugular, which he developed as the
group's whip. But it was President Lech Walesa in the middle of 1992 who
gave Mr Pawlak national prominence.
This was after Mr Walesa had toppled an ineffectual cabinet led by Mr Jan
Olszewski and was looking for a candidate for prime minister around whom a
parliamentary majority could be built and who was sufficiently junior to do
as he was told. The plan succeeded temporarily and Mr Pawlak was voted in as
prime minister, but failed to form a government, thanks to last-minute
opposition from Solidarity-based groups who were not ready to see someone
from outside their camp as head of government.
The attempt lasted 33 days and the disappointment it engendered has left a
shadow over Mr Pawlak's relations with Mr Walesa, who he feels let him down.
The incident deepened the traditional mistrust that the peasant population,
of whom Mr Pawlak is a typical if better educated representative, feels
towards the city dwellers. But Mr Walesa gave Mr Pawlak 33 days of
prominence. It was time enough to build a popular image and not enough to
make mistakes spoiling the picture.
He comes across as a sound and homely figure that Poles, after four years of
reform and upheaval, now appear to hanker after. The 33-day episode was an
unexpected bonus from which he profited in the September 19 elections.
In these, the PSL won the vote in the rural areas where 40 per cent of the
population lives and an overall 15 per cent share of the national ballot.
Almost a month later Mr Pawlak continues to perform well in opinion surveys.
Now he has to put together a cabinet, working this time with the former
communist Left Democratic Alliance (SLD). Talks between the two groups over
the past three weeks have shown Mr Pawlak to be a stubborn negotiator. He
knows he holds a strong hand in that he can find other allies with whom to
form a government should the SLD withdraw. This is a luxury the SLD does not
enjoy.
He will be looking for policies from the next cabinet which will improve the
lot of the farmers. That means increased budget support for the sector and
customs barriers against European Community food imports, and Mr Pawlak
knows that he must deliver to his peasant voters.
He is also canny enough to realise that his party needs allies in the towns,
maybe recruited from the small business sector, to break out from the rural
ghetto the PSL now finds itself in.
He is looking too to build bridges with the Catholic church, which itself
needs an ally in parliament.
