FT  23 MAR 93 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (6):
Plenty of surprises ahead - Personal Computers: PC power increases as prices
plunge
FOR the past few years the personal computer market has been in turmoil.
Plunging prices, relatively flat sales outside Europe, and wafer-thin
margins have taken their toll and left many heavyweight market leaders -
including IBM - floundering.
Over the past decade, the personal computer has revolutionised corporate
data processing and thrown up a new set of challenges and opportunities for
suppliers and their increasingly sophisticated customers.
PCs now dominate the computer industry, accounting for 44.5 per cent of
revenues last year, according to Dataquest, the US-based IT consultancy.
This was nearly as much as mainframes (21.6 per cent) and minis (23.4 per
cent) combined. Workstations (8.7 per cent) and supercomputers (1.8 per
cent) made up the rest.
'Direct' mail-order sales have helped nimble lower-cost clone-makers - such
as Dell - to challenge, and in some cases overtake, their more lethargic
rivals. Direct sales accounted for 37 per cent of the UK market last year,
according to figures from Romtec, the UK-based market research organisation.
Other new distribution channels include the PC 'superstore,' which, like
direct selling, have been imported to Europe from the US.
The wide availability of low-cost high-quality PC components, mostly from
Far Eastern suppliers, has turned much of the hardware market into a
commodity business and removed most barriers to entry for the clone-makers.
Customer-loyalty is low and, for many, the only distinguishing factors
between suppliers are price and service.
Meanwhile, the pace of technological change is still accelerating,
shortening product cycles and propelling new concepts like desktop
video-conferencing, multimedia, and the integration of voice, data and video
to the fore.
In the office, workstations for computer-aided design and manufacturing
(CAD/CAM) and desktop PCs, many of then linked by local area networks
(LANs), have brought real computing power to the desktop and provided a huge
market for operating system and business software companies.
On the factory floor, personal computers now control automated production
and manufacturing systems while outside the office, notebook computers have
delivered fully functional computing power 'on the move.' About one-in-five
of all PC sales today are portables, and the proportion is increasing.
Consultants Frost Sullivan estimate total shipments of portable computers in
the US last year at 2.3m units, 2.14 of which were notebook machines.
The notebook computer has been made possible by greater silicon integration
and the overall trend towards miniaturisation which have allowed designers
to pack more and more computing power into lighter packages.
At the same time, low-power chips, standard processors, improved battery and
screen technology, and new lightweight components like PCMIA-card drives
have enabled manufacturers to deliver most if not all the functionality of
desktop systems in much smaller boxes.
Taken to the extreme this has resulted in a crop of even smaller machines
called hand-held computers and palm-tops. Some, equipped with mobile radio
communications, are already being used to collect data outside the office
and transmit it back to headquarters - exemplifying the increasing
integration of telecommunications and computing. Meanwhile, new pen-based
and voice-activated computers provide the prospect easier to use machines
while IBM, Apple Computer and others are talking about personal digital
assistants (PDAs) which will integrate voice and data communications and
processing power in a machine small enough to fit in a coat pocket.
Apple's Newton, which is due to be launched later this year, will be a
pocket-sized machine combining computing power and the ability to accept pen
input, with many of the facilities of an electronic organiser. Separately,
EO, a Californian company, is working with AT&amp;T, the US telecommunications
giant, and Japan's Matsushita to develop a personal communicator combining
the features of a cellular telephone and a hand-held computer.
Today, however, the PC industry's leaders are not so much the PC
manufacturers themselves, but companies such as Intel, the US semiconductor
manufacturer which makes the microprocessors used by the majority of PCs;
Microsoft, the software group which sells, MS/DOS, the most popular
operating system, the Windows 'environment' and a wide range of business and
other software packages; and Novell, which markets the most popular
networking software.
Software is increasingly important in setting hardware parameters from
desktops to notebooks. According to Romtec sales of Windows-based
application software topped DOS-based software for the first time in the UK
in November last year.
Since Windows applications generally require large amounts of memory and
storage, and benefit from fast processors, larger screens and add-ons like
dedicated graphics accelerators the specifications of the entry level
desktop machine have been pushed up.
This process of upward power migration has been cultivated by Intel which,
as part of its marketing strategy, has developed a range of upgradable
'clock-doubled' processors built around its 80486 microprocessor - soon to
be displaced by the its new high-end 'Pentium' processor. However, Intel no
longer has the PC processor market all to itself. New chips from its rivals,
AMD and Cyrix, have added to the recent proliferation of processor types.
In terms of hardware boxes, IBM is still the world leader in PC sales, with
revenues from its PC business of between Dollars 7bn and Dollars 10bn a year
and a worldwide market share of about 12.4 per cent followed by Apple (11.9
per cent), Compaq (6.6 per cent), NEC (5.1 per cent) and Dell (3.5 per
cent), according to Dataquest figures. The European leader is Olivetti of
Italy, while NEC continues to dominate the Japanese market thanks to its
proprietary design.
PC manufacturers across the world have, however, had to come to grips with
some new economic realities. In particular corporate customers are no longer
scaling up their IT expenditure each year. Dataquest, the US-based
consultancy, estimates that total investment in computer systems actually
fell by about Dollars 2.5bn to just under Dollars 104.5bn last year. The
decline mainly reflects the recession, the continuing decline in the cost of
computers and a tougher corporate attitudes to IT investment. Overall, the
PC market grew by a relatively modest 7.1 per cent to reach Dollars 46.5bn
in 1992, says Dataquest. However, European PC suppliers experienced a surge
in demand in the second half of 1992 which left some manufacturers,
including Compaq and Apple scrambling to keep up with orders.
While the European PC market grew by about 11 per cent, the main feature of
the market in 1992 was the outbreak of an unbridled price war. Compaq is
widely credited with triggered the action. Having watched the clone-makers
such as Dell in the US, Elonex in the UK and Vobis in Germany snatch
market-share, Compaq - and then IBM - finally hit back last summer with
substantial price cuts and a new ranges of low-price models which have
proved highly successful.
THE result was an orgy of price-cutting with many PC prices dropping by 40
per cent or more in 1992 - a decline that was only arrested in the UK in the
autumn by sterling's devaluation. The big winners are the customers, but
margins have been cut to the bone and a handful of clone manufacturers have
gone out of business.
Until recently, most observers had expected that, with shipments remaining
strong, prices in Europe at least might begin to stabilise this year, but
that PCs manufacturers would continue to add power and new features. But
earlier this month Compaq again cut the prices of its PC in the US by up to
20 per cent, sparking fears of a new price war.
Compaq is still considering whether to make corresponding cuts in Europe.
Yet, as so often happens with an industry which is barely a decade old, the
future probably holds at least as many surprises we have seen in the past.
