FT  05 NOV 93 / Molyneaux optimistic on talks: Ulster Unionist party leader
says N Ireland assembly is possible
MR JAMES MOLYNEAUX last night gave a substantial boost to the Anglo-Irish
initiative for peace in Northern Ireland by delivering a surprisingly upbeat
assessment of its prospects for success.
In his first public comments since Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr
Albert Reynolds, his Irish counterpart, launched the initiative in Brussels
last week, the leader of the biggest political party in the province, the
Ulster Unionist party, suggested a Northern Ireland assembly could be set up
'in the fairly short term'.
He also responded positively to the six-point plan set out recently by Mr
Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, saying it was a 'hopeful sign'.
His remarks came as Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist Social
Democratic and Labour party, sought to revive his joint peace initiative
with Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, by claiming the offer of a
'total cessation of violence' was on the table as a result of their
dialogue.
Mr Hume said there would be 'peace within a week' if his initiative was
embraced. 'My conclusion is that that is now a real possibility - a total
cessation of violence, not a ceasefire.'
But after an hour-long meeting between Mr Hume and Mr Major, Downing Street
issued a fresh rebuff to the SDLP leader, insisting it was last week's
statement by Mr Major and Mr Reynolds that had set out the basis for 'peace,
stability and reconciliation' in the province.
Further cold water was poured over the Hume-Adams plan by Mr Molyneaux, who
said it was 'six bridges too far'.
In a move likely to inflame Unionists further, Mr Hume said he intended to
brief Mr Adams on his meeting at Downing Street.
The session was also attended by Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland
secretary. Mr Hume indicated later it would no longer be possible for Sir
Patrick to say he did not know details of the Hume-Adams initiative.
Mr Major is seeing leaders of the province's four constitutional political
parties over the next few days. Yesterday's meeting with Mr Hume was
followed by a similar session with Mr John Alderdice of the Alliance party.
Last night's Downing Street statement emphasised that the government was
'ready' to table proposals to give 'focus and direction' to talks involving
the four parties once they agreed to resume negotiations.
It emerged yesterday that the Irish government believes it will become clear
by early December if there is to be a breakthrough on the Major-Reynolds
peace initiative. Mr Reynolds told the Irish parliament he intended to meet
Mr Major again on December 3, before the next meeting of the European
Council.
Dublin also acted to clear up ambiguity over Mr Spring's six points, one of
which was that Unionist consent would be required for any constitutional
change in the north. Mr Reynolds made it clear this was not meant as an
additional concession.
In Commons exchanges with Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, Mr Major said he
intended to take 'a very direct interest' in peace efforts, while hinting
that an early return to round-table talks was unlikely.
'I don't want to see an artificially staged event where the talks are called
together with no probability of them making progress,' he said.
Molyneaux on peace, Page 10
