FT  04 DEC 93 / Few ladies in red: Women in Russian politics
Mrs Alevtina Fedulova is the best Russia can offer as a female leader with
the kind of clout once held by Mrs Thatcher. Blonde and articulate, she
hopes to make big political advances for women as leader of the country's
first party dedicated to female rights. In next weekend's parliamentary
elections, Women of Russia is putting up 44 female candidates for the
450-seat State Duma.
Mrs Fedulova has a reputation as a formidable operator. Under the old
Communist regime she headed the Pioneer youth organisation, which ran
holiday camps for millions of children, where Marxist-Leninist values were
mixed with games and music lessons.
This experience is both a disadvantage as well as a plus. Her background as
a pillar of a Communist regime that did little to advance women's well-being
means female voters, eager for a greater voice in Russian politics and
society, are reluctant to support her. She admits the Communists 'proclaimed
rights which were never applied in practice'.
It is ironic that Mrs Fedulova finds herself the founder of Women of Russia
 -and it is a sign of the difficulties women's rights activists have had in
organising themselves in a fledgling democracy.
So far, few women have been able to gain the experience necessary to form
parties.
The problem is not new. Equality between the sexes, promised by the
Bolsheviks in 1917, meant, in practice, that many women were forced to work
in heavy industry and other traditional male jobs but still to carry the
burden of domestic duties.
As a result, Women of Russia seeks to appeal to women voters through largely
pragmatic issues - for instance, pledging to give women the option of
staying at home and stressing the importance of improved healthcare. It
talks about bringing 'feminine qualities' - meaning reliability and
tenderness - into Russia's male-dominated political arena.
The party is unique in trying to turn women's rights into a political issue
 -even though females account for 75 per cent of the unemployed and abortion
remains the most common form of birth-control. The concerns of most other
political parties revolve around the threat of a declining birth rate to
Russia's influence as a world power and promises of improving health care.
One exception - Russia's Choice, the party set up by young radical reformers
in the Russian government - has put Ms Ella Pamfilova, the social welfare
minister, at number three on the party list used in the system of
proportional representation. But in spite of her popularity, most women
activists regard her selection as a token gesture.
Similarly, Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, the economist, has promised that the
radical alliance he leads would try to pilot an equal opportunities law
through the new parliament.
The pervasive indifference is due largely to the lack of pressure from
women. Many blame themselves for the dominance of men in Russian society and
politics. 'We spoil our men,' explains Mrs Natalya Starkova, a 60-year-old
English-language teacher at Moscow University. 'They are accustomed to
expecting Russian women to go out to work, to do everything at home and to
look pretty for them in the evening.' Women made up less than 6 per cent of
the last Russian parliament - against a third under the Soviet regime.
Politicians' wives traditionally stay in the background. Mrs Raisa
Gorbachev, the only Soviet leader's wife to venture into the limelight,
became unpopular because of her aloof image and taste for foreign clothes.
President Boris Yeltsin has tried to avoid the same problem, keeping Mrs
Naina Yeltsin behind the scenes. Not one candidate's wife has appeared on
the campaign trail or posters.
Olga, the 36-year-old wife of Arkady Murashov, a leading candidate for
Russia's Choice, says politicians' wives could play a more prominent role
'if things are done well, not like Mrs Gorbachev'.
The result of the relative sidelining of women is that the elections are
unlikely to advance their cause. Nor are they likely to help themselves in
Russia's first democratic election.
Many believe that supporting Women of Russia would be to waste their vote
when economic reform as advanced by Russia's Choice is more important at
this stage in Russia's history.
'I'm all for getting more women into parliament,' says Mrs Starkova, who
plans to vote for Russia's Choice. 'But this time the main task is to fix
our economy and Women of Russia can't do this.'
Mrs Valentina Konstantinova, one of Russia's few self-proclaimed feminists,
says women must first increase their self-esteem before putting other women
into parliament.
A few others are running as independents with an emphasis on women's rights.
Mrs Fedulova agrees women themselves are part of the problem. Her task is to
convince them of their strength.
