FT  09 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Steel bullet
CLOSING STEEL plants is never popular. Not only does each employ thousands
of people, often in communities with high unemployment. They are also a
symbol of industrial machismo, echoing a time when steel production was the
foundation of much economic activity. But unless the European Community's
steel companies, which are expected to lose about Ecu4bn this year, take
decisive action to cut capacity, the industry will become increasingly
enfeebled, burdening the rest of the economy in the process.
A European Commission plan to resolve the crisis comes to a head next month
when the Council of Ministers meets to thrash out whether governments should
be allowed to aid their ailing companies. The industry's problems stem
mainly from decades of politicisation. Governments have poured subsidies
into new steel plants in mistaken job-creation initiatives. They have then
pumped in yet more aid to prevent closures. Between 1975 and 1990, the
industry is estimated to have received DM121bn in direct aid.
The Community needs a steel industry. But it should be slim and efficient,
not bloated and loss-making. It is not just capacity that needs cutting -
from about 130m tonnes a year to perhaps 100m tonnes - to bring supply into
line with demand. Many big integrated plants will need to be replaced by
lower-cost mini-mills.
The best way of achieving such a restructuring would be to allow the market
to work. But the public-sector owners of the Community's most inefficient
plants are determined to prevent closures. Italy, Spain and the Treuhand,
east Germany's privatisation agency, want to give more hand-outs to Ilva,
CSE and Ekostahl.
Italy argues its proposals do not involve Ecu4bn in aid, as the Commission
claims, but are merely a rational restructuring. This debate has certainly
been muddied by the Commission's decision to write-off debts owed it by
Klockner-Werke, the near-bankrupt private German group, in superficially
similar circumstances. Nevertheless, it is scarcely credible that private
investors would be prepared to prop up loss-making companies on such a scale
and for as long as their public-sector owners propose. The danger is that
taxpayers' money will be wasted and more efficient, privately owned
companies bankrupted.
The European Commission would like to take a tough line but has had to
soften its approach in response to political pressure. Anti-dumping duties
have been imposed on cheap imports from eastern Europe and limited aid will
be allowed if accompanied by capacity cuts. The Commission's approach may
still be rejected by governments. But, even if it passes, the consequent
restructuring will probably be inadequate. The crisis could recur.
A better approach would be for governments to bite the bullet now. Their
goal should not be to freeze economic development, but to ease adjustment by
giving more generous grants than those already planned directly to redundant
steel-workers and their communities. This would offer the best chance of
creating new jobs in industries with a viable future. Such an approach would
not only benefit Europe's taxpayers. It would also be in the best long-term
interests of the steel industry and of most of those who currently work in
it.
