FT  25 NOV 93 / International Company News: Warner-Lambert cuts drugs
dependency - The US group's efforts to counter the effects of healthcare
reform
Warner-Lambert, the US drugs and consumer products group which this week
announced a Dollars 468m restructuring plan, is going through the
pharmaceuticals wringer.
Like other companies, Parke-Davis, its drugs subsidiary which is the 14th
largest pharmaceuticals group in the US, has been hit by healthcare reforms
in Europe and America. The speed of changes in the US, in particular, has
taken the company by surprise, admits Mr Lodewijk de Vink, president and
chief operating officer.
But the subsidiary's performance has also been affected by problems specific
to it. Its growth has been severely limited since January, when the US
patents of its best-selling drug, Lopid, a cholesterol-lowering treatment
with sales last year of Dollars 556m, expired.
Revenues have also been undermined by running foul of the US Food and Drug
Administration, which stopped production at six of its US and Puerto Rican
plants.
The company believes this will cost it Dollars 150m in lost turnover this
year. In addition, the group's tax rate is set to rise next year because of
the US government's decision to limit tax credits for manufacturing in
Puerto Rico.
Warner-Lambert's efforts to counter the expected decline in Lopid sales by
launching new drugs have been dogged by problems.
Cognex, a treatment for Alzheimer's Disease, had a rough ride through the
FDA, being rejected twice before finally being licensed in the US this
September.
New-York analysts HKS &amp; Co believe the medicine could be held back by its
limited efficacy and side-effect concerns, and annual sales could struggle
to only Dollars 100m or reach Dollars 500m.
Warner-Lambert's latest response is to announce a further round of
restructuring and rationalisation. About 2,800 of the group's 34,000
employees will leave the company. That follows job losses of 2,700 announced
earlier in 1991.
Research and development spending - running at 18 per cent of drugs sales -
is not sacrosanct, says Mr de Vink. 'Research used to be a cost centre that
was never questioned. We need to make some hard choices. We can't fish in
every therapeutic pond, but I want more lines in each pond,' he explains.
'The days of macho R&amp;D spending - when more was necessarily better - are
over. The industry's current level of spending on R&amp;D is clearly
unsustainable,' he insists.
Although the pharmaceuticals division is clearly in trouble, the group is
being supported from unexpected quarters.
Its confectionery operations and over-the-counter (OTC) non-prescription
medicines business, with products ranging from Trident chewing gum to
Clorets breath-fresheners, have traditionally been regarded as a burden
because of their low margins compared with prescription pharmaceuticals.
'This is a Dollars 6bn company of which only a third is pharmaceuticals. The
other two-thirds are not affected by healthcare reforms or patent expiries.
Our diversity used to be a weakness. Now it's a strength,' says Mr de Vink.
Warner-Lambert has successfully created strong international brands capable
of generating a steady, though unspectacular, stream of earnings growth.
Some of its products, like Listerine mouth-wash, are more than 50 years old,
but are still growing. The company actually created the mouth-wash market in
Japan when it launched the product there.
The group is still expanding its consumer business through acquisition. In
May it bought the Wilkinson Sword wet shave operations, building a Dollars
500m razor and blade business.
Meanwhile, Warner-Lambert has continued to build its OTC medicines business,
the largest in the US. In July, the company secured access to Glaxo's Zantac
and Wellcome's Zovirax, the two most important drugs capable of switching
status from prescription only to OTC.
Mr de Vink's strategy to deal with expiry patents is to drive
Warner-Lambert's generics business harder.
'Some of the returns are not bad. And we don't have to do the R&amp;D,' he
explains. The operations will be more aggressive in future in an effort to
keep plant operating at capacity. He does not exclude manufacturing drugs
developed by other companies whose patents have expired.
The group's pharmaceuticals portfolio is, however, looking thin, apart from
Cognex and Accupril, an ace inhibitor heart drug, which is doing well thanks
to aggressive pricing. It should become a Dollars 250m product.
Meanwhile, Neurontin, an epilepsy treatment, has been filed with the FDA but
is not yet approved. Mr de Vink says it should generate at least Dollars
100m a year.
Mr de Vink says he wants more products in the pipeline. 'The typical
life-cycle of a drug could be falling to only four or five years and if that
is the case you have to have a lot more new products,' he explains.
The company is planning research alliances with other groups. In February it
acquired 34 per cent of Jouveinal, a French drugs maker with an innovative
pipeline. It already has an alliance with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer in
antibiotics.
The efforts of Mr de Vink and his chairman and chief executive Mr Melvin
Goodes, mean that in spite of Warner-Lambert's difficulties in
pharmaceuticals, analysts expect the group to outperform most of the drugs
sector in the medium-term. A not unimpressive achievement for a mouth-wash
and chewing gum company.
