FT  15 NOV 93 / Management: A week to stand out - Tim Dickson and John
Authers look at two new training initiatives
A recent survey showed that roughly 90 per cent of UK organisations think
management training is 'a good thing'. But whereas those who promote
motherhood and apple pie generally put their money where their mouths are,
the same study suggested that only 50 per cent of UK companies run formal
management training programmes to underpin their beliefs.
It is this gap which the Management Charter Initiative, an independent body
backed by 1,600 companies and the UK government, has tried to fill for the
last five years.
By its own admission there is still a long way to go. MCI's chief executive
Andrew Summers estimates that about 11 per cent of UK organisations are
applying the benchmarks of best practice it has developed for middle and
first-line managers and supervisors; perhaps half of these are encouraging
their staff to acquire a National Vocational Qualification in management.
MCI's underlying thesis that the ability of managers can be improved by
adhering to a set of standard competences has also run into some scepticism.
Undeterred, MCI is aiming to raise its profile and spread the message with
its week-long Be a Better Manager campaign, which starts today and has the
backing of the Confederation of British Industry and the Department of
Employment. Around 7,500 managers in the UK will be working to a selection
of MCI's management standards for the first time, assessing at the end of
the exercise what they have got out of it.
The campaign is being fronted by the Woolwich Building Society, National
Westminster Bank, Auto Windscreens (part of the building products group
Heywood Williams) and the Magistrates Court Service. Others taking part
include the National Trust, BBC Wales, Texas Homecare and the Benefits
Agency.
Participants will work to one of four, one-page checklists - managing the
workplace, cost control, leading meetings and setting objectives - each of
which is an abridged version of an MCI standard. At the end, individuals
compare what they expected with the benefits achieved.
Parts of the MCI check lists may seem obvious, but no more so than the
advice some management consultants sell for a fancy fee.
Setting objectives and explaining them, keeping spending within budget,
preparing adequately for meetings and ensuring equipment is maintained, are
ideas which bear constant repetition. All the more so given the extra
responsibilities thrust on to middle managers due to 'delayering' (the
removal through sacking and early retirement of entire management tiers).
Judging by their comments at Friday's press conference, the four front
organisations are enthusiastic about the campaign, expecting it to raise the
profile of management development within their companies or services and to
encourage wider employee participation. Its success will depend on how far
the MCI convinces others that adhering to the standards has demonstrably
improved these organisations' management performance.
Summers says the chief barrier to more widespread management training in UK
companies is not cost. 'When we ask people that usually come eighth or ninth
on the list. The sort of thing they tend to say is that they are too small,
that they only employ trained staff, or that they have no time.'
For further information on the campaign; Freephone 0891 616999
