FT  01 SEP 93 / Republicans buoyant - but still divided
US REPUBLICAN party bigwigs left Washington at the beginning of August, for
the summer vacation, in a mood of self-congratulation at the points they had
scored against President Bill Clinton in his gruelling battle to pass his
budget.
Mr Haley Barbour, the party chairman, crowed that Mr Clinton had 'done more
to unite the Republican party in the last 200 days than I'll do in four
years.'
But the pleasures of sniping at Mr Clinton have only covered the
philosophical rifts over issues such as 'family values' that the
presidential election campaign last year exposed. Some Republicans worry
about how their party will measure up when the time comes to say what it
stands for, instead of what it stands against.
Some of the criticism has come from the old testament prophets of US
conservatism. Mr Barry Goldwater, presidential candidate in 1964, has been
particularly scathing about his party's decline from fighting communism and
high taxes to fighting homosexuality.
But some of the most piercing comments have come from Congressman Bob
Michel, Republican leader in the House of Representatives. In an interview
this month with his hometown newspaper, the Peoria Journal Star, he wrung
his hands over his party's 'antagonistic' hardliners.
'Bob Michel is going to call it quits. Soon. Very soon,' says Republican
former congressman Mickey Edwards.
Mr Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip in the House who would be best placed
to succeed Mr Michel, is temperamentally more suited to the confrontational
tactics his party now favours. His negligible legislative record suggests
that the party, under his leadership, would be even less of a partner in the
formulation of national policy.
The Republican leader in the Senate, Mr Bob Dole, has shown none of Mr
Michel's qualms about the confrontational approach. He is also much better
placed to make such tactics work, because the Senate's procedural rules
allow the Republican minority there much greater obstructive power than has
its counterpart in the House.
Mr Dole gives the appearance of having the time of his life in his role as
Washington's number one Republican. Despite his age - at 70 he is four
months younger than Mr Michel - he has spent his summer holiday glad-handing
the voters of New Hampshire and Iowa, the two states that vote first in
presidential primaries.
But even Mr Dole's somewhat improbable presidential ambitions reflect to
some extent the split in the Republican party.
His trips to New Hampshire and his hounding of Mr Clinton in Congress seem,
to some Republicans, designed principally to avoid being outflanked on the
right by Senator Phil Gramm, the abrasive Texan who is openly campaigning
for his party's intellectual leadership - and for its presidential
nomination in 1996.
Also, Republicans throughout the spectrum are wondering how to deal with Mr
Ross Perot, the Texas independent who could steal many of their best themes
and deliver them, in 1996, a repeat of the 1992 presidential election -
second place in a three-way race.
It is clear that Mr Clinton cannot expect to pass his next legislative
priorities, the North American Free Trade Agreement and healthcare reform,
without bipartisan support, but it is also clear that a sizeable body at the
centre of the Republican party believes that it, too, needs to be more
constructive in the next session of Congress.
