FT  14 AUG 93 / Hopes high for end to mail strike
A PEACE formula to resolve the 12-day Royal Mail dispute in Cardiff will be
put to a ballot of the 900 postal workers tomorrow by the Union of
Communication Workers.
Hopes of a settlement are high after the UCW's national executive agreed
late on Thursday night to recommend a return to work on the basis of a
framework agreement negotiated between national union officials and the
Royal Mail. Details of the proposed deal have not been disclosed.
The UCW said the union's Cardiff branch will meet this morning when national
and local officials will address the staff on the contents of the framework
agreement. This will be followed by an individual membership ballot
tomorrow.
The UCW said strikers were 'strongly advised' to attend the meeting and
ballot wearing uniforms because the premises of the Cardiff post office
would be protected by security and only postal staff and union officials
would be allowed in.
The Cardiff strike has paralysed delivery of well over 1m letters and has
led to severe difficulties for companies in south Wales.
The point at issue has been the introduction of fixed shift patterns for the
workers to replace the old roster system, a change that has taken place over
a large part of the Royal Mail already.
It has taken more than a week of negotiations to establish a formula for a
return to work, and the careful way in which union officials are handling
the dispute suggests they are aware of possible difficulties with the local
branch.
Yesterday Companies House, the government's corporate information agency in
Cardiff, stepped up its efforts to negate the strike's effects.
The agency has launched a national press advertising campaign and is
considering radio announcements next week to persuade companies to send
annual accounts and returns to its offices elsewhere in the country if the
strike continues.
It estimates that the strike has already cost it about Pounds 250,000 and
that it will be forced to pay substantial additional overtime to staff
processing the backlog.
The volume of company returns received fell to as low as 30 per cent of the
normal level as a result of the strike, although it has now recovered
slightly as companies have begun using alternative methods of delivery.
If the strike continues much later into this month, thousands of companies
may face the prospect of late-filing penalties on their annual accounts
which have been held up in the post.
Companies House is advising businesses to use hand deliveries, the DX
document transfer system or to send returns to its offices in cities other
than Cardiff. It has received several thousand calls from businesses to
special inquiry lines opened two weeks ago.
The agency said it would treat 'sympathetically' any company returns that
have been delayed in the post. 'This strike is costing Cardiff business a
lot of money and disruption,' it said.
Outgoing post has been less affected because the agency has been able to use
private courier services and other agencies to avoid the local postal
system.
