FT  29 OCT 93 / Tensions throughout IADB: A study of the bank's internal
conflicts
A REPORT presented this month to the board of the Inter-American Development
Bank found the bank obsessed with a culture of control and subject to
tension and conflict at all levels of the organisation.
The report on Latin America's Washington-based regional development bank was
commissioned this year by its president, Mr Enrique Iglesias, as part of
discussions among government shareholders about increasing the bank's
capital.
The report was produced by a six-man 'task force' headed by Mr Moeen
Qureshi, a former World Bank official who has just stepped down as caretaker
prime minister in Pakistan.
Mr Qureshi said yesterday that the group found the bank had an impressive
loan portfolio given Latin America's economic difficulties during the 1980s.
The bank was probably closer to its borrowers than any other development
institution, 'which opens possibilities as well as creates problems for the
institution', he said.
The report said however that the bank's emphasis on control had 'given a
high degree of confidence that funds are being used for intended purposes
(which is important) but it places concern for results in a distant second
place.'
This emphasis had slowed decision-making - the process of loan development
and approval takes 18 to 24 months - and created an aversion to taking
risks. It meant insufficient use had been made of the bank's country offices
because most decisions were made at head office. The bank's board was also
'excessively involved in operational matters, not enough in policy'.
According to the report, the control mentality has meant that 'tensions and
conflicts which are more intense than in other development institutions are
found at all levels of the bank's organisation'. This mentality stemmed from
the bank's ownership structure and history.
Latin American borrowing members own a majority of the bank - 53.8 per cent
 -while the US stake is 34.61 per cent. However, only the guarantees of the
non-borrowing members are used when the bank raises money in international
markets. This means that every dollar raised by the IADB is almost 75 per
cent guaranteed by the US government.
Meanwhile, borrowing countries have unduly influenced the allocation of
resources, selection of projects, and senior appointments at the bank, the
report said.
This had led to a mistrust of management among non-borrowing members. 'The
bank's shareholders should consider how they can, collectively, reduce the
politicisation of the bank.' In future, borrowing shareholders should
recognise they are not entitled to bank resources but have to earn them
through good performance. Management also needed a freer hand in day-to-day
operations with the board focusing on policy, but had to be held more
accountable for its mistakes.
The importance of change at the bank was heightened by the likely future
emphasis on lending for social programmes such as health, education and
poverty alleviation. Such loans were inherently more difficult to administer
than traditional project or balance of payments lending, in part because of
the weakness of government agencies dealing with these sectors and the
difficulty in measuring the results.
The report makes 21 recommendations for change at the bank, which last year
approved a record Dollars 6bn (Pounds 3.9bn) in loans and mobilised Dollars
827m in co-financings, mainly with the Japanese government.
It advises that more power be delegated to country offices and procurement
procedures be modified.
The report was presented to the board last week. Discussions about a capital
increase will continue in a working group, expected to put proposals to a
board meeting in Washington in mid-December.
Last year, the US administration aired the idea of a once-and-for-all
capital increase for the bank. This now seems unlikely, although the idea of
automatic capital increases every few years, as in the past, is losing
favour.
However, there is growing confidence that calls from some non-regional
shareholders - in particular Germany and Japan - for a greater stake in the
bank can be accommodated by cuts in the stake held by regional members. This
would mean the US accepting a reduction in its shareholding, though not
losing its veto and delaying rights as the largest single shareholder.
In another development, the future as a separate entity of the bank's
private-sector loans and equity investment arm, the Inter-American
Investment Corporation, appears in jeopardy. It has not secured US backing
for a capital increase. This is likely to require the bank itself, which has
not lent directly to the private sector, to play a bigger role in helping
private-sector development.
Mr Iglesias said in April that a capital increase of Dollars 30bn-Dollars
40bn would let the bank go on lending at the current rate. Bank management
hopes that an increase can be agreed to allow for a formal accord at the
bank's annual meeting in Guadalajara, Mexico, in April. The last capital
increase of Dollars 26.4bn was agreed in 1989, allowing the bank to expand
its lending by Dollars 22.5bn in the four-year period ending this year.
