FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (1): A turn for the better - Argentina
has found its way, combining democratic rule with radical privatisation of
the economy. The challenge now is to make it work - and for the Menem
government to provide firm institutional foundations for political life
TO THE visitor to Buenos Aires, today one of Latin America's most peaceful
capitals, it seems scarcely credible that little more than a decade ago
Argentina was under military rule.
Its bellicose generals had brought the country to the brink of war with
neighbouring Chile and into a disastrous conflict with Britain in the south
Atlantic. The military had abducted, tortured and murdered thousands of
Argentines under the pretext that Argentina's divided society demanded
strong government.
It seems scarcely believable either that four years ago, as the government
of President Carlos Menem took office, the country was in the middle of one
of its most severe economic crises of the century. With inflation rising to
200 per cent a month, commerce ground to a halt and people took to the
streets to protest against food shortages.
Today the military appears a spent force in Argentine politics. Instead of
fighting with its neighbours, the government is planning a customs union
with Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. The Clinton administration in the US has
opened the prospect of Argentina's accession to the North American Free
Trade Agreement.
The economy is enjoying a stability not seen for many years. Annual consumer
price inflation has fallen to single digits, the government has balanced its
budget, helped by a threefold rise in tax revenues between 1989 and 1992.
The government is close to completing one of the most radical privatisation
programmes ever seen, expected to culminate this year in the sale of the
largest company in Argentina, the state oil concern YPF.
Employment by the state and state-owned industry will have fallen from
290,000 at the end of 1989 to 41,000 at the end of 1993, according to
economist Miguel Broda.
The economy has enjoyed two years growth of close to 9 per cent and
industrial production is at record levels. Debate now rages between those
who doubt the change can endure - who see growth driven by a consumer boom
financed essentially by privatisation - and those who think Argentina could
be Latin America's new economic miracle.
The key to the debate is a law that has put the government into an economic
straitjacket. Since April 1991, the Argentine convertibility plan has put
the peso on a parity with the US dollar and allowed the central bank to
issue currency only if backed by foreign exchange reserves. By limiting the
government's ability to print money, the plan has brought down inflation
rapidly.
The architect of this programme is Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy minister,
a Harvard-trained economist whose writings demonstrate an obsession with
Argentina's economic decline in the 20th century.
Even some of Mr Cavallo's supporters - he is the most popular politician in
the government, according to opinion polls - wonder how long the peso's
parity with the dollar can be sustained. They point to a growing current
account deficit as evidence that the policy is eroding the competitiveness
of Argentine exports. Argentine consumer price inflation, while dropping, is
still running well ahead of US inflation, making foreign goods cheap in
Argentina but increasing the costs of exporters. The current account deficit
which the high exchange rate has caused, they argue, makes Argentina
dependent on highly volatile inflows of foreign capital.
Mr Cavallo, however, points out that capital has continued to flow into
Argentina this year, allowing interest rates to fall. More important, he
holds that it would be 'madness' to devalue: the competitive edge it would
give to exporters would be transitory as inflationary expectations, never
far from the surface in modern Argentina, climbed rapidly.
A strong currency is also vital to restructure the private sector so that
Argentine competitiveness can be enhanced. If it is to be successful, it
will require a revolutionary change in the attitudes of business people who
 -due to inflation and the protectionist wall that used to surround the
Argentine economy - were rarely forced to make tough decisions.
For their part, foreign investors have already shifted attitudes. Helped by
the relief negotiated on foreign debt in an accord completed in April,
Argentine borrowers have been re-admitted to the international financial
markets. Foreign companies - from Europe and elsewhere, including,
importantly, the US - have been actively participating in the privatisation
of state utilities.
However, it is too soon to say whether the private sector believes enough in
Argentine stability to start investing in new productive capacity to
stimulate exports, and in what sectors - apart from agriculture and energy -
the country's comparative advantage lies.
Despite these doubts, there appears to be a consensus that the general
direction of economic strategy is more or less right, though only the brave
would argue that this means the end of the deep conflicts that have marked
Argentine politics in the 20th Century. Mr Naldo Brunelli, new head of the
trade union confederation, CGT, says: 'We think that the changes are
irreversible.' Mr Cavallo has praised the two leading economists of the
opposition Radical party as men who would run the economy very well.
Argentina's new economic structure is being depicted increasingly as a
project of the state, not of Menem and Cavallo.
This should reduce the uncertainty surrounding the handover of government in
1995, although if Mr Menem has his way, he will succeed himself.
For this he will need a reform of the constitution, but that will require a
two-thirds majority in Congress and he can only get that in Congressional
elections in October.
Partly because of this, economic policy has been more expansive this year
than many expected. For example, a large part of the proceeds of the YPF
sale will go to clear arrears to pensioners. The YPF sale, it is widely
said, has been brought forward so that the pensioners can be paid before the
elections.
For his part, Mr Menem says he would like another term as president, but
adds: 'It's not an obsession.' Indeed, he has laid less emphasis on his
re-election in recent months, conscious perhaps that if he stresses the
theme and fails to win the necessary support he could turn relative
electoral success for the Peronists into a perceived failure.
Despite the widespread credit he is given for stabilising the economy, there
are some who doubt whether he is the man to deal with the next set of
challenges likely to face the Argentine government - the development of the
institutions of state that remain after privatisation. To critics, he is a
man more interested in the exercise of power than in the rules of the game.
Mr Luis Moreno Ocampo, a former federal prosecutor now in the private
sector, says: 'Just because we have elections, it doesn't mean there is
democracy.
'Of the rights guaranteed under the constitution, we have just two:
elections and freedom of opinion.' This means that concepts important to
democracy, such as respect for the rule of law and the independence of the
judiciary, are still lacking in Argentina.
A lack of public confidence in the judicial system also feeds a public
obsession with corruption in government. Much economic reform - the change
in the exchange rate regime, privatisation, the strict financial limitations
on the government - should reduce future opportunities for corruption.
Yet it still goes on. Past members of the presidential entourage stand
accused of corruption. A free press has heightened awareness of an issue
about which people feel increasing indignation because their taxes are
financing it.
This is not the only priority. As in most countries, education is a central
issue. Argentine labour is among the most expensive in Latin America. If
Argentina is to be successful as an exporter, productivity needs to be
improved through better education.
There is a danger, too, that the success of the economic reform will leave
some sectors of the population behind, particularly in those outlying
provinces whose governments have not followed the central government in
economic reform.
Yet, compared with most of its neighbours, Argentina's problems should be
relatively easy to tackle. High literacy and a reasonable income
distribution mark it out from much of the rest of Latin America. With its
natural resources, it should be a wealthy country.
The economic programme has, by shackling the government, resolved a central
paradox: why a deeply conservative population has been ruled for so long by
licentious governments.
The key to this change is a single piece of legislation: the law which fixes
the value of the peso against the US dollar. For some time to come,
confidence at home and abroad in Argentina's economy will hang on the single
thread of the convertibility law.
Things have turned dramatically for the better in Argentina but it is not
out of the woods yet.
