FT  18 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Temptation of a safe, but undynamic
investment / A look at Northern Ireland Electricity, whose pathfinder
prospectus is published today
IMAGINE a company which was guaranteed fixed revenues on the bulk of its
most profitable business, regardless of whether sales volumes went up or
down. Investors looking for a safe, if undynamic, home for their funds would
be sorely tempted to buy into it.
Next month they will be given the opportunity when the government sells off
Northern Ireland Electricity, the last non-nuclear power company to remain
in the UK public sector, for between Pounds 300m and Pounds 400m.
The guarantee of income stems from a regulatory regime which is among
several factors setting NIE apart from the other electricity companies in
the United Kingdom.
The differences - good and bad - will come under close examination in the
next week or so as the more than 400,000 people and institutions who have
registered an interest in the flotation decide whether to buy shares. A
pathfinder prospectus on the sale will be published today.
Northern Ireland Electricity is what remains of the province's state
electricity company following the disposal last year of four power stations
to trade buyers for about Pounds 350m.
Like the 12 regional electricity companies (recs) in England and Wales it
enjoys a monopoly to distribute power in the area it serves.
Unlike them, it also transmits the power, a function that in England and
Wales is undertaken by the National Grid. In theory NIE could face more
competition than the recs in supplying electricity - that is buying it from
generators and selling it on - but so far only one company, Northern
Electric, has applied for a supply licence.
NIE's penetration among the province's 1.5m population is much more limited
than is that of the regional companies in England and Wales because oil and
coal supply 81 per cent of the fuels market. This gives the company headroom
for volume expansion, particularly as there is as yet no competition from
gas and the population is relatively young and consumer goods oriented.
But the most significant difference between NIE and the regional electricity
companies is in the way they are regulated. The Northern Ireland electricity
system is not linked to that in Great Britain, or indeed the Irish Republic,
and it is regulated separately.
Whereas the recs are negotiating with Ofer, their regulator, on changes to
formulae influencing supply profits and will soon discuss the more lucrative
distribution business, NIE's formulae for the next four years are already
established.
Dr Patrick Haren, chief executive, says this gives NIE more certainty. 'We
are further down the track,' he says, pointing to the widespread belief that
the reviews in England and Wales will follow examples set in the NIE
regulation.
The most significant formula is that governing transmission and
distribution, which provides more than 80 per cent of company operating
profits. In an attempt to encourage energy conservation, Mr Geoff Horton,
the Northern Ireland regulator, has introduced a system whereby he regulates
revenues rather than price per unit.
Three quarters of total revenues are allowed to grow in real terms by 3.5
per cent annually but, for this three quarters, volume growth does not
affect income. If volume growth exceeds expectations NIE must reduce prices
in the following year, but if volume growth falls short NIE can increase
tariffs.
The effect is a highly secure revenue stream. Although this provides
stability, it limits the advantages accruing from stronger volume growth
than on the mainland. In addition it may take away an incentive for
management to market aggressively, skills which may be needed later in the
decade if British Gas decides to compete in the market on completion of a
pipeline from the mainland.
Dr Haren says the advantage of the regulatory regime is that NIE must
concentrate on costs to generate increased profits in transmission and
distribution. 'Recs can allow the economy to drive volume sales and profits.
We have to be vigorous about cost management.'
Jobs are an obvious target. In the last three years NIE has cut about 8 per
cent of its workforce which now stands at about 3,700, but NIE still has six
employees per thousand customers compared to the recs' 3.6. Although this is
partly explained by the wide geographic base of NIE's operation, it leaves
scope for further reductions as the company adopts the more rigorous
practices of the private sector.
The City believes that Dr Haren is well qualified to lead the management in
this period of change. Still only 42, he joined NIE from the Electricity
Supply Board in Eire where he started as an engineer, but later switched to
finance. Generally, the management at NIE is perceived as well balanced in
age and experience. 'They may not set the world alight but they are
comparable with that at most recs and better than some,' says one analyst.
In spite of inherent advantages they have at NIE, managers face two main
challenges, one resulting from high capital expenditure needed over the next
few years, the other from the political problems in Northern Ireland.
Problems associated with terrorism can be exaggerated. As Hoare Govett
points out, the government practice is to replace assets in Northern Ireland
which are damaged through terrorism. None the less terrorism has been and
remains a threat; the headquarters of the NIE was bombed in the 1970s and
the interconnector with Eire was severed following terrorist action.
Even if any attack on NIE had no impact on NIE's finances, it would be
unlikely to leave the share price unscathed.
The other inherent problem at NIE stems from the province's remoteness and
the age of the transmission system, half of which dates from the 1950s or
earlier. NIE is likely to have to pay Pounds 110m for an interconnector to
Scotland which is planned for mid-1990s.
Even without allowing for interconnector costs, Hoare Govett estimates
capital expenditure to rise to Pounds 125m by 1995-6 from last year's Pounds
57m and Barclays de Zoete Wedd, NIE's financial adviser, says gearing could
reach 65 per cent by 1996-7.
However, Hoare Govett believes real dividend growth should be similar to the
recs in the long term.
