FT  27 JUL 93 / People: UK Tec adviser returns to US
The wheel has come full circle. Cay Stratton, who brought her US experience
in training and community regeneration to the UK nearly six years ago, and
who has been one of the lead architects of radical changes in the delivery
of training in the UK, is returning to the US to advise President Clinton's
administration on the same issues.
Stratton, who has been policy adviser to three successive secretaries of
state for employment in the UK, takes up her new post, as senior policy
adviser to Douglas Ross, assistant secretary at the Department of Labor, in
September.
A graduate of Stamford University, she has spent her career in the fields of
education, training and community economic development. It is a role to
which one of her employers says she has brought 'bags of go, a great deal of
authority and a remarkable ability to bridge the very different worlds of
the private and public sectors'.
In the late 1980s Stratton was chief executive of the Boston Pic. Private
Industry Councils are employer-led organisations which involve the private
sector in education and training. Norman Fowler, the then employment
secretary, met her on an educational visit to learn about Pics and US
vocational training and in 1987 she accepted a one-year post as his special
adviser. She has stayed nearly six, also advising his successors, Michael
Howard and Gillian Shephard.
Stratton was part of a small team, headed by Sir Geoffrey Holland, the
department's former permanent secretary, which laid the foundations for the
government's current policies on training.
These include Training and Enterprise Councils. Stratton was keen that Tecs
should learn from Pics' experience - notably by insisting that Tecs'
directors were senior executives with high local profiles. In the US the
seniority of directors on Pics' boards was allowed to fall; Pics' clout
locally also fell.
Stratton, who regularly works a 70-hour week, should also be credited with
arguing that enterprise activities should be bound closely into Tecs. One
former senior DoE official says: 'I doubt we would have had the same
emphasis on enterprise within Tecs without Cay.'
Nor has she been an easy taskmaster. The official adds: 'She has banged away
at the performance of Tecs in a way that has been uncomfortable for some of
them.'
