FT  26 OCT 93 / BET takes another step towards recovery
BET, the business services group which overstretched itself in a series of
1980s acquisitions, took another step on the road to rehabilitation
yesterday by reporting a 24 per cent increase in pre-tax profits.
However, sales fell slightly, from Pounds 1.09bn to Pounds 1.03bn, in the
six months to September 25. Reduced losses from discontinued operations and
lower interest costs mainly accounted for the increase in pre-tax profits to
Pounds 47m from a restated Pounds 36m.
The group warned: 'Conditions in our market are likely to remain tough for
some time. Despite the significant cost reductions that have been made,
pressure on margins persisted.'
Mr John Clark, chief executive, said BET's three-year restructuring
programme was almost complete, although there would would be more disposals.
Since the sell-off programme began in 1991, the group has shrunk from 180
companies to 69, with 11 non-core units sold in the last six months.
Mr Clark said: 'Attention has now been focused on improving the performance
of the core businesses in the areas of productivity and marketing. The
growth potential of these core businesses is being assessed so as to ensure
that we have the right mix of businesses for the future.'
He said the debt and cost reduction programmes and the introduction of new
management systems had eliminated the serious structural and financial
problems previously facing BET.
Net borrowings were cut from Pounds 65.2m to Pounds 9m, giving gearing of 3
per cent. Interest payments fell from Pounds 8.2m to Pounds 3.2m. Operating
profit from continuing operations declined from Pounds 55.9m to Pounds
50.5m, while losses on discontinued operations were about Pounds 10m down at
Pounds 1.2m.
Textile services suffered from reduced demand and business closures.
However, the restructuring of the UK business helped increase the division's
operating profits from Pounds 13.6m to Pounds 18.9m.
The cleaning services division's operating profits fell from Pounds 10.4m to
Pounds 5.4m because of serious problems in the depressed New York commercial
property market and pressure on prices in the UK.
Security services increased operating profits from Pounds 4.6m to Pounds
6.5m. The group said demand remained strong and the outlook appeared
positive.
Heavy pressure on margins caused profits from plant services to fall from
Pounds 23.8m to Pounds 15.4m. The distribution division's profits were flat
at Pounds 14m, in spite of strong sales growth.
Earnings per share rose to 3.3p (1.5p). The interim dividend was cut from 2p
to 1p, in line with an intention to make the final dividend larger than the
interim.
Lex, Page 20
