FT  17 DEC 93 / International Capital Markets: Algeria faces dilemma over
Dollars 26bn foreign borrowings - The difficulties of economic reform
Algeria's economic reforms, pledged by Mr Redha Malek when he became prime
minister four months ago, began to take shape this week. After preliminary
talks with the IMF, Mr Malek said his government would seek a multilateral
refinancing of Algeria's foreign borrowings, which total Dollars 26bn and
will this year absorb more than four-fifths of Algeria's foreign currency
receipts.
Part of Algeria's debt was refinanced between 1989 and 1991. Its commercial
bank debt of Dollars 1.5bn (70 per cent of which is held by Japanese banks)
and its Dollars 2.7bn of bilateral debt with Italy was refinanced.
The latter operation, however, met with strong opposition from the French
Treasury, whose views carry considerable weight among Algeria's state,
private and multilateral creditors.
The relative success of the policy provided Algeria with precious breathing
space, as did budget deficit cuts, but the gains were quickly frittered
away.
Various governments have re-established the state monopoly on foreign trade
and pumped AD308bn (Dollars 12.8bn) into unreformed state corporations. The
1 per cent budget surplus notched up for 1991 looks like being turned this
year into a deficit equal to 17 per cent of GDP.
The respective advantages of rescheduling or refinancing debt have not
changed but Algeria has a weaker hand today. Moreover, the weakness of the
oil price - 97 per cent of export receipts are from hydrocarbons - and
continued political turmoil have led leading western creditors to doubt
Algeria's ability to push through economic reforms.
If agreement is reached with the IMF, several factors argue in favour of
refinancing. The first is the strong opposition to a rescheduling from
Japan, which holds about Dollars 4.5bn of medium and long-term Algerian
paper, 75 per cent of which is not state-guaranteed.
A senior official of Japan's export credit agency, Jexim, put it bluntly:
'The request for debt rescheduling will not only make it impossible for
Japan to accept new commitments for a considerable time, but will also make
it more difficult for Japanese parties to proceed with the implementation of
commercial contracts and disbursement of existing loan contracts.'
Japan is involved in a major co-financing with the World Bank while Japanese
companies are key players in the building of liquid gas and condensate
plants for Sonatrach, the state oil company, factories which hold a
significant key to Algeria's future export earnings.
Rescheduling would also lead to western export credit organisations
suspending, at least for a few months, cover on Algerian loans. Just over
half Algerian foreign borrowings are guaranteed by western credit
organisations.
France, which favours rescheduling, holds FFr33bn worth of Algerian paper,
FFr27bn of which in long and medium-term debt. Its leading banks hold little
debt that is not guaranteed by Coface, France's export credit agency.
Were Algeria to reach agreement with the IMF, it could draw on about Dollars
1bn made up of an IMF loan and the second tranche of a number of World Bank
and EU loans which have been frozen for the past two years. However, this
figure is well short of Algeria's external financing needs.
