FT  08 APR 93 / PM moves to restart Ulster talks: Government to draw up
proposals for devolved assembly
THE GOVERNMENT is to draw up proposals for a devolved government in Northern
Ireland in an attempt to restart political talks in the province, Mr John
Major announced yesterday.
Increasing the pressure on Unionist and nationalist politicians to resume
negotiations, the prime minister said: 'There is an opportunity to catch the
mood, to achieve a political accommodation.' He would be proposing an 'early
start' to new talks.
Fresh reminders of the continuing terrorist threat came when a bomb exploded
outside a Conservative club in London, causing disruption to rush-hour
traffic at nearby Euston and St Pancras stations, but injuring no one.
Earlier, three soldiers were wounded in an IRA mortar attack in Northern
Ireland.
Mr Major returned from Ulster yesterday evening to join Mrs Mary Robinson,
Irish president, in attending a memorial service for the two victims of an
IRA bomb attack on Warrington last month. US President Bill Clinton sent a
strongly worded message condemning those who 'support and perpetuate'
violence - suggesting he is determined not to give succour to IRA supporters
in the US.
Last night also saw the meeting in Ulster of IRA representatives with Irish
Senator Gordon Wilson whose daughter was killed in the 1987 Enniskillen
remembrance day massacre. After a meeting described as 'friendly and
forthright', the IRA issued a statement saying 'peace will only come about'
by recognising the 'proven failure of partition' and accepting the
'fundamental right of the Irish people to self determination'.
The Northern Ireland Office yesterday appeared undecided about what the
government's proposals for Ulster would involve. The government's move,
however, will end ministers' past role as 'neutral' arbiters between local
politicians and the Irish government.
Sir Patrick Mayhew has said he would like to devolve wide-ranging powers to
a new Northern Ireland administration - 'at least' to the same degree as the
Stormont government that was suspended in 1972. Sir Patrick could also
propose new mechanisms to involve the Irish republic in Northern Ireland and
protect the nationalist minority.
The main Northern Ireland parties appeared content yesterday to resume talks
after the province's local elections in May - although they may be low key
initially.
However, the Unionist and nationalist traditions appear as far apart as ever
on a political settlement. Mr Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist
party, said he wanted firmer assurances that the Irish government was
prepared to negotiate away its constitutional claim on the north before he
entered talks.
Vision of an end to the Ulster troubles, Page 8
