FT  30 APR 93 / UK Company News: Meyer launches Pounds 70m cash call
MEYER International, the timber supplier which owns the Jewson builders'
merchants chain, yesterday announced a Pounds 70m rights issue.
The money is to be used to reduce debt and to help finance working capital
as the construction industry moves out of recession and demand for building
material increases.
The group is offering shareholders one new share at 290p for every four
already held. Following the announcement, Meyer's share price slid 20p to
348p but recovered to close only 3p down at 365p.
Mr Richard Jewson, chairman, said that it was unlikely that profits in the
short term would return to previous levels. The company therefore intends to
reduce the final dividend to 5.8p (12.3p) making a total for the year of 10p
(16.5p).
Pre-tax profits for the 12 months to end-March this year were estimated to
be not less than Pounds 14.2m, producing earnings per share of 10.2p under
the new FRS 3 accounting standard.
For the previous year Meyer reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 24.6m and
earnings of 19.2p. Under FRS 3 this was restated to a Pounds 19.9m deficit
and losses per share of 23.3p.
Proceeds from the issue initially would be used to reduce net borrowings,
which had risen to Pounds 131m - equivalent to gearing of 51 per cent on
shareholders' funds of about Pounds 255m.
COMMENT
Meyer has estimated that working capital needs to increase by an average of
Pounds 18m for every extra Pounds 100m of turnover. It remains cautious
about the speed of recovery in UK construction - commercial building remains
severely depressed, but clearly needs to raise money at some stage. Given
the recent rise in the group's share price, now was as good a time as any to
launch a rights - particularly as other construction related companies may
be queueing up to follow its example. The company has done well to reduce
its overheads, but Wolsey, given its exposure to US recovery, still looks a
more attractive investment for supporters of this sector.
