FT  09 OCT 93 / Arts: Courageous writer wins Nobel Prize
IT WOULD be a great pity if the award of the Nobel Prize for Literature to
the black American novelist Toni Morrison were to be seen as merely another
gesture of political correctness because it rewards the work of a courageous
writer who has charted new territory for the modern novel in a hard clear
prose that has the resonance of poetry. The picture we get of the lives of
black people in America from a novel like Beloved (1987) serves as a vivid
and moving corrective to the world depicted by Harriet Beecher Stowe in
Uncle Tom's Cabin.
Morrison gives us slavery as it really was, the beatings and rapings, the
cruel use of leg-irons and mouth-clamps, the interminable punishments
imposed for trivial offences. Her account is both unbearable and
unforgettable through her deep understanding of the people who endured this
system. She creates not merely individuals but whole families and
communities and the way they transmuted their suffering into irony with
consistent black humour (both senses) and a hearty appetite for the good
things that such a life did have to offer at those moments when the whip was
at bay. She takes a long-term historical view showing how the system was so
inhuman that it contained the seeds of its own ultimate destruction.
An uncompromising realism has been the mark of each of Morrison's six
novels, combined with a willingness to experiment with form. In her most
recent book Jazz (1992) concerning black urban migration her prose mimes the
repeated rhythms and syncopations of the music. It is a remarkable effect
that appears completely spontaneous but Morrison has confessed to having
re-written passages many times to get it absolutely right.
Morrison is thus as much a craftswoman of the novel as an engage campaigner.
She was born Chloe Anthony Wofford in 1931 in Lorain, a steel town near
Cleveland, Ohio. She was the second of four children in a black family
severely hit by the Depression yet succeeded in completing her education at
Howard and Cornell.
Her first novel, The Bluest Eye (1970), had for its heroine a young black
girl in Ohio who believes she has blue eyes. The heroine's incest with her
father, pregnancy, and ultimate insanity was a portent of things to come.
Sula (1973) studied the friendship between two black women throughout the
troubled 1930s while Song of Solomon (1977) and Tar Baby (1981) opened wider
perspectives on the fate of black people and dealt with the heritage of
slavery throughout America and the Caribbean.
Miss Morrison teaches creative writing at the University of Princeton.
Winning this prize (worth Pounds 563,000) to be awarded in Stockholm on
December 10 is likely to make Morrison's courses even more over-subscribed
than they are at present. It is also likely to give a new boost to the cause
of multi-culturalism in American education. Morrison has emerged publicly on
television as a resolute champion of multi-culturalism in direct opposition
to the views of people like her now fellow-Nobel-prize-winner Saul Bellow
and the historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr who continue to uphold the primacy
of the traditional white-oriented culture. It is an explosive issue that
divides American academe into two fiercely hostile camps.
