FT  28 SEP 93 / Ministers seek to reopen Ulster talks with Dublin
THE GOVERNMENT of the Irish Republic yesterday confirmed that an Anglo-Irish
working party is attempting to 'reconcile differences' in putting together a
draft constitutional settlement for Northern Ireland with a view to reviving
the stalled inter-party talks on the province.
But it has also reaffirmed that the Republic's constitutional claim to
jurisdiction over Northern Ireland would be modified to an 'aspiration' only
in the context of an overall settlement.
It emerged at the weekend that both governments had recently instructed
their civil servants to draw up a draft constitutional settlement paper by
the end of October which could be tabled at a new round of inter-party
talks.
The Irish government insisted yesterday that the constitutional issue 'will
only be dealt with through a referendum which is part of an overall and
balanced settlement'.
For the UK, Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said there would
be 'no change whatever' in the constitutional status of Northern Ireland
without the consent of its people.
In Dublin an Irish foreign ministry spokesman said that 'different political
and constitutional scenarios are being discussed and a joint (Anglo-Irish)
working party is engaged in reconciling differences between the two
government positions'.
But there was a sense of confusion and perplexity in Dublin over the turn of
events on the Northern Ireland issue, and suspicion that the latest
statements coming from the British government 'are not unconnected with the
Hume story', according to one official source.
Last Saturday Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour
party, and Mr Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Fein, announced that they are to
submit a joint report to the Irish government on the progress so far of
their bilateral talks, which have been taking place since last April.
Proposals contained in the report are believed to set out a mechanism
through which the IRA could be persuaded to abandon its 23-year military
campaign, and which would then lead to an inclusion of Sinn Fein in the
round-table talks process.
It is thought that Mr Hume's current visit to the US is to seek a US
government-appointed mediator to facilitate 'arms-length' contact between
Sinn Fein and the British and Irish governments.
An Irish government spokesman said: 'The government's objective has always
been to try and stop the killing and establish a lasting peace (in Northern
Ireland) . . . the government looks forward to hearing what progress may
have been achieved in the talks between Mr Hume and Mr Adams.'
A source close to Mr Albert Reynolds, Irish prime minister, said that Mr
Reynolds 'will not be walking away from any proposal that might bring about
(a political settlement)'. Mr Hume is due to brief Mr Reynolds in Dublin
next week after his US visit.
As Downing Street confirmed that the government was trying 'very hard' to
get the talks process back on the rails, Sir Patrick stressed that the
government would not 'talk or negotiate with' anyone who perpetrates or
justifies acts of violence, in a statement pegged to yesterday's bomb
explosion in Belfast.
Lord Hulme, Liberal Democrat Northern Ireland spokesman, said it was
dangerous that 'two separate blueprints for the future' now seemed to be in
draft.
