FT  16 AUG 93 / Warriors in a war of words: Christopher Parkes chronicles
the clashes between Volkswagen and GM
On January 1, Ferdinand Piech was installed as chairman of Volkswagen. He
already knew the approximate scale of the task ahead of him: losses had
soared in the second half of 1992. The company was losing an estimated DM400
on every Golf it sold. Its six German works could break even only if
operated at more than 100 per cent of capacity. As was to emerge later,
full-year net earnings crashed almost 90 per cent to DM147m (Pounds 57.10m)
on record sales of DM85.4bn.
As Dan Jones, the motor industry guru and co-author of The machine that
changed the world, was to remark: VW needed a man like Piech to put a bomb
under the group.
The 56-year-old Austrian engineer had come eagerly to Wolfsburg, VW's
headquarters in Lower Saxony, from the relative calm of the Audi quality car
division in Ingoldstadt, Bavaria, where he had been chairman. The man who
once boasted that he could drive the 120km winding route from Ingoldstadt to
Munich without taking his foot off the accelerator, was pressing on the
pedal even before he had his hands on the wheel.
In mid-November 1992, through the good offices of Bosch, Germany's biggest
and most secretive vehicle components maker, he met his 'soul-mate', Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua. Piech's aim was to lure Lopez away from his job
as vice-president in charge of procurement at General Motors in Detroit and
install him in Wolfsburg.
Lopez, an eccentric, visionary Basque engineer, had been given his GM job in
May. He had been chosen by Jack Smith, GM president, to save the suffering
automotive giant by applying his rigorous cost-reduction tactics through the
agency of his troupe of so-called purchasing department 'warriors'.
Lopez had earned his stripes - and his nickname 'the Russelsheim strangler'
 -as head of purchasing at Adam Opel, the US group's German subsidiary.
Thanks largely to him, Russelsheim-based Opel had become the most profitable
car maker in the country.
Smith knew in December, Lopez says, that he had been approached by VW. But
then, as he did consistently through the following months, the Spaniard was
to assure the group president and his top-level colleagues that he would not
leave. As a trusted executive, he went about his business unhindered.
When he quit abruptly on March 10 this year, suspicions mushroomed about his
and his closest allies' activities in the interim, in which box-loads of
secret and confidential data about most of GM's future European plans were
allegedly systematically collected - only to disappear.
With hindsight, GM now suspects he may already have been working on VW's
behalf as early as December 2 last year. On that day he asked for, and
received 20 days later, GM Europe's so-called Epos list: computer-stored
details of parts prices and suppliers, equivalent to up to 90,000 print-out
sheets. According to Mr Hans Wilhelm Gab, vice-president of GM Europe, they
were of no use to him in his US-based job. Was the bomb already ticking?
In January, Piech met Lopez again, at least once this month, around the time
of an extraordinary meeting of the VW supervisory board on Wednesday January
13.
January 13, Wolfsburg: the 20 men responsible for appointing and overseeing
the conduct of VW top management learn the scale of Mr Piech's plans. As
'preliminary' measures, the group workforce is to be cut from 270,000 to
240,000 in the medium term, and an investment plan agreed the previous
summer is torn up.
Jens Neumann, a close colleague of Piech at Audi, and newly-appointed
director in charge of group strategy, is given extra responsibilities for
'group management development'. The board agrees to meet again on March 16
to review developments.
January 14, Detroit: Lopez drafts a letter in Spanish, to be signed by Jack
Smith, telling a Basque banking and construction consortium that a plan to
build a super-lean production factory in Lopez's homeland has been 'put on
ice' because of over-capacity in Europe and poor business conditions. Lopez
and his countrymen will have to wait for the realisation of his top-secret
dream project, dubbed Plateau 6, on which he and a GM team have worked for
18 months.
January 15, Essen: Lopez meets Neumann for the first time: object, to
introduce the Basque to Klaus Liesen, chairman of Ruhrgas, head of the VW
supervisory board, and the man whose blessing is needed to appoint a new
director. Piech, Neumann says, was prevented from attending.
February 3, Munich: TopBusiness magazine completes its March issue for
printing. It contains an article on VW with pictures of new board members,
including one of Lopez, marked 'NEW', 'Production'. The February issue of
Manager Magazine, just out, earmarks Lopez as successor to Daniel
Goeudevert, Piech's deputy. Negotiations have been going on 'for weeks', it
says.
February 3, Russelsheim: Lopez attends a two-day meeting, called at his
request, at which he allegedly asks for and is given details of GM Europe's
purchasing, costs and new models strategies. During his visit he asks Dino
Martinez, his personal assistant, to clear his Opel office and send all
contents to Spain, care of Cirilo Uribe, a relation.
February 4, Frankfurt: Lopez leaves Opel talks for a meeting with Neumann to
discuss 'possible' employment contract details. The GM executive, Neumann
says, 'leaves open' the question of his joining VW.
February 5, Eisenach: Lopez, due to take Lufthansa flight LH4586 at 08.45 to
Zurich for meetings at GM Europe, turns up unexpectedly at Opel's brand-new
low-cost factory in former East Germany. He allegedly asks for and takes
documents on the plant's low-cost production system.
February 6, Russelsheim: He telephones Wolfsburg. Neumann says between
February 4 and March 9, the two spoke several times on contract details.
February 9, Russelsheim: Martinez ships the first batch of Lopez office
contents to Amorebieta, northern Spain.
Around this time, Jorge Manuel Gutierrez, Lopez's closest GM associate in
Detroit, is allegedly collecting Opel data.
February 17, Detroit: Gutierrez writes to Opel, asking for internal files on
the Corsa, Omega and Astra models and the successor to the Vectra, plus
details on engines and production plants. He will collect them on February
23, when he is due to arrive in Frankfurt.
February 23, Hanover: Officials in the Lower Saxony economics ministry - in
a position to speak since the state owns almost 20 per cent of VW and two
government ministers sit on its supervisory board - say Lopez is to join VW
at the March 16 session of the supervisory board. Privately and publicly,
Lopez denies the reports. 'I am happy here,' he says from Detroit.
March 7, Detroit: Gathering of GM/Opel employees at Gutierrez's home discuss
'rumours' that Lopez is about to go.
March 8: Alleged start of three-week 'recruiting' campaign said to be led by
Lopez, Gutierrez and colleague Rosario Piazza, in which about 40 GM/Opel
managers are asked to join VW. Some of the people approached were offered
double their current salaries.
March 8, Russelsheim: Lopez at top-level Opel international strategy board
meeting, allegedly given 2cm-thick wad of confidential documents on future
strategies.
At this meeting he learns that Spain is no longer to get Plateau 6, 'my
dream plant'. No final decision, but Hungary or Poland are more likely.
March 9, Frankfurt: Lopez meets Neumann for second time. Neumann has a
contract, signed on March 8 by Klaus Liesen. According to Neumann, the
contract was wrongly dated March 5 'because that was when the meeting with
Dr Liesen was originally planned'.
Neumann reminds Lopez that the March 16 supervisory board meeting is close.
Lopez accepts with an added proviso, that VW's life insurance on him should
be effective immediately the contract is signed.
At 21.57, immediately after putting his name to the document, Lopez calls
Piech 'happy that he would soon be a member of the VW family', according to
Neumann.
March 10, Russelsheim: Lopez attends an Opel human resources meeting. He
collects a binder of 'internal' documents and asks Martinez to send them to
Spain. He then flies to Detroit to inform Jack Smith.
March 12, Bloomfield Hills, near Detroit: Jack Smith, Harry Pearce, GM's top
laywer, and Rick Wagoner, finance director visit Lopez and plead with him to
stay. VW formally announces Lopez is changing sides.
March 12, Wolfsburg: Neumann receives call from an 'emotionally shocked'
Lopez at 05.30 Detroit time, who allegedly says he will stick to his promise
to come to VW.
March 13, Wolfsburg: at 11.00 (05.00 in Detroit) Neumann receives another
call. Smith and his wife have applied more 'emotional pressure', but Lopez
is resolute. 'The word of a Basque cannot be broken,' he tells Neumann.
At 16.00 (10.00 in the US) on the same day, Piech tells Neumann to stay in
close touch with the Spaniard.
Half an hour later, Neumann calls Lopez, who tells him four GM board members
just left his home. He has agreed not to leave the US group. He begs Piech
to forgive him. 'He was a broken man,' says Neumann.
But by 14.00 Detroit time, Piech and Lopez have agreed on a year's delay
before he leaves GM for VW. The German group announces that he will not be
coming 'now', and blames interference from Smith.
March 13, Detroit: Late evening, at a social gathering Lopez dictates
outline of a speech in the late evening to Toni Simonetti, his PR aide. The
speech is to be prepared for delivery at 13.00 on March 15, and will explain
why he has chosen to stay in the US. According to her notes, read out
recently in a court, VW had offered to implement his plan for the Plateau 6
factory in Spain. At GM there was now a 'stronger commitment'. Lopez then
instructed Simonetti not mention the plant in her draft.
March 15, Detroit: GM has tried to lock Lopez in with a five-year contract.
At 10.45 US time, as he put the finishing touches to his 'I'm staying'
speech, he calls Neumann, who notes he is 'very unhappy'. Within 15 minutes
he has had a call from Piech, who asks him to get on a aircraft. Lopez
leaves almost immediately with American Airlines.
March 16, Braunschweig airport: Lopez is picked up and taken to a welcoming
VW supervisory board meeting.
In Detroit, Harry Pearce orders a search of the lost executive's office. The
office of Gutierrez, away on GM business, is also searched around this time.
Gutierrez failed to return from his trip and next appeared in Wolfsburg.
March 17, Detroit: Alan Perriton, a GM purchasing executive who searched the
offices, signs an affidavit that none of the secret and confidential
document allegedly in the two executives' possession was to be found.
March 22, Detroit and Russelsheim: six of Lopez's buying executives abruptly
leave GM/Opel, citing 'personal reasons', and turn up at VW, according to
Lopez, without firm job offers or contracts.
Week beginning March 22, Wolfsburg: in VW's Rotehof guesthouse, at the
suggestion of Lopez, his 'warriors' allegedly destroy his personal office
contents - including possibly secret or sensitive Opel material  - to
prevent, it is said, any such data finding its way into VW's possession.
March 25, Wolfsburg: Press statement says Werner Svetlik, procurement chief
for the VW brand since January is to leave and will be replaced by Gutierrez
on April 1.
April 2, Detroit: Harry Pearce writes to Lopez, seeking unequivocal
statement on missing documents. Lopez finally replies about two weeks later
that neither he nor his colleagues took any secrets when they left and nor
did they have any now.
April 2, Frankfurt: A regional court issues a temporary injunction
preventing VW from systematically recuiting Opel and GM staff.
Mid-April, Wiesbaden: Witnesses allegedly hear and see documents being
shredded all night long by Jorge Alvarez Aguirre and Rosario Piazza, two
ex-Opel men who had followed their leader to VW.
April 30, Darmstadt: Opel asks public prosecutors to investigate its
supsicions of theft and industrial espionage.
May 24, Hamburg: Der Spiegel publishes eight-page article: 'A clear view
into the guts' with detailed allegations of spying against Lopez and his
warriors.
May 24, Braunschweig: Lopez reads out a statement: 'What did I bring with
me? My personal knowledge, motivation, a desire to make quantum leaps at VW
 -and no secret documents.'
May 25, Darmstadt: Prosecutors, having examined Opel evidence, announce they
have enough to launch a criminal investigation. Piech tells FT Lopez
approached him first.
June 4, Hanover: VW supervisory board announces full confidence in Lopez at
annual meeting where Piech says the group will return to profit in the
second half after a DM1.25bn loss in the first quarter.
June 14, Hanover: Lopez gives first press conference and says he lost all
will to work at GM when he learnt his dream plant would not be built in his
Basque homeland. In Madrid the same day, he reportedly claims it will be
built instead by VW in 1996. He denies all allegations, and says he and
Piech were brought together by an intermediary.
June 22, Wiesbaden: Four boxes, allegedly left behind by Alvarez and Piazza
in their former home, are handed to police and on to the investigating
prosecutors.
July 2, Wolfsburg: Daniel Goeudevert, once favoured to run VW, resigns, but
is tied in with a consultancy contract.
July 3, Darmstadt: Georg Nauth, prosecutors' spokesman, says the
investigation has advanced a 'decisive step' forward.
July 9: In a newspaper interview Piech says the Basque factory will not be
built by VW at this time. It was out of the question, and he had told Lopez.
July 14, Washington: US justice department lets it be known it is
investigating the Lopez case on its own initiative.
July 15, Hamburg: Der Spiegel presents written and oral evidence in the
state court in a bid to prevent VW from stopping its reporting on the issue.
Witnesses contradict Lopez affidavits on several counts.
July 20, Hamburg: Court allows Der Spiegel almost free rein. Costs, shared
under German law according to the extent to which the parties involved have
won or lost, are split 30:70 per cent against VW.
July 20, Wolfsburg: Neumann issues personal statement on his contacts with
Lopez, stating that he never wanted, asked for, was offered, received or had
any GM secrets.
July 22, Darmstadt: Investigators reveal that boxes from Wiesbaden contain
details of a secret Opel mini-car which 'should be accessible or made known
only to top-level management'. Slides and transparencies also found had been
collated and translated at the express wish of Lopez. 'The investigation
will continue with special emphasis on the interrogation of witnesses from
VW,' the prosecutors' office says.
July 23, Wolfsburg: Inner circle of VW supervisory board summons Piech and
demands explanations and more convincing public response to charges.
July 28, Wolfsburg: Piech reacts at press conference, called at short
notice; accuses Opel of mudslinging, conducting an international war against
VW and Germany, and suggests - saying, 'there were other hands involved' -
that GM/Opel planted secrets in Wiesbaden and may have hacked into VW's
computers to plant secrets there. He says he has ordered an internal
electronic audit.
In Darmstadt, meanwhile, investigators have received from Neumann a detailed
chronology of the tug-of-war in early March when Jack Smith tried to snatch
Lopez back from VW.
July 29, Frankfurt: Hans Wilhelm Gab, vice president of GM Europe, describes
Piech attacks as 'grotesque'. The VW chairman's warlike words suggested a
'psychosis-like bunker mentality'.
July 30, Wolfsburg: Piech calls Smith in bid to call off the offensive.
August 2, Detroit: Smith and Piech talk on telephone. The VW chairman is
told there will be no further communications until he withdraws his
allegations, and even then any contacts should be in writing with David
Herman, Opel chairman.
August 6, Wolfsburg: Klaus Liesen returns from holiday in Majorca to chair
an emergency meeting of the VW supervisory board, following signs of
wavering support among members, and complaints that they were not being kept
fully informed.
Lopez appears to contradict his earlier public claim that he never took any
secret documents and tells board that papers from his former offices were
destroyed, including 'possibly secret or sensitive' GM/Opel material, in
Wiesbaden and during his stay at the group's Rotehof guesthouse in late
March. The aim was to avoid any danger that such data could be circulated
within VW, he says.
The board's statement after the meeting, which pledges Lopez 'unaltered
support', and says no grounds were found to warrant accusations of
industrial espionage, notes: 'No possibly secret documents left the
possession of former GM employees and came into the possession of VW.'
August 8, Russelsheim: Opel welcomes the 'belated' admission that documents
had been destroyed and returns to the attack with a reminder that the
investigations also include suspicions of theft, fraud and perjury. 'Based
on the present status of the investigation, it is apparent that in a
concerted action thousands of pages of highly-sensitive data concerning
cost-structures, manufacturing and future planning were stolen,' Opel says.
August 12, Darmstadt: Prosecutors interrogate Daniel Goeudevert, the former
VW director displaced on July 2. Although out of the inner circle, he is
likely to be well-informed on the timing and details of the initial contacts
between Piech and Lopez.
Nauth, the prosecutors' spokesman, says VW witnesses will be re-examined
after reports that a female employee had told a third party that she had
seen the Opel logo on data she punched into the VW computer system under
instructions from an assistant to Lopez.
August 13, Russelsheim: Opel reveals that the FBI has demanded to see all GM
group data and affidavits relevant to the case. According to one company
official: 'There are box loads of the stuff.'
In Wolfsburg, almost 12 weeks after public prosecutors said they had enough
evidence to support a criminal investigation, the VW supervisory board says
it has appointed auditors, KPMG Deutsche Treuhand, to carry out an
independent probe within Volkswagen.
August 14, Hamburg: Der Spiegel claims a dozen VW trainees punched GM/Opel
data into VW computers at the end of March. Volkswagen says it will make no
further comments on the case.
