FT  09 JUL 93 / Government Bonds: French issues slide as franc comes under
pressure
FRENCH government bonds reacted to heavy currency selling yesterday as a
range of economic data persuaded investors that economic convergence with
Germany had gone far enough.
The data coincided with positive economic German figures and prompted a
rapid movement of money out of France and into Germany.
Economists were engaged in intense debate over whether the move was a
one-off correction or whether it meant the end of the trend for French
government bond yields to move below those in Germany at every point on the
yield curve.
There was certainly a sharp divergence for the yield spread between the two
countries' 10-year bonds, which widened to 21 basis points after being
around 10 basis points for the past few weeks.
Investors focused on a report issued by Insee, the official French
statistics agency, which forecast that national output would fall by 0.7 per
cent this year and that the unemployment rate would rise to 12.5 per cent by
December. These predictions were more pessimistic than earlier government
forecasts which forecast a GDP contraction of 0.4 per cent.
The French franc moved dangerously close to the key FFr3.40 level against
the D-Mark and one analyst argued that it was now profitable for speculators
to sell the franc and buy the D-Mark as short term French rates were lower
than those in Germany.
For France this compares badly with the situation at the end of last year
when there was heavy speculation, but that was countered by the 4 percentage
point differential between French rates and the lower German levels.
It was also pointed out that at a time of deepening recession France was
unlikely to raise rates and so there was less incentive to leave money in
francs.
On the Matif, September 10-year futures fell 0.30 in official trading and a
further 0.20 after the close to hit 119.34.
GERMAN debt prices soared yesterday. There was a feeling that institutions
which responded to comments a few weeks ago by Mr George Soros, the
international speculator, and moved money out of Germany, decided that they
might have gone too short and it was time to correct the weightings.
A revision in the west German consumer price index for June to show a 4.2
per cent year-on-year increase saw German debt prices dip briefly but the
trend was optimistic across the board, and in the futures market the
contract jumped half a point to 95.91.
IN THE UK, gilts confounded many expectations and held firm although they
were sidelined by the franc/D-Mark tussle.
The surprise was heightened because much of the recent buying has come from
German investors and it was thought that they would take the opportunity
yesterday to repatriate funds.
Gilt futures opened slightly lower at 107 1/2 and traded up to 107 by the
close. Underlying gilts were marginally weaker along the curve.
ITALIAN government bonds initially traded higher in the futures market on
the latest vote of confidence for the government but the concentration on
Germany and a weaker lira sent them back to close half a point lower at
103.80. Spain also drifted back, sliding 40 basis points from the start of
trading to 92.90.
US treasury prices drifted lower yesterday morning in dull trading as the
market digested an unexpected decline in weekly jobless claims.
By midday the benchmark 30-year government bond was  7/32 lower at 105 17/32
, yielding 6.690 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year note
was off  1/32 , to yield 4.008 per cent.
The market was depressed by a report that jobless claims fell 12,000 in the
week ended July 3. Most economists had expected claims to rise 5,000 in the
week. Sentiment was dampened further by a string of strong sales
improvements for a number of large US stores.
In the absence of significant economic news, market participants are waiting
to see whether next week's release of June's producer price index and
consumer price index will provide fresh signs of inflation.
