FT  10 MAY 93 / Management: Ford's engineers become lateral thinkers / A
look at the company's new programme to spark creativity
Ford Europe is undertaking what could be the biggest profit-motivated
retraining and re-motivating exercise in the field of production and
engineering. The object, according to Tom Smith, co-ordinator of
occupational psychology at Ford Training and Education, is to make better
motor cars available more quickly.
'As a company we could see areas where the decision-making process stifled
creativity. The aim of the Education Training Quality Improvement Plan
(Equip) is to remove obstacles at all levels, and hopefully everything we
achieve will show through quickly on the cars themselves.'
A few years ago that type of statement would have verged upon heresy in
Henry Ford's empire. But as western manufacturers have watched the Japanese
and latterly the Koreans, slash new model development times from five years
to two, corporate structures have come in for overdue questioning.
Part of the aim is to raise the level of ingenuity and efficiency of the
engineering staff and to change the perception of the engineer within the
organisation.
'Our engineers are first class but if a creative man feels that he is being
badly managed or badly rewarded, he can soon feel penalised because of his
skills. So the wider programme extends to all areas of management,' says
Smith.
Originally conceived by Ford UK, the programme has now been adopted by Ford
Europe which plans to extend it to some 4,000 engineers. Allowing for the
projected individual timespan of the programme - some 15 months - its scale
is enormous.
But just how do you identify the creative engineer? The question is far more
complex than it appears; for instance, normal personnel tests tend to be
self-defeating. Faced with a questionnaire asking whether you have: very few
creative ideas; more than a few; many ideas; would anyone other than a fool
opt for the first?
According to Smith's colleague Fiona Patterson, the answer lies in
questioning established engineering values. 'There is a tendency to
over-engineer solutions to what can be simple problems. This, as with the
set hierarchical structure, is not unique to Ford and probably begins at
university. The creative engineer will have some ability to think
laterally.'
One test devised by the team for use at recruitment level is to take a
ball-bearing travelling down a ramp into and through a funnel (normal time
about five seconds) and ask candidates to extend its journey to 20 seconds.
The majority of engineering graduates seek to slow the ball on the ramp with
cardboard or masking tape. Few bother to ask if they can move the funnel and
even fewer grasp the principle that tilting the funnel will cause the
ball-bearing to spin inside the lip and gain the extra time. A small test,
but a good pointer towards the kind of lateral thinking sought by Ford.
As well as identifying and motivating the creative element, Equip is seeking
to break down other long-term barriers towards engineering excellence.
In common with most retraining programmes the course offers sections on
problem-solving and constructional use of theoretical skills. But where it
differs from other such programmes is in seeking to develop a range of
behavioural skills.
As sequential development and manufacturing is replaced by faster
simultaneous methods, so teamwork is of increasing importance. This is where
the sports psychologists come in. The same disciplines which allow teamwork
on the football pitch can be harnessed in the design and development
processes.
The prize, if Ford succeeds, is engineers freed from their present
constraints and able to match the Japanese in the all-important 'surprise
and delight' field.
At its most simplistic level, this philosophy states that if the product
performs satisfactorily on all other levels - for instance, in a car that
would mean utility, economy, reliability and value-for-money  - the deciding
factors in whether a customer buys one product over another is how many
'surprise and delight' features are available.
To succeed, the company must understand what the public will want, before
they really demand it and it is up to the engineers to provide it. It is a
field in which the Japanese excel. With that in mind, as the first 300 Ford
engineers went into the Equip programme in March, the question of whether
psychologists can speed up the production process took on a great deal of
importance.
