FT  20 MAY 93 / Russia offers troops for Bosnia's borders
RUSSIA has given a pledge to the international mediators on the Yugoslav
crisis that it will provide troops to monitor Bosnia's borders, officials
close to the peace conference said in Geneva yesterday.
The officials said the undertaking was given over the telephone by Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, in Rome to meet European foreign and
defence ministers attending a meeting of the Western European Union.
The number of troops to be provided by Russia has not been specified but is
understood to be relatively small. The mediators, Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald
Stoltenberg, were due to fly from Naples to Ukraine and Belarus yesterday to
ask for similar pledges from these two countries.
Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg, who want to start implementing their peace
plan for Bosnia, in spite of its rejection by the Bosnian Serbs, are
pressing members of the UN Security Council to commit troops for this
purpose.
Both Mr Kozyrev and Lord Owen said Tuesday's truce agreement between the
warring Bosnian Moslems and Croats, formerly allies in the struggle against
Serb domination, was a first sign that the peace plan could start to be
implemented at least partially. The US, however, has made it clear that it
does not consider it realistic to implement the plan as long as it has not
been accepted by all parties.
The continuing disagreement between the major powers on what action to take
following the rejection of the Vance-Owen plan by the Bosnian Serbs led to
Washington's refusal to attend a special Security Council meeting at foreign
minister level, which Mr Kozyrev proposed for Friday to discuss Bosnian
policy.
However, both Mr Kozyrev and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state,
have played down reports of a serious rift between their two countries or
between the US and its European allies. Mr Kozyrev, as well as Mr Douglas
Hurd, British foreign secretary, and their French opposite number, Mr Alain
Juppe, are due to meet Mr Christopher in Washington at the end of this week.
Mr Christopher said yesterday he was sure he would find some common ground
on Bosnia in his talks with the three foreign ministers.
Bosnian Serbs voted by 96 per cent to reject the Vance-Owen peace plan for
Bosnia in a referendum last weekend.
After the result, Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb leader, said his people
would never give up their self-proclaimed Bosnian Serb republic, though they
would be ready to accept a confederation with separate Croat and Moslem
states within Bosnia-Hercegovina.
A declaration adopted by the Bosnian Serbs' assembly last night said that
the Bosnian Serb armed forces had been ordered to halt all military
operations, in keeping with ceasefire agreements signed with the other
parties in the conflict.
However, given the breakdown of innumerable ceasefire agreements since the
beginning of the conflict more than a year ago, it was not immediately
evident what value should be attached to the latest declaration, adopted
shortly after the publication of the referendum results.
