FT  15 JAN 93 / Management: Stirring up the waters - Yorkshire Water is
peeling away layers of old management thinking
The difficult transition from public to private ownership has thrown up
strange watchwords at Yorkshire Water, one of Britain's 10 water and sewage
companies privatised in 1989. Onions, Maces and Matsushita are just some of
the management tools Yorkshire hopes will prompt a revolution.
Yorkshire's problem, according to senior managers, is that the structure and
ethos inherited from pre-privatisation days do not suit the private sector.
In places the company is overmanned and inefficient. Its management style
remains too hierarchical, with little information flow except from top to
bottom.
'As an ex-public sector, ex-nationalised industry, we have an attitude of
saying 'No',' according to Trevor Newton, group managing director.
Since 1990 Yorkshire has hired management consultants, sent Newton to
Harvard University for three months and organised a series of workshops for
managers. As a result, it has introduced a three-pronged plan - probably the
most radical in the water industry - to restructure its business and change
its culture.
The first prong, known as Onion, will strip away non-essential services,
such as pipe laying, from the 'core', regulated business. These services
will have to compete in the private sector or be closed.
Last year, Yorkshire and its consultants decided that 21 of its 40 areas of
business, or about 65 per cent of employees, could - over time - be put
outside the core.
From next April, Yorkshire will change its structure from one based on 10
geographical regions to one based on functions, like water resources. About
100 middle to senior managers will leave the company through voluntary
severance because of the change.
The largest business so far placed outside the core is Leeds Pipeline
Services, a new company made up of about 60 former employees, involved in
laying and maintaining water mains. It still relies on contracts from the
core for most of its business. But John Fenwick, operations manager, hopes
to increase non-core work to 20 per cent in the next few years.
Because work is now carried out at market prices, rather than cost, there is
an incentive for LPS to maximise profit by finishing contracts early. Strict
job demarcation rules have been changed and efficiency gains, which used to
lead to job cuts, now mean LPS can bid for more work. Fenwick estimated time
lost due to sickness and other absences has been cut by 100 hours to 150
hours a week.
Previously sceptical employees are beginning to accept the changes. Steve
Pennistone, a senior shop steward, said: 'So far they've stuck to their
promises. It's running much more efficiently and the lads are doing better
out of it.'
A Pounds 750 bonus paid because performance was ahead of targets helped win
employee support. Staff also noticed LPS continued to recruit workers when
other companies in Leeds were laying them off.
Some employees are less happy, complaining that the drive for profits will
compromise service and quality. Others say the new system has created
divisions within Yorkshire Water and its management. And the hidden costs of
contracting out - such as stricter and more costly monitoring of
contractors' performance - are not yet visible.
John Taylor, Yorkshire's deputy managing director, acknowledged that forcing
change could be disruptive. But he hopes LPS's example will prove a strong
incentive. Another understated incentive is that areas which do not welcome
change could lose work and jobs to areas which do.
Yorkshire's second prong is Mace, an acronym for a Pounds 75m new technology
programme which could lead to greater efficiencies and further contracting
out of tasks. One area being studied, for example, is the use of sensors and
telemetry to identify illegal toxic waste before it reaches a sewage plant
and relay this information to a central control. The sewage treatment
process could then be adjusted remotely.
If they are to succeed, Onion and Mace require another change - in
Yorkshire's managers and staff. Although progress was made in the 1980s,
Newton believes the company is still too hierarchical. Communication between
employees and managers is poor, achievement often goes unrewarded and ideas
still largely come from the top.
This works against Onion and dilutes Mace. Water companies are also being
told by the regulator to improve customer service standards, so Yorkshire
and its employees have to become more open and responsive to change.
The new strategy was presented to Yorkshire's 100 senior managers in
February 1991. They were told to spread cultural change through the company,
'energise' their people, be more positive, communicate with and empower
their staff and recognise their successes. Drawing on the example of
Matsushita, the Japanese electronics company, Yorkshire employees were told
that profit was a by-product of business, not the only aim.
The response was mixed. Newton said that about 50 of Yorkshire's 100 senior
managers agree fully with the changes.
Ideas are starting to flow up management lines instead of down and managers
are learning to recognise and reward good work. Most recognition is
informal, like 'saying 'thank you' and drinks after work', Newton said. A
financial reward system, which only applied to senior management, has been
scrapped. Instead, Yorkshire is studying a company-wide system based on
performance.
There has been opposition among some managers to specific changes, for
example an annual company-wide opinion survey asking employees what they
thought of their managers.
Newton's zest for change has led to uncertainty about job security. His
methods have also been unconventional. For example, he issued a memo banning
team briefings in order 'to improve communications'. He felt Yorkshire's
team briefings did not work because they only allowed information to flow
from the top downwards.
Yorkshire has organised 'learning, coaching and counselling' sessions where
staff are taught what to expect of managers under the new system. 'The way
to change managers is to change the expectations of their people,' according
to Newton.
But he and his fellow converts admit, as products of the hierarchical public
sector themselves, that some managers will never change. 'I've also been
brought up in an environment of shouting at people to get things done. Some
people don't recognise this has to change. They will either get driven out
by their people, or by me.'
