FT  05 NOV 93 / Powers of persuasion: The fight for freedom of speech in
Russia
Just one month ago, parliamentary rebels were storming Moscow's main
television tower. Mr Yegor Yakovlev, a 63-year-old newspaper editor and
former television chief, says the media are now fighting a new battle, this
time for freedom of speech - with the country's first democratically elected
president on the other side of the barricades.
The first salvo in that battle came from Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, President
Boris Yeltsin's new information minister, who announced recently that the
media's task was to help develop a 'new democratic ideology' for society. In
future, he said, subsidies designed to help all media, most of which are
state-owned, switch to a market system would go only to those that helped
construct this ideology.
'I used to measure my freedom by the degree of criticism I could level at
the authorities,' says Mr Yakovlev, who, as editor of Moscow News, helped
roll back the frontiers of communist censorship under President Mikhail
Gorbachev's glasnost policy. 'But when the democrats defeated the communists
with the August 1991 coup, we found ourselves tied to the regime.'
In the latest struggle, between Mr Yeltsin and his parliamentary
adversaries, many editors chose to back the president and his radical reform
programme. The defeat of the communist hardliners ironically cleared the way
for presidential supporters like Mr Shumeiko to revert to a communist
conception of the media as a tool for 'shaping social consciousness'. In
particular, Mr Yeltsin's supporters want to use the media to help Russia's
Choice, the electoral bloc set up by leading reformers in the cabinet, win a
majority in the December 12 parliamentary elections.
Promising free and fair elections, Mr Yeltsin has invited foreign observers
to monitor the polls. The electoral law promises 'equal airtime' to all
participants. Mr Yeltsin has also set up a special 'arbitration court' to
'protect mass media against unlawful interference in their activities during
the electoral campaign and unhindered propaganda for or against candidates'.
Even if each party is given equal amount of time for political broadcasts,
the real test of fairness will be in the balance of day-to-day news coverage
and the amount of debate shown among candidates.
Newspapers - including the pro-communist Pravda, which reopened this week
after being closed in the wake of the uprising - are also lining up to
campaign for alternative political groups. Rabochaya Tribuna, funded by Mr
Arkady Volsky's Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, is backing his
centrist Civic Union alliance. But the newspapers' influence remains
negligible compared with that of television.
This is mainly because television in Russia, the biggest country in the
world, covers huge expanses of territory that candidates cannot hope to
cover, and because of a strong perception among Russians that what appears
on television must be true.
'Of course we believe what we see on television, out of habit, all the more
so because the people now in charge are supposed to be democrats, not
communists,' says Olga, a Moscow cook. 'But sometimes you feel that things
are not quite right. I try to watch all the news programmes and look out for
differences between them to form my opinion.'
Mr Yakovlev, who was chief of the Ostankino television station, one of the
two nationwide state-owned channels, until he was sacked last winter by Mr
Yeltsin for trying to stay neutral over the struggle with parliament, claims
he is again working for a 'one-party system'. Its election coverage has been
dominated by stories about Russia's Choice, with only a few references to
what other parties are saying.
The government's increasingly strong-arm tactics towards the media also
underline the vulnerable economics of an industry dependent on state
subsidies. Russian Television, the other main state network, for instance,
receives Rbs30bn (Dollars 25,000) a year; its advertising revenues total
just Rbs400m.
Emerging independent companies, such as the New Television Company
established by Mr Vladimir Gussinsky, a banking and construction magnate,
are not immune to government pressure. NTV employees say that the
state-owned St Petersburg television channel is being urged to break off its
contract to broadcast NTV programmes, which are seen as too independent.
Its weekly news digest recently aired interviews with the leaders of
anti-government parties, ranging from the pro-reform bloc of Mr Grigory
Yavlinsky, the economist, to the Civic Union. It also appealed for a public
voice for the supporters of the dissolved parliament. This, however, was
followed by a complimentary report on Mr Yeltsin's trip to the town of
Yaroslavl the day before. The programme ended with the 'sensational news'
that Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, former parliamentary speaker and co-leader of
parliament's revolt, had, according to an Arab newspaper, received millions
of dollars in secret subsidies from Iraq.
Attempts to use the media for the government's own ends pose two immediate
risks for Mr Yeltsin.
One is that he risks alienating supporters of economic and political
reforms. The second is that it could drive underground the views of a
sizeable minority - 10-20 per cent of the population - who supported the
parliamentary rebels. When the rebels stormed Ostankino television station
on October 3, it was because Mr Alexander Rutskoi, the former vice-president
now in jail for ordering the attack, said they needed airtime to help them
seize power. But there was also anger among the hardliners against what they
saw as biased coverage.
Now that that struggle is over, and there is no parliament to hold the
government to account, balanced coverage has become imperative in the
transition to a new parliament. As Mr Anatoly Sobchak, the liberal mayor of
St Petersburg, put it: 'In conditions of presidential rule, it is more
essential than ever to create as democratic an atmosphere as possible.'
But old habits are unlikely to die quickly. Indicative of the leadership's
cynicism about the media was the response of Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the
central bank governor, who was accountable to the former parliament, to an
Izvestia report that he had transferred Rbs600m to the Russian parliament
the day after Mr Yeltsin suspended it. 'Yes, that's so,' he reportedly told
Mr Igor Golembiovsky, the newspaper's editor. 'But why did you have to write
about it?'
While it remains uncertain how democratic the new Russian parliament will
be, the media remains the only source of healthy criticism of the
government. If Mr Yeltsin denies such expression, it will indicate that his
rule is becoming irreversibly intolerant.
