FT  16 SEP 93 / Public pay freeze 'torpedoed' claims Labour: Industry says
price pressures 'almost totally absent' - Commercial performance patchy
THE GOVERNMENT'S attempt to justify a virtual freeze on public-sector pay
had been torpedoed by its own statistics, Mr Gordon Brown, Labour's shadow
chancellor, said yesterday.
He attacked Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, for
describing Britain as an 'inflation-free' economy when he must have known
that within 24 hours official figures would record increases in the actual
and underlying rate of inflation.
Mr Brown said: 'The government's talk of zero inflation and an
inflation-free environment has been a pretext for trying to introduce its
new incomes policy for the public sector.' The government, he said, wanted
to cut the living standards of millions of people while the real cost of
living was going up.
Mr Brown also accused the government of failing to acknowledge that by the
end of the year inflation in Britain was likely to be higher than the
average in the G7 group of leading industrial countries.
Deploring claims about 'zero inflation' he urged ministers to ensure there
was no repetition of the damage inflicted on Britain in the 1980s, when Mr
Nigel Lawson was chancellor.
Mr Brown said the government was increasing taxes and cutting living
standards.
Questioned about the likelihood of the Labour party backing any strike
action by unions representing public-sector workers, he said negotiation
should be the way forward.
Mr Brown called on Mr John Major, the prime minister, to agree to a meeting
with the TUC. 'The government's high-handed behaviour on the issue of public
sector pay should come to an end,' he said.
Mr Alan Beith, treasury spokesman for the Liberal Democrats, said that the
latest figures simply showed that it was 'foolish for ministers to claim
they had defeated inflation'.
Renewing his party's demand for an independent central bank, he said there
was a need for continued vigilance against rising inflation.
