FT  16 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Shephard hopeful that Argentina
will lift 'mad cow' ban
MRS Gillian Shephard said she hoped for a rapid lifting of the ban on
imports of British cattle to Argentina after talks held during her recent
trade promotion trip to three South American countries.
Argentina remains one of 17 countries still banning British cattle for
breeding because of the outbreak of 'mad cow disease' in the 1980s.
Mrs Shephard who has left officials behind in Argentina to continue
negotiations on lifting of the ban, said some very real progress had been
made. 'Not that Argentinian beef needs improving - they have some of the
most magnificent animals in the world - but there is enormous enthusiasm for
freshening the stock and there will be opportunities for co-operation.'
The ban applies chiefly to frozen embryos and semen used for introducing new
strains to beef cattle.
Mrs Shephard said Argentina was also interested in improving techniques in
the pig industry and was keen to co-operate with UK experts.
Mr Eric Thain, executive director of the Scottish Agricultural College, who
accompanied Mrs Shephard on her trip, said he had agreed a deal to
co-operate with Argentina's technology institute on a wide range of farming
issues, including pig breeding. Mr Thain will also be helping the Argentines
with sustainable farming methods and vaccinations for foot and mouth
disease.
Mrs Shephard touched on the sensitive issue of fish stocks in the South
Atlantic during her trip, but she said the issue of sovereignity of the
Falkland Islands was not mentioned.
A two-week spell of dry weather in Argentina's farming belt could hurt
production of the 1993-94 wheat crop, traders have warned, Reuter reports
from Buenos Aires.
Stunted seedling growth in vast crop areas - caused by the recent lack of
rain and a previous 70-day drought - could inflict losses of up to 1m
tonnes, they added.
Seasonal wheat sowing was concluded in the past week, with farmers planting
a total 5.2m hectares.
