FT  23 JUN 93 / Algeria unveils blueprint for fresh elections
ALGERIA'S military-backed five-man presidency has unveiled a draft blueprint
for 'the return of the electoral process' in the country, according to which
presidential elections will be held by 1996 at the earliest.
Under the blueprint, circulated on Monday to political parties and other
interest groups, the ruling High State Council (HSC), as the joint
presidency is known, will hand over power at the end of December to a new
presidential body. This will oversee a transition period of two to three
years before elections.
A National Consultative Council, embracing political, economic and social
groups, will be formed to advise the presidency during the transition, along
with a new transitional government, according to the document. It also
commits Algeria to an accelerated opening of its failing and largely
state-held economy, saying 'our economy needs, now more than ever, another
strategy, a new model'.
The draft plan follows three rounds of talks between the HSC and several,
though not all, of Algeria's leading opposition parties and national
associations. The dialogue excluded among others the outlawed Islamic
Salvation Front (FIS), whose proximity to outright victory in a 1991 general
election prompted the cancellation of the poll by the government, and threw
Algeria into its present political crisis.
The HSC's announcement is the first timetable for the resumption of any form
of democracy since it took over from President Chadli Bendjedid after the
abortive first round of elections. Its decision to hand over at the end of
this year coincides with what would have been the expiry of Mr Chadli's
presidential term.
The document is due to be discussed at a national conference of political
and other interest groups, possibly next month. The resulting proposals,
which Monday's document says will include alterations to the electoral law
and some parts of the constitution, will be put to a referendum in the
autumn. The 1989 constitution will stay in place during the transition.
Diplomats in Algiers said the HSC's programme was designed to rally what
consensus the government can muster while attempting to shore up its
legitimacy in the absence of elections. However, they pointed out that
political parties were still likely to disagree considerably on the detail
of the blueprint.
Moreover, the proposals come as the government tightens further its military
crackdown on FIS extremists in the face of a steady series of bloody FIS
ambushes of police and military targets. More than 15,000 troops are
deployed in and around the capital.
Although the document says that Islam will remain the 'state religion' and
is the 'foundation of society and the root of its values', it does not
envisage lifting the ban on FIS, which drew some 3m votes in the 1991 poll.
Instead, it emphasises that the government will 'proceed with the
eradication of terrorism' during the transition.
Francis Ghiles adds: Prof Mohamed Boukhobza, head of Algeria's National
Institute for Global Strategy and a respected sociologist, was assassinated
yesterday in Algiers, knifed in his flat. His murder comes three months
after the slaying of his predecessor and former education minister, , Prof
Djilalli Lyabes.
Meanwhile 40 conscript soldiers in a platoon hunting Islamic fundamentalists
in the Chrea mountainous range above Blida, south of Algiers, were killed at
the weekend, it was learnt yesterday. The massacre was the worst since the
insurrection began.
