FT  05 OCT 93 / Letters to the Editor: Lethal cocktail exacerbating economic
problems in Africa
Sir, World Bank President Lewis Preston (Personal View, September 27) is
right; the magnitude of sub-Sahara's deepening crisis presents the
international community with a formidable development challenge. The
question is, are the policies of northern governments, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund capable of meeting it?
Not if proceedings at the World Bank-IMF annual meeting are anything to go
by. Yet again, northern governments missed an opportunity to address
sub-Saharan Africa's debt crisis, with British efforts to secure agreement
on a plan to write off two-thirds of the region's debt foundering on
Japanese resistance. The upshot is that debt servicing will continue to
drain the region of Dollars l0bn annually, or a quarter of export earnings.
These resources are desperately needed for investment in health, education
and the physical infrastructure vital to economic recovery.
With an average debt-to-export ratio of 400 per cent, higher than for Latin
America during the worst days of its debt crisis, the chances of sub-Saharan
Africa attracting the private capital which Mr Preston regards as vital to
recovery are negligible. That is why Oxfam is calling on the World Bank and
northern governments to increase diplomatic pressure on Japan to comply with
the Trinidad terms. As your leader of September 28 ('Debt relief cannot
wait') rightly observes, debt write-offs alone will not resolve Africa's
crisis. Equally urgent is a review of structural adjustment programmes,
designed and implemented under World Bank and IMF tutelage.
Nobody with a concern for Africa can deny the case for adjustment, or the
damage inflicted by policies such as over-valued exchange rates, blanket
protectionism of inefficient industries, or the heavy taxation of peasant
producers by state marketing monopolies. However, adjustment policies are
manifestly not establishing a platform either for sustained economic
recovery or for successful poverty alleviation. This is reflected in the
fact that investment levels in countries undergoing adjustment are lower
than in 1980, and in the persistence of high inflation and unsustainable
budget deficits.
The IMF's dogmatic attachment to reducing inflation through punitive
interest rates, and to rapid import liberalisation, provides part of the
explanation for this failure. Across the region, a lethal cocktail of rising
costs and cut-throat competition from abroad has caused mass unemployment,
and the collapse of labour intensive industries across the region. In many
countries, it is the resulting shortages of goods, rather than lax monetary
policy, which is fuelling inflation.
Oxfam believes that African governments, northern governments,
non-government organisations and the World Bank should unite around a new
agenda for recovery and social justice. That agenda must enshrine a
commitment to debt relief, and to redistributive policies which enable poor
people to benefit from market reforms. Without that commitment, Africa's
accelerating descent into social and economic catastrophe will continue
uninterrupted into the next century.
David Bryer,
director,
Oxfam,
274 Banbury Road,
Oxford OX2 7DZ
