FT  28 AUG 93 / Travel: Puffins and polecats, at home in Wales - Islands,
estuaries, Snowdonia. Michael J. Woods describes the wildlife of Wales, from
cetaceans to the red kite
A STRANGE and mournful wail filtered up from beneath our feet as if some
lost soul was crying in despair from the depths of the earth. The only light
came from the flickering flames on the dark horizon and a slight glow from
the stars as we stumbled forward. Something flopped away from us, struggling
over the uneven grass like a grounded spirit of the night.
Black and white, with wings outstretched, it made pathetic but vain attempts
to take to the air. No effort was required to catch the bird; as I lifted it
skywards, it spread its long wings and, returned to its true element, glided
away with ease.
It was a Manx shearwater, a short-term occupant of one of the old rabbit
holes on Skomer Island off the Pembrokeshire coast, in Wales. More than
100,000 come here every spring to nest in the shelter of their underground
bunkers, safe from the predatory intentions of gulls.
Flying aces, they glide over the stormy oceans with grace, dipping an
occasional wing-tip in the water as if to belittle its power. On land they
are all but helpless, staying hidden under ground during the day and only
venturing out under cover of darkness. Their half-eaten corpses strewn on
the rabbit-cropped turf, particularly around full moon, tell of a successful
night's hunting for the gulls.
In spite of the proximity of Milford Haven and the burning beacons of its
oil refineries, Skomer is a diamond in the Welsh wildlife crown. In addition
to shearwaters, it has large colonies of nesting sea-birds including puffins
and guillemots. Choughs swirl around its cliffs while short-eared owls hunt
its special Skomer voles. Skomer is also one of the most important breeding
sites for grey seals in southern Britain: about 100 pups are born there
every autumn.
Wales is well-blessed with wildlife islands. Further off-shore from Skomer
is Skokholm, which has storm petrels as well as many of Skomer's species;
even more remote Grassholm supports one of the largest gannet colonies in
the northern hemisphere.
Ramsey Island, off St David's Head, has been purchased recently by the Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds. A number of rare birds nest there
including peregrine falcons; there is also a large grey seal colony and a
herd of red deer. Also noted for its birds is Bardsey, accessible by boat
from Pwllheli, which has its own bird and field observatory.
All these islands, along with Anglesey and various headlands on the Welsh
coast, are good spots from which to watch for passing cetaceans, although
less-dedicated whale watchers might have more luck with the resident
bottle-nosed dolphins which live in Cardigan Bay and can be seen off New
Quay Head.
In less rocky areas there are outstanding examples of salt marshes and
estuaries of national and international importance around the Welsh coast,
notably the Loughor estuary north of the Gower peninsula, the Cleddau, the
Dovey and the Dee, Conway and Taff. The last three are under considerable
pressure from development, and the main wildlife interest of the Taff
estuary is likely to disappear if the Cardiff Bay barrage is constructed as
planned.
All have large populations of wildfowl, especially in the winter when they
are important feeding grounds for significant flocks of waders such as
godwit, redshank and oyster catcher, and ducks like pintail, widgeon and
goldeneye.
More picturesque than mudflats at low tide are the sandy beaches and their
flower-rich dunes which are found, notably, around the Gower and nearby
Kenfig and at Newborough Warren on Anglesey. Fine orchids grow in these
unlikely places, including the southern marsh orchid, fen orchid, marsh
helleborine and green-winged orchid. If it is an unusual beach you want,
then try Shell Island south of Harlech where the empty shells of more than
70 different crustaceans may be found.
The Snowdon massif makes a magnificent backdrop to this area and the summits
of these, the highest mountains in Wales, have a flora that dates from the
last Ice Age. On the most exposed tops you can find dwarf willow and
reindeer moss, while in more sheltered spots are other Arctic-alpine species
including cushions of purple saxifrage, mountain avens, Snowdon lilies and
globe flowers.
On the slightly lower slopes are sheets of heather which support both black
and red grouse. The latter, startled by your approach, cries out 'Go back,
go back' as it leaps into the air and glides away. In river gorges you may
spot a ring ouzel, a shy relative of the blackbird with a white bib, not to
be confused with the smaller, tubbier and more confiding dipper.
There are feral goats up here, too: animals that have probably roamed the
hills for centuries. At present there is conflict between the goats and
local agricultural and conservation interests because of the damage they do
to young trees and seedlings; selective culling takes place. But while you
are quite likely to see the goats of Snowdonia, the gwyniad will almost
certainly evade you. It is a small, herring-like fish - an Ice Age remnant -
which occurs only in Bala lake.
Unlike Bala lake, many of Wales' inland waters are man-made, tapping into
the high rainfall of this hilly country to bring water to drier parts of
Britain. Some of these reservoirs, especially in the Elan Valley and at Llyn
Brianne, appear to be strongholds for the red kite. A success story for the
work of the RSPB, the red kite has made a significant return, particularly
in the past decade. While the RSPB's Dinas and Gwenffrwd reserve is the main
centre for these birds, they range widely, and seeing one is a matter of
keeping your eyes peeled for a fine chestnut bird with a forked tail.
There are good chances of seeing otters in Wales, both on lakes and in
rivers, while its relative, the polecat, is a Welsh speciality. This
ferret-sized creature was persecuted to extinction in England, but has been
hiding out in the Brecon Beacons and Tregaron Bog, a notable national nature
reserve, and is now making successful incursions into its old haunts in the
English west midlands.
Countryside Council for Wales, tel: 0248-370444. The Welsh office of the
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (0686-626678) can tell you how to
reach Ramsey Island and other reserves. The Brecknock Wildlife Trust runs
weekend country breaks that include badger watching, looking for otters and
spotting red kites (0874-625708.)
To stay on Skomer or Skokholm islands you must book through the Dyfed
Wildlife Trust (0437-765462). To reach Skokholm and Skomer, book a place
with the Dale Sailing Company (0646-601636). Day trips to Skokholm can be
booked in advance through any national park tourist information centre.
Thousand Islands Expeditions runs exciting trips around Ramsey in large
inflatables (0437-721686).
Just published in paperback: The Summits of Snowdonia by Terry Marsh, a
guide to all the 600-metre summits in Snowdonia national park and the Berwyn
Hills which straddle the park boundary. (Robert Hale, Pounds 6.99).
