FT  08 JAN 93 / Leading Article: Labour's future
NOT BEFORE time, British Labour politicians have begun to argue openly among
themselves. This is good news. We need the possibility of an alternative
government, and unless Labour knocks itself into shape, we will not have
one. The party has lost four general elections in a row. Its research
suggests that it made few converts among wavering Conservatives last year,
in spite of the continuing recession and the disarray into which Mr John
Major and his cabinet fell. Constituency changes will tilt the electoral
odds further against Labour before it has another chance to fight. There is
little reason to believe that it will not lose again in 1996.
Such a defeat could precipitate a gradual dissolution of the party. Finding
a means of avoiding that grim fate is a matter of some urgency. The present
debate is between those who demand root-and-branch change - the modernisers
 -and those who insist on emphasising the party's working-class roots - the
traditionalists. The modernisers, led by Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair,
see merit in learning from President-elect Bill Clinton's victory in the US;
the traditionalists, spoken for by Mr John Prescott, reject this. They seek
to protect what they call the 'heart and soul of the Labour party', whose
nature is defined by its historic links with the trade unions.
The traditionalists' stance has the merit of clarity, but little else. It is
no use going back to an electorate with a socialist, or statist, or
impossibly egalitarian manifesto if that is repeatedly rejected. That is the
central lesson of Mr Clinton's campaign. He sought to convince Reagan
Democrats and aspiring middle-class voters that, while he wished to give the
poor a hand-up, his was not a party for losers alone. American political
methods and ideas cannot easily be transplanted, but that does not mean that
there is nothing to be learnt from November's victory. Traditional Labour
has become identified in the electorate's mind with the worst-off third of
society. Working-class Thatcherites know that. Mr Brown and Mr Blair would
seek to broaden Labour's appeal among the middle third, where elections are
won and lost.
Labour will get nowhere unless it convinces itself, and in consequence the
voters, that it is eagerly responsive to middle-class concerns. All else is
detail. Some new strategies may be proposed by the various committees set up
by the party's leader, Mr John Smith. One is studying links with the trade
unions; another, 'social justice'; a third, electoral reform. The best
answers are clear. Labour needs a divorce from the unions. Welfare benefits
will have to be means-tested if taxation is not to be impossibly high.
Constitutional reform is an attractive policy for Labour. Yet none of this
will be on offer unless Mr Smith leads the party in the modernisers'
direction, and all of it will be insufficient unless he contrives to win the
trust of affluent or would-be affluent voters.
