FT  04 AUG 93 / Lloyd's deputy pressed to quit
MR STEPHEN MERRETT, the Lloyd's underwriter, is under increasing pressure to
resign as deputy chairman of the insurance market following the publication
last week of a Lloyd's investigation into losses suffered by a Merrett group
syndicate.
Senior market figures at Lloyd's believe that Mr Merrett's decision to
criticise the findings of the loss review body is incompatible with his
position as deputy chairman - a suggestion he has denied.
One senior figure said Mr David Rowland, the chairman of Lloyd's, 'is going
to have to do something. It is inevitable that he is going to have to take a
view on this issue.'
He added: 'It is fine for Stephen as an underwriter to criticise the report.
But he can't do it and be deputy chairman. It is illogical for him to be
both. For in a sense he is criticising himself. This is a pretty widespread
feeling on the market.'
The loss review, one of about a dozen that have been commissioned by the
Lloyd's council in the past two years, examined losses of Pounds 19.6m
suffered by syndicate 421 on its 1983 year of account.
Names on syndicate 421 face cumulative losses of Pounds 57,000 for each
Pounds 10,000 traded. The review focuses on the underwriting of seven
run-off contracts, which generated most of the loss. Losses on the
contracts, which reinsured other syndicates and insurance companies,
initially arose from US asbestosis claims.
In a letter to the 341 Names - the individuals who supported Merrett
syndicate 421 in 1983 - Mr Merrett said the review had been expensive in
both money and time and had failed to address the issues put to it.
Mr Merrett said last night that he believed the loss review had been
conducted incorrectly. He said: 'It was quite proper for me to make these
criticisms in my capacity as a managing agent without interfering with my
responsibility as deputy chairman. I am entirely in support of loss reviews
so that Names get information on major losses.'
Mr Merrett is one of two deputy chairmen at the market. He was elected last
year and has played an important part in initiatives designed to control the
market's exposures to claims from risks such as asbestosis and environmental
pollution.
Earlier this year Mr Merrett announced he was stepping down as active
underwriter of syndicate 418 at the end of 1993.
Separately Merrett faces legal action from about 2,000 Names who are
claiming compensation for losses suffered by syndicate 418 in the 1985
underwriting year.
