FT  11 JAN 93 / Management: A patent case for looking after your company's
rights
Innovators often fail to understand the management of intellectual property
rights, a complex and arcane area involving patents, copyright, designs,
trade secrets and trade and service marks that is normally the reserve of
specialist practitioners. Yet coming to terms with such issues can be
pivotal to successful corporate innovation.
An example is Company X, a newly-founded software firm. Just as its first
product was about to be launched, the company received a letter from the
solicitor of the former employer of one of the founding members, claiming
that valuable information belonging to their clients was being used in
breach of a confidentiality agreement.
They also claimed that copyright-protected programs belonging to their
clients were used in the development of the new company's products. Threats
of injunctions and demands for damages and return of the copyright works
were made.
It was also suggested from another source that as the company had spent much
time and money on promotional literature, which included the name of the
product, that they check that this was not being used by anyone else. A
search by a trade mark agent found that the name was similar to a name
already registered for the same sort of products and that use of it would
entitle the registered proprietor to sue for infringement of his mark.
The copyright and confidentiality issue was resolved by the grant of a
licence to use the information and copyright work. But the company had to
select a new name and logo, which meant the original promotional literature
had to be pulped.
The commercial ramifications were that the company could not claim to have
exclusive rights over the finished product, the product was late to market
and much management time was wasted and legal fees expended.
But a few precautions could have ensured that the intellectual property
matters, crucial to the success of the product, were secured. Such measures
include:
Raising staff awareness of intellectual property rights through workshop
training and the development of appropriate guides. These can range from a
general introduction to IPRs to industry-specific ones. Or they can be aimed
at specific personnel, such as scientists operating in sensitive research
areas where technology leakage could have dire commercial repercussions.
They can also be subject-specific on, say, trade marks.
Innovation and intellectual property audits. Innovation auditing should
address 'hard' technologies such as engineering capabilities as well as
sales and distribution networks, marketing expertise and financial control.
Intellectual property auditing should focus on the underlying intangible
legal rights which the business enjoys and might create in any product
development.
With this data, management can develop mechanisms to trigger an automatic
review of IP issues at all stages of business and product development.
Management controls include guides to inform managers how to protect IPRs
when they arise. Other guidelines would establish the proper procedures for
confidentiality agreements. Control mechanisms could prevent technology
leakage by the unvetted disclosure of patentable materials from research
departments. Staff responsible for licensing would follow safe practices in
both the pre- and post-licensing function.
Finally, intellectual property legal protection insurance enables the
insured company to sue those who threaten to infringe its rights and to
defend itself if accused of infringing the rights of others. Good IP risk
management policy is having in place the best control environment together
with appropriate insurance.
IP problems can normally be predicted and prevented. Innovators should
ensure that they use the intellectual property system which is there to
protect their interests, saving management time and potential legal and
other fees.
The author heads Trevor Black &amp; Associates, intellectual property management
consultants.
