FT  15 MAY 93 / Sport: Tears for a queen - Tennis
'GABYLANDIA ESTA DE FIESTA' proclaimed one of the many banners that were
strung along the railings high up in the stands of Rome's marbled
masterpiece, the Foro Italico. 'GABYMANIA STUPENDA]' shrieked another.
Sadly, the reality was neither stupendous nor fiesta-like. Gabriela
Sabatini, the darling of the noisy army of Argentine and Italian youngsters
at the final of the 1993 Italian Open last Sunday, was struggling. Indeed,
the four-time champion whose last tournament win had been earned exactly 12
months earlier in this same red dust bowl - a 7-5 6-4 victory over Monica
Seles - was finding the going tough. Even the huge marble statues, their
faces streaked by daily downpours, seemed to be crying.
To the 22-year-old it must have seemed as if she was looking into a mirror.
The moonballing game of her Spanish opponent, Conchita Martinez, so like her
own, had reduced Sabatini to impotence. Yet she had had her chances. The
third game of the first set should have clinched it for her. This monumental
battle of 30 and 40 stroke rallies swayed backwards and forwards for 24
minutes - the time it normally takes for Seles or Steffi Graf to win a
complete set. It ended with Sabatini hitting a winning backhand volley on
the 32nd point after squandering seven previous break points.
A 2-1 lead should have been the launching pad the defending champion needed.
Yet something was missing: confidence. That precious and fragile commodity
was somehow just out of reach.
There had been moments during Sabatini's super-efficient semi-final
destruction of Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, when it seemed that the year-long
nightmare of failure, exacerbated by a series of niggling injuries, had
ended. This was the same woman who had served-and-volleyed her way to the
1990 US Open title so brilliantly against an astonished Graf. She was back
in the groove. Or so it seemed. Yet in the final, once the first set had
been lost, belief died. Sabatini switched off mentally and bowed to the
inevitable, going down 7-5 6-1.
Strolling back to the interview room after the match I fell into step beside
Sabatini's new coach, Dennis Ralston. I asked him if Gaby would shower
before her press conference. 'I have no idea,' he replied. 'I'm still
learning]'
There is much to learn about the art of psychological first aid. One of the
pre-requisites is the undivided attention of the subject. That is not easily
guaranteed by a superstar like Sabatini whose on court earnings alone are
approaching Dollars 6.5m. The pressures on her for interviews and special
appearances are enormous. She has become a multi-million dollar industry
with annual turnover estimated to be Dollars 7m-Dollars 10m. Two perfumes
have been named after her, and there is endorsement income from Aerolineas
Argentinas, Yamaha rackets, Pepsi-Cola, Tacchini sportswear, Longine
watches, Fuji cameras and film, Rayban sunglasses, Gosen tennis strings and
the new Gaby Doll, which is the rage in South America.
Sabatini turned to Ralston a couple of months ago. Her relationship with the
Brazilian Carlos Kirmayr, begun at Wimbledon in 1990, had run its course.
The joy that he had rekindled that year at Flushing Meadow seemed to have
died.
Ralston has had enough experience working with US Davis Cup teams, and with
Chris Evert for a while, to help Gaby rediscover that winning feeling. There
is no doubt that, even after two months, she is already looking fitter and
faster. If she allows Ralston to help her with her serve, then we might see
a real breakthrough. It was deficiency in that department that cost Gaby the
Wimbledon title in 1991. Twice she served for the match in the final set
against Graf and twice she fumbled it.
Gabriela knows she cannot afford any more fumbles. Ten times in the last
four years she has reached the semi-finals or better at Grand Slam
championships but she can claim only one title. She also knows that with
Seles temporarily sidelined by that horrific knife attack she will never
have a better chance. With Ralston's help we may yet see Sabatini's
potential fulfilled.
