FT  15 MAY 93 / Travel: Guilt trip to Tasmania's past - Australians are
beginning to exploit their convict history. Keith Wheatley visited Sarah
Island
ARRIVING in Strahan, the loneliest town in Tasmania's south-west wilderness,
after a taxing drive on bumpy mountain roads, it was hard not to feel
bone-weary. And guilty. After all, what were the privations of a few hours
at the wheel of a hired Toyota compared with the miseries endured by the
first Europeans to reach this area?
Just offshore from Strahan, in the limpid waters of Macquarie harbour, lies
Sarah Island. From 1822-32 it held men and women prisoners in conditions of
deliberately bestial cruelty. Sarah Island was a 19th century precursor to
Belsen and Dachau.
Convict tourism - a very special branch of the heritage industry - is
relatively new in Australia. Even a decade ago, the era of transportation
could be a touchy subject at an Australian dinner table. However,
publication of Robert Hughes' masterly account of penal colony life, The
Fatal Shore, was a turning point. Hughes emphasised the role of Sarah Island
as an ultimate deterrent - far beyond fear of capital punishment.
'This place was at the very bottom of the inferno-like system of convict
classification devised by George Arthur, Lieutenant Governor of Van Diemen's
Land (as Tasmania) was then known,' wrote Hughes. 'It was a hell where men
deprived of the means of suicide had been known to commit murder solely for
the privilege of being taken in chains to Hobart and hanged - and thus
escape.'
If Australia itself was remote, Sarah Island was another planet. There was
no overland route through the 250 miles of mountain and rainforest - an
untouched wilderness that now attracts visitors, hikers and naturalists -
that lie between the settlement and Hobart.
Like the convicts, we arrived at Sarah Island by boat. In those days,
prisoners took up to a month on sailing ships that travelled the wickedly
rocky coastline from Hobart. They were given no accommodation aboard. They
had to lie in chains on top of the cargo, wrapped in soaking wet blankets.
Today, the comfortable Wilderness Explorer takes about 90 minutes from the
sleepy Strahan waterfront.
'Stick to the paths as you walk around. There are big leeches in the
undergrowth,' warned the Explorer's owner-skipper, Guy Grining. He has seen
a big rise in interest towards Sarah Island. Ten years ago eyes were averted
as his ship cruised past, heading into the nearby Gordon River and the deep
rainforest. Recently, Grining carried a visitor related to a convict who
died on the island.
'She was first off the boat and last back aboard. Didn't speak for hours,'
said Grining. He is the great-grandson of a German boatbuilder who came to
Macquarie Harbour in the 1890s to build ships of the magnificent local Huon
pine.
Boat-building became one of the principal activities at Sarah Island. Traces
of the slipways can still be glimpsed through the clear but tea-coloured
water. Tannin from the roots of the buttongrass leaches into every local
watercourse and turns it brown.
Ashore, little survives of the prison buildings. There is a stone wall here,
or a fragment of the chaplain's hut. Sensibly, the Tasmania wildlife and
heritage department has kept its work on Sarah Island low-key. There are
small engraved information plaques at key points, but everything is
intensely quiet.
Despite the endless floggings, hunger and cold, many convicts did attempt to
escape from Sarah Island. Since many were sent off into the forest on
logging parties - involving a 15-mile row each way, towing huge logs on the
return journey, and without mid-day food - the convicts had only to conquer
their fear of the unknown to slip away into the green dankness.
Flying today over the trackless forest, incised by deep, fast-flowing
rivers, one can understand how nearly two-thirds of the 112 prisoners who
absconded in the first six years of Sarah Island died of hunger or animal
attack in the bush.
Chas Osborn, temporary pilot of the tourist seaplane and by trade a
crop-sprayer, says it still gives him shivers flying over the deep forest.
'Once you're on the ground in there you can see nothing and you don't even
know which way is up,' he says.
Convicts who escaped would occasionally resort to cannibalism. Various
incidents are documented, though the most celebrated concern Alexander
Pearce. When soldiers apprehended him after his second escape in November
1823, they found the part-eaten arm of another convict in Pearce's bag.
This is a beautiful but hostile area. It was 30 miles from Strahan, at the
site of the proposed Franklin River dam, that environmental protestors
chained themselves to bulldozers in 1982 and set off a Ghandi-like campaign
that still resonates around the world.
The unusual and beautifully designed Strahan visitors' centre tackles both
the convict story and the environmental campaign with vigorous and
thought-provoking displays. It must be one of the few tourist information
bases where the visitor is challenged to ask whether he or she should even
be there. Guilt is never far away in south-west Tasmania.
Keith Wheatley travelled to Tasmania c/o Air New Zealand (London tel:
081-846-9595). Information about travel within Tasmania can be obtained from
Australia Naturally (081-789-7088).
