FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: Tory loyalists rally behind Major
TORY loyalists cheered Mr John Major when he announced that he would seek a
vote of confidence today to rescue the government from the wreckage of its
policy over ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
The prime minister, ignoring Labour shouts of 'resign', claimed that the
tied vote had shown that there was no majority in the Commons for the UK to
join the social chapter.
He insisted that earlier votes had shown that there was majority in favour
of ratifying the Maastricht treaty.
There were angry shouts of 'no' from the Labour benches when he invited the
opposition parties to reconsider the position they had adopted in respect of
the social chapter and reaffirm their earlier declarations of support for
the treaty.
Mr Major declared: 'In any case we must resolve this issue. It cannot be
permitted to fester any longer.'
When he opened the debate Mr Major delivered an impassioned warning that
unless the UK honoured its obligations it would lose its growing influence
within the European Community.
He made what proved to be a largely ineffective appeal to Tory rebels to
think again before joining opposition parties in a 'cynical' vote for the
social chapter.
He was particularly vitriolic about the Liberal Democrats, describing their
tactics as 'frankly contemptible' given the party's pro-European stance.
His attack incensed Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, who insisted
that voting against the government amounted to support for the social
chapter.
The electric atmosphere in the packed Commons chamber alternated between
uproar and rapt silence as Mr Major said that the true will of parliament
had been expressed by the 71 previous votes in favour of the Maastricht act.
They 'should not be frustrated by one parliamentary motion'.
If there were a free-standing debate on the social chapter, he asserted, MPs
would reject it. He had been acting 'within the remit of parliament' when he
negotiated the treaty, including the opt-out from the social chapter.
Insisting that the UK would ratify the treaty, Mr Major made it clear that
the Tory Euro-sceptics were wrong to have convinced themselves that voting
with Labour would prevent ratification.
The alliance lined up against the government was 'not based on any
conviction whatsoever'. A vote cast with the aim of preventing ratification
of the treaty would be 'a cynical and disreputable vote'.
Two former rebels intervened in the prime minister's speech to announce that
they would vote with the government. 'I am always delighted to accept a
sinner returning home,' Mr Major replied.
He later earned a standing ovation from a private meeting of Tory
backbenchers with an uncompromising appeal for party unity.
