FT  21 SEP 93 / Money Markets: European futures fall
EUROPEAN interest rate futures markets yesterday lost some of the enthusiasm
for monetary policy easing that they had displayed at the end of last week,
with prices falling across the board in Europe, writes James Blitz.
There were no official interest rate moves yesterday, and the Bank of France
failed to ease either its five to 10-day lending rate or its intervention
rate in its regular Thursday operation.
Moreover, there appeared to be some uncertainty about what the Bundesbank
would do in its regular money market operations this week.
At the end of last week, there had been some thought that the Bundesbank
could return to a variable rate repo in its money market oper-ations. But a
London-based dealer said the market appeared to be getting back to the view
that the repo could be fixed today at 6.70 per cent.
There have also been some fairly wild guesses about the German M3 money
supply figure, due this week. Some forecasters were talking about 5.5 per
cent at the end of last week. But more conservative estimates, around the
7.5 per cent mark, were gaining ground yesterday.
Euromark futures therefore lost ground yesterday. The December contract
finished at 93.98, down 2 basis points on the day. The March contract
declined 4 basis points to 94.46. In the French market, the December Pibor
contract closed 2 basis points off at 93.76.
In UK markets, dealers continued to be swayed by last week's figures for the
retail prices index which showed a larger than expected rise in the
inflation figure in the year to August.
The December short sterling contract fell back 6 basis points on the day to
close at 94.27.
In the sterling cash market, the overnight rate of lending rose as high as 7
1/2 per cent, amid difficulties removing a shortage that was forecast at the
start of the day at Pounds 900m.
The Bank of England invited offers to tender for funds in an early round of
trading. But it was not until the afternoon that some Pounds 355m worth of
bills were offered. The Bank provided late assistance of Pounds 670m, which
may contribute to a higher shortage today. Three-month money ended a little
higher at 5 31/32 per cent, with a spread of 5 15/16 per cent on the bid
side and 5 7/8 per cent on the offered.
