FT  11 FEB 93 / Thames steps up pressure over Channel 5 licence
THAMES Television is expected to call next week for the early
re-advertisement of a national Channel 5 licence.
This follows the Independent Television Commission's formal rejection of a
plea to reconsider its decision in December not to award a licence to
Channel Five Holdings.
The main companies involved in that bid were Thames and Time Warner, the
world's largest media group. Channel Five Holdings wrote to the commission -
the commercial broadcasting regulatory body - on January 20 asking for its
case to be reconsidered. The appeal was rejected by the commission the
following day.
It is believed the appeal contested the commission's two grounds for
rejecting the bid from Channel Five Holdings: concern over investor
commitment and the channel's cost, audience share and revenue projections.
Thames was fully committed for 35 per cent and Time Warner for 10 per cent
plus an undertaking that a recommendation for a further 25 per cent would be
put before the main Time Warner board.
Last month Time Warner visited the commission and suggested that if there
was any sign of flexibility the money would be available from the US company
to fund the venture.
The commission's legal advice was that it could not reopen a final decision.
The commission made clear that even if it had the discretion to reopen the
decision it would choose not to.
It then decided to look at the possibility of using different frequencies to
run several local city-based television services.
The announcement, which surprised the National Heritage Department, would
require legislation. The next broadcasting legislation is not expected
before 1995.
Even if local stations got approval it is unlikely they could be set up
before 1997.
'This is not just kicking Channel 5 into touch, it's kicking it out of the
stadium,' one senior broadcasting executive said yesterday.
Channel Five Holdings continues to reserve its right to try to seek a
judicial review over the rejection of its bid.
