FT  26 JUN 93 / The EBRD - Attali Resigns: Bank faces uphill fight to define
way forward
THE European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was set up in 1991 to
guide the recovery of a region stricken by the legacy of totalitarian rule.
Establishing the bank's credentials amid recession in western Europe and
severe economic restructuring in the east was always going to be a difficult
challenge. Had the dispute over Mr Attali's role in the bank's spending
persisted, that task would have become impossible.
The bank's hope must now be that its planned management shake-up and a
return of confidence of its main shareholders will give it the means to get
on with the job.
Both the US and Germany have shown in recent weeks their strong doubts about
Mr Attali's suitability - although neither wanted to call openly for the
president's dismissal.
Even now, however, restoring the bank's sense of purpose will be an uphill
struggle. One seasoned London merchant banker, who knows Mr Attali well and
likes him, said he increasingly believes the decision to set up the EBRD was
a mistake.
Although without experience of managing a bank or even a department of a
public sector institution, Mr Attali was chosen to head the EBRD in view of
the visionary qualities he would bring to the post. In that respect, at
least, he has lived up to expectations.
No European public figure has been more assiduous in calling for a new
spirit of economic co-operation to unite east and west. With passion, he has
warned of the danger that conflict in the former Soviet republics and
Yugoslavia could spill over into the rest of Europe.
Yet, through his own misjudgment, Mr Attali has himself produced the debacle
from which the institution is now trying to escape.
As a result of the bad publicity, doubts over the bank's role already voiced
at its inception have intensified.
Scepticism remains whether the EBRD will be able to find a niche in
assisting eastern Europe, at a time of difficulties for both public sector
development institutions and private sector banks in the region.
The nature of the EBRD's remit itself will be under review as the bank's 56
shareholder nations and agencies get down to the task of choosing Mr
Attali's successor.
In particular, questions are being asked about the balance of the bank's
activities in the 25 countries which it can assist. The proposed appointment
to a senior EBRD position of Mr Ernest Stern, the present number two at the
World Bank, has been widely interpreted as presaging a shift towards public
sector development projects.
Supporting the idea of shifting resources to infrastructure development, one
official in Paris said yesterday: 'The bank's statute that 60 per cent of
its lending should be to the private sector could be interpreted more
flexibly, particularly in the bank's early years. Spending more on public
infrastructure now would help the private sector later.'
The bank's relatively slow rate of disbursements - one of the reasons it has
attracted complaints - has partly reflected its statutory priority towards
financing private sector development.
Since it started at the beginning of 1991, the EBRD has disbursed Ecu244m
(Pounds 192m) in loans and equity.
This is less than 20 per cent of its commitments of Ecu1.5bn, and only about
11 per cent of the total of Ecu2.3bn of projects approved.
Its disbursements thus are only slightly more than the Ecu180m in loans to
eastern Europe paid out by the European Investment Bank, the EC's own
long-term financing institution.
The bank, which has started to lend east of the Community, focuses its funds
on infrastructure projects.
A recent internal report commissioned by Mr Attali, complaining about the
EBRD's lack of impact in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, brought
to a head criticism of the bank's activities.
The report - by Mr Martin Paijmans and Mr Stanley Katz, consultants who have
worked for the EBRD - accused the EBRD of failing to make a 'coherent'
contribution to east European transition.
Of the 95 projects approved by the EBRD since its inception, over 51 per
cent have been in the four most economically advanced countries of Poland,
Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republics.
Greater concentration on infrastructure development, particularly in former
Soviet republics without any experience of private sector entrepreneurial
activity, might thus be a logical move. The risk of such a move, which has
attracted criticism from several of the bank's directors, is that the EBRD
would evolve into little more than the European arm of the World Bank.
In Warsaw yesterday there was some support for the idea that the EBRD should
move into the area until now favoured by the World Bank.
Mr Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, Poland's minister in charge of relations with the
EC, said he would like to see the EBRD more involved in infrastructural
projects such as transport and telecommunications ventures.
'The EBRD should take a lesson from the European Investment Bank,' he said.
Mr Bielecki suggested the EBRD take on the task of guaranteeing loans made
by other lenders in Poland. But he also said the EBRD should lend to and
invest in small private business rather than larger, safer projects.
Ms Hanna Gronkiewicz Waltz, the head of the Polish central bank, signalled
she was happy with the EBRD's emphasis in favour of private industry by
praising the EBRD's activities as being 'in accord with our general
priorities'.
She said the scale of the EBRD's involvement in Poland was larger than
elsewhere and that this was a trend which could only be encouraged in the
future.
Mr Janusz Dedo, in charge of credit policy at the Powszechny Bank Kredytowy,
a major state-owned bank in Warsaw, said: 'We have had good relations with
the EBRD and the main thing is that changes at the top shouldn't be too
abrupt.'
Mr Hubert Janiszewski, the head of Samuel Montagu Financial Services in
Warsaw, warned that ongoing projects might now be changed although he felt
the bank's record had been 'positive'.
In Hungary, Mr Imre Tarafas, an alternate governor of the EBRD and first
deputy president of the National Bank of Hungary, was determined to put the
events of the last few months behind him. He said he hoped the appointment
of a replacement for Mr Attali would end the 'internal tensions and
uncertainty'.
