FT  30 JAN 93 / Arts: Bronzes bequeathed to BM
Roman treasures now in New York which were stolen from a Suffolk farm in
1981 by a gang using metal detectors ('Long hunt for the raiders of the lost
art,' Weekend FT, November 16 1991) - are coming home.
Not at once, and not to Suffolk. But after legal action in New York by John
Browning, the farmer from whose field the bronzes were taken, and out of
court negotiations, their present owners, Leon Levy and his wife Shelby
White, have offered to bequeath them to the British Museum.
The bronzes once adorned a Roman temple. They include a statuette of Vulcan,
horse collar fittings, two helmets, and face masks for putting on wooden
statues. The most spectacular piece is a bronze cheetah inlaid with silver
spots. The field at Icklingham was robbed frequently when metal detectors
became popular in the 1970s. Over the years Browning has had to sit on guard
in the hedge at nights and has caught 13 people.
News of the bronzes spread quickly as the robbers tried to sell them.
Photographs were circulated which, luckily, were seen by the British Museum.
The Suffolk police followed the trail to the Continent and Australia and
started extradition moves there, but no prosecutions followed.
The bronzes surfaced in 1988 at New York's Ariadne Galleries, which tried to
sell the cheetah for Dollars 600,000 to the Getty Museum in Malibu,
California. While the Getty was eager to buy, it was cautious about
acquiring pieces with a murky provenance and consulted the British Museum.
When the BM recognised the animal, the Getty withdrew. Ariadne then sold it
to Levy, who had bought the other pieces already.
In the meantime, Browning and his solicitor, David Barns, had begun a
campaign to regain the bronzes. Little help came from the British
government, which has not ratified the UNESCO convention prohibiting and
preventing the illicit import, export and transfer of ownership of cultural
pottery (the US has). Despairing of official action, Browning started
proceedings as a private individual in New York in 1991. He was convinced
there was enough evidence of the New York bronzes coming from Icklingham to
secure their repatriation, even if it did not suffice for criminal
prosecutions.
Browning's perseverance has won, but he will continue to battle to improve
the law's protection for the cultural heritage buried in British soil. And,
as he said this week: 'A bequest to a third party is not really my idea of
what to do when you're caught with your trousers down. But the goods will
come back to their country of origin. That is what is important.'
The return, however, is likely to take time. As it may be our children or
grandchildren who will be the first to see the bronzes installed in the BM,
there is an urgent need for a scholarly study of them now.
