FT  01 MAY 93 / Money Markets: T-Bill rate cut again
THE BUNDESBANK yesterday triggered speculation that it would ease its
official interest rates again in the next few weeks, by cutting its 3-day
Treasury Bill rate by 50 basis points to 7.00 per cent, writes James Blitz.
The provision of 3-day Treasury bills to the money market provides the
Bundesbank with a method of mopping up excess liquidity.
Some analysts see these bills as a relatively unimportant instrument for the
conduct of monetary policy compared to the Lombard and discount rates.
However, Mr Jonathan Hoffman of Credit Suisse First Boston, believes that
this latest cut, which brings the T-Bill rate 50 basis points below the
discount rate, is an important signal that the Bundesbank wants to ease
policy again.
In his view, commercial banks will be more willing to lend money to the
Bundesbank at the lower T-Bill rate because of the value of the Bundesbank
as an interbank counterparty. This, in turn, should soften German call
money, which is currently at 7.71 per cent, bringing pressure on the
discount rate floor, at 7.5 per cent.
Mr Hoffman also believes that the last cut in the T-Bill rate, in the last
week of March, was an important precursor to the cuts in the other official
rates which came last month.
The Bundesbank's move had less effect in German and French futures market
than in the foreign exchanges. The June Euromark contract had a 9 basis
point rise to close at 92.75, but dealers said this was a technical response
to the rather heavy sell off of recent days.
French franc futures were also stronger, helped by the Euromark rise and the
franc's strength on the currency markets in recent days. The June French
franc contract closed at 92.35, 6 basis points up on the day. The French
franc closed at FFr3.370, slightly weaker than its previous close of
FFr3.369.
Short dated interest rates in the sterling market were firmer after the Bank
of England forecast a large shortage of Pounds 1.85bn at the start of its
operations. The Bank of England did not operate in the market in the morning
and the overnight lending rate peaked at 7.25 per cent.
In these conditions, 3-month sterling cash rose  1/16 per cent on the day,
closing at 6 1/8 per cent.
