FT  30 OCT 93 / Ulster peace process role possible for Sinn Fein: London and
Dublin would 'respond imaginatively' if IRA ends violence
THE BRITISH and Irish governments last night signalled that Sinn Fein could
be brought into the Northern Ireland peace process in return for a permanent
end to IRA terrorism.
Their statement came as Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds responded to
the escalating violence in the province by announcing a new drive towards a
political settlement.
A joint communique issued by the two leaders after talks in Brussels said
there could be no question of contacts with terrorists, but that 'new doors'
would open if the IRA and its supporters renounced violence for good.
In his most explicit recognition yet of a potential role for Sinn Fein, Mr
Major agreed that the political wing of the IRA could eventually be brought
into the peace process. The two governments said they would 'respond
imaginatively' to a permanent cessation of violence.
However, the British and Irish prime ministers rejected as a basis for peace
the conclusions of recent talks between Mr John Hume of the SDLP and Mr
Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein. There could be 'no question' of the two
governments adopting or endorsing Mr Hume's report of the dialogue. Details
of those talks were reported yesterday for the first time to Mr Major by Mr
Reynolds.
At the end of a week of the worst sectarian violence for two decades, the
two leaders condemned the tit-for-tat killings by terrorists from the
Catholic and Protestant communities. Their communique attacked the
'murderous and premeditated acts which could serve no end other than to
deepen the bloodshed in Northern Ireland'.
Mr Major and Mr Reynolds reaffirmed their determination to restart the
stalled negotiating process designed to bring a permanent political
settlement to the province.
Their cautiously upbeat tone followed the Dublin government's
acknowledgement earlier this week of the right of the Unionist community to
exercise a permanent veto on changes in Ulster's constitutional status.
Both sides confirmed that the essence of any agreement would be a move by
the Republic to replace its constitutional claim to the province with the
aspiration of a united Ireland. Britain in return would offer a significant
extension of cross-border administration.
But the communique glossed over significant differences on the extent to
which elements of the Hume-Adams peace initiative could be incorporated into
their own negotiations.
Mr Reynolds told Mr Major that they could not ignore the potential for a
cessation of violence by the IRA in return for a place at the negotiating
table for Sinn Fein. But, speaking after their talks, Mr Major said there
could be 'no talks or negotiations between democratic governments and those
who use, threaten or support violence'.
Ulster principles, Page 4
