FT  29 MAR 93 / Arts: A spirit of eastern promise - The new European Bank in
London has a building to live up to
Look East seems to be the motto of the moment. The inauguration last week of
the headquarters of the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, in
one of the recently completed office buildings of Broadgate, confirmed the
success of that development which has so effectively extended the City of
London to the east of Liverpool Street. Can it be a simple coincidence that
the approach to the entrance of the bank on Exchange Square from the station
is an elegant route called Great Eastern Walk? The role of the bank is to
foster development and democracy in the newly liberated countries of eastern
and central Europe, and as Mr Jaques Attali, the inspiring president of the
Bank, said at the inauguration, 'Europe is awakening to the east.' In the
same week Michael Howard, secretary of state for the environment, announced
proposals for the development of an East Thames Corridor along the marshy
and polluted banks of the Thames from Beckton to Sheerness. The question of
how best to awaken London to the east is almost as difficult a question as
how to achieve the rejuvenation of eastern Europe.
The importance of the European Bank and the wonder of it being in the City
of London was underlined in a very positive speech by HRH The Prince of
Wales when he inaugurated the new headquarters. He praised the decision of
the bank to establish a new European Cultural Fund and took the opportunity
to announce his own joint initiative with President Havel of the Czech
Republic to create a Prague Heritage Fund for the restoration of some of the
buildings, monuments and gardens of that remarkable city.
All this noble rhetoric seemed well grounded because it was issuing forth in
the fine new halls of what Mr Attali called, 'the first pan-European
institution of the post cold war era'. If the actual architecture of the
interiors of the new bank is anything to go by, the new Europe promises to
be both culturally stimulating and incredibly chic.
The architects for the interior of the building are an Anglo-French design
team, a partnership of Berthet et Pochy and Sidell Gibson. They have
achieved the remarkable feat of fitting out in record time a building
designed by the American architects Skidmore Owings and Merrill for
developer Mr Stuart Lipton (in his Rosehaugh Stanhope days). Broadgate
development. What struck me as particularly exciting was the way they have
completely transformed the whole idea of a banking environment. Their brief
from the president was to give a visual rendering of the diverse nature of
this international institution while making it possible for the open
teamwork of the operation to function efficiently.
The result is no cold and clinical routine set of offices but an open and
sparkling world with inventive spatial planning and an atmosphere that is
visually stimulating. The tone is set by the entrance hall - a great
mirrored space linking the Bishopsgate and Exchange Square entrances. The
ceiling is mirrored to reflect the marble floor and the hewn slabs of
Carrara marble that have been placed between the lifts. There are plans for
a video wall and a piece of the Berlin Wall to be at the Exchange Square
entrance. The cafe at the entrance level with an exhibition area will be
open to the public. (Its first big exhibition will be a display of religious
masterpieces from the State Museum of Sacred Art in St Petersburg, opening
in April.)
A large auditorium will house conferences and lectures and will also be the
setting for a series of cultural events sponsored by the bank. A line of
flags of member countries leads to the dramatic false perspective on the way
to the staff restaurant.
The 12 floors of offices have been planned to relate to one another both
horizontally and vertically. New internal staircases have been installed to
encourage easy communication between the departments that work together to
avoid dependence upon the well used lifts. The smaller top three floors
house the president's office, the boardroom and the executive dining and
meeting rooms. Many of these have remarkable views over Spitalfields and
east London. Looking down on the immediate neighbourhood of the former
Spitalfields market, which is dominated by the magnificent tower and spire
of Hawksmoor's Christ Church, it is hard to resist the idea that this should
become the newest residential area of the City instead of another sea of
offices. Residential developers - look east.
The main office floors have a rather spectacular sense of space - and
beautiful light sycamore furniture from the British firm of Gordon Russell.
Meeting rooms are circular with red doors all named after the rivers of
Europe. Tea and coffee areas are screened by glass panels etched with
entertaining designs. There are some enjoyable jokes in the bizarre conical
and pyramid signposts and the signs in the lobby areas which are engraved in
reverse and look Cyrillic until you read them the right way round in the
mirrored ceiling. When columns appear in large open spaces they have been
dramatically clad in very tactile rough metal casings.
The top floors have a restful and simple quality - the emphasis here is on
the quality of the materials and the display of some of the bank's art
collection. The dining rooms bear the names of European composers and some
will display memorabilia associated with the composers. Semi-precious stones
from the Urals, artefacts from eastern Europe, paintings and sculptures
combine to give the new offices something of an international intellectual
content. The Italian government have given a series of Piranesi engravings,
the developers have given the brilliant lion sculpture by Jane Ackroyd. A
giant fresco by a Russian, Polish and French group of artists will shortly
be unveiled, and a sculpture by Cesar has already been lent by the artist.
The high quality and the originality of the commissioned art works have
already given this new building a unique and distinguished character.
The European Bank is indeed welcome in London as a crucial and inventive
catalyst for the new Europe. If the creative atmosphere of culture and
commerce, which is so evident in the new headquarters, is indicative of its
approach to the rejuvenation of formerly communist Europe then the future in
the east will indeed be bright.
