FT  27 JUL 93 / GM fires new salvo in row with VW
GENERAL MOTORS has opened up a new flank in its assault on Volkswagen by
raising doubts about legal testimony from Mr Ferdinand Piech, the VW
chairman.
Lawyers representing Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, have written to
public prosecutors in Hamburg, suggesting they examine 'discrepancies'
between evidence in a civil case in Hamburg on July 15.
The letter is the most explicit attempt yet by Opel to involve Mr Piech
directly in the GM/VW industrial espionage case.
At the July 15 hearing written and verbal testimony from GM employees
clashed with affidavits from Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW's
production director, and two of his colleagues. Other evidence, produced by
lawyers for Der Spiegel news magazine, which was fighting a VW attempt to
prevent it effectively from reporting on the VW/GM ind-ustrial espionage
case, contradicted a statement from Mr Piech.
The VW chairman said in an affidavit that Mr Lopez did not decide to leave
GM for VW until March 9. However, the magazine's lawyers produced an article
from the March edition of a magazine, TopBusiness, showing photographs of VW
board members. A picture of Mr Lopez was captioned 'Production' and marked
'New'. Mr Peter Carl, editor-in-charge of the magazine, said yesterday the
edition closed for printing on February 3. The inclusion of the Lopez
appointment had been confirmed by VW, he said, 'otherwise, we would not have
known'.
Other clashes of testimony concerned a wad of documents allegedly handed to
Mr Lopez shortly before he was due to leave GM, missing photographs of a new
Opel car, and details of a secret diesel engine.
The court later ruled mainly in favour of Der Spiegel, allowing it to
continue its reporting of 'admissible suspicions', and obliged VW to pay the
lion's share of the costs.
Volkswagen said yesterday that it it stood by all the statements presented
at the hearing. 'These are affidavits, and therefore true,' Mr Lutz
Schilling, chief spokesman said.
In a further development yesterday, Mr Jens Neumann, a VW director, stated
that at no time had he asked for or been given any GM secret documents. He
was replying to revelations at the weekend of contacts between himself and
Mr Lopez in early February, around the time when Mr Lopez was given more
details of GM group plans.
Mr Neumann, whose responsibilities by that time had been expanded to include
group management development, as well as corporate strategy and
organisation, said he met and spoke to Mr Lopez for the first time on
January 15. He discussed VW's proposed terms of employment on several
occasions between February 4 and when Mr Lopez finally signed the contract
on March 9.
