FT  16 APR 93 / S Africa counts the cost of mass action
SOUTH AFRICA was yesterday counting the political and economic cost of
Wednesday's national protest strike which left 17 people dead.
Yesterday an angry mob attacked two whites in the black homeland of Transkei
less than 48 hours after the slaying of two white South African tourists,
police said.
The death toll from Wednesday's protest rose to 17 after 11 people were
massacred in Natal province following a commemoration rally for slain
African National Congress leader Chris Hani.
However, it was not clear how closely the deaths were related to the ANC
protest, given that such massacres have become a regular occurrence in
Natal.
There were further violent incidents in Port Elizabeth, Cape Town and on the
East Rand near Johannesburg. The black township of Soweto was reported
quiet.
Further mass protests are planned for tomorrow, Sunday and Monday, raising
the risk of further violence.
The ANC has called another national protest strike for Monday, the day Mr
Hani will be buried.
Yesterday it appeared the political impact of the Hani assassination might
prove positive, as the South African government announced it would drop
crucial preconditions to the establishment of the first phase of a
multi-racial interim government, the Transitional Executive Council.
The council would include representatives of all the main parties, and would
have sub-councils to advise and monitor government actions in areas such as
law and order, defence, finance and foreign affairs.
Mr Roelf Meyer, the ANC's chief negotiator, said the government would no
longer insist that the 26 parties to the multi-party negotiating forum agree
a transitional constitution before this council could be formed. This
removes a big obstacle to formation of the Council, which Mr Meyer said
could be agreed by May.
However, he cautioned that some parties, such as the Inkatha Freedom Party,
might object, causing further delays. Inkatha believes there should be no
extended transition to full democracy.
Meanwhile, the US state department advised Americans to stay away from black
homelands and townships in South Africa. Transkei leader Major-General Bantu
Holomisa said armed police were being sent to protect tourists in the
homeland's popular coastal resorts, but South Africans were advised to avoid
Transkei.
Ms Michelle Cohen, executive director of the US chamber of commerce, said
she knew of businessmen, representing US companies which stuck with South
Africa through sanctions, curtailing visits to the country because of the
turmoil.
She expected a hefty rise in the cost of insurance on trade with South
Africa. 'We'll be on the same list as Vietnam. . . Sarajevo.'
