FT  02 OCT 93 / Arts: Bristol romps along, London overreaches - Theatre on
the Fringe
THE HEN &amp; Chicken Theatre in south Bristol is a rare bird in the South West
of England: pub theatre of national quality. Last year the resident company,
Show of Strength, won a London Weekend Television Plays on Stage award to
produce Fanny Burney's unperformed play A Busy Day (probably 1800-01). Now
the Pounds 14,000 prize has been spent, and the result is a fizzing
production of a very funny play in an exciting venue.
Burney's life (1752-1840) was a catalogue of adversity. Her mother died when
she was ten, she outlived her sister and son, and survived a mastectomy
without anaesthesia in 1811. Her husband, Alexandre D'Arblay  - who wrote
down the manuscript of A Busy Day - was exiled to France during the
Napoleonic wars, was kicked by a horse at Waterloo, and died in 1818.
Burney's reputation has rested on her diary and four novels; in the 1980s,
her work was the sine qua non of any politically correct university
syllabus.
A Busy Day draws on the restoration comedy of Etherege, Wycherley and
Vanburgh and continues the tradition of English social comedy from Ben
Jonson to Mike Leigh. It has the pace of Fielding and the whimsy of Peacock.
But like all of its kind, it deals principally with money and manners.
The text here is cut, with some initial confusion, but the plot romps along.
Eliza Watts, born to a working-class City family, but adopted and brought up
in a middle-class home, returns to London to meet her now very rich natural
parents. She will marry a Mr Cleveland of impeccable but impoverished stock.
The pretentious Wattses embarrass Eliza, while a stray fiancee and a raffish
younger brother add to Cleveland's difficulties; so City arrivisme meets
metropolitan savoir faire, with Eliza and Cleveland caught between.
Cleveland's condescending uncle and aunt preside over the mess. Never has
Bond Street been farther from St James's, nor Kensington perched more
precariously on the rim of the hub of decency.
The language rattles along with 'pish', 'devilled', 'deuced' and
'confounded' at every turn. There are more crafted moments, between
Cleveland's extravagantly romantic fiancee (played by Juliette Grassby) and
his needy brother (Ian Kelly): 'You're always very stupid, I must say that
for you', she says. Opposite her, he is all thesaurus: 'Allow me, Madam?
Nay, ordain, enjoin, command, insist]' Between them, they have the play's
best scenes. She asks him, 'Do you not think that young lady ugly?' and he
replies, 'she stands so near to you that I cannot judge.' The other
principals, Wendy Hewitt as Eliza and Richard Stemp as Cleveland are at the
mercy of their characters; in this game, the righteous are never as
appealing as the rakish.
The direction (Alan Coveney) could be tighter and the acting more fluid and
less forced, but overall the staging, the open in-the- round set (Elizabeth
Bowden) and the costumes are a delight. Burney would have approved. She was
Queen Charlotte's Second Keeper of Robes until 1791.
Sometimes even the best of the London fringe theatres overreach themselves.
This has happened on at least three occasions in the last few weeks. The
Bush put on a play - Chris Hannan's The Baby set in Rome 78 BC - in the
mistaken belief that the author is a maturing writer. The piece was simply
not good enough for the performance nor for the standards we have come to
expect from that theatre.
The Gate spoiled its re-opening, after some splendid refurbishing with the
help of Allied Lyons, by arbitrarily transposing Ramon Valle-Inclan's
Bohemian Lights from Spain to Ireland. The experiment might have worked if
most of the audience had been already familiar with the original setting.
One doubts if they were. In practice, the production was perverse: too
clever by half. And I also think that the Almeida, if it can still be called
a fringe theatre, made a mess of the staging of Harold Pinter's Moonlight.
It might look a much better play in another place.
The overreaching occurs again at the New End in Hampstead where there is a
revival of Andorra by Max Frisch. In the past year or two the New End has
had one of the best track records of any fringe theatre in London, including
revivals of Pirandello and JR Ackerley's The Prisoners of War. Andorra,
first performed in Zurich in 1961, is one of the most striking and memorable
of postwar European plays. The challenge of carrying it off on a small stage
in Hampstead in 1993 is enormous.
One hoped for the best, as always, but they just cannot do it. Andorra has a
large cast, a minimum of 15 if you include the silent characters. It also
has a huge subject. Basically it is about questions of Jewishness and
nationalism and what happened in in Europe in the run-up to, and during, the
second world war. In fact, it is more subtle and timeless than that. Germany
is not mentioned. Andorra is a fictitious place, not even a replica of
Frisch's native land of Switzerland. The piece is about outsiders anywhere
and suspicions within communities and across frontiers. The Jewish theme was
topical, but it could be black and white, catholics and protestants.
The man accused of being Jewish in Andorra is not Jewish at all. He is the
illegitimate child of an extramarital liaison. His father simply said that
he was Jewish as a way of adopting him and bringing him into respectable
family life. This was presented as an act of charity at a time when helping
poor Jews was seen as a good cause. Times change.
These are deep and fascinating waters, not easy to navigate. Anyone who has
not seen Andorra before and who lives in Hampstead should make a short
journey to see it. The defects are that the production is out of its depth,
that the set, which is meant to be a small square in a southern European
town, looks more like a sheet-lined waiting room in a hospital, and that
most of the cast are not up to their parts. It would be invidious to name
names, but if fringe theatre is to maintain its growing reputation, it
should remember that its abilities do not always live up to its aspirations.
A Busy Day until October 23 at the Hen &amp; Chicken, Bedminster, Bristol 0272
537735; Andorra at the New End, Hampstead until October 24. (071) 794 0022
