FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (6): The centre is strained -
Politics
THE victory in Poland of leftwing political parties with communist roots
only four years after the collapse of communism throughout eastern Europe is
leading to a reappraisal of political probabilities throughout the former
communist world, writes Anthony Robinson.
The Polish left's turnabout has aroused particular interest in Slovakia,
Poland's southern neighbour, where the Party of the Democratic Left (SDL),
led by Mr Peter Weiss, closely resembles Poland's Democratic Left Alliance
guided by Mr Alexander Kwasniewski.
In Poland, the election results were as much a defeat for the fragmented
anti-communist parties of the Solidarity-era opposition as a victory for the
re-packaged communist-era politicians.
There are similarities in Slovakia where the centre stage is tenuously held
by the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). This movement, a loose
alliance bound together more by the personality of Mr Vladimir Meciar than
any ideological cement, was formed in 1991 after the disintegration of
Slovakia's 'velvet revolution' alliance called People Against Violence
(VPN).
To its left the HZDS is challenged by the neo-communists, to its right by
the Christian Democrat party (KDH), led by Mr Jan Carnogursky, the Slovak
National Party (SNS) led by Mr Ludovit Cernak, and smaller parties
representing ethnic Hungarians.
But the ability of the HZDS to command the centre ground has been undermined
by the inability of the government to deliver the promised economic recovery
and growing disillusionment with the suspicious, combative personality of
its leader.
The erosion of confidence in the HZDS and deep, often personal animosities,
between leaders of the non-communist parties has inevitably rebounded to the
benefit of the former communist SLD. Like their Polish counterparts, Mr
Weiss and key aides such as Mr Pavel Kanis, the SLD deputy chairman, have
spent the last four years trying to shed the stigma of the Soviet-imposed
communist past, and present themselves as a respectable, democratic party,
eligible for membership in a future government coalition.
At the last elections in June 1992 the SLD already emerged as the second
largest party with 28 seats in the 150 seat Narodna Rada, the single chamber
Slovak parliament. The SLD was dwarfed by the HZDS which won 74 seats won
but came out well ahead of the Slovak Nationalist Party (SNS), which was the
only party to stand unambiguously in favour of Slovak independence. The SNS
won only 15 seats and agreed to become a junior coalition partner in the
post-election HZDS-SNS government.
This government collapsed last March when Mr Ludovit Cernak, the SNS leader,
took his party out of the coalition after attacking Mr Meciar for his
alleged authoritarian style and his closeness to politicians such as the
Defence and Culture Ministers with shady political antecedents and ties to
Czechoslovakia's Moscow-dominated past.
Last month, however, Mr Cernak agreed in principle to take his party back
into the government, mainly because his reluctance to risk early elections
which the former communists might win proved stronger than personal and
political antipathy to Mr Meciar.
A renewed HZDS-SNS coalition, still to be finalised at the time of writing,
would create a secure parliamentary majority and ensure passage of next
year's budget. It would give a reprieve to Mr Meciar whose shaky minority
government has been dangerously weak since Mr Milan Knazko, a former actor
who was a popular idol of the VPN movement in 1989, was sacked as foreign
minister five months ago. Mr Knazko left the HZDS after fierce arguments
with Mr Meciar over policy towards ethnic minorities and neighbouring
states. He has since formed his own breakaway party, the Alliance of
Independent Democrats, with eight seats in parliament.
The new alliance patches up the government but does not reduce the
underlying challenge from the former communist SLD or the risk of sharing
the fate suffered by Poland's Solidarity era parties. But Slovakia does not
share Poland's deeper political culture or its self-confidence as one of the
historic nations of eastern Europe. The reform communists, who form the
frontline of the Polish Democratic Left Alliance, were committed to
reformist politics before being swept from power in 1989 and have been able
to attract support from the new business class which has since emerged.
Slovakia has no so such self-confident past. The communists who ran
Czechoslovakia in the Stalinist years and after the Soviet invasion of 1968
were, almost to a man, grey mediocrities who showed an insensitivity bred of
ignorance to tradition and theenvironment.
Nowhere was the deliberate destruction of the creative and productive middle
class more complete than in former Czechoslovakia which before the war,
together with its large German and Jewish minorities, formed perhaps the
most successful democracy in continental Europe. And the Slovak part of the
old republic, singled out for investment in heavy industry, suffered the
most.
Given this history, the risk of a return to power of parties with their
roots in Slovakia's communist past is a sobering one. The men who lead the
party seem bright and intelligent. But with Slovakia's slow record of reform
to date, many of the old nomenklatura bosses are still running the various
bureaucracies, the big state owned factories and the security forces.
Several former communists are already in the HZDS government. It is
difficult to escape the conclusion that once the reformed communists
regained power in their own right it might be difficult to remove them.
Ironically the widespread sense that the former communists represent the
most likely alternative to the HZDS, together with the personal rivalries
and relative inexperience of the non-communist opposition parties, are the
main factors keeping Mr Meciar in power.
'Meciar is a confrontationalist. With him Slovak politics cannot be brought
to the level needed to modernise the economy and society,' says Mr Igor
Uhrik, vicepresident of the SNS and one of a handful of expatriate Slovaks
who have returned to contribute their skills and foreign experience to
building up the new state. But Mr Meciar is in charge, and while he remains
that way he will be the one to choose the timing of the next election to his
greatest advantage.
