FT  17 MAY 93 / Home loans and Euro-money
Eurosceptics who hoped that the third Spanish devaluation in less than a
year would halt the move towards European Monetary Union are likely to be
disappointed. But it does make it even more probable that Emu will start
with a small group of countries based on France, Germany and its neighbours,
which have minimised realignment within the exchange rate mechanism. A more
significant event will be tomorrow's Danish referendum, which will determine
whether the Maastricht treaty can still be used as the basis for such a
union.
In a series of gatherings in Europe I have denied that a single currency -
and still less 'fixed exchange rates' - require a single political
authority. For this is what the Eurosceptics fear most and the
Euro-enthusiasts privately hope to achieve.
The more difficult supplementary question is: 'How much co-operation or
assimilation of economic structures do fixed monetary arrangements require?'
My tentative answer has been: 'About as much as the G7 group of leading
industrial countries have aspired to on a worldwide basis, but have rarely
succeeded in achieving.'
This answer gives the right flavour, but it is short on detail. The two
conditions that the British government has most frequently given for
rejoining the ERM are cyclical convergence with Germany - by which it seems
to mean that similar short-term interest rates should be appropriate in the
two countries - and an end to the recession in the UK. Because of the
unexpectedly severe German downturn and a more vigorous than expected UK
recovery both these conditions may now be fulfilled within months rather
than years - too early to avoid a huge Tory split, if rejoining the ERM were
to be mooted.
Meanwhile, the question frequently put to me by German and French officials
is: why do the British concentrate so much on short-term interest rates and
not on long-term ones, where German levels have been quite moderate?
The answer surely lies in a structural difference. A far larger share of
British borrowing is on a short-term basis than is the case on the
continent. This applies to both business borrowing and loans for home
ownership. But it is the latter which has proved the biggest political
land-mine. A tightening of monetary policy to reduce inflationary pressure
has a catastrophic effect on UK mortgage rates. The effect is especially
severe on recent homebuyers. A comparable increase in interest rates in
Germany and France is certainly not pleasant, but it does not have the same
effect on the home loan market where borrowing is mostly on a medium or
long-term basis.
A development has however occurred in the British housing market which may
change all this: the growing vogue for fixed rate mortgages. These have
become popular with borrowers after the shock of recent high rates.
Fixed-rate mortgages have now become possible in the UK because of the rapid
growth of the sterling swap market, which has enabled building societies -
which themselves borrow short - to reduce their exposure to interest rate
fluctuations.
An estimate of what might have happened had fixed mortgage rates been
available in the past few years has been made by Morgan Grenfell and is
shown in the chart. The thick line shows what might have happened if all
existing borrowers had five-year fixed rates. The dotted line is drawn on
the more realistic assumption that only new borrowers had been on such a
basis.
The results are as expected, but still pretty dramatic. The long period of
extremely high mortgage rates, which both intensified the UK recession and
undermined ERM membership, would not have taken place. Of course mortgage
rates would not have fallen so much in recent months. But they would not
have had to, if the slump had been less bad.
With more stable mortgage rates, UK governments would not have been able to
impose quite such such sharp interest rate squeezes on homebuyers. But with
diminished volatility in both directions credit booms would have been
diminished too and the need for shock treatment correspondingly smaller.
The peculiarities of the British mortgage market may seem a long way from
European monetary politics. But the encouragement of the change towards
fixed-rate borrowing may make a more important contribution to eventual
British membership of a European monetary area than more obvious moves in
the field of financial diplomacy.
