FT  27 OCT 93 / IBM cost-cutting checks losses
LOSSES at International Business Machines were lower than expected in the
third quarter, as revenues stabilised and cost-cutting began to take effect.
Nonetheless, Mr Lou Gerstner, chairman and chief executive, said: 'The
company's cost and expense structure remain uncompetitive. During the third
quarter, aggressive internal taskforce work took place to identify
additional areas where our costs can be reduced.'
IBM could return to profitability 'as our gross margins increasingly match
those of the rest of our industry. I am confident IBM is on the right
track,' he said.
Net losses for the quarter were Dollars 48m (Pounds 32.4m), or 12 cents per
share, better than analysts' predictions. Earnings were boosted by a Dollars
34m tax benefit. In the period last year IBM reported a net profit of
Dollars 86m, or 15 cents a share, before restructuring charges, but a loss
of Dollars 2.8bn, or Dollars 4.87 per share, after them.
The decline in revenues was halted with the company making Dollars 14.7bn,
similar to the second quarter. IBM said strong personal computer sales and a
slower rate of decline in mainframe computer sales had helped stabilise the
figure. 'Although our overall results are clearly unsatisfactory, the third
quarter included some encouraging signs,' Mr Gerstner said.
Sales of computer hardware fell just 1 per cent on last year's third quarter
at Dollars 6.96bn. Analysts had predicted a decline of about 10 per cent.
But revenues from rentals and financing fell 14.2 per cent to Dollars 1bn,
and software revenues also declined. These trends reflected the impact of
declining mainframe computer sales on IBM's business. Service revenues rose
26.5 per cent to Dollars 2.3bn.
IBM's third-quarter gross profit margin was 38 per cent, down from 46.1 per
cent. 'We believe our gross margins will continue to be under pressure,' Mr
Gerstner said. The squeeze was felt in both personal computers and services,
two high revenue growth segments.
Similar trends have taken their toll on other US computer makers. Last week
Digital Equipment reported heavy losses and Amdahl expects a substantial
loss. Apple Computer also saw gross margins fall sharply.
IBM's operating expenses fell 11.8 per cent as the company continued to shed
workers. The staff totalled about 267,000 at the end of the quarter, down
41,000 from a year earlier. By the year-end the company plans to cut back to
255,000 workers.
Revenue for the first nine months was Dollars 43.3bn, down 3.7 per cent from
Dollars 45bn. Net losses before restructuring charges were Dollars 373m, or
70 cents per share. After charges the loss was Dollars 8.4bn. In the same
period last year, IBM reported net earnings, before charges, of Dollars
1.5bn or Dollars 2.56. After charges, losses were Dollars 1.4bn or Dollars
2.46.
