FT  06 MAR 93 / Quick success is good news for G-men: Unused to terrorism,
New York can take it
JUDGE William Sessions was almost cheerful this week. The beleaguered head
of the FBI, whose job appears to hang by a thread, was able to appear
constantly on television, eventually announcing an arrest in the World Trade
Centre bombing. He was also not on the spot for the siege in Waco, Texas,
because the Bureau of Arms, Tobacco and Firearms, which may have bungled its
initial raid on the religious cult last Sunday, does not fall under his
jurisdiction.
While he was able to exude unaccustomed confidence, initial public reaction
to the detention of Mr Mohammed Salameh has been dominated by praise for the
forensic detective work of the FBI and the local New York police.
Even without the unexpectedly quick arrest in this case, both New York and
the country seem to have taken the events of the last week in their stride.
The US has, by international standards, been quite free of acts of terrorism
on its own soil in the last decade.
But, as the siege of Waco, the recent gangland-style execution of six people
in the Bronx and a shooting outside the CIA in January, allegedly by a
Pakistani citizen, all demonstrate, it is only too familiar with violence.
A typical reaction from a public figure was provided by Mr Peter Jennings,
the ABC TV anchorman, who was asked on Thursday after a speech at Howard
University in Washington if he thought the country had been traumatised by
the New York bombing. He brusquely dismissed as rubbish one tabloidesque
piece of reporting which had concluded 'America will never be the same
again.'
As Mr Mario Cuomo, governor of New York said: 'The greatest threat to this
country is not some group gone mad over religion in the Middle East
somewhere. It's what we do to ourselves with violence, with drugs. The
people in Waco didn't fly in here from Mesopotamia.'
Under the surface calm, to which even normally excitable New Yorkers seem to
subscribe, there is some concern at the reminder that terrorist groups can
and do operate in the US. This sentiment has been fanned by self-styled
security experts, much in demand this week by the media.
A typical example was one opinion piece in the New York Times which said
'the new world disorder means we'll be a bigger target' but provided little
justification for its prognostication. Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
leader, also issued a warning that US involvement in Bosnia could make it
vulnerable to terrorism, but, under pressure, he later said his comments had
been 'mistranslated'.
Another prescient and factual article in the same newspaper two weeks ago
had detailed the known activities of presumed terrorist groups inside the
US.
The article quoted Israeli intelligence as believing that command of Hamas,
the radical Palestinian group, was exercised not from Beirut or Tehran but
from a house in suburban Virginia. But the prevalent view of the quoted
experts was that, as with the IRA, the US has mostly been a source of
funding and some recruitment for activities well away from American shores.
The last big arrest of a foreign terrorist in the US was that of Mr Yu
Kikumura of the Japanese Red Army, picked up in a bomb-laden car by a New
Jersey highway patrolman in 1988. There is also evidence that the El Rukhn
black extremist group in Chicago was plotting with Libya to bring down a
domestic US aircraft about five years ago.
General Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser in the Bush
administration, this week said he believed Iran was the country now most
responsible for sustaining various terrorist groups, though not necessarily
controlling all of them. Also this week Mr Warren Christopher, the secretary
of state, expressed the hope that Russia would not sell arms to Iran, in
part for the same reason.
However, there is simply no evidence that US foreign policy is about to be
affected by the implication of Islamic fundamentalists in the New York
bombing. If New Yorkers could take it in their stride, the Clinton
administration could hardly do less.
