FT  14 DEC 93 / Democratic past shaped Antall's vision of future
Mr Jozsef Antall, the Hungarian prime minister who died of cancer on Sunday
at the age of 61, was a man rooted in his country's history.
That is most trivially true in his training and earlier profession as an
historian. More meaningfully, he drew strength from an abiding faith in
Hungary's democratic traditions inherited in part from his father, a
minister in the post-war government, who opposed both Nazis and communists.
His background led him to participate as a young man in the 1956 uprising
against Soviet and communist rule. It made almost inevitable his entry into
Hungary's political scene when democratisation began in the late 1980s.
In 1989 Mr Antall became leader of the centre-right Hungarian Democratic
Forum and in 1990 took a conservative coalition to victory in free
elections.
He brought to the premiership impeccable credentials as a democrat of the
old school. Politics was in his blood. The prime minister, although not an
inspiring leader, was a consummate politician: a master of the subtle
manoeuvre and the political balancing act.
But he took with him from his earlier career a tendency to lecture on
Hungary's traditions and that opened him to the charge that he was not just
old-fashioned but backward-looking.
Indeed he found it difficult to communicate with the post-communist,
materialist Hungarian whose Holy Trinity, it was said, was car, video and
weekend cottage. He was far happier meeting west German politicians and
playing the statesman.
Nor was he ever comfortable with economic policymaking during a hectic
period of free-market reforms. His response to the modern media's aggressive
role was prickly at best.
But Mr Antall's historical orientation gave him surer bearings than most
other post-communist politicians.
His grounding in Hungary's democratic and western traditions gave him a firm
sense of direction during the transition from one-party to multi-party rule
and from Warsaw Pact membership towards Nato and the European Union.
Above all, acute awareness of Hungary's 20th century trauma made Mr Antall
prize stability. And stability, which seemed an unambitious goal at the
euphoric start of the decade, looked a more impressive achievement over
time.
