FT  08 MAY 93 / Asil Nadir in Cyprus: 'I had to have freedom to move, to
talk' - Polly Peck's chairman explains why he jumped bail and protests at
the 'skulduggery' around his case
Extracts from Mr Asil Nadir's statement yesterday:
'I do assure you it wasn't an easy decision to leave Great Britain, knowing
as I do the consequences of jumping bail. But the chances of me receiving a
fair trial were receding by the day. Ladies and gentlemen, nobody can live
without hope. Sadly, the authorities had during the past 2 1/2 years
demolished my hope of receiving a fair trial. I had to have freedom to move,
to think, to talk. They had killed that, and so I came here so that I could
at long last obtain for myself the basic human right to defend myself.'
Polly Peck shares were hit severely after the Serious Fraud Office's initial
raid, in September 1990, on South Audley Management, the family company. 'It
was evident that the authorities were feeding incorrect material to the
media. Quite frankly, if I was a journalist I would have used that material
too. But it was lies. The Stock Exchange and the company's brokers were
obstructive in not suspending the shares when I requested it. It is a
scandal that when I requested the DTI to conduct an inquiry, they refused
unless I paid Pounds 1m.
'The president and government of the Republic of Turkey asked Her Majesty's
Government to step in. The Foreign Office sent a curt message back to the
president at 4pm on a Saturday demanding that Pounds 100m be deposited by
10am on Monday, an impossible request.
'I travelled many thousands of miles trying to shore up confidence in Polly
Peck . . . In December 1990 I was in Turkey and Cyprus assisting the
administrators and was advised that to return to Great Britain would lead to
my arrest. I actually thought in a strange way that this would be a good
thing because I had great faith in British justice and wanted the whole
ghastly business to be cleared up.'
His returning aircraft was diverted to Heathrow. 'We were greeted . . . by
60 fully armed police complete with flak jackets and dogs. They dramatically
stormed the plane and told me, as they say in the movies, to freeze]'
After two days in custody, he was charged with theft and false accounting.
'Bail was set at a UK record of Pounds 3.5m, but I wasn't allowed to contact
any of my family or anybody who had the remotest connection with me
commercially, which amounts to approximately 175,000 persons.'
His lawyers arranged for a firm of accountants to look at the books of
Unipak, a Polly Peck subsidiary in northern Cyprus. 'All along the
investigators had insisted that there were no assets in either of these
countries. Well, ladies and gentlemen, we are now all gathered in a phantom
hotel. According to the authorities, it does not exist. I am glad to say
that Binder Hamlyn's report confirmed that monies allegedly stolen by myself
were accounted for in the books here. The SFO . . . indicated that the books
must have been cooked. My lawyers then chose forensic experts from the SFO's
own approved list to investigate this. Their report verified that the books
had not been tampered with.
'What has been most alarming has been the tactics of the SFO and other
authorities. First of all, my private and confidential mail to and from my
lawyers has been opened. It was a criminal act and confirmed in court.
The SFO seemed to be desperate 'so on to the scene comes a QC from the
director of public prosecutions. He walks into court uninvited and tells the
judge that he is under investigation for conspiring to pervert the course of
justice . . . The charade continued a few days later in a court the size of
a broom cupboard . . . This hearing involved a High Court judge continually
protesting his innocence. It was pure farce.
'On April 6 there was another knock on my door. In walked a representative
of the trustees in bankruptcy, escorted by the Metropolitan Police. They
took every single document relating to my defence . . . This action
demonstrated to me that there was absolutely no possibility of getting a
fair trial because all the skulduggery which I have described to you has
been cloaked in secrecy.
'There are many points that I have left out. I shall reveal all in due
course. I assure you that there is much more to the whole of this
persecution than meets the eye. We are now putting together certain evidence
which at a later date will be placed before you. In conclusion, I would like
to quote a leader comment in the Financial Times. The FT remarked that so
long as it takes several years to bring such cases to court, little can be
done to prevent defendants rebelling, unless - and I quote - 'society is
willing to ride roughshod over their human rights'. Thank you very much.'
