FT  24 NOV 93 / Brussels seeks jobs blueprint
Over the next fortnight, Europe's political leaders will be hit with a
blizzard of paper recommending ways to combat unemployment and spur an
economic recovery.
The European Commission is preparing no fewer than four separate studies on
these topics, an exercise which has strained the bureaucracy's powers of
co-ordination to its limits. Even supporters admit there is duplication and
overlap.
The Brussels paper trail includes a Green paper on the future of European
social policy drawn up by Mr Padraig Flynn, the Irish commissioner; a
Commission document setting out 'broad economic policy guidelines' to be
adopted at next month's EU summit; a paper on the state of 'convergence'
among the 12 member states' economies; and Mr Jacques Delors' own White
Paper on employment, competitiveness and growth which will borrow liberally
from all the above.
Mr Delors, approaching his 10th and final year as Commission president, is
keen to go out on a high note. The White Paper has become something of a
last will and testament which he hopes will lift EU leaders sights above
their short-term difficulties to the long-term future of the European
economy. Mr Delors' dilemma is how to influence the debate at a time when
member states are increasingly looking for national - rather than
pan-European - solutions to their economic problems. The Bank of England's
half percentage point reduction in its base lending rate yesterday
underlined the trend. At a meeting of EU finance ministers last Monday, Mr
Delors pleaded for an open-minded debate; but his prescriptions for job
creation, such as a shorter-working week, lower retirement age, compulsory
cuts in overtime, and more 'solidarity' between those in and out of work
appeared to be given short shrift.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, dismissed the ideas
as 'folly' and claimed they would actually create more unemployment. Mr
Johann Eekhoff, Germany's state secretary for the economy, said such
measures could only be 'a short-term emergency instrument'. Mr Jean-Claude
Juncker, Luxembourg's finance minister, said shorter working hours would
send a 'negative, defeatist signal' to Europe's workers.
Similarly, finance ministers expressed concern about the difficulty in
cutting employment taxes. Though there is general recognition that it is
necessary to encourage businesses to hire labour, ministers are worried that
the loss in state revenue will have to be made up with higher taxes, such as
valued added tax or new environmental levies. There is also a widespread
reluctance to commit to specific targets either on interest rate cuts, or
the ambitious target of creating 15m new jobs by the year 2000.
Mr Delors' aides insist that the tone inside Monday's meeting was friendly,
with ministers welcoming the Commission's analysis of the structural
economic problems facing the Union. Yet the question of the prescription
persists and will form the core debate at the European summit in Brussels on
December 10 to 11.
So far, there is a curiously tentative tone to the latest drafts of the
White Paper. The opening section disavows any intention to legislate, and it
explicitly recognises that solutions must be tailored to member states'
needs. About the only strong statement the Commission makes is a rejection
of the US 'trickle-down' model of reducing income disparities and improving
job creation through more wealth creation.
Commission officials also predict there will have to be substantial
revisions of the White Book's chapter on employment. There is widespread
scepticism about claims that up to 1m new jobs could be created through
tighter environmental standards and more 'green' public and private sector
inspectors by the end of the century. Similar assertions about the potential
for employment in the arts and leisure industry are also viewed with
suspicion inside the Commission. 'They seem to want to turn Europe into a
giant Disney park,' said one official.
Mr Delors faces a delicate balancing act, uniting his fellow Commissioners
behind his own White Paper and then winning the support of the member states
for a general plan of action. He must also square the circle between his
support for the European social welfare state and the need for more labour
market flexibility. Much work still needs to be done.
