FT  23 APR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Aluminium can recycling reaches
record levels
THE ALUMINIUM industry's determined efforts to promote can recycling as one
of the few forms of used packaging that can generate a decent income for
collectors are paying off.
Aluminium can recycling rates in Europe and the US reached record levels
last year. In Europe the rate rose from 21 per cent in 1991 to 25 per cent
while the US rate jumped from 62.5 per cent to 67.9 per cent.
Big money was involved. The US Aluminum Association estimates that the
industry paid out Dollars 968m for used cans, money that went back into
local economies to benefit individuals, schools, churches, scout troops and
so on.
However, the industry also benefits - and not only from giving itself a
'green' image. Cans provide cheaper metal because they can be recycled on a
'closed loop' system (from cans to scrap and back to cans again), because
they save as much as 95 per cent of the energy needed to produce new
aluminium and because the capital cost of a recycling plant is only
one-tenth of that for a smelter.
According to Aluminium Can Recycling Europe (Acre), at least 39,595 tonnes
of aluminium cans were recycled in Europe last year, up from 32,350 tonnes.
The European industry has set itself a target of recycling 50 per cent of
all aluminium cans by the mid-1990s at a time when aluminium's share of the
beverage can market is also growing rapidly - it reached 51 per cent in
1992. Sweden, which has a mandatory deposit scheme, had the highest
recycling rate last year, 86 per cent, followed by Iceland, 75 per cent, and
Switzerland, 68 per cent.
Mr Alexander Wirtz of Acre, says that 'cash for aluminium cans' machines in
Switzerland today are even found high up in the Alps next to ski huts.
The recycling rate in Austria jumped from 25 per cent to 40 per cent last
year and there were steady increases in Ireland (11 to 16 per cent), Italy
(15 to 18 per cent), Greece (26 to 29 per cent) and the UK (11 to 16 per
cent.)
Efforts to promote further growth and to provide the necessary collection
infrastructure are being co-ordinated by Acre, which was formed in 1984 by
Alcan of Canada, Pechiney of France and VAW of Germany. Alcoa and Reynolds
of the US, joined in 1988, and Alusuisse-Lonza (Switzerland), Hydro
Aluminium (Norway) and Elval (Greece) agreed to provide support in their
domestic markets.
