FT  03 AUG 93 / Government backs down on plans for school testing
THE government yesterday signalled a full-scale retreat on education policy,
announcing a reversal of its plans for testing, the publication of school
league tables and the content of the national curriculum.
The changes, which follow a report by Sir Ron Dearing - appointed by Mr John
Patten, education secretary, in April to review the curriculum - appear
likely to bring an end to the boycotts by teachers' unions which wrecked
tests for seven-year-olds and 14-year-olds this year.
Baroness Blatch, the education minister who responded to the Dearing report
on behalf of Mr Patten, who is ill, announced that league tables of school
performance based on tests for seven-year-olds and 14-year-olds, planned to
start this year, will be abandoned. Teachers' unions had lobbied heavily for
this change, which was not in Sir Ron's recommendations.
The government plans to publish league tables for tests taken by
11-year-olds, which will not start on a compulsory basis until 1995 at the
earliest.
Other climbdowns included restricting compulsory tests to the three core
subjects of English, mathematics and science - it had been planned to
introduce them across the full range of 10 national curriculum subjects -
and raising teachers' assessments to equal status with the tests.
Sir Ron proposed that the curriculum should be slimmed down so that it only
took up 75 per cent of classroom time for 14-year-olds.
In a surprising step, Sir Ron also announced that he will consult employers
and teachers on introducing new vocational courses for 14-year-olds.
Baroness Blatch denied that the move was a government climbdown. She said:
'The early architects of the system built into the system too much
bureaucracy, too much convolution and that has been substantially addressed
by Sir Ron.'
The three teachers' unions which are boycotting the tests all cautiously
welcomed the news. The Association of Teachers and Lecturers is to ballot
its members in the new term, while the National Association of Schoolmasters
Union of Women Teachers said its boycott would be lifted once the reductions
in workload took effect. Mr Doug McAvoy of the National Union of Teachers
said his union's boycott would continue at least until its national
executive has met to discuss the issue.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, described the news as 'a
significant blow to the government's original position' and called for Mr
Patten's resignation. She said Pounds 35m had been wasted on attempting to
introduce tests this year.
Unions claim victory in fight over tests, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 13
