FT  14 OCT 93 / Search is on for new Groupe Bull head to replace Pache
THE FRENCH government is searching for a replacement for Mr Bernard Pache,
chairman and chief executive of Groupe Bull, the loss-making computer
manufacturer, according to sources close to the government.
Groupe Bull yesterday refused to comment on a report in Les Echos, the
business newspaper, that Mr Pache was shortly to be replaced.
The newspaper report follows months of speculation in Paris that Mr Pache's
job was at risk.
Mr Pache, 58, ex-head of the French coal board, was appointed by the former
left-wing government in June last year with a remit to return Bull to
profitability and prepare it for privatisation.
One senior French businessman with experience of the computer industry said
yesterday that it would be 'crazy' to dismiss Mr Pache after such a short
period in office or to replace him with somebody from outside the industry.
The newspaper report said Mr Pache's departure might be announced in
conjunction with the publication of the group's recovery plan. The plan is
expected to include a request for FFr9.2bn (Dollars 1.6bn) of state aid.
Speculation about a successor has mentioned Mr Jean-Marie Descarpentries,
former head of the French packaging company Carnaud, who engineered the
merger with Metal Box of the UK. He was offered the job at the time of Mr
Pache's appointment, but turned it down.
Some argue that Mr Pache has incurred government displeasure by moving too
slowly to transform and revitalise Bull, which has lost FFr15bn in the past
three years.
It is a time of intense uncertainty for the senior management of France's
state-controlled companies. The Balladur government has already made two new
appointments. Mr Michel Pebereau has replaced Mr Rene Thomas as chairman of
Banque Nationale de Paris and Mr Philippe Jaffre has succeeded Mr Loik Le
Floch-Prigent at the Elf Aquitaine oil group.
Mr Jean-Yves Haberer, chairman of Credit Lyonnais, the troubled banking
group, is mooted as the next target. He is expected to move to Credit
National, another bank, to make way for Mr Jean Peyrelevade, currently
chairman of the Union des Assurances de Paris (UAP) insurance group.
The appointment of a French government usually triggers a round of corporate
changes as the new administration exercises its right to hire and fire the
heads of France's public sector companies. However the current round has a
particular importance because of the privatisation programme. The Balladur
government is anxious to ensure that the privatisation candidates move into
the private sector with its own sympathisers in charge.
