FT  06 OCT 93 / Management: Japan keeps up the pressure - Competitiveness is
still improving
If, like many western managers, you are heaving a sigh of relief at all the
current cases of recession-hit trauma in Japanese industry, you should look
again - and worry.
A few fat multinationals in Tokyo and Osaka may be suffering - with their
suppliers hurting, too - but many medium-sized Japanese companies with
sizeable export ratios are responding to recession by raising still further
their already daunting competitiveness.
They are doing so, not through the sort of quantum-leap 're-engineering'
which has become fashionable in the US and Europe, but by maintaining their
traditional commitment to 'kaizen' or 'continuous improvement' on every
front: in the 'time-to-market' of new products; in speed of manufacture and
delivery; in stock turn rates; and in their cost and total productivity
levels. This strategy is effective, since most Japanese manufacturers start
from a higher level of efficiency and effectiveness than their western
rivals.
These are the main messages to emerge from a late summer research trip to
Japan by a consultant who is helping Britain's Department of Industry
organise a series of high-level autumn 'benchmarking brunches' on how
manufacturing companies can learn from Japanese best practice. Starting at
the end of this month in Newcastle as part of the DTI's Priority Japan
campaign, they will also be held in Reading and Birmingham*.
Mark Smalley, who heads PA Consulting's Midlands office, as well as acting
as one of its chief Japan watchers, studied a sample of eight
export-orientated companies of similar size and sector to many UK
enterprises. Most employ between 1,000 and 2,000 people. Their industries
include pumps, compressors, electronics components and test equipment, cycle
parts, and materials handling equipment.
His many conclusions include the following:
Almost every company spends heavily on product development and production
plant.
Although product life cycles are now being lengthened in some Japanese
industries - a move which has given false comfort to some of their western
competitors - the time required to develop new products is being shortened
further, as companies postpone their design decisions as late as possible.
One of the study companies has cut its already rapid development cycle by 50
per cent over the past three years.
Almost every company is slashing still further its order-to-delivery cycle
for products and services, whether they are standard or customised items. In
one instance, this has been cut from seven to two days over a period of
several years, in another from four months to one. Logistics and production
improvements are rife. Since 1991, one company has raised its annual stock
turn from 13 to 14.3 times, while another has gone from 6.25 to 7.8. A third
has climbed from eight to 12 times since 1989. One company now makes a
sophisticated calculation of the optimum trade-off between stock turns and
shorter delivery times.
Companies are looking for annual increases in total productivity of about 10
per cent. More ambitiously, one has aimed for some time to make its unit
cost improvements track the surge in the yen-dollar exchange rate. With two
exceptions, the eight companies have raised sales-per-employee by between a
fifth and two-thirds over the past four years.
Overall, Smalley says the companies are placing even greater emphasis than
before on collaboration between marketing, sales, design, engineering and
production. 'They don't use phrases such as 'marketing-led',' he comments.
'They see everything having to work together.'
The half-day 'benchmarking brunches', for up to 100 participants at a time,
will differ from many DTI initiatives, in that they will be aimed at
leading-edge UK companies as well as average performers. In addition to
presentations from top industrialists, the events will include workshops led
by academics in three areas: closeness to market, production and logistics.
* Tel: 071 727 9732.
