FT  14 AUG 93 / Still divided over calling the shots: Nato's credibility is
at stake in Sarajevo, but internal uncertainty remains
Nato is beating its chest. For the first time in the alliance's 44-year
history it may be about to fire a shot in anger. Or again, it may not.
In the cold war it did not have to shoot. The combined military strength of
its members, pledged to treat an attack on any one of them as an attack on
all, was sufficient to ensure that no such attack took place. But the fear
of one was enough to justify the alliance in the eyes of its members.
With the end of the cold war and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, that
is no longer the case. Nato members do not feel any immediate danger of a
direct attack on their territory. But many do fear that their security will
be jeopardised indirectly, by conflicts in eastern Europe.
Perhaps paradoxically, this feeling is strong in the country furthest away
from eastern Europe, namely the US. Americans, after all, never relied on
Nato to fend off a direct attack on their own territory. The purpose of Nato
was to ensure the security of western Europe. That being apparently
achieved, at least in the short term, many Americans now feel that Nato must
play a role in ensuring stability in eastern Europe if it is to justify its
continued existence.
That view is summed up in a currently fashionable slogan: 'out of area or
out of business'. 'Out of area' is Nato jargon for anywhere outside the
territory to which the mutual defence pact applies: that of its member
states in Europe and North America. In the past some members, notably
France, took the view that Nato should not do anything outside this area.
Now, however, all recognise that Nato has a broader role to play, especially
in eastern Europe, although as yet few existing members are willing to
enlarge the alliance itself.
Many central or east European states, headed by the Czech Republic, Hungary
and Poland, would like to join, but have been politely told the time is not
ripe. A sort of waiting room or annex was set up at the beginning of last
year: the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NAC-C), in which Nato members
sit together with their former Warsaw Pact adversaries, including all the
successor states of the Soviet Union.
But membership of NAC-C does not in itself prevent conflict - as events in
Transcaucasia and other parts of the former Soviet Union amply demonstrate -
and anyway NAC-C does not include the successor states of the situation in
the former Yugoslavia, where conflict is raging close to Nato territory.
Nato's inability to bring peace to Bosnia, or to defend the Bosnians against
'ethnic cleansing' and other atrocities, has tarnished its image in many
member states, and notably in the US.
That is why last Monday's decision to threaten the Bosnian Serbs with air
strikes unless they 'lift without delay the siege of Sarajevo' is seen, both
in Washington and at Nato HQ in Brussels, as a crucial test of Nato's
credibility.
'Nato as an institution has drawn a line in the sand on this,' says a senior
Nato official. 'It has its credibility on the line.'
'Among many in this town,' says Morton Abramowitz, head of Washington's
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and former US ambassador to
Turkey, 'the belief has grown up that this is a genuine crisis that can
affect the vitality of Nato. If Nato fails to act in a serious way in the
next few weeks, at a minimum by ending the siege and stopping the shelling
of Sarajevo, its future will be in serious doubt.'
Mr Abramowitz says there is growing frustration in Washington at the
obstructive attitude of some of the US's European allies, and that unnamed
but influential members of Congress have told him they will block
appropriations of funds for US forces in Europe if it continues. 'The
British role has been the worst,' he adds.
In London, officials readily concede that there have been sharp differences
of view, notably on 'the utility of the use of force, especially in Europe
in the post-cold war environment'. In terms not heard in Whitehall for some
years, they seek to present Britain's position as a mainstream European one,
while emphasising differences of perspective between Europe and the US. They
claim, for instance, that Americans think the formula that worked in Desert
Storm, Panama and Grenada should be applicable in Europe, whereas 'most of
us here don't see that approach as very helpful, and even less so when it
comes from people who are not themselves prepared to put forces on the
ground'.
'Leaving aside the Germans, who are pretty well out of this now,' says one
British policymaker, 'the Europeans have attached a high priority to the
humanitarian operation (in Bosnia) and to a negotiated settlement. The
Americans, who are not very directly involved, feel this is being used as an
excuse for inaction, that UN troops are almost hostages and that, but for
our constant hand-wringing, an application of force from the air would
somehow sort things out.'
It is clear that Britain only accepted the decision on air strikes because
it feared the effect on Nato of snubbing the US for a second time, after the
humiliating rejection of an American proposal to lift the arms embargo on
Bosnia earlier in the year.
The French position is somewhere in between. In early June, at a meeting of
the North Atlantic Council in Athens, France was pressing for air strikes to
help secure the 'safe havens' in Bosnia proclaimed by the UN Security
Council, while the US insisted on a restrictive interpretation, allowing
only for retaliation if UN troops were themselves attacked. By late July,
however, the US wanted to use air strikes to break the Serb stranglehold on
Sarajevo. It was France that insisted air strikes could only be initiated
with UN authorisation, and must be co-ordinated with the UN force on the
ground, whose commander is a Frenchman, General Jean Cot.
One interesting feature of the affair is that earlier French reservations
about Nato's 'out of area' role have vanished completely. 'Out of area or
out of business is out of date,' says one senior Nato official with evident
satisfaction. 'We're already out of area.'
This official brushed aside fears that the UN secretary-general, Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, might refuse to authorise air strikes, or that the Serbs
would succeed in dividing the allies on whether they had complied with the
ultimatum or not. 'The only source of judgment now is the US,' he declared.
'If the US comes to a decision, with a credible case, I'm confident we will
prevail both in the (North Atlantic) Council and in New York.' As for the
Serbs, 'I suspect if they think they can diddle the United States on this
one they're in for a shock. No one in Washington is in any mood to be
diddled'.
Mr Abramowitz and other Washington hawks remain sceptical, however, fearing
that the Europeans will exploit the complex chain of command, intriguing
with the UN and even with doubters in the US military to delay or avoid
taking action.
