FT  19 FEB 93 / International Bonds: Strong demand for Sweden's Dollars 2bn
global offering
THE STREAM of large international issues continued yesterday as the Kingdom
of Sweden launched its Dollars 2bn, 10-year global offering to strong
demand.
Meanwhile, Toyota Motor Corp announced that it planned to raise Dollars
1.5bn through a five-year offering early next week in what would be the
largest corporate deal yet seen in the Eurobond market.
Toyota's offering is expected to be priced to yield around 40 basis points
above comparable US Treasuries, which syndicate managers said was fair value
in view of the car manufacturer's triple A rating and its scarcity value in
the market.
The proposed yield is close to that on Toyota's Dollars 1bn five-year
Eurobond which was launched last May, the biggest corporate issue currently.
The flood of issues fanned rumours yesterday that a big UK corporate utility
or a Scandinavian sovereign was sounding the market for a possible
sterling-denominated Eurobond.
Officials at the joint lead underwriters of the Swedish deal, Salomon
Brothers and Morgan Stanley, said that demand for the bonds was centred in
Europe but that there was also good interest from Tokyo and New York.
However, they discounted market talk that the deal would be raised to
Dollars 3bn.
There were reports that European investors were willing to pay 40 basis
points above the the 6 1/4 per cent US Treasury due 2003, well below the
indicated range of 42-45 basis points. This suggested that the deal would be
priced at the lower end of the range.
The current fashion of global deals is expected to continue during the next
few weeks and the Republic of Italy is said to be considering a dollar
global offering.
The World Bank's Y200bn global offering, launched on Wednesday, was priced
at 25 basis points over the benchmark Japanese government bond No 145
yesterday. This was at the lower end of the indicated range of 25 to 27
basis points and in line with expectations.
The World Bank also took advantage of investor demand for high-yielding debt
instruments by issuing the Eurobond market's first floating rate note based
on the yield on 10-year US Treasury bonds. This contrasts with other recent
note issues with minimum and maximum coupon levels, which have been tied to
short-term interest rates.
An official at Lehman Brothers International, which arranged the Dollars
100m five-year note for the World Bank, said that this type of note was
attractive to investors who believed that the US yield curve would remain
steep or flatten only gradually.
The note was issued at par to yield 50 per cent of the US Federal Reserve's
Constant Maturity Treasury plus 145 basis points. The CMT reflects the
average blend of 10-year US Treasuries, currently at 6.29 per cent.
The minimum coupon on the notes is 4.6 per cent, which compares with
three-month dollar Libor of 3.25 per cent, and the maximum is 25 per cent.
By late yesterday, the bonds had not been freed to trade.
Lehman Brothers also provided the market's other colourful issue, a Dollars
125m five-year offering for the Mexican company, Gruma, the world's largest
tortilla manufacturer. Gruma generates Dollars 300m annually in the US.
The bonds were priced to yield 445 basis points above the 5 3/4 per cent US
Treasuries due 1998, in the middle of the indicated range of 430-455 basis
points.
An official at Lehman said that price was chosen so that both the issuer and
the investors could share the impact of the rise in the underlying US bond
prices yesterday.
She added that the yield was close to that of other dollar-denominated
Mexican corporate paper.
