FT  05 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Medeva court setback over drug infringement
MEDEVA, the rapidly growing pharmaceuticals company whose shares halved this
summer after a profits warning, yesterday suffered a further set back in the
High Court.
Mr Justice Aldous ruled that Medeva's activities had infringed a patent held
by US drug company Biogen for a Hepatitis B vaccine.
The vaccine, bought by Medeva last year, was the company's best early
opportunity to produce a block-buster drug and demonstrate it could market
products it had developed.
Mr Bernard Taylor, chairman, said Medeva was 'disappointed and surprised by
the decision' and the company would appeal. When the vaccine was bought for
an initial Pounds 3.86m in 1992, Medeva expected a fight with Biogen but had
expected to win. Last year the European Patent Office revoked Biogen's
patent over Hepatitis B, a decision which the US company is also appealing
against.
A Medeva spokesman said that if the EPO rejected this appeal when it passed
judgment next year, the decision would over-rule whatever had happened in
the British High Court.
Medeva's shares had a roller coaster day, rising sharply initially on
anticipation of the judge finding in Medeva's favour. The shares then fell
to 109p in heavy trading before recovering to close at 119 1/2 p, a loss of
5 1/2 p on the day.
The judge held Biogen's patent partially valid on the Hepatitis B vaccine
which is licensed to Merck and SmithKline Beecham. Medeva said it would
continue to develop the vaccine, sales of which were not due to start until
1995-96.
The company has adopted a novel strategy that includes buying portfolios of
drugs in late stages of development to take them through the regulatory
procedures to market.
Just as the strategy was beginning to convert some of the sceptics in the
summer, Medeva warned that profits this year would rise but still be well
below expectations.
There was a write-down of previously reported profits in MD Pharmaceuticals,
its Californian subsidiary, but the company also said MD had been forced by
the Food and Drug Administration to close temporarily to deal with
production shortcomings.
In September, Medeva's hopes of launching a generic metered dose inhaler
which would have challenged markets dominated by proprietary anti-asthma
products, also suffered a setback.
