FT  21 APR 93 / The Queens's Awards for Environmental Achievement 1993:
Little worms that commit insecticide - Agricultural Genetics Company
TINY worms which kill insect pests have won a joint environmental
achievement award for Agricultural Genetics Company, an independent
biotechnology company based in Cambridge, and Horticulture Research
International, the state-backed agency responsible for fruit and vegetable
research, writes Clive Cookson.
AGC's MicroBio subsidiary has been working for six years with HRI's
Littlehampton research station in Sussex to develop natural pesticides based
on nematode worms. The first two products were launched in 1989/90: Nemasys
against glasshouse sciarids and Nemasys H against vine weevils. Both insects
are important horticultural pests, particularly of nursery stock.
The Nemasys products are in the forefront of what is likely to be a huge
wave of biopesticides introduced over the next decade. Their environmental
advantage is that, unlike synthetic chemical pesticides, they do not leave
harmful residues in crops and water supplies.
Worldwide sales of biological pesticides were worth about Dollars 120m last
year - only 2 per cent of the figure for chemical pesticides. Industry
predictions put the biopesticide market in 2000 in the Dollars 500m to
Dollars 2bn region.
So far the emerging market has been dominated by products based on Bacillus
thuringiensis, a naturally occurring bacterium that makes an insect-killing
toxin. The AGC-HRI partnership has lead the way on nematode-based
insecticides, though a Californian company, Biosys, is about to launch a
competitive product.
The achievement of AGC and HRI researchers has been to identify nematode
strains with specific activity against their target pests and then develop a
technique for mass-producing the microscopic worms by large-scale
fermentation.
Nemasys is sold in packs, each containing at least 50m juvenile worms in a
moist, inert carrier which is applied to the compost or soil around the
plants. There the nematodes seek out and kill insect larvae (to be precise,
the actual killing is done by symbiotic bacteria that live inside the
worms). The nematodes reproduce inside the dead insect as it decomposes and
release a new generation of juveniles which move off into the compost in
search of more prey.
The next target for the AGC-HRI nematodes will be the flies that feed off
cultivated mushrooms, the most valuable horticultural crop in the UK. A new
Nemasys product is being introduced this year for biological control of
sciarid flies in mushrooms. If it is adopted instead of chemical
insecticides, it will remove the environmental problem of disposing of
650,000 tonnes a year of spent pesticide-laden mushroom compost.
AGC is also working with the Agriculture and Food Research Council's Long
Ashton Research Station to develop biopesticides to control slugs and
snails.
Production of the slug control nematode has reached the pilot plant stage
and it is expected to reach the market in two to three years, after
extensive field trials.
'We are confident that our natural product will be as effective as chemical
control methods at a competitive cost to users,' says Peter Innes, AGC
MicroBio director.
