FT  20 SEP 93 / Rabin in surprise Egypt visit
MR Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, yesterday flew to Alexandria for
talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Mr Rabin's surprise trip came as the government prepared to muster its
forces to face right-wing demonstrations and a two-day parliamentary debate
over the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord. Over the weekend Mr Rabin and Mr
Shimon Peres, the foreign minister, appeared to rule out the possibility of
a referendum on the peace deal.
Israeli officials said the Alexandria talks would focus on how Egypt could
cement the peace agreement, the possibility of Cairo as a venue for further
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations and how to make progress in peace talks
with Syria and Lebanon.
Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, was
also in Egypt yesterday where he addressed Arab League foreign ministers but
Israeli officials said a Rabin-Arafat meeting was unlikely.
PLO officials, preparing for meetings with Israel, Arab states and the World
Bank said they were asking the bank to more than double a Dollars 3bn
development plan to rehabilitate the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Separately,
The Japanese government is considering contributing Dollars 100m a year to
Palestinian communities according to weekend press reports.
In the occupied territories the Islamic fundamentalist Hamas movement said
it had not reached an accord with the PLO, as announced by PLO headquarters
in Tunis. Hamas also said it would not participate in elections to a
self-rule council and would urge Palestinians to boycott the vote.
Also yesterday, the Jordanian government indicated it may postpone
multi-party elections to avoid debate on the Palestinian self-rule agreement
from overshadowing other issues.
The elections, due on 8 November, were to be the first since 1956 in which
political parties would campaign.
King Hussein and government officials say they fear the elections may become
a referendum on the peace process. They also expressed concern that
Palestinians who intend to return to the West Bank and Gaza under the
PLO-Israeli agreement will distort the result.
Jordan's nationalist parties and tribal leaders have been vocal in their
calls for postponing the elections. Head of the nationalist party Al Ahd, Mr
Hadi Abdul Majali, argues that either Palestinians who will be allowed to
return should have their voting rights relinquished or the elections should
be postponed.
