FT  06 MAR 93 / Man in the news: Long arm of the computer - Antonio Di
Pietro
In Italy, the country that nurtured Machiavelli, nothing is taken at face
value. A conspiracy theory is always the preferred explanation.
Sooner or later, the corruption scandals now enveloping Italy's political
and business elite were likely to be seen in a conspiratorial context. The
most fanciful theory is that a CIA plot to undermine the European
Community's efforts to forge closer ties has started in Italy, the weakest
of its 12 member states.
This week Mr Bettino Craxi, the former Socialist leader who wants to prevent
parliament from waiving his immunity to face corruption charges, came up
with his own theory. He claimed that magistrates in Milan were investigating
him as part of a co-ordinated plan to decapitate his party's influence. He
insisted one set of magistrates, headed by his main accuser, Mr Antonio Di
Pietro, was part of a Catholic reform group with links to the grand master
of Italian manipulation, Giulio Andreotti, the Christain Democrat who served
as premier seven times. Another set, Mr Craxi claimed, was linked to
sympathisers in the former Communist party, now the party of the Democratic
Left (PDS).
Mr Craxi, with some justification, may feel he is being made the principal
scapegoat for a profoundly corrupt politico-economic system. But it is
self-seeking to regard the Milan magistrates, and Mr Di Pietro in
particular, as conspirators. The circumstances of the investigation and the
credentials of magistrates such as Mr Di Pietro suggest the widening
corruption scandal is not the result of a conspiracy - international or
otherwise - but rather the product of good police work, new investigative
methods, the failures of the postwar political establishment and a growing
public consensus against the corruption.
Those familiar with the investigation are convinced the magistrates are
inspired by a determination to clean up political wrongdoing. 'Rather than
punish individuals, they want to end an entire system that has dominated
Italian life,' says Mr Roberto Mongini, a Christian Democrat lawyer in Milan
who was one of the first to confess to accepting bribes.
Di Pietro's origins are outside of that system; he is not a typical
magistrate, many of whom owe their careers to political patrons. Born in
1950, he comes from the humble agricultural world of southern Italy. He
joined the police force after doing a seven-month stint in Germany as a
'guest worker' in a factory. He graduated into the judiciary, becoming in
the mid-1980s a Milan magistrate, whose role is essentially that of a
detective preparing evidence for prosecution.
His first big case was to break a driving licence scam which had been
ignored because no one had been able to knit together the complex threads of
the case. He noticed from police reports of trucking accidents that many of
the drivers had obtained licences from a handful of driving schools. On
investigation, one school was found to have passed 10,000 drivers in a year.
The documentation was voluminous so the magistrate had to learn how to use
computers. In one of several books just published about Di Pietro, he says
he fed in 30m pieces of data onto floppy discs to break the case. Though
computer cross-referencing and solid detective work, 125 people, mainly
driving-school owners and officials in the Milan vehicle-licensing
department were brought before the courts. Only 11 were acquitted.
This gave Di Pietro a taste of how the computer could revolutionise
investigative work. His computer expertise subsequently led him to be called
in to solve a case of hacking at Milan University. But according to a
colleague, the case also gave him insight into how corruption was working at
all levels of Milan society. 'If it happened with driving licences, surely
it was happening with everything else.'
The computer programme for breaking the driving licence case was code-named
Perseus, after the mythical hero who cut off the Medusa's head. But Di
Pietro discovered how corrupton had spread when, in 1988, he investigated a
bribery scandal in the purchasing department of a Milan municipal transport
company, ATM. This involved the payment of up to 5 per cent commission on
orders, the sums being agreed between transport officials - whose jobs were
owed to the main political parties - and the suppliers. The accused were
brought to trial in 1991.
By this time, Di Pietro and fellow magistrates had acquired a formidable
computerised dossier of suspect officials, politicians and contractors.
Early last year, when a small contractor complained to the police that he
was being asked to pay a 10 per cent bribe on a cleaning contract by Mr
Mario Chiesa, the Socialist head of an old people's home, a trap was set.
Chiesa was already on the files, as were some of his associates.
Since then, the investigation has snowballed, largely on the strength of
computer-based information. Some of the main leads have come by breaking the
codes in floppy discs confiscated from arrested politicians, officials and
businessman. This vast accumulation of data has also had an intimidating
effect; it has persuaded many of those under investigation to co-operate.
But Di Pietro has also proved a 'good cop' in the traditional sense,
cleverly assessing the psychology of those accused. 'He's a magistrate I
would wish no one to find themselves in front of,' says Mr Mongini, who
confessed after being interrogated by the magistrate.
Indeed, an important feature of the recent scandals is the number of people
who have admitted their involvement. As the magistrates do not hesitate to
resort to preventive detention in prison to make people talk, more and more
are coming forward to cut bargains with the law - especially businessmen who
have paid the bribes.
Thus the magistrates have been able to break the omerta - the law of silence
 -which businessmen and politicians have observed in postwar Italy while
operating a system of bribes and corruption which everyone tolerated. But Di
Pietro and his fellow magistrates only bring cases to the courts. The
growing political debate over possible pardons for the offenders is out of
their hands.
