FT  01 SEP 93 / Survey of Africa - A continent at stake (10): An optimistic
outlook - Stock markets
PROBABLY there is more optimism and enthusiasm about stock market
development in Africa than about any other aspect of the business landscape.
The strong rebound in Latin American markets since the end of the 1980s
shows what could happen in sub-Saharan Africa as reform programmes take
hold.
Zimbabwe's experience is a case in point. Reforms introduced mid-year,
including reduced taxes and guaranteed free exit for dividends and
disinvestment proceeds, saw the ZSE index rise more than 50 per cent, driven
by an influx of more than Dollars 2m in foreign money.
Initiatives from the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and private
investment agencies will boost the sector. In mid-1991, there were no funds
operating in the region, but in the past two years, a number have been
established, most notably the Africa Growth Fund (a venture capital
vehicle), the Commonwealth Equity Fund, the Emerging Markets Fund and the
Mauritius Fund, while London-based Genesis Emerging Markets Fund has minor
African holdings.
Also active in the fund field is the Wall Street-based Aidoo group, headed
by a Ghanaian American, Judith Aidoo, which earlier in the year formed an
investment advisory arm, Aidoo Group Asset Management. AGAM plans to market
African fixed-interest and equity securities to US investors. Initially, it
is using a niche market approach seeking to interest expatriate Africans
living in the US and elsewhere in investing back home, while also targeting
black Americans. The fund, of about Dollars 20m to Dollars 30m is likely to
be followed by a purely equity fund at a later stage.
South Africa comes into the picture here too, with scope for reversing the
sanctions process of pension funds and institutional investors that divested
from the country during the sanctions era. Ms Aidoo is also developing
innovative ways of tapping into privatisation and debt restructuring
financings. One of these involves linking the Clinton administration's
proposed 'Russia Fund', designed to finance Russian privatisation, with debt
relief for African countries that owe money to the Russians. Angola,
Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia together owe the
former Soviet Union some Dollars 14bn. She suggests that Russia should sell
its African debt to western donors in the G-7 group at deep discounts.
The Aidoo group puts the market value of African debt owed to Russia at no
more than 10c in the dollar. So a Pounds 1bn Russia privatisation fund could
purchase Dollars 10bn of the total Dollars 14bn African debt owed to Russia.
The purchasers could then either cancel the debt outright or use it for
debt-for-nature or debt-equity swaps.
Debt trade is also a growing area. The Aidoo group estimates the outstanding
debt paper at around Dollars 180bn - or almost 30 per cent of the global
market in emerging market debt - covering 60 to 70 issues with an annual
turnover of some Dollars 13bn. Prices range up to 50 per cent of nominal
value, but the average is lower at around 15 per cent. This year, Salomon
Brothers in New York calculated Nigerian par bonds were the highest yielding
collateralised Brady bond paper in the market, offering a yield of some 15
per cent compared with 9.3 per cent for Mexico.
But the fundamental need is the return of sub-Saharan Africa's 'stock' of
flight capital, which may exceed 80 per cent of GDP, according to the World
Bank calculations. Only after Africans show themselves willing to invest in
their own countries will foreigners follow.
