FT  28 APR 93 / Management: Stacking the odds against cancer - Health Check
EAT some cereal before you go to work; take regular apple breaks instead of
drinking coffee all day; set about making your office a smoke-free zone; and
convince your company to offer cantaloup and broccoli in the restaurant.
All these measures should lower your chances of developing certain kinds of
cancer, and stack the odds in favour of a long retirement.
Fear may stop some people from finding out about cancer. But statistically,
the chances of dying from it are much less than of dying from heart disease.
Cancer is not a single disease; it is a whole spectrum of pathologic
processes characterised by a profound disturbance in the growth and
proliferation of a cell.
In contrast to a normal cell, whose growth and reproductive cycle proceeds
in a relatively orderly manner as dictated by genetic coding, deregulated
cancer cells dominate and replace normal cells and often spread to other
parts of the body.
More than 200 forms of cancer have been identified and can be classified
into three large groups; carcinoma (deregulation of those cells that act as
lining for organs and secrete mucus), sarcoma (cancers of connective tissue
such as muscle and bone) and liquid cancer (such as leukemias).
Lung cancer is the most preventable carcinoma. Its incidence varies from
country to country. Death rates are dropping in England, Wales, Finland and
Sweden, have plateaued in Australia, Austria, the US, Belgium, Germany, the
Netherlands, New Zealand and Switzerland, and are still rising in Spain,
France, Hungary, Italy, Ireland and Poland.
The average age for developing lung cancer is 60. Once diagnosed, less than
30 per cent of patients are eligible for curative surgery, explaining in
part the dismal chances of survival, less than 10 per cent five years after
diagnosis.
The vast majority of lung cancers (around 85 per cent) are due to exposure
to tobacco smoke (either active or passive), though other substances
(asbestos, pollution, heavy metals and chloromethyltethers) have strong
causative relationships with lung cancers.
If you are unable to stop smoking entirely, you might consider a less
harmful way of getting nicotine into your system (a pipe, cigar or nicotine
patch).
Colon (large intestine) carcinoma also has links to lifestyle. It is among
the top five cancers in most developed countries, but unheard of in some
African and Asian countries.
One theory is that it is related to the longer transit time of faecal
material through the intestines in developed countries. The refined
carbohydrates in highly processed foods have less cellulose (non-absorbed
plant fibre) than in fruits and vegetables. They travel slower through the
intestines which may be conducive to inactive carcinogens turning into
active ones.
Eating more fresh fruits and vegetables, or bran cereals can help prevent
colon cancer. With the help of a qualified nutritionist, also try limiting
saturated (animal) fats to less than 25 per cent of your diet. If colon
cancer or polyps runs in your family, consult your doctor about when to have
preventative screenings.
Prostate cancer, another kind of carcinoma, is the most common malignant
tumour in men worldwide. The cause of this slow-growing tumour is unknown,
although there appears to be a hormonal relationship. It appears to be on
the increase even in areas where it was previously uncommon, such as east
and southeast Asia.
Prostate cancer is frequent in North America and Europe. Incidence and
mortality increase in Chinese and Japanese after migrating to the US.
Prostate cancer is rare before the age of 50 but then its occurence grows
steeply with age until about 80 when it begins to fall again except in
Norwegian, French and Japanese populations.
When it comes to screening, a combination of Digital Rectal Exam and a
relatively inexpensive blood test is probably the best balance between cost,
benefit and efficacy.
The author is medical director of the Insead Business Health course.
