FT  04 MAY 93 / Survey of Flanders (4): Hard water problem - Eco-law needs
rationalising, says Andrew Hill
THE Senne is a small river with its source in Wallonia. From there, it flows
into Flanders where it becomes the Zenne, passes under Brussels - which, to
its eternal shame, built over the river around the turn of the century - and
emerges again in Flanders.
By the time it joins the much larger river Schelde - and despite having
passed through three different regional environment policies - it is heavily
polluted.
That makes the Zenne an excellent symbol for Flemish ecologists of what is
wrong with Belgium's regionalised environmental policy. 'The problem is that
the greens of Belgium are the only ones who speak to each other (about the
environment),' says Luc Barbe, a member of national and Flemish parliaments
for Flanders' green party, Agalev.
Norbert de Batselier, the Flemish minister for the environment, denies the
accusation. He says Flanders wants to consult with neighbouring authorities,
and his claims are partly borne out by recent evidence.
For example, pollution of the rivers Schelde and Meuse was one of the main
items on the agenda for the recent meeting between Luc Van den Brande, head
of the Flemish government, and Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch prime minister.
De Batselier's advisers admit to Agalev's second charge, which is that
environmental legislation in Flanders and Belgium is too complicated.
In fact, the Flemish government is trying to rationalise regional eco-law,
aiming for what one official calls a 'uniform and well-regulated legislative
instrument', including harmonised treatment of company environmental
licences, and sanctions for ecological crime. An expert committee should
come up with recommendations for harmonisation by July, but the ministry
concedes it could take another two years before any of those proposals are
enacted. 'The law is being reformed, but it's going very slowly,' says
Barbe.
De Batselier's principal operational aims are waste management, control of
water pollution - in line with EC directives on water purity - and general
conservation.
The water problem is particularly tough. The cost - particularly of bringing
sewage treatment in Flanders within EC guidelines - was originally set at
about BFr60bn two or three years ago. Advisers in the environment ministry
now reckon the total could be double that over the next 10 years.
At the same time, Flemings, like their Dutch neighbours, are having to cope
with the problem of overloaded agricultural land. Fertilisers, as well as
pig and cow manure, can pollute groundwater.
The main problem for de Batselier is that he wants to pursue a policy of
sustainable development, within an administration mainly dedicated to
encouraging the economic growth of the region. It is one of Agalev's
principal criticisms, compounded by the allegation that de Batselier's team
is short of resources.
Financially, that situation may be eased somewhat by the planned
introduction of a Belgian 'eco-tax' on certain types of packaging.
The proceeds from the tax must be used by the regions to tackle one-off
environmental problems. But as one Flemish environment official points out,
somewhat ruefully, the benefits should only be temporary: 'The chief purpose
of this tax is to discourage consumers from buying harmful packaging, and to
encourage them to switch to (untaxed) environmentally friendly products. If
that succeeds, the income from the levy will obviously decrease.'
