FT  21 DEC 93 / Figures boost outlook for UK economic growth
Prospects for steady economic expansion in the UK next year brightened
yesterday with news of a big improvement in company finances and an upward
revision of growth in the third quarter.
Hopes of a continuation in Britain's relatively strong economic performance
were also buoyed by the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, which said the UK would experience modest growth with low
inflation for the next two years.
Mr Kumiharu Shigehara, the OECD's chief economist, welcomed the UK
government's move in the November 30 Budget to reduce the large fiscal
deficit, even though he said the large tax rises and spending cuts due would
damp demand.
On the London stock market, shares rose to yet another record on
expectations that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, would cut interest
rates soon to offset the effects of the fiscal tightening.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares jumped 27.8 to close at 3,364.9, a
rise of nearly 8 per cent since the day before the Budget. In the 15 months
since Britain left the European exchange rate mechanism, the index has put
on almost 1,000 points.
In the third quarter, UK companies recorded a financial surplus of Pounds
1.726bn, the highest for seven years. This underlined efforts by business to
capitalise on firmer demand and lower interest rates to reduce borrowings
and strengthen balance sheets.
Optimism about growth prospects was nudged higher by other government
figures showing gross domestic product expanded 2.1 per cent in the third
quarter on a year earlier, stronger than the 1.9 per cent growth previously
thought.
Even though consumer spending in the third quarter was strong, total
sterling lending to the private sector was exceptionally weak in November,
with Bank of England figures showing the amount borrowed fell to Pounds 500m
from the previous month's Pounds 1.8bn. However, the City said the numbers
resulted from uncertainty before the Budget.
Much of the higher growth in the third quarter was due to upward revisions
by government statisticians to estimates of activity in service industries
such as retailing, hotels, catering and transport. Another pointer to the
better outlook for the UK was a large fall in the current account deficit in
the third quarter.
Lex, Page 14
OECD annual report, Page 4
Service sector and consumers lift economy, Page 6
Europe must cut rates, Page 14
