FT  21 APR 93 / The Queens's Awards for Export Achievement 1993: With a
little help from Mozart - Academy of St Martin in the Fields
FOR Britain's only non-subsidised orchestra, winning royal recognition of
its export effort is like the crescendo of a symphony as the music rolls
towards the final chords.
'It's that feeling of achievement you get - that's what we feel like
today,', says Ms Monya Gilbert, general manager of The Academy of St Martin
in the Fields, as she savours its award for export.
The orchestra, set up in 1959, took its name from the central London church
where one of the founder members of the group, Mr Jack Churchill, was then
musical director.
The Academy's first audiences were office workers who attended lunch time
concerts at St Martin in the Fields.
The title Academy is a reference to the older literary and medical
academies. Sir Neville Marriner, the orchestra's founder, rejected the title
of 'orchestra' on the grounds that there were then only 13 players. He also
ruled out 'chamber group' because of its stuffy, elitist connotations and
'ensemble' because it 'bungs up your nose'.
Today the Academy has a regular core of about 35 to 40 players but can
expand to 85. It earns about two-thirds of its roughly Pounds 2m annual
revenue from overseas tours and sales of its recordings.
It began recording in 1960 and now has more than 1,000 recordings, all of
which it says still sell well. While the orchestra is not subsidised it has
qualified for public funds from time to time, when the government has
matched the money it has won from new sponsors.
The Academy admits to luck as part of the explanation for its success. Long
famous for its Mozart interpretations, in the 1980s the orchestra was chosen
to record the soundtrack to Amadeus, the successful film of the composer's
life.
It was then well-placed to capitalise on the bicentenary of Mozart's death
in 1991 which helped consolidate its already broadening audience.
The orchestra's biggest market is America where it has become well known
through public service broadcasting.
It also tours and sells records to a German audience and is building a new
market in Japan.
Ms Gilbert believes the orchestra's success has a widersignificance than
simple recognition of The Academy's particular contribution.
It is a significance which she says fits in with the increasingly higher
profile and broader appeal of classical music. 'This is a recognition that
will mean something not only to people in the arts, but also to ordinary
people involved in industry who will turn around and say 'My goodness, an
orchestra has qualified for an award for its contribution to exports'.'
The Academy's award will also, Ms Gilbert believes, illustrate how the arts
can act as attractive ambassadors for Britain in overseas markets.
'It shows how the arts can give a focus of publicity to England and Great
Britain. This is a wonderful way to publicise the country.'
It was this belief which guided the orchestra's decision to apply for the
award.
'We applied for a form, filled it in, kept our fingers crossed and hoped
something would happen.'
