FT  05 APR 93 / Polluted land review to focus on liability
PROPERTY developers and bankers are to be invited to take part next month in
the government's review of the problems of land pollution and the use of
contaminated land.
The inter-departmental review is expected to last three to four months, so
that any changes in the law that it recommends could be included in the
'green' bill expected in the autumn.
This is the the third review of policy in this sector. It was announced last
month when Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, confirmed that the
government would not be going ahead with plans for a register of
contaminated land. But there are signs that the review will concentrate more
on easing the development of contaminated land than some environmental
campaigners will welcome.
In particular, ministers are concerned that the liability for the costs
relating to land that may become polluted may act as a deterrent to banks
lending money for its development.
Ministers are also considering offering guidance on the different standards
of clean-up required for contaminated land, depending on its future use.
Land that is going to be buried under concrete for a car park, for example,
might not need to be cleaned to as high a standard as if it were going to be
used for housing.
Ministers' focus on the question of costs liability reflects a report
published earlier this year by a working group of the government's advisory
committee on business and the environment. It concluded that flows of
capital to industry could be 'seriously impeded' because bankers and
insurers were afraid of future environmental costs.
The property industry would welcome unequivocal guidance on the standards of
clean-up expected in different circumstances.
But property owners are resigned to more stringent environment standards,
not least because of increasingly exacting standards of lending
institutions. 'Everyone accepts it is important. There is no way of escape
from it,' said Mr Michael Chambers of the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors.
A green paper issued by the European Commission a few weeks ago sought to
establish an enforceable code of civil liability for environmental damage.
EC officials, like the UK property industry, are anxious to avoid the
problems the US experienced with its 'Superfund' legislation. This has
imposed huge costs on industry and generated huge fees for the legal
profession.
Blue Circle Cement is moving 150 employees from its headquarters adjoining
the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston, Berkshire, because of
contamination of the site.
The company said yesterday the establishment had assured it that there was
only 'low-level' contamination of the site by traces of plutonium and
uranium, but directors had decided employees should be relocated as a safety
precaution.
