FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget: Doubts remain about promised rail bonanza
YESTERDAY'S BUDGET gave the go-ahead to plans for the long-awaited Pounds
300m Heathrow Express but triggered deep concern about the outlook for other
transport projects.
The chancellor said that the government would be prepared to contribute
towards a privately-funded channel tunnel rail link but gave no indication
of where the private sector funding was to come from.
He also raised the spectre of long delays for central London's badly-needed
Pounds 1.8bn Crossrail scheme by announcing that it would be re-appraised as
a candidate for private-sector financing.
Mr Norman Lamont held up all three projects as examples of ways in which his
Autumn Statement initiative, aimed at attracting private-sector funding into
transport infrastructure projects, had moved forward.
Approval for the Heathrow Express, a joint venture between state-owned
British Rail and BAA, the private-sector airport operator, means passengers
will be able to travel from London Paddington station to Heathrow airport in
16 minutes when the line opens in 1997.
Specially designed electric trains will travel along existing British Rail
tracks for three-quarters of the journey before turning off along a
newly-built spur.
The project will cost Pounds 300m, of which Pounds 51m will be equity. BR
will contribute Pounds 15m, giving it a 30 per cent stake in the venture,
and BAA will contribute Pounds 36m, giving it 70 per cent. The balance will
be raised in commercial debt.
Mr Lamont's announcement on the channel tunnel rail link, although presented
in positive terms, marked a climb-down from the government's
previously-stated intention of getting the line built entirely by the
private sector.
He conceded that it would now be necessary for the government to make a
financial contribution to the Pounds 2.5bn project to reflect the fact that
the line would be used by long-distance commuter trains.
He said Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, would invite the private
sector to submit bids in the hope that the project would proceed to
completion 'around the end of the decade', indicating that there were still
no firm funding plans for the project.
He also delivered a slap in the face to Sir Bob Reid, British Rail's
chairman, by saying the link would run into London's St Pancras station, not
the Pounds 1.4bn terminal BR had hoped to build at King's Cross.
Mr Lamont's plans for Crossrail, a main line railway link between London's
Paddington and Liverpool Street, will cause deep concern in the capital
because the project had previously figured strongly in the government's
spending programme as a public-sector project.
The scheme is by far the biggest public transport project in the pipeline
for central London, but re-assessing it now as a scheme for possible
private-sector participation will be seen as a way of deferring it into the
indefinite future.
Construction companies and investment bankers yesterday expressed
disappointment that no fresh projects had been announced by the chancellor.
Mr Joe Dwyer, chief executive of Wimpey, the construction group, said: 'It
was well known that the three rail schemes were on the government's
wish-list for private finance.
Picture, Page 21
