FT  13 DEC 93 / Smoke gets in Europe's eyes: Divisions among EU health
ministers and advertisers over tobacco products
Peter Mead is a 30-a-day smoker who thinks tobacco advertising should be
banned. He knows it isn't entirely logical, but he feels some degree of
reassurance every time he sees a cigarette advertisement. 'At the back of my
mind I have to believe the government wouldn't allow something that's going
to kill me to be advertised.' Mr Mead is chairman of Abbott Mead Vickers, a
top UK advertising agency which refuses tobacco company business.
Dominic Proctor, London chief executive of New York-based agency J Walter
Thompson, which has among its clients the tobacco company Gallaher, the UK
subsidiary of the US company American Brands, takes the rather less
exceptional line for an advertising man. 'There should be freedom to
advertise anything which it is legal to market,' he says.
In Brussels today the arguments which currently divide the advertising
industry will be reflected in a debate between European Union health
ministers. Under discussion is a European Commission draft directive that
would ban all tobacco advertising, apart from point-of-sale material, across
the EU.
The Commission's action has been prompted by research showing tobacco
products cause 430,000 deaths a year in EU countries. Among the middle-aged
population, tobacco products are responsible for at least a quarter of all
deaths.
The Commission also says prohibiting advertising will overcome the problem
of differing rules across member states preventing the free flow of, for
instance, magazines containing cigarette advertisments.
In response, the tobacco and advertising industries point out that the
keenest advocates of the plan - France, Italy, Portugal and Spain - either
have state-run tobacco companies or allow other companies to operate a
monopoly. It would be harder for others to compete against the dominant
players in these countries if they were not allowed to promote their
products.
They also warn that a ban could set a worrying precedent: today Brussels
wants to outlaw tobacco advertising, tomorrow it could be fast cars,
children's toys, pharmaceuticals or Black Forest gateaux.
For the moment, at least, it is likely that the Commission will be unable to
persuade EU states to support its directive, as it has been since the
directive was first put on the table in 1991. Realising that agreement is
unlikely, supporters of a ban will probably not push for a vote today.
In the past it has been Germany, Denmark, Holland, Greece and the UK which
have blocked a comprehensive ban. Greece, under its new Socialist
government, may have softened its stance. But the four remaining opponents
have enough votes under the qualified majority voting system to continue
blocking its progress.
The position of the UK could prove pivotal. It has been the most vociferous
opponent of an EU-wide ban and it is widely thought that Denmark and the
Netherlands would switch sides if the UK were to change its position.
So far the British have preferred a policy of a voluntary approach to
restricting advertising and high taxes on tobacco products - the duty on
tobacco was increased by 7 per cent in last month's Budget.
Tobacco advertisers in Europe believe they have won a reprieve - but no
more. Privately, many in the advertising industry see public opinion forcing
an end to tobacco advertising in Europe within three or four years.
An indication of the mounting pressure of public opinion is already being
seen in the UK. The government is expected soon to announce it will be
negotiating tighter 'voluntary' controls with the tobacco and advertising
industries.
Options include an end to poster advertising, a ban on tobacco
advertisements in womens' magazines, removing shopfront advertising, and
larger health warnings on packs. Proposals along these lines could help to
head off the threat of cross-party support growing for a private member's
bill introduced by Labour MP Mr Kevin Barron which the government is highly
likely to want to block. Such proposals would also provide something for
ministers to offer at a European level as an alternative to the proposed
ban.
The advertising sector accepts that such a move in the UK could presage an
eventual crumbling of UK resistance to a EU wide ban. And it is already
preparing accordingly even though the European Commission calculates that
tobacco advertising makes up less than 3 per cent of advertising for all
goods and services in the 12 member states. For example, Mr Russell
Gore-Andrews, chairman of More O'Ferrall, the hoardings company which has
operations across Europe says: 'The job of our marketing has been to broaden
the base of customer demand in all our markets, so that we are not too
dependent on one sector.'
While there is clearly movement towards further restrictions in Europe,
voluntary or otherwise, there is no definitive answer to one question which
ought to be central. Does a ban on advertising cut the number of smokers?
The Tobacco Advisory Council, the UK trade body, says that the sole purpose
of tobacco advertising is to promote competition and encourage existing
smokers to switch brands. It estimates that the value of business from
smokers who switch is worth Pounds 3bn a year. It denies that advertising
encourages smoking.
Not so, according to Dr Clive Smee, the department of health's chief
economist. Last year he reported that studies of Canada, Finland, New
Zealand and Norway, where tobacco advertising bans have been in operation,
showed 'a fall in smoking on a scale which cannot reasonably be attributed
to other factors'.
But his research appears to clash with a study by Michael Stewart, an
econometrician, in the May edition of the International Journal of
Advertising. That showed a slight increase in smoking in those countries
where there has been a ban. A possible reason is that banning advertising
also means no health warnings to put off smokers, except on packets. 'This
increase is not quite statistically significant, but clearly refutes the
belief that advertising bans have appreciably reduced consumption,'
concludes Mr Stewart.
As he points out, the space now devoted to the health warnings is the
'equivalent of millions of Ecus of ongoing anti-smoking advertising' across
Europe. If European health ministers decide that they want to impose a ban
on advertisments, they may need to seek some alternative ways of funding
those warnings.
But the niceties of this debate are unlikely to worry the tobacco companies,
although they will continue to lobby vigorously against any measure which
could affect sales. The companies already know that tobacco consumption in
western European markets is dropping as concerns about the health effects
spread and as smoking becomes less socially acceptable. The decline is not
sharp - about 2.5 per cent in volume terms in EU countries over the past
five years - but it is steady and shows no sign of slowing.
In contrast, new markets are opening in Asia and the Pacific Rim, and in
eastern Europe, where smoking is gaining in popularity and sales. In China,
for example, cigarette sales grew from 1,649bn to 1,705bn in between 1991
and 1992.
With such virgin territories to play for, the possibility of an ban on
advertising in Europe may ultimately appear to be a a small distraction.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
          TOBACCO ADVERTISING IN THE EU: BEING STUBBED OUT
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
(TV advertising is banned                        Cigarettes per capita
throughout EU)                                   per annum (1991)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
France       Banned                                               1,714
Portugal     Banned                                               1,503
Italy        Banned - widely circumvented by indirect advertising 1,691
Belgium      Severe restrictions; total ban in the pipeline       1,681*
Denmark      Local radio ban, other controls through voluntary
             agreement                                            1,556
Germany      Banned on radio. Other legal controsl and voluntary
             agreements                                           1,821
Greece       Banned on radio. Other controls                      3,012
Ireland      Detailed regulations                                 1,714
Luxembourg   Major legal restrictions                             1,681*
Netherlands  Banned on radio; press and posters voluntary         1,
             agreements                                           1,222
Spain        Radio and poster banned; additional voluntary
             restrictions                                         2,140
UK           Voluntary agreements                                 1,641
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Action on Smoking and Helath and Euromonitor
*For Belgium and Luxembourg combined
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
