FT  14 JUN 93 / International Bonds: Activity in fledgling Asian Dragons
begins to take off
ASIA'S Dragon bond market is still in its infancy, with the handful of
issues launched so far adding up to just over Dollars 2bn.
But with the recent flurry of activity - five borrowers have launched issues
in Asia in the last three months and more are rumoured to be lining up deals
 -some bankers are wondering whether the fledgling market has finally taken
off.
A Dragon bond is similar in structure to a Eurobond, except it is listed in
Asia (usually in Hong Kong or Singapore) and is targeted at investors in the
region. It is usually heavily marketed in Asia and traded in the Asian time
zone so that investors there get first bite at the cherry before London
wakes up for trading.
Mr Andrew Pisker, managing director of corporate finance at Lehman Brothers
International, notes that one of the main aims of the borrower is to attract
a wider range of investors in Asia.
'There is a large market out there . . . there are investors in the region
who have bought Eurobonds, and if you are an issuer you should have a large
investor base,' he says.
The seven Dragon bonds issued to date range from the Asian Development
Bank's dollar and yen deals (which provided the foundation for the market)
to financial agencies (such as Nordic Investment Bank, European Investment
Bank and Swedish Export Credit), as well as General Electric Capital
Corporation (GECC), the sole corporate name to have tapped this market.
Lehman Brothers says the issues have attracted a wide range of investors in
the region, including central banks, regional and local commercial banks,
non-bank financial institutions, fund managers and mutual funds.
Mr Peter Yngwe, treasurer and head of finance department at Swedish Export
Credit (known in the market as SEK) says one reason for launching a Dollars
200m Dragon bond issue earlier this month was 'to tap into a market where we
find old and new investors, so we are broadening our investor base. It
should be easier to be remembered if we are there early.'
But just as important, he claims, is the implied commitment to the Asian
region. 'It suits us because we are lending to Swedish exporters and we have
a lot of corporations in Sweden which do business in Asia, for example in
infrastructure projects.'
According to Lehman Brothers, lead manager for GECC's Dollars 300m five-year
Dragon bond in March, GECC was keen to raise funds from Asian investors to
demonstrate its 'commitment to the (Asian) region', especially since it is
involved in joint ventures in the area.
The Asian Development Bank is keen to develop the capital markets in the
region, and some capital market participants hope to see more and more big
names turning to the Dragon bond market.
Mr Yngwe of SEK sees a gradual development of the Asian market, with the
current triple-A rated names blazing the trail.
He predicts local banks will turn to the Dragon bond market because of the
strong need for financing in the region related to infrastructure and
construction projects.
One senior investment banker in Hong Kong thinks the Dragon bond market will
remain an arena for triple-A and double-A credits in the immediate future,
but he predicts that 'in five years' time we'll probably have seen a move
down the credit rating spectrum'.
Not all international bond market participants are so enthusiastic about the
future of the Dragon bond market. Some question the point of launching
issues aimed only at Asia. These detractors would prefer to see 'big name'
borrowers launching global bond issues, or else considering bond issues
launched in both Asia and Europe.
'There's no practical reason why we shouldn't have a sort of hybrid bond
issue launched in Asia and Europe,' says one syndicate head at a Japanese
house.
But the more serious criticisms levelled at the recent Dragon bond issues
concern their relatively poor liquidity and the fact that in some cases,
yield spreads have widened out in the period since launch.
The deals issued by the Nordic Investment Bank, European Investment Bank and
SEK were all seen as aggressively priced at the time of launch. Dealers
point out that Eurobond spreads over US treasury bonds have tightened very
slightly in recent weeks, whereas the yield spreads on NIB, EIB and SEK
Dragon bonds have inched very slightly wider.
Naturally, borrowers are keen to raise funds at the most aggressive pricing
possible, and can usually borrow at a similar cost using a Dragon bond or a
Eurobond.
But as one Hong Kong-based banker put it: 'Perhaps the lesson to be learned
is not to price the next few deals too tightly or investors may be deterred
from buying the bonds if they see that there is a risk of spreads widening
out again. Otherwise there's a danger the market will crash and burn.'
