FT  05 OCT 93 / Crisis in Russia: Yeltsin pulls army into political ring
IT IS an irony that Mr Boris Yeltsin relied so heavily on the army to
prevail over his enemies yesterday - an army which had desperately tried to
stay out of Russia's political battles.
Only two weeks ago, General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister, warned of
disaster if the army were drawn into politics.
But when police and Interior Ministry troops fled from the rag-tag army who
broke out of the White House on Sunday, Mr Yeltsin had only the army to turn
to.
'I am not surprised by the support he received because the army's conditions
had considerably improved in recent times,' says Professor Sergei
Blagovolin, a defence expert at Moscow's Institute for National Security and
Strategic Studies.
'But I am surprised by the fact that support was so unanimous.' By
increasing officers' pay and touring key garrisons outside Moscow, Mr
Yeltsin had done a certain amount of homework before using the army.
But more than anything else, the success of Mr Yeltsin's desperate gamble
depended on the speed with which elite troops moved to crush the rebellion
in the White House.
At his disposal were the paratroopers from the 77th Guards airborne division
in Pskov and the 106th from Tula, as well as the Kantemir artillery
division, which is a four-hour tank drive from Moscow.
Any protracted conflict in Moscow would have given army commanders more time
for doubt. That was precisely what the disgraced vice-president, Gen
Alexander Rutskoi, had banked on when he ordered his detachments to seize
key points in the city.
In the event, Gen Alexander Lebed, the ambitious commander of Russian forces
in the breakaway enclave of Dnestr, was the only senior officer to publicly
express doubt in Mr Yeltsin's ability to override the crisis as he did. But
he went no further than suggesting that Russia's regional leaders should
take power in their hands.
Mr Rutskoi may have complained at a press conference only hours before the
onslaught that Mr Yeltsin would be held responsible for the destruction of
the army and the fact that it could no longer defend the motherland.
But it was Mr Rutskoi, a former Afghan war veteran who saw himself as the
country's saviour, who pushed Russia to the brink of civil war by making a
last pitch for power.
'He was nothing but a puppet who was manipulated by pro-communist forces,'
said Nikolai, a major in the air force where Mr Rutskoi made his mark. 'They
thought the army would follow him.
'But more than anything else, the army is afraid of the country falling
apart,' he added, as he stopped along the Moscow River to watch the storming
of the White House. 'It has stopped believing rival politicians' promises
they would do a better job defending the army's interests.'
Popular memories of Russia's own murderous civil war in 1918-20, as well as
of the disgrace of officers who supported the failed coup against President
Mikhail Gorbachev, were an added incentive for officers to keep their heads
down.
But another lesson of the 1991 coup, which Mr Yeltsin must now act on, is to
capitalise on his victory and move ahead quickly with reforms, including
sweeping reform of the army.
The fact that only officers manned the tanks and armoured personnel carriers
at the White House underlined Kremlin leaders' preference for a professional
army instead of its big unwieldy conscript force. But moves to cut the
2m-strong force to a 1.5m semi-professional army, and to stop it from
meddling in the affairs of other former Soviet republics, will require
level-headed management of the army by the civilians. Although conscripts
were present, President Yeltsin's military adviser, Gen Dmitry Volkogonov,
said the White House operation was planned to 'prevent the deaths of Russian
18-year-old conscripts'.
The pace of the assault on the White House was also slowed to minimise a
loss of life among the anti-terrorist Spetznaz troops who were the first
into the parliament building yesterday.
The Russian army has traditionally played a crucial role in Russian history.
'In truth what is it that has essentially upheld Russian statehood? Not only
but exclusively the army,' said Sergei Witte, Russia's prime minister at the
beginning of the 20th cen-tury.
But at a time when the country faces dire financial straits and restlessness
among its regions, its masters are rightly keen to use the world's most
powerful standing army with care.
