FT  21 SEP 93 / Survey of Using Computers in Business (5): The pickaxe and
the PC - Disturbing statistics indicate a high level of inefficiency through
lost information in the average office / Workgroup computing and groupware
FOR future reference, file this FT survey somewhere safe, somewhere obvious.
People waste a total of six weeks a year trying to find mislabeled, misfiled
or misplaced documents, according to a recent survey of 200 executives by
Xerox Corporation.
According to Xerox 'collaboration is an instinctive foundation of our
natural work processes', but currently, it doesn't seem to work that well.
There are more disturbing statistics. They say that 50 per cent of projects
are behind schedule, 60 per cent of an office worker's time is spent working
with documents, and the average worker has 36 hours worth of work stacked up
on his or her desk, and only 90 minutes in which to handle it.
Even worse, anything up to 80 per sent of time is spent looking for the
information needed to complete a task. This usually means going outside
one's own personal domain, referring a problem or a document to someone
else, and waiting for an answer. It is this problem that the computer
industry is now addressing with such concepts as workgroup computing (also
known as groupware), and workflow.
A chain-gang is a good place to start when looking for a definition of a
workgroup. It is a group of people brought together from various places and
disciplines, who have in common a task on which their efforts are jointly
focused. The key to the modern workgroup is the PC, not the pickaxe, but the
same principle applies. Working in unison is more effective than each person
pecking away at their small corner.
The PC has been focused closely on 'personal' productivity, with such
products as word processors and spreadsheets aimed at creating a cosy
environment for the individual. However productive on a personal level,
these do not seem to have helped mass productivity.
Michael Skok, chief executive of Maidenhead-based ESP, distributor of the
Forests and Trees groupware, sums it up bluntly: 'In the past decade, US
service companies had spent more than Dollars 800bn on information
technology and bought more than 60m PCs. The power of the PCs has increased
but white-collar productivity has only increased by less than one per cent
per annum. Personal computing isn't the answer: there has to be workgroup
information sharing.'
Groupware is software that seeks to create that productivity by linking
people who are focused on a task which can be anything from a one-off
project to an everyday process.
One person can work simultaneously on different projects, and belong to
several workgroups. This is an extension of the 'message groups' long used
in electronic mail (email). In fact, electronic mail is the basic ingredient
of much workgroup software. Instead of dealing simply with messages
originated by one person to another or to a group, the email principle is
extended to embrace documents, spreadsheets, and any other form of
information people need to pass to one another.
'Groupware' is a general term which brings under one umbrella a number of
functions that may well have been managed in separate software tools, such
as diary management, decision support, project management, conferencing,
scheduling, and database access.
Groupware's role is not only in the dissemination of information throughout
one building, but in crossing other barriers - the more physical and
geographic ones of distance and 'time windows.'
This is becoming more important as organisations look for harmony across
different countries in their IT strategies.
One of the problems of an email system is that it too can become a 'closed
shop,' a cosy environment which builds its own walls, excluding anyone that
doesn't have the right sort of terminal or PC.
It follows that a true 'workgroup' solution must be able to embrace any sort
of technology already in use, and allow users to link in different sorts of
hardware.
The advantage of this is that the links can be extended outside the
organisation itself. A good example of how barriers can be transcended comes
from within the software industry itself.
Software 2000, the supplier of accounting packages for the AS400 IBM
computer, is supplying software updates to its users for the latest version
via the Lotus Notes package for Lotus Development.
Lotus claims to have swept the board with its Lotus Notes groupware, for
which it has sold around 750,000 licences in the last two and a half years.
The product is used in around 3,000 companies worldwide, and Lotus has done
extensive analysis on its customer-base, interviewing around 40 companies
with more than 200 Notes nodes each.
According to its 1992 paper, The Impact of Lotus Notes on Organisational
Productivity, the return on investment is, on average, well over 100 per
cent, with payback taking place within three months or less.
One of Lotus' underlying principles has always been that Notes must provide
open access to existing technologies. This means that it can be implemented
without enormous cost, and without transgressing the 'Not Invented Here'
rule. This might explain why it has found such ready acceptance within other
technology companies.
Intel, manufacturer of the microprocessors which provide the guts of many a
PC, is an enthusiastic user of Notes. The re-organisation of its salesforce,
(scattered in 80 worldwide locations linked by a private wide area network,
or WAN) made it essential to have a clear route for the communication of
bookings, billings and backlogs.
Mail, fax, and other feedback methods imposed a four-week lag in the
production of a marketing plan. Now feedback is immediate, and daily.
According to Louis Burns, director of corporate marketing, Lotus Notes has
made a big difference - 'we have 1,000 people around the world working in
islands. If we can work together, the group intelligence is much higher,' he
says. Concerns about integration with other software tools, and flexibility
are noticeable in recent groupware launches. Xerox identifies integration,
ease of 'workflow mapping' and, thirdly, flexibility as the main concerns in
the industry. Xerox uses uses an underlying software methodology (known as
'object oriented technology') to create a client/server solution in its
InConcert System, recently launched by the Xerox division Xsoft.
The client/server approach is more 'open' in allowing several sorts of
different hosts or terminals to be attached to one central server, and Xerox
claims that its software can be used with other third-party software tools
such as word processors, spreadsheets and calendars.
Another new product, claiming to leapfrog all existing developments, comes
from Uniplex, a UK-owned company which managed to become the world market
leader in office automation for Unix computers, by virtue of being the
first, a decade or so ago, with a robust product. Now it is launching OnGo,
which it claims as the first distributed client/server groupware solutions
to run on all significant hardware platforms.
With OnGo it has launched another buzzword: 'Enterpriseware,' to describe
the way that OnGo can convert files from other software applications for
'mission critical' operations.
It is easy to assume that overcoming the technology is the only problem in
introducing groupware and workflow systems. In fact, one of the most
outstanding obstacles can be the people themselves.
Training is vital, plus a campaign of awareness to help staff think about
what their jobs really are, and where better communications can help.
The evidence is, that once people discover the potential of collaboration
via computer, they become creative, even imaginative, about the
possibilities that open up.
