FT  27 APR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Finland's farming Euro-sceptic
in EC hot seat: The choice of an ex-farm union chief as foreign minister
IF THE Finnish government wanted to send Brussels a strong signal about the
importance it attaches to agriculture in its negotiations on European
Community membership, it could not have done better than appoint Mr Heikki
Haavisto as its new foreign minister.
He takes up the post on May 4, having been president of the influential
Central Union of Agricultural Producers. He is well-known for his anti-EC
views, which accord with those of the Finnish farming community as a whole.
Giving him a key role in the negotiating process is a shrewd move by the
government, not least because the dominant coalition partner, the Centre
Party, traditionally draws its support from rural areas. But it is a risky
strategy too. If the government can get a deal of which Mr Haavisto approves
it will have gone a long way to easing the membership doubts of the farming
community. If it cannot get such a deal opposition to EC membership, which
opinion polls put at about 38 per cent, might grow.
It is, perhaps, surprising that agriculture has become the key issue in
Finland's EC membership discussions. The country has only about 170,000
farmers, corresponding to just 7 per cent of its workforce. Finnish
agriculture is also a huge consumer of subsidies and support, costing the
taxpayer about FM7bn (Pounds 830m) a year, and food prices are high.
Farming's importance is not so much economic as psychological in a land
where the countryside is regarded as an essential part of national identity
and cultural heritage. It also overlaps with regional, conservation and
defence considerations, particularly given the security sensitivities
aroused by Finland's 1,300-km (800-mile) border with Russia.
What Finland wants is recognition of the special difficulties and costs of
agricultural production in a country where the growing season is less than
180 days and distances to markets are often huge.
Under the existing Brussels regime, support would fall away dramatically,
according to Mr Haavisto. A small dairy farm in the north of the Finland,
for which direct support and price subsidies now amount to FM94,200 a year,
would get only FM11,700 under EC rules. A southern farm's support would
shrink from FM39,700 a year to FM9,800.
There are plenty of reasons to believe that a suitable compromise can be
found. After all, Finland is not a production problem, as far as the EC is
concerned, and it will not add to existing surpluses. Nor is it a special
regime problem, as the EC has proved flexible in the past in adapting to new
situations. It may simply end up being a transition and funding problem -
whether it is Brussels or the national government that meets the continuing
subsidy cost.
Feelings on the agriculture issue are running high in Finland today because
of sensitivity about adding to unemployment, which is already about 18 per
cent of the workforce. But there is a chance that as the economy improves
those fears will become less important for much of the non-farming
population than the issue of high food prices. Certainly, there are many who
would be reluctant to see the whole question of Finland's EC membership
becoming dependent on agriculture alone.
In reality the country's farming industry is shrinking anyway. Even Mr
Haavisto accepts that 10,000 of Finland's 120,000 farms will disappear this
decade irrespective of EC membership.
