FT  20 JAN 93 / (CORRECTED) YSL and Elf-Sanofi form world's third-biggest
beauty group
Correction (Published 21st January 1993) appended to this article.
ELF-SANOFI, the French drug and perfume company, is to absorb Yves Saint
Laurent, one of the most famous names in Paris fashion, to create the
world's third-biggest beauty products company.
The deal, based on a share exchange of four of Sanofi's shares for every one
YSL share, was announced yesterday. Trading in the two companies' shares is
to resume today. Before it was suspended on Monday, Elf-Sanofi's shares were
FFr1,100 and YSL shares were FFr630.
The merger provides a way out for YSL's two controlling partners - the
fashion designer of the same name and his long-time friend and co-founder,
Mr Pierre Berge - of a financial squeeze that had left them shouldering
increased debt with sharply reduced profits.
Mr Berge, who will keep management control of the fashion side of YSL but
lose that of the perfume side of the business, said he had long been
concerned about the company's long-term future. This was now assured, he
said, with Sanofi as a partner.
Mr Jean-Francois Dehecq, Elf-Sanofi's president, said the merger was a great
opportunity to add an illustrious name to its list of perfume brands - Oscar
de la Renta, Roger &amp; Gallet, Stendhal and Van Cleef &amp; Arpels.
Elf-Sanofi, whose total turnover of around FFr19bn (Pounds 2.25bn) is about
six times that of YSL, is principally interested in acquiring 'image, rather
than cash flow', according to one executive.
Mr Dehecq yesterday forecast that Elf-Sanofi's net profits in 1992 will
'comfortably top' FFr1bn, up from FFr956m in 1991. This contrasts with the
plunge in YSL profits last year to FFr2.6m in the first six months compared
with FFr41m in the same period of the previous year.
At present, Mr Yves Saint Laurent and Mr Berge control more than 40 per cent
of YSL. This partnership will be wound up and YSL's two founders will have
8.1 per cent of the new YSL group.
Elf-Acquitaine, the state-owned oil company which controls Elf-Sanofi, is
not subscribing to this share issue, and so will see its stake in its
subsidiary drop from 61 per cent to 51.5 per cent.
Mr Loik Le Floch-Prigent, Elf-Acquitaine's president, said he was pleased to
see Elf-Sanofi diversify at no cost to the parent company.
CORRECTION
THE terms of the merger between Yves Saint Laurent and Elf-Sanofi are four
Sanofi shares for every five YSL shares. This was incorrectly reported in
yesterday's FT.
