FT  01 SEP 93 / Survey of Africa - A continent at stake (2): Wanted: bigger
carrot, more stick - Structural adjustment / Economic recovery can be
secured only when donors and aid agencies offer greater rewards to committed
reformers and are prepared to be tougher on defaulters
Some are inclined to write Africa off as hopeless. Others see Africa as a
special case to which the principles of economics do not apply. I reject
such views. It is our approach that has failed. Africa has not . . . We need
to bear in mind that Afro-pessimism is widespread in the world outside. We
face a challenge. We must overcome the pessimists.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, UN secretary-general, December 1992
FOR THOSE who seek culprits to blame for Africa's deepening economic crisis,
there are many candidates: the lingering legacy of the colonial era, the
harsh dictates of World Bank structural adjustment programmes, the miserly
aid and restrictive trade policies of developed country governments and the
kleptocratic tendencies of Africa's own governing elite.
So-called 'Afro-pessimists' and their gloomy appraisals make an easier
target for those who are reluctant to confront the true dimensions of
Africa's crisis.
Yet the facts tell their own story. After a dozen years of structural
adjustment and more than Dollars 170bn in net development assistance, the
sub-Saharan economy is still falling behind. Incomes per head fell by an
average 1.1 per cent a year between 1982 and 1992 compared to an average
rise of 0.8 per cent a year in all developing countries and 6.4 per cent in
the east Asia developing countries.
The outlook is far from encouraging, as the accompanying articles
demonstrate throughout this survey. Institutional and infrastructural
decline is accelerating, the number of countries facing political
disintegration is growing and the Aids crisis is deepening.
The aid keeps flowing, although sub-Saharan Africa cannot be sure that its
share of global aid - up to 38 per cent in 1991 from 17 per cent in 1970 -
will continue to rise. But Africa is increasingly cut off from the rest of
the world economy - there is little evidence to suggest that either
returning flight capital or foreign investment can fill the gap between
Africa's capital needs and its ability to generate domestic savings.
The combination of half-hearted policy reform, some debt relief, and
substantial aid is expected to continue to slow the pace, rather than
reverse the direction, of this relative and absolute decline. The World Bank
expects African real incomes per head to rise by 0.6 per cent a year over
the next decade compared to 2.9 per cent for all developing countries and
5.9 per cent in east Asia.
Still, as the World Bank rightly says, the gloom can be overdone. Across the
continent, human development indicators have improved over the past two
decades. Infant mortality has fallen from 137 per 1,000 live births in 1973
to 107 in 1991, while life expectancy has risen from 45 years to 51 years
over the same period.
Progress on these social measures of quality of life was made in the 1980s
despite adverse shifts in Africa's terms of trade, volatile commodity
prices, persisting protectionism in OECD countries, and the doubling over 10
years in the the share of Africa's export earnings which go to service
debts.
Moreover, the World Bank can correctly claim that the nature of the
obstacles to economic progress in Africa is now better understood. Ten years
ago, African governments defended to the death fixed exchange rates,
administered prices, state ownership of industry, subsidies to parastatals,
cheap food for urban workers and negative real interest rates while the
private sector was regarded with suspicion.
Now most governments accept, at least in principle, that establishing
macro-economic stability through structural adjustment policies - cutting
budget deficits, slowing inflation and monetary growth, establishing a
competitive exchange rate and eliminating obstacles to exports - is
necessary if their economies are to achieve self-sustaining economic growth.
The World Bank can point to signs of success in the handful of countries
which has taken the structural adjustment advice to heart - most notably
Ghana but also Uganda, Burkina Faso and until recently, Malawi - as evidence
that structural adjustment is a necessary condition for progress. Since
Ghana's adjustment programme began, its gross domestic product has grown by
an average of 4.9 per cent a year, over twice the sub-Saharan average of 2.1
per cent.
Equally powerfully, the Bank can point to the deepening recessions in the
member countries of the French African Community (CFA) zone to demonstrate
that governments cannot pick and mix items from the adjustment agenda.
Between 1986 and 1991, cumulative losses in competitiveness cut the output
of the CFA countries by an average of 0.2 per cent a year. GDP in the other
16 African countries which the Bank classifies as 'adjusters' rose by an
average 4.5 per cent a year over the same period, compared to a fall of 0.2
per cent annually in the first half of the decade.
WHY DO the economies of sub-Saharan Africa continue to perform so poorly?
There are two broad explanations. First, most African governments have not
been willing to pay more than lip-service to the need for structural
adjustment. Second, the experience of those countries which have tried to
keep to the spirit, as well as the letter, of World Bank programmes suggests
that structural adjustment is far from sufficient to deliver sustainable
economic growth.
In country after country the political commitment to economic reform has not
been maintained. Of 26 adjusting countries, in 1990-91 only one  - Ghana -
was judged by the World Bank research department to have an adequate
macro-economic policy stance. In another 14 the stance was found to be fair,
while in the remaining 11 it was rated either poor or very poor.
One reason that adjustment is hard to sustain is that it takes many years to
deliver results, much longer than the World Bank and the IMF were originally
prepared to admit. But the deeper problem is that economic reform invariably
runs counter to the interests of the urban elites who dominate government in
Africa. Many African rulers are politically dependent on the patronage and
corruption which regulations and secrecy conceal and which reforms are
designed to root out.
Kenya and Nigeria are prime examples of countries whose governments, in
spite of the glaring need for adjustment, have never been able to maintain
the reform momentum for long - too many powerful Nigerians benefit from the
rewards that a distorted foreign exchange market deliver to those with a
banking licence.
Ghana, by contrast, has sustained adjustment, in part because its military
government consistently aligned its interests with those of the rural poor
rather than the richer urban elite which probably stands to lose more from
adjustment in the early stages. The rural vote secured the election of
Flight Lt Jerry Rawlings as president last December.
The donors have, rightly, come under fire for their willingness to conceal
what they know of the activities of African governments. For all its talk of
'good governance', the World Bank has never been willing to require that its
client governments observe minimum levels of transparency, accountability
and access to information, or apply these tests to its own dealings with
African governments.
The Bank often finds itself standing between unsuccessful governments and
their electorates and withholding vital information on the state of the
economy, and presenting overly optimistic progress reports that do no
service to the reform cause. In Nigeria, the World Bank remains willing to
conceal the extent to which the government siphons off an estimated 200,000
barrels of oil a day for its own off-budget purposes. In Zimbabwe, Bank
officials recently submitted wildly optimistic export and growth numbers to
their executive board to support a loan application.
But the shortcomings of African governments, and the unwillingness of Bank
officials to disclose unpalatable facts, are only part of the story. The
absence of political instability and corruption, and the adoption of the
full adjustment agenda is not, it seems, enough to deliver a significant
growth take-off.
In a handful of cases, there has been an impressive supply-side response.
The Mauritian miracle is the most convincing, but the response of farmers
and textile manufacturers in Nigeria, of clothing exporters in Zimbabwe and
tourist operators in Kenya and Tanzania, all reflect only partial success.
One reason is that the non-farm private sector is too small to exploit the
new opportunities. Private investment amounted to only 8 per cent of GDP in
Ghana in 1990 compared to 18 per cent in all developing countries and 32 per
cent in rapidly growing Thailand.
Across Africa, the private sector is dominated by a handful of
multinationals and hundreds of small-scale enterprises. Those medium-sized
companies which do exist are primarily service-orientated and often
dependent on the regulations and tariff walls that adjustment policies
dismantle.
Meanwhile, global companies have been slow to return. The post-1970
deterioration in commodity prices, the increasing need for skilled rather
than merely plentiful and cheap labour, and the increased emphasis on short
lead times and quality over cost, all make it harder for Africa to sell
itself as a location for foreign direct investment. Even successful
adjusters have not shed the reputation of being high-risk, low-return
locations.
Africa does not have the social and physical infrastructure requirements
that multinationals increasingly demand. Standards of literacy lag behind
those of the east Asian developing economies, while the public
infrastructure, education and health systems have deteriorated across the
continent.
Even when governments are getting macroeconomic policies right,
implementation on the ground - in the central bank, at the tax office, at
the customs desk - is proving much more difficult. The reason acknowledged
in a recent speech by the Bank's vice-president for Africa, Mr Kim Jaycox,
is the region's deteriorating institutional capacity. The Bank group lends
Dollars 4bn a year to sub-Saharan Africa but has Dollars 14bn waiting to be
dispersed.
The World Bank now concedes that some of its performance yardsticks - a
reduction in the number of public servants on the payroll - are not
meaningful indicators of policy reform. Laying off road-workers makes little
impact on the wage bill, has no impact at all on administrative efficiency
and invariably means increased road maintenance charges later.
Reducing the role of the state has left a vacuum - filled in many instances
by the donors and non-governmental organisations. In reality, the shift of
control in Africa is not from the state to the private sector or to the
market but to the donors.
Aid dependence has become aid addiction. Mr Jaycox argues that by
substituting expatriate management for domestic skills, donors are
'systematically destroying capacity that does exist'. This is much worse
than it sounds given the long lead time necessary to rebuild that capacity.
The result is a disturbing contradiction between the desire for private
sector and market-oriented development and the intrusive role the agencies
frequently play in project decision-making. An alarmingly high proportion of
the region's investment decisions are made by aid workers rather than the
private sector.
AFRICA can move from crisis to recovery. Given a healthier global
environment, a more robust OECD growth performance, adoption of the Uruguay
Round proposals, firmer commodity prices, fewer droughts and an end to war
and civil unrest, an acceleration in the sub-Saharan growth towards 5 per
cent a year, from 2 per cent over the past decade, is within reach.
Whether the majority of African countries can achieve even this modest
growth rate will depend on the willingness of African governments to pursue
the right policies, and on the incentives that the developed country donors
can offer to persuade governments to put long-term development before
political short-termism.
The failures of the 1980s suggest that the west, in seeking ways to speed,
rather than impede, development, must make a much clearer and public
distinction between those governments which truly embrace reform and those
which merely pay lip-service. That means offering greater rewards to those
countries - such as Ghana, Uganda and Zambia - which are demonstrating a
sustained commitment to reform, while taking a tougher stance towards those
countries - such as Kenya and Nigeria - which continue to evade
responsibility for their failures.
Lessons must be learned from Somalia: humanitarian intervention without a
political and economic framework for recovery is, at best, short-term relief
and, at worst, compounds the disaster.
Trade, aid and debt relief are the best ways to encourage success. Ghana's
ability to sustain reform over the past decade is due, in large part, to the
fact that annual gross aid flows, averaging 8 per cent of GDP, were
available almost from the moment that reform began.
But it is absurd that Ghana should, at the same time, be paying a third of
its annual export earnings in debt service to bilateral and multilateral
donors. The Ghanaian government will not request debt relief, even though it
clearly qualifies for debt reduction, for fear that these aid flows will dry
up. But the donors should be offering, to Ghana, and other successful
adjusters, much more generous packages of aid and debt relief.
The international aid community must also think hard about the ways their
activities help and hinder development in successful adjusters. The slow
pace of indigenous capacity-building means that the need for external
institutional support will remain for decades.
There is a strong case for more burden-sharing between the donors and
agencies, starting with a greater and more formalised role for
non-government organisations (NGOs), working with local communities in areas
such as primary health and education which are so important if sustainable
growth is to be achieved.
But the World Bank and the donors need, radically, to re-assess their
approach to the numerous African governments who merely flirt with economic
reform.
The 1980s evidence suggests that trying to force adjustment measures on
unwilling and corrupt regimes is counter-productive. First, the World Bank
resident representative and visiting firemen tend to become the regime's
apologist, increasingly willing to answer local critics and justify and
defend ill-designed adjustment policies on the government's behalf.
Then the Bank and the IMF become useful scapegoats when flawed and partially
implemented policies do not deliver results, a tactic that President Moi of
Kenya and ex-Presidents Kaunda of Zambia and Nyerere of Tanzania have all
exploited.
To avoid this trap, the Bank must insist that reform programmes are
home-grown rather than imposed from outside, something which Ghana's
achievements show is difficult but possible. The donors must, meanwhile, be
prepared to put political reform at the top of the agenda. What is needed is
not necessarily a change in government but rather a change in the style of
government towards more open and accountable policy formulation and debate.
Enforcing good governance requirements is much more demanding, and arguably
far more important, than requiring multi-party elections as a pre-condition
for aid. Sometimes elections help: without the defeat of Kenneth Kaunda in
the 1991 elections, Zambia would probably not have become the country with
one of the best macro-economic records in the region. But Ghana's successful
transition to civilian rule occurred, in part, because the military
government was able to build an impressive track record, over a 10-year
period, before putting its popularity to the test through last autumn's
elections. An election in 1985 or 1986 may well have delivered a very
different result.
But there is nothing democratic or economically progressive about
multi-party elections unless minimum standards of good governance are
already achieved. Last year's elections did not persuade President arap Moi
of Kenya to put past patronage policies aside and embrace accountability and
transparency. Nigeria's disastrous and flawed transition to civilian rule
shows how multi-party elections can become an excuse for not taking tough
economic decisions.
Africa's debt burden further complicates the strategy, as the Nigerian
experience again illustrates. Without debt relief, Africa's most populous
country has little hope of progress, a point that World Bank officials make
with great force. But the Paris Club creditors remain unwilling to offer
further relief to a government which consistently misuses the resources it
does control.
Across Africa, the carrot of debt relief has not been enough to persuade
half-hearted adjusters to accelerate reform - the World Bank is right to
argue that a substantial write-off of Africa's remaining debts, on more
generous terms than are currently envisaged, and taking account of differing
debt structures, is now inevitable and should occur across the board.
But debt relief should be combined with a public statement from the Bank and
the donors that, for Africa, the rules of the aid game have changed.
The Bank, and the donors, should refuse to engage in policy-based lending
with any government which does not meet minimum standards of transparency
and public access to information, including the Bank's own reports.
They must be much tougher about policing and enforcing the conditions upon
which future lending is based, including much more rigorous and rapid
internal auditing of Bank and IMF lending. If governments are not willing to
embrace the full structural adjustment agenda and good governance
requirements, then the donors should only finance humanitarian projects.
The World Bank, and the donor community, must speak out about the true state
of Africa. Telling things as they are means being more realistic about what
adjustment programmes can achieve. It means acknowledging that deregulation
and liberalisation are only a beginning, that five-year programmes are
implausibly short and that it will take many years of investment in human
and physical infrastructure before the region's institutional base is
rehabilitated.
Afro-realism means resisting the temptation to declare victory in Ghana or
Uganda or to make excuses for the shortcomings of governments in Nigeria and
Kenya. For those countries which take the structural adjustment medicine,
recovery will be long and hard. For those that do not, the chances of
progress are slim and the future looks bleak.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
ECONOMIC GROWTH
 --------------------------------------------------------------
                       1965-89    1982-92    1992-02
 --------------------------------------------------------------
GDP
All LDCs                 4.7        2.7        4.7
 East Asia               7.2        8.0        7.3
 Latin America           4.3        1.9        3.9
 Sub-Saharan Africa      3.2        2.0        3.7
GDP per head
All LDCs                 2.5        0.8        2.9
 East Asia               5.2        6.4        5.9
 Latin America           1.8       -0.2        2.1
 Sub-Saharan Africa      0.4       -1.1        0.6
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Source: World Bank, Global Economic Prospects 1991 and 1993
 --------------------------------------------------------------
