FT  26 FEB 93 / The ICI Demerger: Tenormin sales collapse hits Zeneca
ZENECA, ICI's newly formed bioscience company, will comprise the group's
drugs, agrochemicals and seeds, and speciality chemicals divisions.
With an annual turnover of nearly Pounds 4bn, Zeneca's products range from
beta-blockers to dyes, genetically engineered tomatoes and herbicides to
anti-cancer drugs. It will be about the 15th largest bioscience group in the
world.
Mr David Barnes, Zeneca's chief executive, faces a considerable challenge
putting the company back on the rails. Last year its operating profits fell
from Pounds 682m to Pounds 587m. All three divisions encountered
difficulties.
The main short-term problem was in drugs. American sales of Tenormin, ICI's
heart drug and once the world's fourth biggest-selling medicine with a
turnover of Dollars 1.18bn, collapsed by as much as 50 per cent last year.
The fall followed the expiry of Tenormin's US patents.
Mr Barnes says the group had expected a fall in Tenormin sales of between 30
and 35 per cent but the drug proved an irresistible target for generic
manufacturers.
'It was the single largest-selling product to come off patent since the
generic industry was set up,' he says. He expects Tenormin's US sales to
stabilise at between 25 and 30 per cent of original turnover.
Tenormin's collapse affected not only sales but also profits, admits Mr
Barnes. Tenormin was a high-margin product. Newer products offset the fall
in Tenormin sales - pharmaceutical turnover was up from Pounds 1.55bn to
Pounds 1.61bn - but operating profits fell from Pounds 536m to Pounds 488m.
Sales of Zestril, a newer heart drug, grew 30 per cent, while Diprivan, an
anaesthetic, and Zoladex, a cancer treatment, both rose by 50 per cent last
year. These three products represent 30 per cent of Zeneca's drugs sales.
Much of the future of Zeneca depends on new drugs in research and
development. Mr Barnes is dismissive of those who argue the pipeline is
thin.
'The quality of the pipeline of new products is better than at any time in
the last 35 years,' he says.
He points to Merrem, an antibiotic, which was filed for licensing last
December. Casodex, a treatment for prostate cancer, and Accolate, a
promising asthma treatment, will be filed next year.
Mr Barnes says the group is moving from its core of anti-cancer and heart
drugs into new therapeutic areas such as asthma, in which the group has less
marketing experience.
'We will look at all forms of strategic alliance,' he says. These will
include cross-licensing, co-marketing and even acquisition. But Zeneca is
not racing out to buy another company.
Nearly all of Zeneca's earnings growth - for this year at least - will come
from pharmaceuticals. The main impact of Tenormin's US decline has probably
come to an end.
Meanwhile, the new products will continue to grow. The group will also
benefit from currency changes - about 40 per cent of drug sales are in the
US.
While the drugs division has been suffering, so, too, have the agrochemicals
and seeds operations. Trading profits fell from Pounds 145m to Pounds 85m
last year on turnover down from Pounds 1.32bn to Pounds 1.29bn. The decline
would have been worse but for rigorous cost-containment.
Pricing pressure and a cold wet spring in the US dented turnover, as did a
30 per cent plunge in sales to the East European market.
Zeneca also suffered from a decline of between 3 and 5 per cent last year in
the west European agrochemicals market after the announcement of the reforms
of the common agricultural policy. Mr Barnes said there would be a
continuing decline in Europe this year, perhaps of between 1 and 2 per cent.
Meanwhile, specialities have also been hit by the recession. Colours, which
represent about 30 per cent of the division's Pounds 936bn turnover, have
been suffering particularly, since their performance is tied to the textile
industry.
Mr Barnes accepts that the division's profits of Pounds 26m on such a large
turnover is unacceptable. However, he insists the colours operations are not
for sale.
For the next couple of years, any improvement in Zeneca's earnings is likely
to come from renewed growth in pharmaceuticals, currency benefits and
cost-cutting.
Specialities should benefit from an upturn in the economic cycle, when it
happens. But the problems at the agrochemicals operations are more related
to structural problems within the industry and are unlikely to be resolved
quickly.
The other executive directors at Zeneca will be Dr Peter Doyle, Mr John
Mayo, Mr Alan Pink and Mr Tony Rodgers. The non-executive directors will be
Lord Chilver, Sir Richard Greenbury, Miss Gill Lewis, Sir Jeremy Morse and
Mr Tom Wyman.
