FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (5): New
kid on the block
LEICESTER Grammar provides a potent riposte to plenty of preconceptions
about schools. It is fast gathering fresh claims to fame. The newest recruit
to the prestigious Headmasters' Conference, having been inducted earlier
this year, it is also the top coeducational school in the FT-1,000.
But most remarkably, Leicester Grammar opened as recently as 1981. The
centuries of tradition and wealthy endowments boasted by most schools above
it in the tables, and many below it, might be expensive luxuries.
Leicester Grammar started in response to public demand following the
abolition of the city's state grammar schools.
As the history of the school's first 10 years proclaims, the Grammar is 'a
product of the enterprise culture of the 1980s'. A group of worthies clubbed
together to take over the buildings of one of the old grammar schools when
it was closed by the council. Its fees still put it high in the
value-for-money league tables, and it has expanded rapidly - from 94 pupils
on opening day in 1981 to 565 now. The only problem is overcrowding.
Ingenuity has allowed the school to reclaim every nook and cranny in the
buildings it has inherited. Music rooms are in the cellar, while a
fully-equipped multigym lurks in what used to be a broom cupboard.
Leicester cathedral, next to the school buildings, is used for religious
assemblies, while the school's impressive hall is also used for drama
rehearsals.
Lack of resources has not dented formidable extracurricular ambitions. The
school runs its own glossy magazine and the school choir has even released a
record.
Coeducation was never an issue, according to John Sugden, the headmaster. At
its foundation, the school needed as many pupils as possible and cutting out
boys or girls was ruled out on purely commercial grounds. He backs mixed
schools on educational grounds as well: 'If you put the two sexes together
you are bound, if you get the balance right, to get a better education.
Otherwise you are cutting out half the human race.'
The pupils, dressed in adult business clothes rather than uniform at
sixth-form level and including many members of Leicester's east African
Asian community, certainly seem happy with coeducation - to judge by the
necking couples to be found in the sixth form's attic-like common room,
which is off-limits to staff . . .
