FT  18 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Placer 'to pull out of Chile
deal'
PLACER DOME, Canada's biggest gold producer, will almost certainly withdraw
from the Leonor copper project in Chile, according to Mr Peter McAleer,
chief executive of Equatorial Gold, the small Australian company that owns
the project.
Placer has until April 2 to decide whether to take up an option to earn 70
per cent of Leonor by spending USDollars 80m to bring the project into
production. Leonor, which is midway between Chuquicamata, the biggest copper
mine in the world, and Escondida, the third largest, is scheduled to produce
about 30,000 tonnes of copper in cathodes annually for 10 years.
Mr McAleer says he is 'very unhappy' with the lack of progress Placer has
made in assessing the project. 'Placer has not done the ground work
necessary to make a decision in April. In any case, I do not believe Placer
will want to focus on what for them is a relatively small operation.'
Since taking up its option on Leonor, Mr McAleer points out, Placer has
acquired a 50 per cent interest in the nearby Zaldivar copper project for
Dollars 100m and has committed itself to finding another Dollars 400m of
project finance to bring a mine into production. Zaldivar, in which Placer's
partner is Outokumpu of Finland, is forecast to produce more than 100,000
tonnes of copper a year at about 50 cents a lb for at least 20 years.
A Placer official yesterday denied that his company had not done enough work
to assess Leonor. However, he said that, while he could not anticipate
Placer's final decision, the future of Leonor depended on it being developed
with an adjoining property. 'Leonor on its own is not so attractive.'
Mr McAleer says talks have been held in the past with Antofagasta, the
mining, railways and water group, which owns the neighbouring Sorpresa
copper deposit. Both parties agreed that it made sense to combine Leonor and
Sorpresa into an operation that would produce 50,000 tonnes of copper a year
for 13 years. However, Antofagasta has withdrawn from negotiations and no
longer seems interested in the proposition.
Rather than delay the project for another year, which would probably be
necessary if Equatorial sought another big partner, his company will raise
equity and debt finance for the project in Chile and possibly from potential
Japanese customers.
