FT  30 NOV 93 / The IRA Connection: Mayhew chronicles the years of secret
contact
A chain of communications existed between the IRA and the British government
for some years, and messages were conveyed indirectly in secrecy, Sir
Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, told the Commons yesterday.
'Clearly such a chain could only function if its secrecy was respected on
both sides,' he said in a statement.
In February a message from the IRA stated that it wanted a ceasefire so that
it could begin a dialogue with the government, leading to peace. But it said
it could not make such a move public - it argued that to do so would lead to
confusion for the IRA volunteers, as the press would interpret it as a
surrender.
'We cannot meet secretary of state's public renunciation of violence, but it
would be given privately as long as we were sure that we were not being
tricked,' it said.
Sir Patrick said the government had a duty to respond to the message as it
came from Mr Martin McGuinness, Sinn Fein's chief of staff. The government
responded on March 19, confirming that if violence had 'genuinely' been
brought to an end, whether or not that fact had been announced, dialogue
could take place.
The government had also made clear in the same message that 'no political
objective which is advocated by constitutional means alone could properly be
excluded from discussion in the talks process'.
It said Sir Patrick had 'no blueprint' and that the government wanted an
agreed accommodation, not an imposed settlement.
In his statement, Sir Patrick said the government had accepted that the
outcome of such a process could be a united Ireland, but only with the
consent of the people of Northern Ireland.
'Should this be the eventual outcome of a peaceful democratic process, the
British government would bring forward legislation to implement the will of
the people here,' he said.
However, unless the people of the province came to express such a view, Sir
Patrick made clear that the government would continue to uphold the Union.
He insisted: 'It is clear that this message was consistent with our declared
policy: namely that if such people wanted to enter into talks or
negotiations with the government they first had genuinely to end violence -
not just temporarily, but for good.'
Sir Patrick said the IRA's reply on May 10 'did not constitute the
unequivocal assurance of a genuine end to violence on which we had
insisted'. A temporary ceasefire would not do.
Substantive contact resumed on November 2, when the IRA sent a message
warning that Northern Ireland could be 'at the point of no return' and
asking when dialogue would be opened. Sir Patrick said yesterday that the
government's reply sent on November 5 said: 'Your message of November 2 is
taken as being of the greatest importance and significance.'
He said it repeated the government's insistence that there could be 'no
secret agreements or understandings between governments and organisations
supporting violence as a price for its cessation'.
He said the reply insisted dialogue could only follow a permanent end to
violent activity. Then a meeting could take place within a week of
parliament's return in January.
'It is for the IRA and their supporters to explain why they have failed to
deliver the promised ending of violence. They should do so at once.'
Sir Patrick concluded by saying that if an end to violence was promised, the
way would still be open for Sinn Fein to enter the political arena 'after a
sufficient interval to demonstrate that they mean it'.
