FT  15 SEP 93 / International Company News: Biotechnology back to rude
health - Survey paints rosy picture of the US industry
THE biotechnology industry is 'surprisingly healthy' after a difficult year,
according to a comprehensive survey of almost 1,300 US biotech companies.
The annual survey by Ernst &amp; Young, the US consultancy, shows total revenues
up 20 per cent to Dollars 10bn for the year to June 30 1993, compared with
Dollars 8.3bn in the previous 12 months. Product sales amounted to Dollars
7bn (up from Dollars 6bn), and the remaining Dollars 3bn came from licensing
and research fees.
The total market value of the biotech industry fluctuated wildly during the
period. It declined by 30 per cent and then rallied to end at Dollars 45bn,
just 6 cent down on the previous year's Dollars 48bn.
But Wall Street treated the biotech sector rather better than the mainstream
pharmaceutical industry, and its total capitalisation overtook that of
Merck, the largest drug company, for the first time.
Seven new drugs produced by genetic engineering received approval from the
Food and Drug Administration during the year, including Factor VIII for
haemophilia and Betaseron for multiple sclerosis.
Twenty genetically engineered drugs are already on the US market. The two
best-sellers both come from Amgen, the most successful biotech company so
far: Neupogen and Epogen had sales of Dollars 544m (up 134 per cent) and
Dollars 506m (up 24 per cent) respectively.
Behind them, Ernst &amp; Young estimates that the industry has 270 drugs in
clinical trials and 2,000 at earlier stages of development. 'One hundred
represent truly novel substances with no precedent in medical therapy,' the
report says.
Ernst &amp; Young concedes that there may be as much biotechnology R&amp;D going on
within traditional pharmaceutical companies as in the specialist biotech
industry (up to Dollars 5.7bn from Dollars 5bn). 'Even so, biotech companies
produce drugs far more efficiently. According to our survey, biotech
companies' average development cost (for a new drug) is Dollars 125m versus
Dollars 230m for the pharmaceutical industry. Biotech companies are leaner,
more flexible, and attract talents that would not flourish as well in more
traditional corporate structures.'
Yet investors' faith in the industry has been damaged by setbacks to
well-publicised biotech drugs in the final stages of development, such as
two treatments for septic shock (Centocor's Centoxin and Synergen's Antril).
The view of Ernst &amp; Young is that investors operate a double standard: 'For
big pharmaceutical companies, clinical trial tribulations are business as
normal. Yet the financial markets expect biotech's clinical trials to be
linear and predictable.'
Fears that the Clinton administration's healthcare reforms will do
disproportionate damage to biotech have also damaged market sentiment.
As a result, the industry managed to raise only Dollars 5.2bn in new funds,
compared with Dollars 6.5bn in the previous year. The sharp fall in new
equity offerings on the stock market was partly balanced by a revival in
private and venture capital funding.
Although the overall tone of the Ernst &amp; Young report is upbeat, the authors
do express concern about the 'feverish' rate at which many biotech companies
are burning cash. 'The number of public companies with less than two years
cash is alarming, while capital sourcing is less predictable than ever,'
they say. 'More than ever, biotech CEOs are compelled to engineer creative
financing methods.'
