FT  17 JUN 93 / Shell to sell farm chemicals business
SHELL, the Anglo-Dutch group, plans to sell its agrochemicals business to
American Cyanamid of the US.
The deal, the latest in a series in the Dollars 27bn-a-year (Pounds 17.5bn)
industry, would propel the US group from tenth to sixth in the world
agrochemicals league. The combined operation would have sales of about
Dollars 2bn, although about Dollars 300m of American Cyanamid's operations
are in animal health and nutrition.
Shell's business, employing 2,200, generated sales last year of about
Dollars 700m. 'The multiples in agrochemicals are less than they were a
couple of years ago. Given that half of Shell's sales are third party
products, we think the exit multiple won't be much more than one,' said Mr
John McDougall at Wood Mackenzie.
The deal is part of a broader rationalisation of a sector involving
fungicides, pesticides and insecticides, though not fertilisers. The EC
market shrank by between 10 and 13 per cent last year after reforms of the
common agricultural policy.
In May Schering, the German bioscience group, revealed it was negotiating
the possible merger of its agrochemicals operations with Hoechst, the German
chemicals giant. Rhone-Poulenc of France has forged links with Sumitomo of
Japan.
American Cyanamid said the two businesses formed a perfect fit
geographically and in products. Its operations were mainly in the US with
herbicides for soyabeans and soil insecticides. Shell's business was more
international and sold fungicides and leaf insecticides.
The US concern is repositioning itself as a bioscience group. Two years ago
it sold its consumer products business and earlier this year announced a
plan to spin-off its Dollars 1bn chemicals business.
Shell said its business had not generated a satisfactory return. The
operations needed to be larger to cover the costs of developing a stream of
new products.
The deal, expected to be completed by the end of the year, includes
factories at Paulinia, Brazil, research operations at Schwabenheim in
Germany, and formulation sites around the world. Shell did not expect either
its crop protection research facilities at Sittingbourne and Amsterdam or
manufacturing plant at Pernis in the Netherlands to be involved.
