FT  29 SEP 93 / Opec divided over production quotas
TALKS aimed at allocating new quotas to the 12 members of the Organisation
of Petroleum Exporting Countries ran into trouble in Geneva yesterday as
Kuwait, Iran and the United Arab Emirates resisted efforts to cut their
preferred production levels.
A full ministerial meeting due to be held yesterday to discuss proposed
quotas was postponed until noon today to allow a sub-committee of three
ministers and Mr Subroto, Opec's secretary-general, to continue negotiations
with individual dele-gations.
Kuwait, whose reintegration into Opec's new production ceiling of 24.5m
barrels a day was one of the main goals of the meeting, is understood to
have demanded no change to its present output of 2.16m b/d.
Kuwait left the production arrangement last June, complaining that the quota
offered to it was not large enough to make up for output lost during the
Gulf crisis.
Under one of the most widely discussed plans to split up the Opec production
ceiling for the fourth quarter of this year, Kuwait would be granted a quota
of 2m b/d, compared with its previous quota of 1.6m b/d.
An Arab delegate suggested there was a split in the Kuwaiti delegation, with
one faction willing to compromise to reach an agreement being opposed by a
hardline group.
One Kuwaiti delegate remarked: 'We enjoyed being out of the arrangement, it
was quite painless.'
Iran, which has a current quota of 3.34m b/d, is understood to be holding
out for more than the reported offer of 3.6m b/d.
The UAE apparently rejected a proposal that it freeze production in order to
help Opec to accommodate higher outputs from larger members, such as Iran
and Nigeria, whose economic problems are more pressing.
According to Arab sources, the UAE is said to have demanded a pro rata or
somewhat lower increase.
The gap between the 1.96m b/d quota demanded by Nigeria and that on offer is
reported to have narrowed significantly yesterday and is unlikely to prove
to be a barrier to any agreement. The demands of the eight other Opec
members also do not appear to pose a threat to an agree-ment, according to
the Arab delegate.
Any suggestion that Opec might have to raise the production ceiling set on
Monday to accommodate the demands of Kuwait, Iran and the UAE is likely to
be strongly opposed by a number of other members, including Saudi Arabia,
the biggest producer, which has agreed to freeze its quota of 8m b/d.
Commodities, Page 36
