FT  22 JUN 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (7): Why Britain went wrong
 -Finance
BRITISH PROTECTIONISM AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY: OVERSEAS COMMERCIAL
POLICY IN THE 1930s by Tim Rooth OUP, Pounds 40, 357 pages
ON SEPTEMBER 21 1931 the UK abandoned the gold standard. On March 1 1932,
when the Import Duties Act came into effect, Britain had finally adopted
full protection. Thus within less than six months two of the great symbols
of Britain's leadership of the 19th century international economy, the gold
standard and free trade, had gone. Analysing both measures together, as Tim
Rooth does in this commendable book, is vital to understand the history of
UK PLC.
Britain's return to the gold standard in 1925 ignored the dramatic fall in
the UK's share of world trade. Between 1890 and 1929 Britain's share of
world exports in manufactures declined from 40.7 per cent to 20.4 per cent.
Britain was exporting the wrong commodities to the wrong places, Empire
countries such as India and Australia, where demand was weakest. Instead of
meeting the challenge posed by its competitors by developing newer
commodities, Britain had deflected it by finding new markets for old
products, and pumping up demand by the export of capital. The result was
high unemployment and deteriorating balance of payments. Enforced by the
need to meet the challenge of the US, Britain's return to the gold standard
aggravated the problems of UK exporters and made maintaining the value of
sterling even more difficult.
Support for protectionism was gaining ground even as the return to gold was
made. By raising prices, Keynes thought tariffs would reduce real wage cost,
the rigidity of which he saw as the prime cause of unemployment. A tariff
could help solve unemployment without jeopardising the gold standard. Keynes
did not favour devolution, because it would have undermined London as an
international banking centre and might start a series of competitive
devaluations. When devaluation happened, Keynes opposed tariffs, since by
causing the exchange rate to appreciate, they would reduce output and have
the opposite effect upon unemployment to that intended.
So why were they introduced? Rooth's argument is that the Conservative
majority in the National Government, led by Neville Chamberlain, was
enacting the protectionist policies championed by Chamberlain's father,
Joseph, in the 1890s.
Public opinion was also pro-protectionist. A Bankers' Manifesto signed that
year also complained that 'the sale of surplus foreign products in the
British market has steadily grown.' The more banal truth, is that, like the
luckless Norman Lamont, the government was simply trying to keep an eye on a
'variety of indicators.' They were as concerned about sterling, inflation,
and the balance of payments, as much as about unemployment.
The surprise is that Britain did manage to muddle through this period as
successfully as she did, using protectionism to bargain for trade advantages
in the markets of its chief suppliers of food and raw materials. Britain was
still an important market for primary producers, within and outside the
Empire. The depression, accentuated by the rise of protectionist barriers
elsewhere, gave Britain enhanced economic leverage.
Britain continued to favour the emergence of an Empire trading bloc for
itself in the organisation of its tariffs. It had still not addressed its
competitive weaknesses, but it was making the most of a weak hand when its
competitors were even weaker. Once Germany became stronger in the 1930s,
Britain's economic appeasement consisted of meeting the challenge by trying
to agree on target markets. The true test came with America's departure from
the gold standard. The Anglo-American trade agreement of 1938 was the first
sign of the US wanting to wrest free trade back onto the agenda and to its
own advantage. Even if the second world war had not consolidated its
hegemony over the rest of the world, the writing was on the wall.
