FT  21 SEP 93 / Time for long trousers
This is the week in which Mr Paddy Ashdown must grow up, put on the long
trousers of politics, even, if you follow me, select an appropriate jacket
and tie. At pres-ent he is leader of - I speak metaphorically, you
understand - the short-trousered philanthropists of British politics. The
Liberal Democrats are doing well, but even the most sanguine among them
confess that they are not a coherent national political force. They
represent a collection of local committees, each tailoring its appeal to
what will win votes on this particular pavement or that, each voicing the
parish outrage of the moment.
Street corner opportunism can blow up in the participants' faces, as the
publication of racialist propaganda by Liberal Democrats in Tower Hamlets
has demonstrated. The perpetrators should be drummed out of politics. The
party leaders, who cannot have been wholly unaware of what was going on,
should be ashamed. The way they are expressing their anger now suggests that
they are. Yet populism can be effective, and legitimate. Here in Torquay it
has produced the most well-attended third-party conference since the high
days of the Liberal-Social Democratic Alliance in the early 1980s. It has
badly frightened the government. The Liberal Democrat victories at
Christchurch and Newbury may yet bring down the prime minister.
No one in Torquay believes that would be good enough. More is required if Mr
Ashdown and his colleagues are to become the heirs of Asquith and Lloyd
George. The what? The Lib Dem leader confessed at the weekend that, like any
other ambitious politician, he hopes to be prime minister one day. The
probability that he will achieve that at the next election is low. I would
have said something about a snowball's chances, but Mr Ashdown might demur.
He is the sort of chap who reflects on the capacity of history to surprise
us. Over the past few years it has. The Berlin Wall is down. The Soviet
Union has vanished. Israel and the PLO have signed a peace agreement. Which
do you find easier to believe? All of the above, or the Liberal Democrats
sweeping the country sometime between now and 1996?
The realistic view, as expressed in relaxed conversations by some of the
principals at the party's conference, is more mundane. It is that the best
that can be hoped for is the capture of, say, a further 15 seats from the
Tories. That would put the trailing opposition party at 35-40 members of
parliament. Let us give Mr Ashdown that. Go on. Assume, just for the sake of
argument, that the Conservatives do not recover the protest vote that
currently threatens them. We would then reach a shortlist of two
possibilities, familiar to those who followed the election of April 1992.
Labour would either govern on its own on the basis of a very small majority,
or depend on, say, 35 Liberal Democratic MPs.
Either way, it would make little difference to the governance of Britain.
The Liberal Democrats would grasp the opportunities open to them in a hung
parliament with the eagerness with which they have grabbed the anti-Tory
protest vote. They could do so with a clear conscience. Take their new value
statement, Facing up to the Future, which was debated yesterday. It might as
well have been published by Labour's modernisers. The emphasis on free
markets in the Lib Dems' earlier statements has been softened, by putting
capitalism in the context of regulation and community values. The old
Euro-federalist enthusiasm has been tempered by a new realisation that this
does not sell under every British lamp-post.
The two parties are close enough on constitutional reform for it to be a
fair bet that in either of the two realistic scenarios - a Labour majority
administration, or one dependent on Lib Dem support - there would be early
legislation on a Scottish assembly, and a referendum on proportional
representation. Labour policies on Europe, trade union law, education,
health, and other bread-and-butter issues would sail through. Both parties
support active government; as to taxation it is the Liberal Democrats who
have hit on the possibly useful wheezes of hypothecating imposts, such as a
penny on income tax for education, or moving from taxes on earnings to taxes
on energy. With the latter, you get cash to spend and the green vote thrown
in for free.
In short, the Lib Dems propose next to nothing that would upset the
programme of a Labour government under Mr John Smith. This is probably
welcome news to members of the Liberal Democratic party, who are typically
graduates with salaried jobs, many in the public sector. The results of a
sample survey, presented at the weekend by John Curtice of Strathclyde
University, suggests that while most Lib Dems are middle-class, more than
half support a coalition with Labour. The differences between the parties
are cultural, not matters of policy. Torquay wholly rejects the idea of Mr
Paddy Ashdown and his backbenchers propping up a future Tory government.
This is not to say that life under Labour would be the same if there were no
third party. We have heard much about the effect on the Conservatives of the
persistent strengthening of the Liberal Democrats. What of the effect on
Labour? In the medium term it should strengthen the case for modernising,
for dissociating Labour from relics of its past, such as its dependence on
trade unions, or its hankering after a non-competitive world. This is
essential if either party's dreams are to come true: southern voters will
reject Liberal Democrats if they fear an unmodernised Labour party. Despised
rival or potential partner, the third party is a player in the same centrist
market for votes. It cannot be ignored.
Mr Ashdown may therefore be propelled by events into a greater domestic
political game than that played by his post-1945 Liberal party predecessors,
or by the SDP 'gang of four', Lords Jenkins and Owen and Lady Williams
included. The question is, is he up to it? He has come a long way since he
took over the remnants of the old SDP and Liberals in 1989. He deserves
credit for the success of the new enterprise, although Mr John Major has
probably done more for the Liberal Democrats than anyone else. Mr Ashdown
must now move from being the pied piper of pavement politics to leadership
of a serious party of consistent purpose. He will be watched.
