FT  20 OCT 93 / Can-do versus no-do: Europe must act and not just sneer at
US foreign policy failures
The Trilateral Commission, 20 years old this year, might plausibly claim to
be the most influential non-governmental, non-profit-making organisation in
the world. It brings together members of the political and business elites
from north America, Europe and Japan. Its former members now in public
service include President Bill Clinton and 20 senior figures in his
administration; Mr Tsutomu Hata, the new Japanese foreign minister; and Mr
Johan Jorgen Holst, the Norwegian foreign minister who played a vital role
in brokering the recent Middle East peace accord. As networks go, that takes
some beating.
The commission's three current chairmen - Count Otto Lambsdorff (former
German economy minister), Mr Paul Volcker (former chairman of the US Federal
Reserve) and Mr Akio Morita (founder of Sony) - are not just names on a
letterhead. All three were present last weekend, and each made a personal
report on the state of the economy in his region, at the commission's
meeting in Barcelona - which was not even the annual plenary meeting, only a
mid-term European regional one.
That meant it was essentially a gathering of the west European elite. (No
central or east Europeans - not even a Greek or Turk.) One session was
devoted to the host country, Spain, and another to the 'Mediterranean
dialogue' between Europe and the Arab world. But the short breakfast meeting
on Russia was, to me, the most revealing - not so much about Russia as about
western Europe. It was not very encouraging.
Mr Sergio Romano, who served as Italian ambassador in Moscow during the
perestroika years, gave a short talk. His main concern was to pour cold
water on the notion that President Boris Yeltsin's recent victory over
parliament should be seen as a victory for either democracy or the market
economy.
There would, he suggested, be 'little democracy in Russia's near future'.
The diarchy of president and parliament would be replaced by 'a diarchy of
centre and periphery'. There might be 'more room for some economic measures
along the lines originally tried by Gaidar (first deputy prime minister)',
but the army would be stronger and 'if Russia is strong the countries of the
Caucasus and central Asia will inevitably rally, as in the past, under
Russian power' - a development which he personally considered 'very
positive'.
In the discussion that followed some details of this analysis were
questioned but the general tone of elegant scepticism, mixed with nostalgia
for the simple certainties of great power politics, was maintained - until
Mr Richard Gardner, newly arrived US ambassador to Spain and one of the very
few non-Europeans in the room, intervened. He alone pointed out that what
happens in Russia is hardly a matter of indifference to the rest of the
world and that, while no one can be sure of success, there are things that
the west can and should be doing about it. In fact, he produced six:
Head off nuclear proliferation, by holding former Soviet republics to, and
helping them implement, their commitments under the strategic arms reduction
treaties. Secure and where necessary decommission unsafe nuclear energy
plants.
Help Russia develop its oil and gas industries.
Give technical assistance, bypassing central government as far as possible,
in the skills a market economy requires.
Set up an 'enterprise fund' to finance privatisation and military conversion
schemes, and help launch joint ventures.
Give 'political technical assistance' with such things as elections, rule of
law and an independent judiciary.
This was back-of-the-envelope stuff, neither definitive nor original. In all
the areas mentioned western efforts are already being made, though perhaps
not enough, and none of them is simple to implement in the chaotic
circumstances now prevailing. Mr Gardner was not claiming to have all the
answers, but his tone was refreshing. Here spoke the representative of a
power which has not given up - which still believes there are things that
need doing in the world, and that something can be done.
Contrast that with the reported remarks of Mr Jacques Delors, president of
the European Commission, who that same day was telling Radio Luxembourg that
the European Community was 'drifting towards a free-trade zone, that is to
say an English-style Europe', which in 15 years would lead to a break-up.
Clearly Euro-pessimism is back with a vengeance, while the US, with a new
administration, is at least trying to identify global problems and propose
solutions to them.
Yet at the same time the remarks made over the weekend by Mr Clinton and his
secretary of state, Warren Christopher, make it clear that the US now has
limited resources, and limited patience, to devote to European problems. The
cold war is over, and European security no longer has the overriding urgency
it once had, either for US policy-makers or, still less, for the US public.
To sneer at the blunders of the Clinton administration, as it feels its way
towards a foreign policy in a new and anarchic world, is easy enough. But it
will not do Europe any good. What Europe needs is a dose of that
much-derided 'can do' spirit that courses through American veins. If west
Europeans would only come together in that spirit, rather than haggling
endlessly over the 'national' interests of producer lobbies, they could
remind themselves that the breakdown of communism is an opportunity and a
challenge, as well as a threat. Who knows, they might even work out a common
strategy for dealing with it.
