FT  11 MAY 93 / Pharmaceutical industry seeks a tonic in bid for drug
bureau: The potential returns which may flow from the European Medicines
Evaluation Agency
THE UK government and the pharmaceutical industry will today launch a
high-profile bid to set up the European Medicines Evaluation Agency in
London.
Potential gains from attracting the agency, which will control the safety of
medicines in the EC and encourage innovation and technical co-operation
between member states, extend beyond status and direct jobs. Britain has one
of the community's leading pharmaceutical industries and the presence of the
agency would be likely to stimulate its growth.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, will launch the campaign for
London's bid today with the backing of Mr John Major, prime minister. He
says in a note endorsing the bid that the case for siting the agency in
London is a 'powerful one'.
A brochure setting out the UK case enlists the support of a variety of
leading figures in pharmaceuticals and medicine including representatives of
Zeneca, Hoechst UK, Glaxo, Wellcome Foundation, Astra Pharmaceuticals,
London University and its medical schools.
Although it is possible that a decision on the agency's location may be made
at the Copenhagen EC summit next month, it is more likely to come later in
the year.
Rival bids are likely to come from Spain, Denmark, the Netherlands and the
Irish Republic.
The British bid will emphasise that London's worldwide reputation as a
medical research centre, with more than half the nation's expenditure on
academic medical research going to the London medical schools, is
complemented by a well-established pharmaceutical industry.
There are 65 pharmaceutical manufacturers in the UK, 89 per cent of them
foreign-owned, employing 87,000 people. One fifth of these staff are
employed in medical research and development.
Britain is Europe's largest investor in pharmaceutical research and
development - spending in 1991 was Pounds 1.2bn or 22 per cent of the EC
total - and is second only to Germany as an EC exporter of pharmaceuticals
to non-community countries. Exports from Britain account for about 16 per
cent of the EC total.
Locating close to the predominantly London and home counties-based
pharmaceuticals industry would, say the promoters of the British bid, have
the additional advantage of guaranteeing the agency an adequate supply of
qualified and experienced staff.
The British bid will stress other advantages of housing the agency in
London, many of these related to communications.
Evaluating new drugs requires the exchange of massive amounts of
information. Supporters argue that Britain's telecommunications system,
allied to physical communications advantages such as the capital's airports
and the opening of the Channel tunnel, make London the natural choice.
English is also the internationally recognised language of medicines
regulation.
The agency, which is due to start work in 1995, will have 300 at first staff
with substantial information technology and archive support. It is estimated
that it will need 5,300 square metres of office space by the end of the
century.
