FT  08 SEP 93 / Attack on plan to ease care rules
GOVERNMENT plans to relax the regulation and inspection of private
residential care and nursing homes came under attack yesterday from health
professionals and the Labour party.
The Department of Health this week wrote to the proprietors of residential
care homes, which are registered with local authorities, and private nursing
homes and hospitals which are registered with health authorities, as part of
its Whitehall-wide drive to cut the 'onerous' burden of regulations on
businesses.
All of the 247,000 homes and hospitals in the private and voluntary sectors
have to comply with the Registered Homes Act of 1984. Since the National
Health Service started to cut its provision for long-term elderly patients,
the number of private beds in Britain has leapt to more than 500,000 from
64,000 in 1988.
The British Federation of Care Home Proprietors said that the cost of
registration and inspection was 'burdensome' and that there was a strong
case for self-regulation. At present, providers have to pay a one-off
registration fee of up to Pounds 1,060, recurring annual costs and expect
about two inspections a year.
Mr Clive Johnston, group commercial manager of Takare, the Telford-based
provider of 5,000 places at 200 nursing homes, said statutory regulation was
essential. But the fact that residential care homes and nursing homes were
registered with both local and health authorities made for unnecessary
bureaucracy.
He said: 'The number of inspections and the quality standards differ from
authority to authority - what satisfies one will not satisfy another.
Registration requirements should be standardised throughout the country.'
The National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts opposed the plans
to deregulate the sector. 'Nursing homes are responsible for providing
24-hour nursing care to vulnerable people,' said the association, which
inspects the homes to ensure that qualified nurses are on hand and standards
of drug administration, food, hygiene and overall quality are acceptable.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said the plans 'put business
before care' and called on the government to withdraw the letter.
'The Tories introduced the Registered Homes Act as a specific response to
problems emerging in the burgeoning private care homes market. Removing
inspection and registration . . . will assist cowboys to flout the rules.'
He was critical that the letter invites proprietors to make suggestions as
about to how to reducing the 'combined impact' of environmental health, fire
and other regulations.
