FT  19 JUL 93 / Power lines unleashed from home base: Why UK electricity
companies are venturing abroad
Two and a half years after they were privatised, Britain's electricity
companies are developing ambitions to break out of their home market.
Both the large generation companies, National Power and PowerGen, have
announced projects in places as far apart as India, eastern Germany and the
US. Some of the regional electricity distribution companies are also looking
overseas.
These wider aspirations are understandable given the crowded nature of the
UK power market with its large surplus of generating capacity. But the news
has been received with caution on the stock exchange. Investors are not sure
whether utilities should be chasing business abroad, and they are watching
developments carefully.
Mr John Baker, chief executive of National Power, puts his company's
international case bluntly. NP's share of the UK generation market is being
whittled away by new competitors, such as Nuclear Electric and the
independent power producers, and will probably fall below 40 per cent quite
soon. To achieve growth, NP must either diversify out of electricity, which
it is unwilling to do, or try to sell its electricity expertise in new
markets.
What particularly attracts NP overseas is an estimate by the World Bank that
800,000MW of new electricity capacity - more than 10 times the capacity of
the UK electricity industry - costing Pounds 500bn will have to be built
globally over the next 10 years, much of it in the Third World. NP is
prepared to commit Pounds 1bn to this market, a sum which, geared up as
power projects usually are, could involve it in Pounds 15bn of power
stations.
PowerGen, NP's smaller competitor, is also worried about pressures on the
home front, so it commissioned McKinsey, the management consultants, to
assess its chances overseas. McKinsey identified 350 companies with the
strength to compete in the international power market, and placed PowerGen
among the top 10. This, Mr Ed Wallis, PowerGen's chief executive says,
helped persuade him to pursue opportunities abroad.
Both NP and PowerGen are keen to play down the risks in their strategies.
Mr Graham Hagley, NP's managing director for international business
development, says the company intends to build a mixed portfolio of overseas
investments in which those with high risks and high rewards are balanced by
others which are less exposed financially, but produce lower returns.
NP's recent Dollars 160m acquisition of TEVCO, the owner of seven power
plants in the south eastern US - its largest so far - falls into the second
category, and provides 'ballast' for higher risk ventures in areas such as
the Indian subcontinent and the Far East.
One of these involves NP teaming up with Ashok Leyland of Madras to build a
1,000MW coal-fired station in Andhra Pradesh at a cost of Pounds 1.3bn. 'Our
concept is to hold a significant stake and have long-term operating
responsibility,' says Mr Hagley. NP could contribute expertise both in the
construction and management of the project.
PowerGen is sticking closer to home. Its major projects so far have been in
Portugal, where it is participating in a gas-fired power station, and in
eastern Germany where it is negotiating with other partners to buy a power
station and the nearby coal mine which supplies it.
'We're not running a race,' says Mr Wallis. 'We're being a bit sniffy,
looking for quality investments. We're telling our shareholders that we're
limiting ourselves to activities for which we have the management skills.'
PowerGen is unlikely to go into either the US, which is too competitive, or
India because of the risks, but it is looking at the Asean states and China.
In particular he hopes that cementing PowerGen's links with German partners
will give it a base for expansion into the east European market.
But competition in the international power market has intensified in recent
years. The main players include large US utilities, and manufacturers of
power generating equipment in North America and Europe. Among the UK
electricity distributors, Midlands Electricity has teamed up with Enron, the
Houston-based gas company, and several US utilities in a joint venture
called Wing Merrill International, which is looking at projects in Kuwait,
Turkey and China.
The risks are high. Mr Wallis estimates that 50 per cent of international
power projects fail to get off the ground. People are bamboozled by
over-optimistic profit forecasts, or fail to do their homework properly.
'There are often skeletons in the cupboard,' he says.
Analysts have said that PowerGen's project in Portugal could run into
trouble because the power station was started before the government reached
agreement on how to ship in the gas. But Mr Wallis said the delay on gas was
foreseen and his company is not exposed financially.
One of the precautions that National Power took before embarking on its
Indian project was to secure a guarantee from the Indian government that it
would receive all the payments and dividends due to it.
All of which explains why investors are cautious. Mr Alex Milne, electricity
analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, says that foreign markets are a
'reasonable area' for UK generators to look at, given their technical
expertise and financial strength.
He applauds their measured approach, but in such a new market there is
little way of judging how successful their investments will be. 'You have to
take it on trust that they are not going to shovel a lot of money down a big
black hole'.
