FT  19 OCT 93 / Extra days off leave workers at a loose end
MR BENICHI ETO, president of the Federation of Nippon Steel Workers' Unions,
contemplates the prospect of two extra days off from work each month and
looks troubled. 'With two extra days off from work, what would people do? I
don't know how people will use their time,' he says.
Mr Eto's concern follows last week's request from the world's largest steel
company to its workers to accept reduced working hours of about two days a
month from next month as an emergency measure to tide the company over a
difficult trading environment.
'We Japanese are not good at using our free time. If it had been in the old
days when we only had Sundays off, it probably would have been all right.
But with two days on top of the eight to 10 days people already take off
each month, they will say they have too many days off,' Mr Eto adds.
He is preparing to bow to the management request, even though it would mean
a cut in pay for all Nippon Steel employees, including managers. 'This is a
very rare case.'
The unions' contract with the company allows the introduction of emergency
holidays on condition the company pays 85 per cent of the basic salary of
those affected.
Nippon Steel's unions had been prepared for such an eventuality. 'The last
time the company introduced such a measure was during the previous rise of
the yen (in the mid-1980s). But since the economic situation today is worse
than before, we thought that this might happen.'
For the 43,000 members of Nippon Steel's labour unions, there is little
choice but to accept the company's request. The union leaders and their
43,000 members know that, in addition to three years of economic slowdown,
the industry is under pressure from the recent sharp appreciation of the
yen, which has made Japanese steel far less competitive than that of
overseas rivals.
But it is not just the steel industry which is suffering from the recession
and the yen's strength. Every Japanese manufacturing industry that competes
internationally is under pressure, making it hard to resort to job transfers
to subsidiaries and other industries, one of the first measures Japanese
companies turn to in times of trouble.
Already 13,000 of the unions' members have been transferred to several
hundred different companies, some of which are completely unrelated to
Nippon Steel, which is bearing the cost of making up the difference in pay
and other social benefits.
Union members also know their choice is between maintaining work, at reduced
pay, or facing redundancies for the first time.
'We are agreeing to the emergency holidays because the most important thing
is to maintain employment,' Mr Eto says. If the choice is between reduced
working days and reduced pay or redundancies, he has no doubt 'the company,
the labour union and individuals all need to make sacrifices to maintain
employment.'
He feels that, as parts of an industry leader, both the unions and
management of Nippon Steel have a responsibility to choose to keep
employment intact as a sign to the rest of Japanese industry. Other steel
companies are considering similar measures.
'If Nippon Steel makes redundancies, it would not be just a matter affecting
employees of Nippon Steel; it would affect the whole of the Japanese labour
system,' he notes.
Nippon Steel's unions are not blaming management for what is happening,
since they recognise that the problem they face is mostly to do with the
sharp rise of the yen.
Past experience may not be enough to overcome the industry's difficulties,
but Mr Eto is confident that if the situation worsens, the company can be
expected to take some unusual measures before it sheds employees.
'There is nothing stopping a company from borrowing money to maintain
employment,' he says. 'When we have seen that the company has used up all
its assets and is still unable to deal with the situation, we will have to
prepare ourselves for the worst.'
For the time being, the one request from the unions to management is to
ensure that the programme of reduced working days is introduced equally
among employees and that no exceptions are allowed.
As for Mr Eto himself, he will have to accept the salary cut, but will
probably not be able actually to take time off. 'For union officials, the
worse the recession becomes, the busier we are,' he says.
