FT  20 OCT 93 / Shadow roles sought by Labour stars
THE VAST MAJORITY of Labour's 271 MPs will today visit a small room in the
Commons to cast their votes in the party's annual popularity stakes.
The results of their deliberations will determine whether Mr John Smith will
have changes to his shadow cabinet forced upon him.
The Labour leader retains full authority to shuffle portfolios but can only
choose from among the 18 MPs elected by their colleagues.
Mr Smith has not decided whether to reshuffle if the same 18 are elected,
although it is expected that he would.
Forecasting the outcome of these polls is hazardous - the quality of a
shadow cabinet member's performance is a notoriously unreliable guide.
This year a series of factors has combined to produce even greater
uncertainty than usual.
For one thing, this will be the first ever shadow cabinet election to be
conducted by secret ballot, featuring much tighter restrictions on proxy
voting than in the past.
Some participants believe this guarantee of anonymity could have a
significant impact on how MPs cast their votes.
For another, MPs must now include four women in their 18 nominations, up
from three last year. This has led to a widespread assumption that the
number of women in the shadow cabinet is set to rise from five at present.
But the water has been muddied by the fact that there are no fewer than 15
women among the 44 MPs standing for election. While it is possible therefore
that the female contingent will increase, it could equally transpire that
votes are so widely spread among these women candidates that no more are
elected.
One final source of uncertainty is that the 69 Labour MPs who entered
parliament in 1992 - more than a quarter of the electorate - now know the
candidates much better. In last year's ballot they had to vote within months
of arriving at Westminster.
In spite of this, the most commonly expressed view is that there will be few
changes.
Among those most likely to benefit from any subsequent reshuffle is Mr John
Prescott. Mr Smith certainly owes his long-serving shadow transport
secretary a favour after his powerful speech in Brighton which was widely
held to have swung the critical vote on selection reforms in Mr Smith's
favour.
It is also speculated that Mr Smith might want to move Mr Jack Cunningham,
shadow foreign secretary, and Ms Harriet Harman, shadow chief Treasury
secretary, neither of whom are thought to have found their feet.
The most vulnerable are arguably Mr Tom Clarke, shadow Scottish secretary,
Mr Ron Davies, shadow Welsh secretary, who won the race to replace Mr Bryan
Gould after his resignation, and Mr David Clark, shadow defence secretary.
Ms Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, is also expected to see a decline
in her support.
As usual, it is Mr George Robertson, a frontbench foreign affairs spokesman,
who heads the list of those waiting in the wings. His impressive
performances during the passage of the Maastricht bill may help him add to
his tally last year when he was 22 votes short of a shadow cabinet seat.
At least six women not in the cabinet stand some chance of being elected.
The front runners are generally thought to be Ms Clare Short, an environment
spokeswoman, Ms Joyce Quin, employment, Ms Llin Golding, social security,
and Ms Dawn Primarolo, health.
