FT  23 DEC 93 / Specialist unions warned over merger danger
Small specialist trade unions are in danger of being swallowed up in the
wave of union mergers, a union official warned yesterday.
Mr Michael Bradley, general secretary of the General Federation of Trade
Unions which has 29 union affiliates with memberships totalling 200,000,
said the trend of small unions merging into larger ones was likely to
accelerate in 1994.
More unions would be under financial pressure to merge, he said, because of
the difficulties in administering the 'check-off' system which requires
written authorisation for subscriptions to be deducted by employers at
source. The burden of increasing administrative and financial
responsibilities on unions is concerning the Trades Union Congress which is
debating whether union mergers are the only answer to pressures on
resources.
Mr John Monks, the TUC general secretary, questioned in a discussion
document on the TUC's planned relaunch whether there was scope for unions to
share the provision of some services or to use their combined purchasing
power to get good deals from approved lists of suppliers.
Mr Bradley said that three unions in the federation had been absorbed by
union mergers in the past year and he expected more to opt for merger in the
coming year.
'Small unions have a number of advantages over larger ones, such as a higher
officer-to-member ratio, and we have to give them the confidence to remain
independent,' he said.
Meanwhile, the leaders of Britain's two largest unions expressed their
unease yesterday about the pace of radical reform being proposed for the
future structure of the TUC by Mr Monks.
Both Mr Bill Morris of the TGWU general union and Mr Alan Jinkinson,
general-secretary of Unison, the public services union, revealed their
anxieties at yesterday's TUC general council meeting that gave the go-ahead
for consultation on the plans before February 11.
While the two men said Mr Monk's plans were an 'important first step' and
their 'general direction was very good', they thought more time should be
spent on consultation. They also raised doubts about the composition and
powers of the proposed new TUC executive which will follow the abolition of
existing policy committees.
Mr Monks hopes to relaunch the TUC on March 1 but observers believe he may
have to compromise on the details if he wants to carry everybody with him.
