FT  11 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Heseltine called on to launch inquiry into
events at Alpine
MR MICHAEL Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, has been urged to launch
an investigation into events at Alpine (Double Glazing), the windows company
which ceased trading at the end of May.
Mr Giles Radice, Labour MP for Durham North, yesterday sent a letter to Mr
Heseltine voicing concerns over the whereabouts and status of employees'
pension payments.
He asks Mr Heseltine to 'institute inquiries into the activities of Alpine
and those associated with it and, should it be necessary, refer your
findings to the Serious Fraud Office.'
About Pounds 50,000 of pension monies are in a solicitor's account,
according to the receiver, Mr Grant Jones of Morison Stoneham who was
appointed on Friday. However, it is unclear whether employees will have
rights to these funds.
Mr Radice's letter adds that since Alpine 'was sold in early 1992', with the
backing of Midlands entrepreneur Mr Clive Smith, the company's activities
and administration have been open to question.
Mr Radice, acting on behalf of those employed at the Alpine factory in his
constituency, also appealed to Mr David Hunt, employment secretary, to
confirm that they were entitled to statutory rights under the Insolvency
Fund.
The DTI refused to comment yesterday on Mr Radice's letter. However, it is
understood that representatives of the department met former employees of
Alpine earlier this year following a series of complaints over events at the
company.
Separately, trading standards officers are investigating Alpine (Double
Glazing) for allegedly using the logo of the Glass and Glazing Federation
after its membership had lapsed.
Mr Brian Hern, director of the Glass and Glazing Federation,said Alpine's
membership of the trade association was terminated in September 1991.
Ms Helen Lamb of Brent Ealing and Harrow trading standards service said:
'Investigations are continuing into Alpine over an allegation of offences
under the Trade Description Act. The allegation is of using the Glass and
Glazing Federation logo after their membership had lagged.'
