FT  10 MAR 93 / Electronic newspaper for the blind is launched
THE FIRST electronic newspaper of its kind in Europe for the blind and
visually impaired was launched yesterday by the Royal National Institute for
the Blind and The Guardian.
The entire text of each copy of The Guardian will be broadcast by teletext
in the middle of the night and stored in a personal computer. With the help
of a voice synthesiser a blind person can browse through the headlines and
articles in the way that a sighted person flicks through a newspaper.
Mr Ian Wright, managing editor of The Guardian, said: 'This is the first
time a newspaper has travelled into people's homes other than through the
letterbox.'
He believes that one day it will be the way that all newspapers are
delivered.
The service is being provided as a commercial enterprise by Electronic Text
Network Associates of Newcastle upon Tyne, a joint-venture company that
includes the RNIB, The Guardian and two technology companies, Aptech and
Intelligent Research.
The entire text of an issue of The Guardian can be broadcast to a PC in 20
minutes and is available by 6am.
The RNIB wants other newspapers to join the service so that the UK's 1m
blind or visually impaired people have a choice of daily newspapers.
Mr Brian Payne, the blind chairman of Electronic Aids For the Blind, said:
'I think it is absolutely marvellous to be able to read a daily newspaper in
the same way that everyone else can.'
A basic system, including a year's subscription to The Guardian, costs
Pounds 560, but that does not include the personal computer or the voice
synthesiser. Apart from purchases by individuals, the RNIB hopes the system
will become increasingly available in libraries, colleges and workplaces.
Although the system has been designed primarily for the visually impaired -
apart from the voice synthesiser the text can be displayed on screen in very
large letters - it could have wider implications.
When a wider selection of newspapers become available, electronic newspapers
for the blind could become a relatively inexpensive data base for everyone
else.
