FT  01 JUL 93 / US likely to extend N-test moratorium
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton is expected to extend the US moratorium on nuclear
testing, bowing to intense opposition from Congress to any further such
tests.
The extension would also halt any British tests at the US testing site in
Nevada and please the Russian government, which wants neither to incur the
cost of further tests of its own nor to encourage any nuclear ambitions
among its neighbours, especially Ukraine.
Mr Clinton said yesterday that he had made a decision but was still working
on details. He would make a statement in the next few days.
Congress last year passed a nine-month moratorium on nuclear testing that
expires today, but it allows up to 15 tests over the next three years.
After an intense debate within the administration, a proposal was submitted
to the president 10 days ago for six US and three British tests over the
1993-96 period.
Consultations with members of Congress showed, however, that there was no
likelihood that the House of Representatives would accept a resumption of
testing, and little support for further tests even in the Senate.
Particularly damaging to the case for renewed testing was the Defence
Department's refusal to commit itself to fitting its nuclear missiles with
any safety features developed because of the tests.
Nuclear weapons laboratories have argued that more tests are needed to
improve nuclear weapons' safety and reliability.
Mr Clinton is expected to announce a 12-month extension to the moratorium,
leaving the possibility of resuming tests in 1995, before the 1996 target
date which Congress and the president have set for negotiating a
comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty.
Unless other nuclear powers conduct their own tests before then, a
resumption appears unlikely, especially as new US tests in 1995 could
undercut efforts to win support from other nations for the renewal of the
Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, which is due to expire that year.
The British government, which had hoped for more tests to help it develop a
new warhead for the Trident missile, has little choice but to go along with
a US moratorium.
The country most embarrassed by an extension of the test ban is likely to be
France, which started the moratorium by announcing that it was suspending
its own controversial tests at Mururoa in the South Pacific, but which is
keen to conduct more tests to help it modernise its nuclear arsenal.
