FT  04 DEC 93 / How to Spend it: If the going gets tough, call for the
Huskies - The tweed perfectly adapted to the shooting set
A reader writes to me in praise of the glories of the Husky tweed shooting
coat. 'It is,' he says, 'the real unsung hero of the shooting field and it
thoroughly deserves an article all to its ugly, drab but elitist and
oh-so-functional little self.'
So, Mr Samengo-Turner, here it is.
The qualities of the Husky tweed shooting jacket are, according to Mr
Samengo-Turner, an almost masonically-guarded secret and in the parts in
which he shoots (Suffolk, 'the home of shooting') it is referred to as 'the
Norfolk Mink']
(For those who are feeling sceptical, I should hasten to add that Mr
Samengo-Turner has absolutely no financial interest in the matter.)
From this, readers may gather that the jacket confers on shooting folk the
kind of status that mink used to confer upon suburban matrons - and make
similar inroads on the purse.
There are, of course, more ubiquitous and parvenu rivals which have
attempted to bring the ploughed field to the pavements of Wandsworth and
which have become the social standby of the 'wannabe'.
However, the real man and woman of the shooting and country estate proudly
sports this garment which looks like a 'sackcloth-cum-tweed-wigam'. From
this, readers will further gather that flattery does not come into the
matter. Function and insider knowledge is all.
The charm of the Husky tweed coat is its perfect adaptation to the needs of
the shooting set. 'Sometimes,' says one of Mr Samengo-Turner's shooting
companions, 'on a very fine day we will all set off in nothing but tweeds -
but come the really damp and deep mid-winter days and we revert back to our
Huskies.'
Huskies come in various forms but the one to which the shooting set is
addicted is the one that looks from the outside like a tweed jacket but
which is lined with warm, thermal padded quilting.
It is 'incredibly warm, virtually waterproof and incredibly hardwearing' -
this is a garment to last a shooting life-time. Indeed Mr Samengo-Turner has
shooting friends who are still wearing Husky tweeds made in the late 1960s.
There are all sorts of details which make it the preferred choice of the
true shooting man. The sleeves are cut so that the arms may move freely when
raising a gun (the technical phrase being a 'reverse-cut sleeve'), there are
cartridge pockets and insulated hand-warmer pockets.
There are also storm cuffs, a detachable storm flap and a heavy duty two-way
zip.
Those who want the complete look can buy plus-twos and cap in a matching
tweed. Tweeds come in quite a range of checks and colours.
Husky's order book, I am reliably informed, reads much like a cross-section
of Burke's peerage. And just the other day Prince Edward was photographed
wearing one.
According to Mr Samengo-Turner: 'If one wears a Husky tweed in London, or on
a train into or out of London one gets almost 'secret society' knowing nods
and smiles of acknowledgement from country ladies and crusty gents.
'Meeting another wearer in London causes a firm exchange of a 'hello' or a
raising of hats] Hunt followers, national hunt racehorse trainers,
bloodstock agents, farmers and point-to-point racehorse owners all tends to
sport what the Shooting Times once referred to as 'the Rolls-Royce of
shooting coats' - although these days, perhaps it should be 'the Subaru of
shooting coats'.'
Its cult status has caught on abroad, particularly in Italy where an Italian
trend-setting socialite wore one at a first night at La Scala and the
resulting press hoo-ha was such that the company opened up in Bologna with a
showroom in Milan.
Once upon a time the Husky company was a small, little-known secret which
operated only by mail order out of Suffolk.
These days it is catching on everywhere and it is stocked by gunshops,
riding and shooting shops up and down the country. In London the range can
be seen at Harrods of Knightsbridge, London SW1 and in WH Gidden branches.
Prices range from between Pounds 235 and Pounds 245.
