FT  26 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: E German energy investment
programme under gas cloud
THE FIRST phase of a massive investment programme in eastern Germany's brown
coal-based energy sector began yesterday amid growing concerns that more
cities in the region will switch to gas.
Vereinigte Energiewerke, or Veag, eastern Germany's major utility company,
started construction of a DM5bn (Pounds 2bn) power generating block at
Schwarze Pumpe in the eastern state of Brandenburg, which will be fuelled by
brown coal. The plant, which will have a capacity of 800MW, is part of a
long-term investment programme totalling DM46bn and spread over ten years.
The investment programme by Veag, which is due to be sold by the Treuhand
privatisation agency, to western Germany's eight utility companies, is aimed
at constructing, modernising and upgrading eastern Germany's electricity
sector which, when completed, will have a capacity of 12,400MW.
The implementation of this ambitious plan is part of the federal
government's commitment to save the brown coal industry, which before
unification employed over 120,000 people and accounted for 90 per cent of
eastern Germany's energy consumption.
Consumption of brown coal has since fallen below 50 per cent because of the
collapse of the region's manufacturing base, and the workforce has been
reduced to 35,000.
Both Veag and Laubag, eastern Germany's largest brown coal producer, which
is the main supplier to Veag, estimates that the region must consume 55m
tonnes of coal a year to secure the economic viability of both companies.
However, several cities, most notably Potsdam, the state capital of
Brandenburg, earlier this month voted to switch from brown coal to gas. Veag
officials yesterday said they were concerned that this would set a precedent
for other cities, including neighbouring Cottbus, and Gorlitz, in Saxony,
which are also considering a switch to gas.
Potsdam's decision means a loss of 1m tonnes of brown coal. If this trend
continues, Veag may decide not to build a new 800MW power plant at Boxberg,
in Saxony. This would rob Laubag of a further 10m tonnes. And unless there
was a sharp rise in the eastern German industrial sector the viability of
Veag and Laubag could be undermined.
