FT  09 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: LME moves to relieve copper
'squeeze'
THE LONDON Metal Exchange last night took emergency action in response to
widespread suggestions that its 'flagship' copper market, on which most
contracts around the world are based, was being manipulated to boost the
price.
It said the daily backwardation (premium over the future price for metal for
immediate delivery) was to be limited to Dollars 5 a tonne.
After an LME board meeting, Mr David King, chief executive,strode on to the
trading floor at 3.30pm London time to announce the details.
He said later that the board had also authorised him to take any further
action that might be needed to ensure an orderly copper market.
The LME board's intervention was widely expected because two formal warnings
had already been given that action might be taken to end the squeeze.
In similar circumstances in the copper and zinc markets in the past the LME
has imposed limits on daily backwardations.
'This should have come as a surprise to no-one,' said Mr Nick Moore, analyst
at the Ord Minnett financial services company. 'So there should be no
squeals from traders. But, once again, it helps those who are short of metal
to get out of a tight spot.'
Many traders suggested that Sumitomo, the Japanese group, has been
responsible for the supply tightness building up this summer, possibly in
preparation for a large sale of physical copper deal. Sumitomo denied it was
manipulating the market.
Mr King said yesterday that the backwardation now imposed until further
notice took account of both present prices and the level of trading. Dealers
said the premiums for key dates, such as next week's September delivery date
and October 7 and 8, have varied but they have never been much above Dollars
7 a tonne.
After the LME's move copper for immediate delivery closed down Dollars 15.50
a tonne at Dollars 1,986 and three-month copper was down Dollars 19 at
Dollars 1,928. Analysts suggested that, with a lacklustre world economy and
LME stocks at a 15-year peak, copper had further to fall when the 'squeeze'
ended.
