FT  14 OCT 93 / Technology: Turn on, tune in and print out - An experimental
interactive television service is set to alter our viewing habits
Television viewers in Orlando, Florida, will be invited to turn on, tune in
and print out next year, when Time Warner launches its US interactive cable
television services network.
As an adjunct to television shopping, 'movies on demand', video games,
information services and a host of other programming planned for interactive
television, Time Warner will provide 4,000 subscribers involved in its
Orlando I-TV trial with specially modified Hewlett-Packard colour printers.
Linked to the TV cable, the printers will enable users to make paper copies
of TV screen images - Madonna in a striking pose or a family snapshot from a
home video. The core technology for this new service was derived from HP's
new line of 'Vidjet Pro' printers for video production professionals.
Connected to any video source, such as a television or laser-disc player,
these printers store and reproduce individual frames, or sequences of
frames, on plain paper at a fraction of the cost of current methods. The
'home media printing service' will also let cable subscribers print out news
and information selected from menus on the TV screen.
The printer will enhance I-TV services such as 'TV shopping'. Using a remote
control device, the subscriber could select the 'Shopping Mall' section of
Time Warner's I-TV network. A menu would enable the viewer to select a car
based on a choice of priorities such as model, price, features or
manufacturer. Next choice: 'info-mercials' about cars that might suit. Still
interested? Press a button on the remote control and a colour brochure
giving details of the car is printed out. A few more clicks and the
subscriber can request a test drive. A local dealer will receive the message
 -via his printer.
Printers might also help to solve a thorny problem facing developers of I-TV
services. Consumer research suggests that when given the ability to choose
from a broad range of programming, the majority of viewers will not watch TV
advertising.
Of more than 3,000 people interviewed by H&amp;M Consulting, a California market
research firm, 73 per cent said they do not want advertising to impinge upon
their interactive viewing. However, without advertising revenues, the cost
of I-TV would be well above the average Dollars 12 a month consumers expect
to pay for interactive services, says Mark Macgillivray of H&amp;M.
By printing out discount coupons or offering further information in the form
of brochures, order forms or price quotations, the 'home media printing
service' can provide an incentive for viewers to watch advertising. And
because viewers will select which commercials to watch, advertising can be
tightly targeted to prospective customers.
The Orlando trial will provide valuable consumer feedback on all aspects of
interactive television. HP acknowledges that its agreement to link printers
to the cable TV service is experimental. One question is whether people will
accept a printer in their living rooms. 'The printer will have to be very
small, and cost no more than Dollars 300-Dollars 400 (Pounds 197-Pounds
263),' says Jim Olson, general manager of HP's new video communications
division.
For HP, the leading manufacturer of non-impact printers, the I-TV trial also
represents an opportunity to explore the potential of 'home peripherals' -
products that blend home entertainment and computer technologies.
Another question will be whether home computer owners need an extra printer
tied to their TV sets. It might be more efficient to link the TV cable to an
existing PC printer. The next step in the confluence of computer and
consumer electronics technology may be the 'home network' - linking the PC
in the study to the TV in the living room.
