FT  02 APR 93 / International Company News: Eni draws up plans for Agip
float
ENI, the Italian state energy and chemicals group which has been implicated
in the country's political corruption scandal, could raise up to L2,000bn
(Dollars 1.25bn) by floating its Agip petroleum subsidiary.
Details of the plan, presented to the treasury earlier this week, were
accompanied by news that Eni had sold two parts of its Savio textile
machinery subsidiary for about L150bn. The remaining Savio operations may be
sold by the end of the year.
Although Eni has given no indication of how much of Agip, its upstream oil
and gas operation, it intended to list, analysts predict the issue could
involve up to 20 per cent of the company.
Agip made net profits of L1,101bn on sales of L10,957bn in 1991.
Eni's plans to list some of its subsidiaries have involved a number of
merchant banks. While Swiss Bank Corporation and Lazard Freres have been
working on the Agip project, the plans to list Snam, Eni's natural gas
distribution arm, have been handled by Goldman Sachs and Paribas. It is
believed that SBC and Goldman Sachs will now be taking the Agip project
forward.
Italy's privatisation programme envisages the proceeds should go to the
government. However, some money may be diverted to Eni in view of growing
pressure on its earnings.
Group results for 1992 will not be released for some time. However, it is
believed that Eni will set aside about L500bn to cover job losses and
restructuring. Similar provisions are thought to be necessary this year.
Eni may also have to set aside a large, but so far unspecified, sum in its
1992 and 1993 accounts for extraordinary provisions linked to alleged bribes
and illegal party funding.
Large extraordinary allocations may also be necessary to cover write-downs
on fixed assets, according to a senior executive.
Floating Agip would end more than two years of uncertainty during which Eni
has studied listing both Agip and Snam. Last December, the government gave
Eni an end-March deadline to present plans for a share issue.
Having opted to list Agip, it is now up to the treasury to take the final
decision. Prospects for the deal have been overshadowed by the wider
political uncertainties facing the Amato government, which has made
privatisation one of its main policies.
