FT  06 NOV 93 / Fashion: Coats - the winter wrap-up / Picking up a wardrobe
staple need not be a chore
SHOPPING for a winter coat is unlike any other fashion experience. It rarely
involves the passion which the discovery of an exquisitely-cut suit or a
knock-'em-dead evening dress can excite. Searching for something
serviceable, long-lasting and neutral enough to go with everything is more
of a chore than a pleasure.
The winter coat is the Space Wagon of fashion rather than the sports coupe.
It can look like that too - shapeless, large and rather dull. Most of us
search for this worthy, essential but rather unexciting garment in fashion
chains or department stores. It may, sadly, be the only thing we go to
department stores for, now every high street is full of specialists in every
fashion area.
But something is afoot with both stores and coats. Since ex-Habitat boss Sir
Terence Conran and George Davies of Next et al brought 'design' to the high
street in the early 1980s, standards have risen. But the result has been a
certain homogeneity - if you woke up in a chainstore bereft of labels and
'house style' you would be hard put to know which one it was. And department
stores, selling a little of everything, have had an even bigger identity
crisis.
This year, however, several big names have aimed for greater individuality.
This may mean giving designer clothes a higher profile, or targeting a
specific audience more closely, or developing a stronger fashion image.
Whichever method is chosen, and whatever the results, the customer benefits.
As far as the great winter coat hunt is concerned, all this means sharper
styles and keen prices. The flamboyant long coat is back with bravura, and
the favourites are the velvet-trimmed dandy style, the 1970s throwback
military greatcoat and the fur-trimmed Russian coat. Any could be a
one-season wonder so you are best off searching the budget rails. Spend real
money instead on an all-enveloping, soft edge-to-edge or wrap style which in
camel, black or luxurious blonde will last for years.
For men there is a similar divide; long coats, sometimes belted, in forest
green or rust are here and now, but navy, grey and camel are still
investments.
As for the new corporate images to go with the new coats, Jim Maxmin, Laura
Ashley's American chief executive, says of his company, although he could
have been talking of many others: 'In the late 1980s we lost sight of our
roots, of what made us special. We are now restoring that very individual
charm'.
This means interpreting trends within a very traditional British image - and
ignoring them if they do not fit in. About 10 per cent of the collection is
adventurous enough to lure new customers - including sophisticated long
coats designed by students of London's Royal College of Art - while the rest
is planned to please their established market while still keeping abreast of
1990s fashion.
Take Principles, the middle-of-the-road chainstore which was looking
increasingly middle-aged. Perhaps realising that too many of its businesses
were competing against each other, the Burton Group, of which Principles is
a part, has this autumn 'repositioned' it towards a far tighter market
segment, defined as 'ABC1s, women in their 30s and men from 25 to 35.'
Whatever the marketing reasoning, the result is cleaner, more contemporary
but not over-adventurous clothes. The attention is on quality rather than
fussy detail, and prices are keen. This sensible formula should appeal to
customer, whether single women of 29 or married men of 40.
A not dissimilar, if less dramatic, change has taken place at Jaeger. When
chief executive Fiona Harrison arrived three years ago she found Jaeger's
image stuck in a dowdy 1980s groove. She took on Jeanette Todd, the Burton
Group's experienced design director, 18 months ago and the results have been
swift. Jaeger is now the holder of the British Fashion Award for Classic
Design which, says Todd, 'would have been unthinkable a year ago.'
The 'bitty' image of department stores makes refinding an identity harder.
In advance of its flotation as a public company, House of Fraser has made a
huge effort in fashion, on both style and price. More high-profile designers
are balanced by much sharper buying of inexpensive special purchases,
including the season's top coat styles and the fashion-forward Hot Shop
section which is shared with Harrods.
Debenhams is targeting a younger, design- and cost-conscious market,
persuading designers such as voguish milliner Philip Treacy to produce
exclusive styles with accessible price-tags. Even their most luxurious coats
are reasonable.
Intriguingly, Liberty is going in the opposite direction on price. In the
past its fashion image has been less strong than that of areas such as
interior design, something the store is now rectifying with a vengeance.
Following its Arts and Crafts tradition are quirky British designers like
Vivienne Westwood, Sophia Malig and Xavier Foley and individualist
foreigners such as Issey Miyake and Koji Tatsuno. The fashion floor is now a
sea of modish black, a far cry from chintzy Liberty prints. Coat prices are
correspondingly higher but the quality of styles, like Feminella's
capacious, perfectly plain wool and cashmere edge-to-edge coat justifies
this.
Finally, a word of warning. The long coat rarely really is, especially if
you are tall. The big store groups which call the shots with British
manufacturers maintain that their average customer is 5ft 4in and is highly
put off if she trips over the hem. Tall women must still resort to dearer,
designer coats. Until this changes, coats will not inspire the excitement of
true high fashion.
