FT  06 MAY 93 / World Bank loan check plan rejected
WORLD BANK shareholder countries have sent management back to the drawing
board to produce a new set of measures for improving the implementation and
supervision of loans.
Executive directors representing the member countries rejected a first-draft
action plan called 'Next Steps' as an inadequate response to a commission's
report which documented an alarming deterioration in the performance of the
World Bank's loan portfolio. The commission was chaired by Mr Willi
Wapenhans.
'We worked closely with other member countries in determining that the first
response was not satisfactory, and we joined with the others in sending
management back to the drawing board for further work,' Mr Lawrence Summers,
the US Treasury under-secretary in charge of international affairs, told a
House of Representatives committee yesterday.
'We made clear that the initial response went insufficiently far to respond
to concerns about the need for more adequate supervision of bank projects,
and much more emphasis on implementation rather than on approval of loans,'
he said.
The Wapenhans report said that more than 75 per cent of World Bank projects
showed acceptable performance, but noted a steady deterioration in portfolio
performance. The proportion of projects with significant problems rose from
11 per cent in 1981 to 20 per cent in 1991.
The World Bank has been caught in the unfavourable spotlight cast in recent
weeks on the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, its sister
multilateral bank. Some members of Congress are treating the
administration's request for funds for the International Development
Association, the concessional loan arm of the World Bank, with as little
enthusiasm as they are showing for EBRD funding.
But the Clinton administration, although at first hesitant about the size of
the IDA contribution negotiated by its predecessor, is throwing its weight
behind the request, involving a Dollars 1.25bn (Pounds 796m) US contribution
this year.
