FT  06 OCT 93 / Business and the Environment: Recycling begins at home
RWE, the German energy-based conglomerate, Greenpeace, the environmental
pressure group, and paper recyclers in the UK have one thing in common: they
want German waste exports to stop.
In the case of RWE, based in Dusseldorf, the motivation is money. About to
start building one of the largest waste recycling plants in Europe, the
company wants to be sure it will find enough customers. The success of the
project is pinned on the introduction of EC-wide waste requirements which
would destroy the incentive of German companies to dump their waste abroad.
At the moment, recycling in Germany (or paying for landfill space) costs a
local company more than transporting and recycling (or dumping) waste
material abroad. Foreign destinations can be just across the border in
France, or as far away as Asia, with returning cargo ships charging
relatively little for transport. Turning used steel into scrap, for example,
costs an estimated DM600 (Pounds 240) per tonne in Germany compared with
DM250 in France, according to analysts.
The tendency of German companies to export their waste, often circumventing
labelling requirements, has led to a string of scandals. Michael Stock,
director of the plant which RWE plans to build, believes the only solution
to curb such practices is an EC-wide waste disposal regime.
RWE is betting one will be in place by the end of the century. And it wants
to offer the most modern and cost-advantageous recycling technology to
German and other European companies faced with it. 'Our aim is to operate
the most modern recycling plant in Europe by the time German producers can
no longer export their waste,' he explains.
The project will regroup three plants dealing with 60,000 tonnes a year of
toxic waste (such as fats, oil-contaminated substances and paints), 80,000
tonnes of scrap metal and 40,000 tonnes of biological waste (such as
contaminated water from sewage or agricultural lands). Thyssen Handelsunion,
the diversified trading arm of the Thyssen conglomerate, is co-investor.
As part of the project, RWE also plans to develop the know-how and
technologies to rehabilitate contaminated soils.
The plants should be operational by 1998, after a four-year construction
period starting next year. Local authorities in Duisburg, which studied the
project for three years, are expected to give the final go-ahead in the
spring.
While the project will be a considerable boost for local enterprises, which
are expected to provide 48 per cent of the DM600m investment, it will not
offer many jobs to offset the rising levels of unemployment in the
traditional coal-and-steel Ruhr region. Fully computerised, the entire
'centre' will be operated by 180 people at most.
The project also offers an example of how energy groups in Germany are
moving towards becoming large, indispensable players in the recycling
industry. Smaller recyclers were prompted to complain to the Federal Cartel
Office in Berlin early this year about this trend.
But with the success of Germany's strict recycling models at stake and with
a dearth of local recycling capacity to make them work, the cartel office
has kept silent.
