FT  09 SEP 93 / World Trade News: VW is accused of paying lip service to
probe
VOLKSWAGEN should start to co-operate fully with the investigation by public
prosecutors of the alleged theft of secret documents from General Motors and
not just 'pay lip service' to co-operation, Mr Louis Hughes, president of GM
Europe, said at the Frankfurt motor show yesterday.
'I wish that the Volkswagen group, instead of saying they would fully
co-operate with the public prosecutors, would actually do so. It is lip
service. It is not endorsed by action.' If charges were made, it would be 'a
case of industrial espionage of unbelievable proportions,' Mr Hughes said.
'An industrial version of Watergate.'
VW said yesterday it was co-operating fully with the state prosecutors and
that Mr Hughes' remarks were 'unjust'. It was in VW's interest that the
matter be cleared up as quickly as possible, said Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs,
VW spokesman.
The prosecutors have been investigating for more than four months the
alleged theft of thousands of confidential documents from General Motors,
the US carmaker and from Opel, its German subsidiary, in connection with the
defection to Volkswagen in March of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, GM's
former global purchasing director, along with several of his former GM
colleagues.
Mr Lopez is now the VW group's production and purchasing director. The
prosecutors raided VW's head office in Wolfsburg and several other locations
late last month.
The alleged theft concerns the disappearance of highly sensitive GM
documents which the US group says are vital to its competitive standing,
including the prices it pays suppliers for components, lists of its
components suppliers, and confidential details of its future product
programmes stretching through the 1990s.
'It would be good if Mr Piech (VW chief executive) and Mr (Klaus) Liesen
(chairman of the VW supervisory board) would send a letter to VW employees
saying that, without any danger to their job security or their relationship
with their supervisors, they should say what they know of this case.'
