FT  08 APR 93 / LA braced for more mayhem over beating
LOS ANGELES is bracing itself for renewed violence as the second trial of
four police officers involved in the beating of Mr Rodney King, a black
motorist, draws to a close.
Last year, their acquittal in a state court on charges of assault and use of
excessive force in a beating video-taped by a bystander and shown on
television worldwide, set off three days of rioting in the city, claimed
more than 50 lives and resulted in damage estimated at Dollars 2bn.
Tomorrow, a jury is expected to begin its deliberations in the new trial, in
a federal court. This has lasted six weeks. The policemen are accused of
having violated Mr King's civil rights by failing to protect him.
Mr Tom Bradley, Los Angeles mayor, and Mr Willie Williams, city police
chief, have appealed for calm and said that the police department is now
better prepared to deal with potential violence than when the riots broke
out.
However, tension is rising. The Los Angeles Times reported this week that
the national guard had moved armoured vehicles into the area 'to facilitate
a rapid response' and that the city police department, the Los Angeles
county sheriff's department, the California highway patrol and other
agencies had trained to contain violence 'in case disturbances break out
again.'
On Sunday, a televised 'town meeting' drew repudiations of the criminal
justice system from participants who claimed that minorities still face
discrimination from police, prosecutors and judges. 'We have been told to
respect the justice system but injustice has been perpetrated on us,' said
Mr Danny Bakewell, president of the Brotherhood Crusade, a charity group in
south central Los Angeles, an area devastated by the riots. 'We are not
going to allow our people to be abused any longer.'
Fears of renewed rioting have been heightened by rumours that armed gangs
will invade suburban homes and businesses, although local officials say
these stories are based only on the boasts of a few gang members. Even so,
sales of guns are reported to have increased by more than 30 per cent in
recent weeks as residents prepare themselves for feared attacks.
