FT  30 JAN 93 / International Company News: Nippon Steel expands electronics
business
NIPPON STEEL, the leading Japanese steel maker, is to expand its electronics
business by paying about Y35.5bn (Dollars 286m) for a majority stake in the
lossmaking NMB Semiconductor (NMBS), which has run out of investment funds.
The ailing NMBS is a subsidiary of Minebea, the Japanese bearings maker,
which has agreed to sell its 56 per cent stake for Y5.5bn, while Nippon
Steel will also take on Y30bn of the chip maker's outstanding debt.
NMBS was founded by Minebea in 1984, but has been unable to keep pace in the
increasingly expensive semiconductor race.
For Nippon Steel, the acquisition, due to be completed by the end of March,
provides an opportunity to expand its electronics business, but the purchase
will expose the company to the cut-throat competition of the international
chip market.
The past two years have been particularly difficult for NMBS, which reported
a loss of Y12.4bn in the year ended September, leaving the company without
the resources to take advantage of a recent upturn in sales for its main
product, memory chips.
Minebea has also been burdened by NMBS, having reported a consolidated loss
of Y13.6bn last year. Mr Iwao Ishizuka, Minebea's chairman, said the sale
would allow his company to concentrate on its core business, as NMBS has
been losing at least Y1bn a month.
However, his company will be forced to write-off Y44bn in outstanding loans
to NMBS, and now expects a net loss of about Y50bn in the first half, ending
in March, compared with a previously forecast profit of Y1.8bn.
When the acquisition is complete, NMBS will be renamed Nippon Steel
Semiconductor, and the steel maker expects that turning the company around
will take about three years.
Mr Takashi Imai, Nippon Steel vice-president, said agreement had been
reached after a month of negotiation, and that the change of ownership would
not affect an existing NMBS partnership with Intel, the US electronics
company.
