FT  09 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Streamlining and cost cuts bolster Blenheim
ALTHOUGH Blenheim Group's share price dived sharply yesterday the directors
said improved overhead and direct cost control, as well as continued
streamlining of the exhibition group's portfolio of events, had contributed
to a rise in interim operating margins from 22 per cent to 24 per cent.
The shares closed 43p down at 355p.
Turnover rose by 10.7 per cent to Pounds 80.4m and pre-tax profits were 17.6
per cent ahead at Pounds 15.4m in the six months to June 30.
Earnings per share increased by 15 per cent to 11.2p (9.7p) and the interim
dividend is lifted 13 per cent to 3.4p, compared with a pro-forma 3p.
At constant exchange rates, pre-tax profits and earnings increased by 6 per
cent.
The group confirmed it still intended to pay dividends for the year of not
less than 10.25p, representing an annualised increase of about 14 per cent
over the annualised dividend for the 16 months to December.
Average visitor attendance at the group's trade exhibitions improved
marginally. There was a net cash inflow from operations of Pounds 26.5m.
Blenheim said that as of August 23, 97 per cent of projected exhibition
space revenues for the financial year to December had either been realised
or contracted.
COMMENT
It was not the respectable half-year results which did the damage, but the
downgrading of future profit forecasts. The market is never kind to former
go-go companies which puncture high hopes, and there is nothing analysts
like less than a change in tune of this kind - particularly so soon after a
big cash-raising operation. Most concern centres on the outlook for France
and Germany next year, when any currency effect is likely to be adverse.
There is also a fear that the unexpectedly large spending on new launches
may mask more fundamental problems. There has been growing scepticism about
Blenheim's recession-beating performance, and this debacle has certainly
handed the initiative to bears on the stock. The group's credibility is
likely to remain fragile - and would certainly not survive any more nasty
surprises.
