FT  20 OCT 93 / Labour stars seek shadow roles
THE VAST MAJORITY of Labour's 271 MPs will today visit a room in the Commons
to cast their votes in the party's annual popularity stakes.
The results of their deliberations will determine whether Mr John Smith will
have changes to his shadow cabinet forced upon him.
The Labour leader retains full authority to shuffle portfolios but can
choose only from among the 18 MPs elected by their colleagues.
Mr Smith has not decided whether to reshuffle if the same 18 are elected,
although it is expected that he would.
Forecasting the outcome of these polls is hazardous - the quality of a
shadow cabinet member's performance is a notoriously unreliable guide.
This year a series of factors has combined to produce even greater
uncertainty than usual.
This will be the first shadow cabinet election to be conducted by secret
ballot, featuring much tighter restrictions on proxy voting. Some believe
this guarantee of anonymity could have a significant impact.
MPs must now include four women in their 18 nominations, up from three last
year. This has led to a widespread view that the number of women in the
shadow cabinet is set to rise from five.
But the water has been muddied by the fact that there are no fewer than 15
women among the 44 MPs standing. The result could be that votes are so
widely spread among these women candidates that no more are elected.
At least six women not in the shadow cabinet stand some chance of election.
The front runners are thought to be Ms Clare Short, an environment
spokeswoman; Ms Joyce Quin, employment; Ms Llin Golding, social security;
and Ms Dawn Primarolo, health.
One final source of uncertainty is that the 69 Labour MPs who entered
parliament in 1992 now know the candidates much better. Last year they had
to vote within months of arriving at Westminster.
In spite of this, the most commonly expressed view is that there will be few
changes.
Among those most likely to benefit from any reshuffle is Mr John Prescott,
the long-serving shadow transport secretary. Mr Smith certainly owes him a
favour after his speech in Brighton which was widely held to have swung the
critical vote on selection reforms in Mr Smith's favour.
