FT  31 MAR 93 / E Germany braced for pay strikes: IG Metall calls first
officially organised stoppages in the east since 1930s
IG METALL, Germany's giant engineering union, will tomorrow begin a wave of
warning strikes throughout eastern Germany in protest against a wage
agreement broken by the employers earlier this month.
The strikes, the first officially organised workers' protests since the
1930s, will take place among the region's 300,000 electrical and metal
employees.
The union is demanding a 26 per cent pay increase as part of an agreement
signed in March 1991 with Gesamtmetall, the electrical and metal employers'
association. It intends to ballot its members for an all-out indefinite
strike if the employers do not offer higher wage increases.
At the same time, IG Metall said it would instruct its members to hold
warning strikes in eastern Germany's steel sector if the steel employers did
not offer a 20 per cent wage increase, as part of a similar pay settlement
in 1991.
Yesterday, the Arbeitgeber-verband steel employers' association was still
locked in bitter disagreement over what increase to pay its workers. Along
with Gesamtmetall, it has already offered an increase of 9 per cent. But
unlike Gesamtmetall, it has so far not pulled out of the wage agreement.
This is because the Arbeitgeberverband board is divided between western and
eastern German managers.
A fifth of the 15-member board are eastern German. They are demanding that
the employers offer the steel sector in the five new eastern German states a
pay increase of 20 per cent. Gesamtmetall was supposed to have offered the
metal and electrical sector a 26 per cent increase, until it reneged on the
agreement earlier this month on the grounds that economic conditions in the
east had deteriorated.
'We cannot afford to pay 20 per cent. We will pay in line with inflation,
which is just over 9 per cent,' a spokesman for the steel employers said
yesterday. Wages for eastern German steel workers are 57 per cent of western
German levels, while wages for the region's electrical and metal workers are
currently 70 per cent of western German levels.
IG Metall wants the wages in the two sectors to be increased to 80 per cent
of their western counterparts, even though productivity levels are about 70
per cent lower.
However, other sectors, such as chemicals and construction have agreed on a
9 per cent rise for this year in the east.
In addition, several large enterprises in eastern Germany have already
offered their employees wage increases of between 9 and 15 per cent.
Although IG Metall has instructed the factory unions to reject these offers,
the workforce may be reluctant to vote for an all-out strike. Workers in all
three sectors now fear that if they strike the chance of investment in the
region will decrease as will the possibility of small and medium sized
companies making sufficient profits to themselves invest and create jobs.
IG Metall officials privately admit their concern about these developments
but argue that while large wage increases this year may cost workers their
jobs, they will at least entitle them to greater unemployment benefits.
