FT  22 NOV 93 / International Company News: Morgan Stanley looks again at
China
Morgan Stanley's decision last week to tone down its bullish stance towards
China has taken the shine off Hong Kong's dazzling stock market.
Hong Kong has been propelled to record highs this year by a huge inflow of
funds from international investors seeking an exposure to China's booming
economy.
Since China's stock exchanges are still at an early stage in their
development, Hong Kong's liquid stock market is widely regarded as a proxy
for China.
The Hang Seng index, the barometer of the Hong Kong stock market, reached a
record high of 9,733.34 on Monday last week but by Friday it stood 4.8 per
cent lower at 9,263.94, mainly in response to Morgan Stanley's shift in
strategy.
Morgan Stanley's decision to reduce its exposure to Hong Kong comes a little
over one month after Mr Barton Biggs, its emerging markets strategist,
returned from China, saying: 'After eight days in China I'm tuned in,
overfed and maximum bullish.'
In addition, Morgan Stanley actively promoted its positive stance towards
China last month when it arranged a series of international convertible bond
issues for Chinese companies.
Last week, Mr Biggs cut Hong Kong's weighting in his emerging markets model
portfolio from 16 per cent to 10 per cent. In a research document entitled
'Hong Kong: Pausing for Breath', Mr Biggs wrote: 'Momentum investing is
great stuff, but the craziness content in the magic of China is beginning to
look like a bubble and smell like a tulip.'
'To mix metaphors still further,' he continued, 'taking a third of our chips
off the table while the game is still wild and woolly seems sensible.'
Mr David Roche, Morgan Stanley's global strategist, said yesterday that Hong
Kong had lost some of its attraction following its recent run.
But although he had cut Hong Kong's weighting from 7.2 per cent to 5 per
cent in his global equity model portfolio, he was still left with a heavily
overweight position towards Hong Kong.
He noted that Hong Kong's new weighting in the global portfolio was 10 times
its benchmark weighting of 0.5 per cent based on gross domestic product, and
more than double its benchmark weighting of 2 per cent in the Morgan Stanley
Capital Index.
Mr Roche gave two further reasons: the likelihood of a mass repatriation of
US funds as the US economy picks up, and a danger that China's economy could
be badly damaged by a power struggle within China's leadership over economic
policy.
'I am less convinced about the low-growth theory in the US,' he said. In his
view, the US economy will be much stronger than the consensus economic
forecast and that this will create demand for capital in the US.
He noted that there had been been a huge outflow of funds from the US to
other markets, around Dollars 100bn on an annualised basis, because US
interest rates were low and the dollar was weak. 'But this trend will
reverse with a vengeance as the economy recovers and interest rates rise,'
Mr Roche said.
Turning to China, Mr Roche said the recent structural reform package was a
'policy fudge which is indicative of a power struggle'. In addition, signs
of back-tracking on China's austerity programme suggested that Beijing had
yielded to the coastal regions' desire for fast-paced economic growth.
Mr Roche said that as a result, there was an increased risk of a hard
landing for China's economy, that power in China would be decentralised, and
that wealth differentials would widen further.
'All these could lead to political instability,' Mr Roche said.
Nevertheless, Morgan Stanley believes in China's long-term potential.
'I still believe that China is the premier growth and investment story in
the world . . . and that some day China will experience the mother of all
bull markets,' Mr Biggs wrote.
