FT  02 NOV 93 / Government Bonds: Treasuries ease on purchasing managers'
data
THE US bond market eased at both ends of the maturity spectrum yesterday
after dealers and investors sold Treasury securities following a
stronger-than-expected October purchasing managers' report.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  25/32 at 103
1/8 , yielding 6.018 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was down  1/8 at 99 5/8 , to yield 4.056 per cent.
After a subdued opening, prices turned lower when the National Association
of Purchasing Management reported that its index of manufacturing activity
rose to 53.8 in October from 49.7 in September. Analysts had expected the
NAPM index to rise to 50.9 per cent.
Investors and dealers reacted badly because they fear the economy may be
finally picking up after languishing for most of this year. They were
particularly concerned about strength in manufacturing production and
orders.
The only bright spot in the figures was the lack of growth in the NAPM's
index of prices. Analysts said that manufacturing output was growing because
of productivity improvements, which bode well for future inflation.
The market was also buffeted by speculation about the contents of the next
quarterly refunding round, which will be announced tomorrow.
Although the Treasury has said that 30-year bonds will not be part of the
November refunding, dealers were still speculating yesterday that the
government would sell bonds later this month along with new three-year and
10-year issues that may be larger than expected.
MOST European markets were closed for a holiday, but those that were open
took their lead from the US.
GERMAN bond prices fell around  1/4 point in low volume. Although Hesse, the
state in which Frankfurt is located, was open yesterday, most other German
states were closed for All Saints' Day.
'The market has run into a bit of profit-taking of late, but overall it is
extremely well supported,' said Mr Nigel Richardson, an economist at
Yamaichi International. 'The currency was weak today, which may have caused
a bit of a sell off.'
THE UK gilts market fell about  3/8 point as it continued to take its cue
from continental Europe. Dealers were disheartened by chancellor of the
exchequer Mr Kenneth Clarke's comments, in a weekend interview, that he sees
little immediate pressure to reduce interest rates further. He said he
agreed with Bank of England governor Mr Eddie George's view that UK interest
rates should not fall below their current 6 per cent level, if there is a
risk of increasing underlying inflation.
Traders had been discounting further rate cuts around the time of this
month's budget, in order to compensate for any tax increases. 'I wouldn't
say the market has written off an interest rate cut, but there is an
underlying mood of caution,' said Mr Richardson of Yamaichi.
JAPANESE government bond prices rose more than  1/4 point, with heavy volume
in the futures market due to continued speculation on interest rate cuts.
With 3 1/2 per cent 10-year yields in sight, the market's pursuit of this
target is being encouraged by continued economic weakness.
Futures volume may have been partly boosted by the opening of the new
securities subsidiaries of two trust banks, Sumitomo and Mitsubishi, dealers
said.
