FT  15 MAY 93 / Property Plus: Island sun traps with a tax carrot - Audrey
Powell considers the similarities - and differences - between Malta and
Cyprus
MALTA OR Cyprus? How does one make a comparison between the two islands as
the location for holiday or retirement homes?
Both are in the Mediterranean and are sun traps, and each has a golf course.
Beyond that, at first Malta 17 miles long and flat, and Cyprus stretching
150 miles and mountainous, might seem to have little in common. Yet both
were once under British rule and popular with retired British service
families. Both had periods when they lost their attraction - during the
Mintoff regime in Malta and the Turkish invasion of Cyprus.
Now they are back in favour, with a different government in Malta and years
of peace in Cyprus. (United Nations-sponsored talks between the separate
sectors of the island are being resumed). Both Malta and Cyprus offer
beneficial tax arrangements and a lower cost of living than Britain.
English is understood on both islands although too much reliance should not
be placed on this. The Briton who asked a Maltese builder to paint a wall
came back to find it demolished, through a misunderstanding.
On both islands foreign buyers may purchase only one property. In Cyprus
they may not let (though many do). In Malta they may only let if the
property has a pool.
On both islands flat roofs have been the style in the past, though changes
are creeping in. In Malta the properties, of mellow limestone blocks, look
Biblical - if you ignore the television aerials. In Cyprus the flat roofs
tend to look unfinished, as they may have been, awaiting a further storey
for a daughter's dowry. Now daughters work and do not need dowries, and
solar water-heating apparatus sits on the roof.
In Malta a foreign buyer cannot purchase a property costing less than about
Pounds 26,250 (Pounds 31,000 with stamp duty and legal fees), to leave the
lower-priced homes for locals. But there is plenty of choice above that.
Generally, the property market retains its upward trend, says Eric Mason, of
the Malta &amp; Gozo Property Group. Over the past 12 months houses with gardens
have shown a sharp increase - averaging 30 per cent for detached villas or
farmhouses. With flats in holiday areas, where supply exceeds demand, value
has only increased by up to 5 per cent. Yet apartments in popular
residential areas, such as Sliema and St Julians, have shown increases of up
to 20 per cent.
In the first nine months of last year sales to foreigners dropped 20 per
cent, mainly due to the absence of the British. Some buyers are going ahead
with purchases, using an 8 per cent, five-year, interest-only Maltese
mortgage facility.
An EC-funded structure plan for the Maltese islands has been drawn up by
British planning consultants Colin Buchanan &amp; Partners, in conjunction with
Generale Progetti, of Rome, and is being implemented. This will limit new
development which could increase prices of larger houses. Over the past 20
years property prices in Malta have increased by an average of 13.5 per cent
a year, says Mason. He thinks this could continue.
Prices go up to Pounds 525,000 but the most popular price for foreign buyers
is the Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 150,000 band. That could buy a converted
farmhouse with valley views. Prices of farmhouses, with their interior
arches, courtyards and often stone steps at the side of the building, depend
on condition. One with two bedrooms - and the possibility of three more - a
garage and garden is Pounds 22,000 including stamp duty and legal fees.
There is plenty of new property. This may be offered in shell form, to be
completed as a buyer likes, as in the case of Park Towers in St Julians
where there are nearly 60 flats and penthouses with two to five bedrooms,
verandahs and garages. A three-bedroom flat is Pounds 92,300; a penthouse,
Pounds 166,250. All have sea views. Some flats, new or resales, are sold
furnished.
Property lists and copies of a new guide, Moving to Malta, published by the
finance ministry, are available from the Malta &amp; Gozo Property Group's
office at Ashford, Kent (Tel: 0233-720216).
In the Greek sector of Cyprus few older properties come on the market.
Families tend not to sell the appealing houses, with their verandahs
wreathed in vines, in the mountain villages. So the selection is mostly
among the many new developments in coastal towns like Paphos and Limassol.
There are also some projects in the hills inland. The D Zavos Group
(0708-450784), with about eight developments on the island, has a price
range of from Pounds 35,000 for compact bungalows to Pounds 50,000 for
specially designed villas.
Cybarco (071-436-3881), with its own clutch of schemes, has marina beach
apartments back from the water in what is becoming a hotel part of Limassol.
There will be 100 apartments, with the first blocks finished next month.
Prices from Pounds 40,000.
A Cyprus reader gives a warning to the potential buyer who might be swayed
by the friendliness of the people and the choice of property and decide on a
spur-of-the-moment purchase. Procedures are not hurried in Cyprus and it can
take 18 months for permission to transfer a property from seller to buyer.
The authorities receive many applications and like to check papers
thoroughly and ensure that the 'right sort of people' will be coming to live
in their sector of the island. Thus, there is a a period of limbo during
which, in the absence of proper legal assistance to safeguard a buyer, it is
possible for problems to occur.
When a developer or seller offers the services of their advocate to handle
both sides of the transaction to save enormous costs, a number of buyers
accept an offer which cannot be loaded in their favour.
A buyer should always appoint his own advocate, negotiating the fee before
appointment. A list of advocates is available from the British High
Commission in Nicosia. For British people planning a purchase, a visit to
the Citizens' Club in Nicosia, Larnaca, Paphos or Limassol is recommended.
