FT  01 MAR 93 / Cancer therapy ready for trials
THE Imperial Cancer Research Fund plans to test in patients later this year
a genetic treatment for melanoma, Europe's fastest-increasing form of
cancer.
Scientists with the fund said yesterday that their 'gene therapy' had given
promising results in experiments with cell cultures and mice. They will
apply next week for government approval to start human trials at the fund's
Oxford Clinical Oncology Unit.
Melanoma is the most dangerous form of skin cancer. Its incidence in the UK
is doubling every decade and it kills about 1,300 people a year - many of
them young adults. Although melanoma can be cured by surgery if it is caught
early, the later stages are usually fatal.
Dr Michael Crumpton, the fund's laboratories director, said the gene therapy
technique developed for melanoma could be extended to other untreatable
cancers. 'We believe we have an exciting discovery with important clinical
implications for the treatment of tumours.'
The prospect of inserting killer genes into cancers is emerging as one of
the most promising avenues of medical research. Several US teams are
developing gene therapy for cancer.
One distinctive feature of the fund's approach is its simplicity. The
British scientists inject their chosen genes, in the form of a few
millionths of a gram of DNA, directly into the melanoma with a
micro-syringe. Their animal experiments suggest that this works as well as
more complicated US techniques.
Laboratory tests by the fund show that a 'promoter gene' can 'switch on'
other genes in melanoma cells but not elsewhere in the body.
Now the scientists are hooking on to the promoter other genes that will
provoke an attack on the targeted cells. The fund says the effect is like
sprinkling a selective weedkiller over a lawn.
They will try first a gene that instructs melanoma cells to make a substance
called interleukin-2, which will stimulate the body's immune system to
attack the cancer.
Simply injecting IL-2 into patients has an effect on melanoma, but only at
high doses which cause severe side-effects. The ICRF team hopes that
localised production of IL-2 will kill the tumour without causing damage
elsewhere.
Prof Adrian Harris of the Oxford Clinical Oncology Unit expects to receive
approval to start clinical trials before the end of the year. Gene therapy
for cancer is unlikely to be widely available for five to 10 years.
