FT  17 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Searching for an early route out of limbo -
Attempts to realise the value of Vestel for PPI's creditors
MR Tahsin Karan, the long suffering chairman and chief executive of Vestel
Elektronik, Polly Peck International's Istanbul-based consumer electronics
subsidiary, is to step down at tomorrow's annual meeting.
His departure is a further blow to creditors and administrators of the
failed British fruit and electronics group built up by Mr Asil Nadir. The
eventual sale of Vestel is one of the few hopes the 23,000 creditors have of
recouping even a small fraction of their money.
Already in the throes of a corporate restructuring, and facing an
anti-dumping investigation by the European Community, Vestel is losing the
marketing brains and man who, more than any other, was responsible for
Vestel's emergence as an important force in Turkish electronics.
The search for a replacement has been painstakingly slow. 'The company has
been in a sort of limbo,' complains Mr Karan, describing the 27 months since
the administrators were appointed. 'Without solid ownership, it has been
impossible to take aggressive positions.'
For all the tensions, the administrator can have few grumbles about Vestel's
management, which has provided a welcome degree of co-operation, something
which cannot be said of PPI's other Turkish subsidiaries.
Vestel is considered PPI's strongest Turkish asset. Started in 1985 the
company quickly established itself as Turkey's leading exporter of colour
televisions, while carving out a respectable slice of the local market.
Vestel successfully floated a minority stake on the Istanbul exchange in
June 1990. Its present market capitalisation is Dollars 53m (Pounds 37.3m).
Tomorrow it is expected to report 1992 pre-tax profits of TL161bn (Pounds
13.4m) on sales of about TL2,150bn against TL74bn on TL1,400bn a year
earlier and TL167bn on TL851bn in 1990.
Vestel's strategy has been to sell its own branded televisions, audio
products and other brown and white goods under marketing deals in Spain and
Portugal and most recently a joint manufacturing venture in Romania. The
bulk of the export production, though, is made to the design and
specification of a foreign purchaser, under original equipment manufacturing
agreements.
In 1992, Vestel generated Dollars 70m in export sales, with brown goods
accounting for 80 per cent. But export prospects to EC markets are clouded
by the anti-dumping inquiry.
Under Turkey's Association Agreement with the EC, Turkish electronics can
enter the community duty free. The investigation involves imports of colour
televisions which community officials contend rely on cheap components from
the Far East and therefore should incur extra duties.
Turkey is now the largest supplier of medium size televisions to the EC.
Vestel relies on television shipments for 80 per cent of its export
revenues. If the charges stick, Mr Karan anticipates Vestel's exports to the
community could fall by as much as a third.
The export uncertainty and prospect of more import competition in Turkey
have not made it any easier for the administrators to find a buyer for
Vestel.
The first option of floating the company on the Istanbul exchange was
quickly ruled out. 'It was probably always going to be difficult to float
any company associated with PPI,' said an Istanbul banker.
A quest was then launched for a minority partner to help Vestel expand its
product range in the European market. If the company was to attract a
foreign buyer, the administrators argued, it was also necessary to split the
business. Unlike Europe and the US, Turkey's electronics groups are still
engaged in both white and brown goods.
In June, the company sold 25 per cent of its white goods activity to Merloni
Elettrodomestici, the Italian group. The Dollars 8.5m proceeds bolstered the
balance sheet rather than being remitted to PPI in London.
The link up had an obvious logic, given that in its home market Vestel was
already distributing the Philco range, 50 per cent owned by Merloni. In turn
Merloni has the licence for the Philco brand name in Europe, providing what
Mr Karan sees as a 'guarantee for our exports'.
Merloni has also provided a strategic platform to export household and white
goods to north Africa, and the central Asian states.
Capacity is to double at the refrigerator line, where half of production is
for export. Merloni is expected to take up its option to become the 51 per
cent majority shareholder.
The future for the brown goods arm, Vestel's main operation, remains
unresolved. The administrators are in negotiations with a variety of
interested parties, including Singer, the US electronics concern.
Paradoxically, the decision to demerge the white goods business means any
buyer of the brown goods operation may find it more difficult to maintain
share in the domestic market, where traditionally Turkish retailers like to
handle the whole range of consumer electronic goods.
