FT  07 AUG 93 / VW says recruits destroyed GM papers
VOLKSWAGEN last night said that former General Motors employees, who joined
VW in March, brought or had sent to Germany documents containing possibly
'critical information'.
But it said the men destroyed the documents to avoid any danger they might
find their way into VW's possession.
VW's supervisory board, which oversees management of the German car group,
debated its row with GM over allegations of industrial espionage at an
extraordinary meeting that lasted late into the evening.
VW said the discussion was based on an 'explanation of the facts' sent by Mr
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua to prosecutors investigating allegations of
espionage against him and three colleagues. Mr Lopez switched from GM to VW
as production director in mid-March, and was followed by his colleagues.
There were no findings to warrant accusations of espionage, VW said, and the
board restated its trust in Mr Lopez. It also stressed the group's claims
that no secret documents came into VW's possession from its new employees.
The carefully worded VW statement made no connections between the documents
and any specific staff.
But its contents appeared to confirm eye-witness reports of shredders
working all night in mid-April in a house in Wiesbaden.
The house was occupied at the time by Mr Jorge Alvarez Aguirre and Mr
Rosario Piazza, two former employees of Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary,
and associates of Mr Lopez, who joined him at VW on March 22.
In June, four removal company boxes, filled with papers and other data,
including details of a top-secret mini-car to be built by Opel, were
discovered in the house and handed over to police. Some of the data had been
assembled at the specific request of Mr Lopez.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, last week implied GM could have planted
secrets in the boxes to incriminate former employees.
The VW statement also revealed that documents had been destroyed at a hotel,
believed to be near Wolfsburg, the VW headquarters.
'In Wiesbaden, as well as in the Rothehof guesthouse, the former GM
employees took pains to ensure that documents which could possibly be traced
to GM and could contain critical information were destroyed to avoid the
danger of their being distributed within Volkswagen,' the statement said.
Over the past few months, VW has vigorously contested Opel's claims that any
secrets were involved in the affair.
Speaking after the hurriedly called meeting of the supervisory board, Mr
Piech said VW made a loss of DM355m (Pounds 140m) in the second quarter of
the current financial year, bringing the total deficit for the first half to
DM1.6bn. But the company said it could achieve a turn-round by the end of
the year.
GM cost-cutting on track, Page 10
