FT  09 JUN 93 / Whale before 'chicken'?: Norway refuses to be cowed
AMONG the many angry, often abusive, letters that Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland,
the Norwegian prime minister, has received since she announced that Norway
would resume commercial whaling is a studiously polite protest from an
Englishman in Bristol.
His letter tells of how he had grown to admire Mrs Brundtland's impressive
record on world environmental issues, but then expresses his deep
disenchantment at the decision to defy the eight-year-old ban on commercial
whale catching by the International Whaling Commission.
The whaling issue - the whalers set to sea yesterday to resume hunting, amid
fears of sabotage by green activists - has brought Norway unaccustomed
international notoriety. Not the least effect of this has been a sharp
diminution of Mrs Brundtland's public image as a champion of green issues.
It comes on top of growing tension between Norway and the European Community
as Oslo approaches the key phase of negotiations on its application for EC
membership.
But Mrs Brundtland's government has not stumbled blindly into this
predicament. Her posture on whaling and the EC are part of a strategy
calculated to carry her minority Labour administration safely over the twin
hurdles of a difficult general election in September and persistent public
hostility to the EC which could result in rejection of membership in a
referendum that must precede accession.
In Norway, there is broad acceptance of Mrs Brundtland's argument that the
decision to allow limited hunting of minke whales falls within agreements on
responsible marine resource management reached at the Rio environmental
summit last year. The IWC scientific committee's opinion that the minke
whale is not an endangered species also carries great weight in Norway.
The business community is worried that the economic damage from
international boycotts of Norwegian products would far outweigh the marginal
benefits of renewed whaling to the northern fishing communities.
But officials close to Mrs Brundtland say it would have been politically
risky to have bowed to international pressure on the issue, on which she
enjoys the full backing of the Storting (parliament). One official said that
if the government had postponed the decision 'we would have been depicted as
chickens'.
On the face of it, the whaling issue is not linked to the negotiations on EC
membership, but the two questions have collided. Brussels has refused calls
by Oslo for the minke whale to be removed from the EC's list of endangered
species and the European parliament has adopted a resolution saying whaling
is incompatible with Community membership.
This threatens to complicate an already delicate negotiating process.
Officials in Oslo bristle over what they regard as a near chronic lack of
understanding in Brussels of the sensitivities involved in trying to
persuade the Norwegian electorate of the benefits of membership. A recent
case was a move by Brussels to introduce an oil and gas licensing directive
that would weaken Norway's ability, once in the EC, to decide its own energy
policy.
Mrs Brundtland reacted furiously, comparing the draft directive to a
decision by the EC to adopt a common fisheries policy in 1972 just before
Norway voted in a previous referendum on membership. The decision was widely
blamed for tipping the vote against membership. 'When we first heard about
the oil directive, we almost didn't believe it,' said one official.
Oslo has been criticised for adopting an attitude that it is the EC which
should adapt itself to Norway, not vice versa. But with polls showing
opposition to membership growing to 51 per cent and several opposition
parties gearing up to fight the September election on an anti-EC ticket, Mrs
Brundtland clearly believes she will win neither the election nor a second
EC poll without adopting a tough stance.
Fishing makes a small contribution to Norway's economy, while energy
accounts for about 15 per cent of GDP. But the official said they accounted
together for 60 per cent of the country's 'political GDP'.
Mrs Brundtland has given a virtual veto on the EC issue to her fishing
minister, Mr Jan Henry T. Olsen, who has an anti-EC record. Norway is
fighting to retain the right to determine its own fishing policy and not be
ruled by the EC's fisheries policy. The positive result of the Danish
referendum on May 18 gave some encouragement to Oslo that it may be able to
turn the tide of public opinion in Norway. But of the four countries of the
European Free Trade Association seeking membership in 1995 - the others are
Austria, Finland and Sweden - Norway undoubtedly remains the toughest nut to
crack. This will continue to be reflected in the public stance of the
government in the months to come.
