FT  06 APR 93 / After the Summit: EC ready for talks on lower trade barriers
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY foreign ministers yesterday gave the Commission power to
negotiate an eventual free trade zone with Russia. The decision is viewed by
member states as a vital signal to bolster President Boris Yeltsin's
struggle for economic and political reform.
'Partnership' negotiations already started between the EC and Russia will
now be widened - at Moscow's request - to aim at reducing the barriers to
exchanges of goods, services and investment over the course of the coming
decade. The aim is to finalise the EC-Russia accord by the Copenhagen summit
on June 21-22.
The new, so-called evolutionary clause on free trade, according to
Commission officials, should quickly eliminate tariffs on most Russian
industrial goods coming into the EC, and retain very few tariffs on farm
produce. Any attempt to move forward to a full-fledged free trade zone would
not start, however, until Russia joins the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade.
Despite misgivings among some member states, Commission recommendations for
a generous 'safeguard' clause against surges of competitive Russian goods
coming into the EC were accepted. Barriers would only be re-erected in the
event of 'serious injury' to EC producers of similar goods, or the threat of
it. The Commission also had written into the minutes of yesterday's
agreement that the clause would only be invoked after thorough investigation
to prove that the threat was real.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, said the agreement was 'a
recognition of the need for the Community to do what it can to assist the
process of reform and democracy in Russia headed by Mr Yeltsin'.
The ministers overrode Commission objections and laid out tougher human
rights standards as a precondition for the free trade project. A majority of
member states argued that it would strengthen the hand of reformers in
Moscow.
The only mildly discordant notes yesterday came from Belgium, which noted
that it would be a long time before Russia was ready for free trade with the
Community, and that the Twelve would have another opportunity to decide when
that time came. This appeared to cut across the 'evolutionary' intention of
the accord now being sought.
France's new centre-right government, something of an unknown quantity on
its Euro-debut, was in favour of reaching free trade by stages.
Ministers also agreed in principle yesterday to expand the EC's technical
assistance programme to the former Soviet republics, to include so-called
'triangular operations'. This means using EC aid to help re-establish
trading links between east and central Europe and the ex-Soviet republics.
In spite of Greek reservations, Turkey could be involved because of its
growing influence in the Central Asian republics.
The Commission was also defeated on its proposal to extend full employment
and social security rights, throughout the EC, to dependents of Russians
legally established in any given member state. The EC's own growing jobless
totals ruled out such ideas, officials said. 'The whole point is to create
worthwhile jobs for Russians in Russia, not in Aberystwyth,' said one UK
official.
