FT  16 MAR 93 / Survey of Contract Electronics Manufacture (5): Tartan
attractions - James Buxton takes a drive through Scotland's 'Silicon Glen'
A LITTLE plant on the shores of Loch Ness that employs just six people is
probably the most northerly outpost of Scotland's contract electronics
manufacturing industry. Allgood Technology, at Foyers near Inverness, uses
surface mount technology to produce high value populated printed circuit
boards (PCBs) in low volumes.
It was founded three years ago by Mr Peter Allgood, a digital engineer who
took voluntary redundancy from BT at the age of 30 and moved to the
Highlands from Birmingham in search of a better quality of life. The company
now has turnover of Pounds 120,000 and is producing boards for products such
as professional audio equipment.
Allgood Technology is at one end of the spectrum of the Scottish electronics
industry, which employs 45,000 people, and which in 1991 accounted for 13
per cent of Scotland's employment in manufacturing and 21 per cent of its
manufactured output.
The Scottish electronics industry is dominated by multinationals. It has
original equipment manufacturers such as International Business Machines,
employing 2,200 people making personal computers at Greenock, and Motorola,
which produces both semiconductors and mobile telephone equipment at plants
in East Kilbride and Easter Inch.
But there is also a large components sector, in which multinationals play
the major role. In contract electronic manufacturing (CEM), Scotland has
several of the largest operators in the UK - offshoots of Avex, SCI and
Philips - and a number of smaller specialist producers. At the less
sophisticated end of the electronics industry there are substantial
businesses employing many people in assembly and manufacturing.
It is a frequent source of complaint in Scotland that indigenous
Scottish-based companies account for a very small part of the industry -
only about three per cent in terms of employment - and, according to a 1991
survey by Dr Ivan Turok of Strathclyde university, provide only 12 per cent
of material inputs by value. This ignores the fact that most electronics
plants in Scotland see themselves as part of a global or EC-wide industry.
Avex, for example, at East Kilbride, works for eight of the world's largest
electronics companies (though like most CEM companies it refuses to name
them), supplying their plants in Scotland, the EC and the US. It employs
about 1,000 people and can design components to order, as well as
manufacturing populated PCBs and assemble them into such things as
telephones, personal computers and complex medical equipment.
In Dunfermline, Philips Circuit Assembly, part of the Dutch multinational,
has a large plant producing populated PCBs for OEMs. About 50 per cent of
its output goes to OEM plants in Scotland and about 35 per cent is exported.
Mr Cliff Hargess, sales and marketing manager, says it has an advantage over
other CEM companies because its surface mount technology line can work to
'extra fine pitch,' with the space between components being as little as
15,000th of an inch. Philips employs 600 people.
The other major CEM company in Scotland is SCI which has a plant at Irvine
which employs about 800 people, increased by taking on several hundred
temporary workers at busy times. (SCI is dealt with in more detail in the
article below.) Another multinational CEM company is Timex Electronics in
Dundee, currently rebuilding its workforce after dismissing all its 300
production workers after they refused a new pay and conditions package.
But multinationals are not the only key players in the Scottish CEM sector.
A significant player is Keltek, part of the UK quoted Graseby group, which
is based at Kelso in the Borders. It has been operating for 20 years and
occupies a specialised niche in the market.
'We offer a complete service from concept design to turnkey delivery for
OEMs,' says Mr Bob Wardlaw, marketing director. Keltek does CEM work for
companies such as BT, Post Office Counters, BOC, Smiths Industries and
British Gas. It has annual sales of about Pounds 13m and employs 200 people.
Ms Carol Brannigan of Avex, who plays a leading role in the Association of
Contract Electronics Manufacturers (ACeM), argues that Scotland's Silicon
Glen, as it is called, has a strong infrastructure of suppliers and human
skills. But she would like to see more component manufacturers come to widen
the range of products available at short notice.
The picture of the Scottish electronics industry which emerges is one of
close cooperation between OEMs and CEMs as well as component suppliers, many
of which are only a handful of miles apart.
Avex works closely with Prestwick Holdings, a quoted Scottish manufacturer
of raw PCBs. Another important indigenous Scottish company in this field is
Exacta at Selkirk.
The trend is for OEMs to subcontract increasing quantities of their work in
order to hold down their own overheads and let other companies bear the
strain of ramping up and then perhaps running down their labour forces in
response to demand. However, there are also signs that OEMs are beginning to
use their facilities to do CEM work for others.
Digital, which makes PCs at Ayr, recently began assembling and testing
microchips there for test houses and for other manufacturers. In addition it
will be using its recently installed Pounds 1.7m surface mount technology
line to assemble modules for other manufacturers. Its subcontract work to
date has so far been worth about Pounds 1m.
At the less sophisticated end of production, Scottish-based companies do
considerable business in assembling personal computers and other PC
components. Mimtec, an electronics manufacturer owned by Murray
International Holdings, which is 88 per cent owned by Mr David Murray, one
of Scotland's leading entrepreneurs, has for several years been assembling
PCs for Scottish-based OEMs such as IBM and Compaq.
Now, to meet the big increase in demand for IBM's PCs since it introduced a
new range of products and slashed its prices, Mimtec is expected to build a
large, 400,000 square foot plant at Gourock, close to IBM's Greenock
facility, for PC assembly, with IBM likely to be involved in financing the
Pounds 13m project.
In an unusual development the ranks of companies assembling PCs for IBM have
been joined by the transport group LEP International, which has for some
time handled much of Greenock's distribution and has now started operating a
PC assembly line.
Another important player in the Scottish electronics industry is Fullarton
Fabrications, a subsidiary of the UK's Laird Group, which employs about
1,400 people in a network of plants at Irvine. Fullarton does sheetmetal
work (building boxes for PCs and other computers) and assembles keyboards
and other components, some of which are exported to Ireland, Brazil and the
US.
