FT  23 NOV 93 / Cuba set for 'collective government'
Cuba is changing its method of government to a more collective form of
administration, according to Mr Roberto Robaina, the foreign minister.
Speaking in Jamaica at the weekend, he said the switch away from dependence
on the leadership of one person - a situation that has existed for the past
34 years - was part of the political and economic changes being implemented
by President Fidel Castro's administration.
The changes would mean that the country's future would not depend on a new
person appearing to succeed President Castro, but on a strong collective
leadership.
Mr Robaina, who is making official visits to several of Cuba's neighbours,
is himself reported to be favoured by Mr Castro to play a prominent role in
the island's political leadership, and could be the next president.
Earlier this year President Castro said he hoped it would not be 'necessary'
for him to be president when his current term expired in five years.
'Fidel has been urging this change for a long time,' Mr Robaina said. 'There
are now many of the younger generation involved in this leadership project.'
The minister gave no details of how the collective form of government would
work, nor who would be involved. Diplomats in Havana said yesterday that the
plan to move away from strong individual leadership was an attempt by
President Castro to forestall any internecine fights among aspiring
successors.
The government, which has been seeking private foreign investment in Cuba's
embattled economy has introduced several economic changes in the past six
months, allowing private and co-operative farms and permitting Cubans to
hold and use foreign currency.
Mr Robaina denied the changes were the result of US pressure.
'My country is suffering not only from the economic blockade by the US but
also from the collapse of its economic relationship with the former Soviet
Union,' he said.
'In a changing world it is necessary for everyone to find his own way. Cuba
is inserting itself into the world economy and not just trying to settle its
relations with the US.'
Cuba was willing to discuss the economic embargo with the US, but would do
so on the basis of 'mutual respect' and without preconditions, he said. 'We
have always been in a position to talk and the only condition which we have
strongly stated is mutual respect,' he said.
