FT  11 MAY 93 / Pressure rises on LDP over Cambodia force
THE JAPANESE government will come under pressure to review its peacekeeping
operations in Cambodia in a special parliamentary session on Thursday,
called in response to the shock provoked by last week's killing of an
unarmed Japanese policeman.
The opposition parties plan to grill the ruling Liberal Democratic party
over whether the mounting violence violates terms of the Paris peace accord
under which Japanese peacekeepers were sent to help pave the way for
elections this month. One condition for sending unarmed police was that a
ceasefire should be in place.
The killing last week of Mr Haruyuki Takata in an ambush on UN vehicles was
blamed on guerrillas from the Khmer Rouge faction, which is boycotting the
elections.
The government appears determined to sit out what it regards as a war of
nerves in Cambodia, while pressing for improved security for Japanese
personnel, but the opposition parties are likely to press the government to
consider withdrawing peacekeepers if the situation deteriorates.
The damage this would inflict on Japan's aspirations to a wider world role
were pointed out by Mr Goh Chok Tong, the visiting Singaporean prime
minister, who warned a withdrawal would signal that Tokyo no longer wanted
to play an international role.
To underline its commitment to UN peacekeeping operations, the Japanese
government yesterday ordered 48 troops to join UN peacekeeping operations in
Mozambique.
The United Nations Transitional Authority for Cambodia agreed that 41
Japanese civilians being sent to monitor the elections should be sent to the
south, near where 600 Japanese military personnel are engaged in engineering
work.
However, Untac has insisted that the 75 unarmed Japanese police cannot be
withdrawn from their posts to Phnom Penh as this might put other
peacekeepers at risk.
Royalist Cambodian guerrillas and the Khmer Rouge, long-time allies in the
civil war, exchanged artillery fire over the weekend in the north-west, UN
officials said yesterday, Reuter adds from Phnom Penh. The fighting was
apparently prompted by the killing of the Japanese police officer in a zone
nominally controlled by the monarchists.
