FT  13 NOV 93 / Nissan to cut UK output and seek smaller workforce
NISSAN is to halve production at its Pounds 900m car plant at Sunderland in
north-east England during the first two months of 1994 and reduce the
4,600-strong workforce.
The Japanese company is taking drastic action because of the impact of the
continuing steep decline in west European new car sales, which have fallen
by 15 per cent in the first 10 months of this year.
Nissan, the first Japanese carmaker to establish a car plant in Europe,
insisted it was not abandoning its commitment to full job security, but it
was seeking to reduce the workforce both through increased natural wastage -
currently running at about 4 per cent a year - and an 'agreed separation
programme'.
Staff in all areas at the Nissan Motor Manufacturing (UK) plant, which
started production in 1986, are to be offered six months' salary to leave
the company, but there will be no compulsory redundancies. Payments will not
be based on length of service.
Nissan insisted the action could not be termed a voluntary redundancy
programme, as it had set no target for the reduction it was seeking in the
workforce.
Mr Ian Gibson, managing director, said the company had told employees 'if
you want a job, you have it'. Job security 'remains our chief priority', he
said.
Nissan has already moved to single-shift working for November and December
by eliminating the night shift, in order to cut output from 1,200 cars a day
to about 600. Some 2,400 of its 4,600 employees will now work alternate
weeks only on day shift for at least four months to the end of February.
They will remain on full basic pay, which averages Pounds 13,164 a year for
an assembly line worker, but will lose night shift bonuses which average
Pounds 183 a month. A 3.5 per cent pay increase due in January as part of a
two-year deal will be honoured.
Nissan said it expected its UK car output to fall next year to
200,000-240,000. It has already cut production this year to 246,000 from the
270,000 previously forecast.
The proposals for the severance package, which could involve payments of
Pounds 7,000-Pounds 7,500 on average for assembly line workers, together
with the commitment to job security and the guarantee of no compulsory
redundancies, had come from the workforce, claimed the company.
The Nissan workforce has fallen from a peak of around 4,800 earlier this
year through natural wastage. Nissan is suffering losses on its worldwide
operations and the impact of recession in Europe is expected to push the
Sunderland production plant into loss for 1993.
Chris Tighe writes: Mr Harry Morgan, north-east regional organiser for the
AEEU engineering workers union, said the 'agreed separation programme' was a
play on words. 'Traditionally we would say they're asking for volunteers for
redundancy except they haven't put a number on it and they've said that if
there are not volunteers nobody will be paid off.'
Nissan's strategy shies away from the R-word, Page 6
