FT  23 OCT 93 / Markets: City dances to euphoria's siren song - London
THE MOST intriguing story in the FT this week appeared on the capital
markets page on Wednesday. It started: 'Bangkok Land, Thailand's biggest
property group, is planning to launch a Dollars 600m Euro-convertible
debenture.'
We live, of course, in jaded times. And doubtless Bangkok Land is Thailand's
biggest property group. But, still, that sentence makes you blink. After
all, even these days, Dollars 600m is a lot of money. The average British
property group might think twice about an issue of that size. Even blue-chip
British Land, launching a debenture in the spring, managed to keep its
appetite for cash to Pounds 200m.
Thai new issues may seem of limited relevance to the average British
investor. But, even in these days of global money transmission, sentiment is
more fungible across borders than cash. And the sentiment that allows
Bangkok Land to tap the Euromarkets on such a scale is one that has proved
particularly contagious in the past: euphoria.
This comes in two varieties: specific and general. The specific sort is  -
in this instance - a belief in the apparently magical growth properties of
the south-east Asian economies. Although such enthusiasms start off grounded
in fact, calculation soon gives way to blind faith.
Still, the rational investor can easily avoid a specific enthusiasm. Such
localised bursts of hysteria are usually easy to monitor. Someone sceptical
about the 1980s' enthusiasm for small company shares, shown in the chart,
could have opted out of the ride when the ascent became stratospheric early
in 1987. And, despite the recent recovery of interest in small companies,
the market seems to have this enthusiasm under control.
General euphoria is much harder to avoid: it seeps into your bones little by
little. You start off buying a new tie and end up with an over-weight
position in Bolivian warrants.
It might seem absurd to talk about euphoria when much of the country is
still mired in gloom. But, for many of the people in the City, the good
times are back. The markets are rising almost everywhere, new people are
being hired.
It becomes psychologically harder each day to see the glass as half-empty
rather than half-full. That helps explain why the stock market has continued
to set new highs. The FT-SE 100 closed yesterday at 3199 up 10.7, a rise of
61.4 on the week.
A classic example of the half-full glass came on Tuesday when the Bank of
England announced there would be no gilt auction in November. The market
interpreted this as a sign that the funding pressures on the government had
eased and that there might not need to be an auction in December, either.
The yield on 10-year gilts fell; by Wednesday it was below 6 3/4 per cent.
Yet, figures published only the day before had re-emphasised the
government's financial straits. The public sector borrowing requirement for
September was Pounds 5.88bn; quarterly borrowing is 40 per cent higher than
a year ago.
The scale of the public sector deficit was a central theme of the 'Green
Budget' published by Goldman Sachs and the Institute of Fiscal Studies on
Tuesday. The PSBR today is no higher, as a percentage of gdp, than it was in
the mid-1970s but there are two reasons to find it more worrying.
First, much of the 1970s' PSBR was made up of the losses of nationalised
industries. Those losses have gone, leaving a much bigger deficit for the
government itself.
Second, because so much of the national debt was paid off in the 1980s, the
burden of interest payments is much lower than it was in the mid-1970s; so
the 'primary deficit,' the heart of the government's borrowing, is over 4
per cent of gdp, a spectacularly high level.
Still, if the economy performs as the Green Budget authors expect,
government borrowing will be down to manageable levels by 1997-98. That
means that Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, could probably squeak by without
increasing taxes.
They recommend, however, some modest tax-raising, partly to allow tighter
fiscal policy to be offset by easier money. This is a course the markets
clearly expect, especially after this week's half-point cut in German
interest rates which takes the Bundesbank's discount rate (the floor of the
'tunnel' within which actual market rates are set) below UK base rates.
In pricing all this into stock and bond prices, the market is acting
perfectly sensibly. These are, after all, the most likely outcomes. But what
if the glass is actually half empty and recession abroad continues to hold
down economic growth, pushing up government borrowing?
After all, the lowest of the Green Budget's three forecasts for gdp growth
over the next five years, a not-entirely-gloomy 1.7 per cent, yields a PSBR
that actually goes up, rather than down. That is almost certainly not
reflected in current prices.
The Green Budget also points out that stopping tax-exempt investors, such as
pension funds, reclaiming the advance corporation tax paid by companies on
their dividends would raise the tempting sum of Pounds 3bn without any
individual taxpayer noticing.
After all, the amount of tax reclaimable was cut, in effect, in the spring
Budget, yet there were no rallies of actuaries at Central Hall.
The stock market most certainly would notice, though: such a change would
cut sharply the after-tax return on equities for tax-exempt investors. That
would encourage them to shift the balance of their portfolios away from
equities, leading, on some estimates, to a 10-15 per cent fall in share
prices.
On balance, it is not very likely. But, it is a possibility - one that, in
its present mood, the market is happy to ignore. Which is where we came in.
As with emerging markets, the mood is what counts.
