FT  29 NOV 93 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1993 (23):
Cost-efficient worldwide strategy - User view, Entertainment company /
Polygram aims to cut automation costs by strictly enforcing a one-product
policy
Entertainment company Polygram International's office automation strategy is
clear and simple, writes John Kavanagh. Everyone worldwide must use
Wordperfect for word processing and Lotus for spreadsheets. Anyone using
some other product is not only denied access to local and international
networks but can face a severe reprimand. And running illegally-copied
software or even games can lead to dismissal.
The worldwide policy is managed by Mr John Higgins, group information
technology (IT) director, from the company's headquarters in London. He
controls an international networking linking four IBM mainframe computer
data centres, including one in Romford, Essex, 30 IBM AS/400 business
minicomputers and a large number of personal computers. Here, too, the
company has a straightforward policy of standardising on the IBM PS/2.
The equipment is linked across the world through British Telecom's Global
Network Services operation. The Wordperfect Office package is used for
electronic mail.
John Higgins' reasons for standardising on a single word-processing package
are as simple as the policy itself.
'It's very cost-efficient,' he says. 'We're in the entertainment business,
not the IT business, so we have to be careful with our investment in IT. IT
is a service to the company, so we have to find the most cost-efficient and
technically efficient ways to do things.
'Our latest agreement with Wordperfect will save us hundreds of thousands of
pounds. If we had contracts with five different word processor suppliers we
couldn't get such savings or such a partnership.'
The supplier's willingness to take a partnership approach is the main reason
why Polygram settled on Wordperfect.
'The product was as good as any but more importantly they showed a desire to
be a partner,' Mr Higgins says. 'This has meant they have shown flexibility
and have changed the next release of the product to fix problems we have
highlighted. We have close contact: if we hit a problem I can phone the
individual technician who worked on that facility.'
Polygram and Wordperfect are further cementing the relationship with an
agreement negotiated under what the supplier calls its Customer Advantage
Programme. Such programmes have been set up by many big personal computer
software suppliers, including Microsoft and IBM, to offer large customers
bulk discounts and a simple way to distribute software among their users.
Under Wordperfect's programme, customers typically get a licence to
duplicate software and manuals and undertake periodic reviews to ensure
users are not breaking the licence terms, for example by taking extra
copies. The programme is open to customers buying at least 500 copies at the
same time.
Polygram is signing a single worldwide agreement which will give the company
new releases of the Wordperfect package as part of the maintenance fee. The
company is setting up centres of expertise on the package around the world
to hold the master discs and control distribution.
Polygram is now negotiating a similar arrangement with Lotus on spreadsheet
software.
John Higgins happily describes himself as 'autocratic' over the
single-product strategy. 'As long as I'm here, we'll only use Wordperfect,'
he says. 'If you join Polygram International you follow our rules: we don't
adapt to your rules.
'There is a degree of flexibility, in that some people do use non-standard
products on stand-alone PCs. But sooner or later they need to communicate
and then they must come into the fold.'
Flexibility is being forced on Polygram to an extent by its recent
takeovers, which have brought other computers and program products into the
group.
'Our recent takeovers have different strategies and we are attempting to
adapt and compromise,' Mr Higgins says. 'For example, we currently have no
Apple computers linked to the network: I don't allow them. But we recognise
a need to accommodate them and we will be looking at how to do this.'
The strict policy across a worldwide network demands strict control. As a
company with interests in the likes of Elton John, Abba and U2, Polygram is
'very very sensitive' about copyright, as John Higgins puts it. It extends
this sensitivity to its own dealings with software suppliers.
'Software copying is simply not tolerated,' Mr Higgins says. 'In some
countries the local management make it a dismissal offence. We have very
elaborate control and approval procedures for buying and installing
software.'
The approved software is installed on local office processors, supporting
personal computers through local networks. Mr Higgins says this means
software use can be controlled by professional computing staff.
Self-contained computers pose more of a problem but there are audits of
equipment and an inventory of all authorised software is kept strictly up to
date.
Staff are not allowed to bring in games software. This is partly to prevent
the use of illegally copied products and partly to remove the temptation to
play games at work. Even the two simple games supplied as part of
Microsoft's Windows software are deleted from the package.
'Putting it politely, running games is frowned on,' Mr Higgins says. 'If you
were found playing games, your manager would probably meet you in the alley
after work. We consider bringing in games as serious as running pirated
software. It's simply not allowed.'
The banning of games and other non-standard software brought in by staff is
also part of the defence against computer viruses: programs which can
destroy files or slow the processing speed.
Polygram runs virus checking programs on both the office processors (known
as servers) and on individual personal computers.
'When a PC is plugged in the first thing that happens is that the server
checks the discs and memory for viruses,' John Higgins says. 'This is done
every day when a user signs on. If a user signs off and then on again during
the day, the system just checks the memory, to save time. This procedure is
not fully installed yet but when it is, every PC in the network will be
checked every time it connects.
'We have had virus problems but our policy means we always catch the problem
at the point of entry.' He believes viruses normally get into a system
through 'honest mistakes': for example, running programs from discs issued
with computing magazines - 'very few people are vindictive: it's mostly
incompetence or insufficient training,' he says.
On the training front, Polygram has a similar policy to that on software. In
the UK and for parts of Europe it has settled on one external consultant who
has put together a standard training package on each product.
'No one gets on the network without training,' Mr Higgins says. 'In some
areas electronic mail has changed the way we do business and made us much
more efficient. In particular, time lags across the world have disappeared.
We can send electronic mail to the Far East at the end of our day, giving
them a whole day to work on the issue and send us back their work in time
for the start of our next day.
'We're now looking at remote electronic mail from people's homes and from
portable computers.'
Far from using computers and electronic mail grudgingly, senior executives
are leading the way, Mr Higgins says.
'All the corporate controllers world-wide use electronic mail,' he says. 'My
boss, the executive vice-president for finance, administration,
manufacturing and distribution, says it has changed his whole business
style. He now communicates personally through a computer with his associates
worldwide.
'This demonstrates the extent to which Polygram recognises that IT is an
integral part of the business and its future.'
Mr Higgins underlines this last comment with the fact that one of the
hottest properties in the rock music business, U2, touched on the corporate
attitude to IT as one reason why the band signed an exclusive international
publishing agreement with Polygram.
Mr Paul McGuinness, U2's manager, referred to Polygram as 'this new, heavily
resourced, modern publishing business' and to the band's desire to be with a
company which would keep ahead and deal efficiently with changes in the
international administration of music rights.
Compliments like that from a band which has sold more than 40m albums must
be music to an IT director's ears.
