FT  13 OCT 93 / FT Exporter (26): Spreading across a wider map - The
European division of healthcare group Bristol-Myers Squibb is focusing its
sales drive on eastern Europe / Company profile of Convatec
UXBRIDGE in west London is the European headquarters for ConvaTec, a Dollars
600m-sales-a-year division of the US healthcare group Bristol-Myers Squibb.
The company, headquartered in Princeton, New Jersey, describes itself as
world market leader in stoma care products and a leader in modern, as
opposed to traditional, chronic wound dressings. Its breakthrough came about
20 years ago with a new type of skin protective wafer.
At Deeside, north Wales, ConvaTec has its European manufacturing plant,
employing 900 people, from where it exports 75 per cent of production to
continental Europe.
In the UK some 100,000 people are incontinent post-surgery and need stoma
care products - devices to collect urine or faeces - and will do so for
life. Every year 8,000 such operations are carried out in Britain.
In spite of the scale of the UK business, this type of product can only be
sold where operations are necessary and expanding sales means expanding the
market geographically. In Europe, ConvaTec is competing with such companies
as Coloplast of Denmark, Biotrol of France, and Hollister of the US but
claims to be easily the market leader.
Mr Keith Wetherell, managing director, says ConvaTec was conceived on a
multinational basis, selling in Europe rather than only in the UK, because
that offered a much larger market and the incidence of the condition treated
is similar across Europe.
Germany is the largest single market but the company has established sales
and marketing offices in every important European market.
But it is in eastern Europe where much of ConvaTec's export drive is now
focused. Although it had been selling there for over a decade, the break-up
of the old political order meant an 'immense change in opportunity', says
Allan Manecki, vice-president of ConvaTec Europe.
'Our main customers had been the central purchasing authorities. We were
doing a lot of work with surgeons and nurses and had created an awareness
among them of our products, and of ConvaTec as an ethical company.
But awareness does not translate necessarily into what a central agency
would actually order.' When the political situation changed, Mr Manecki
said, awareness meant 'it was a case of saying do we want to be in this
market, yes we do, instead of sitting on the sidelines'.
The approach adopted by ConvaTec, while tailored to individual markets, in
eastern Europeshares three significant features with that taken in western
Europe.
Firstly, local sales and marketing teams are not agents of ConvaTec but all
employees, with implementation of policy devolved to them and product
distribution routed via the offices. 'In certain markets where there is
still a high degree of centralised decision-making then I tend to get
involved,' Mr Manecki says. 'But within other markets, say Poland, it is
left largely to the local management to develop the business within the
strategic guidelines.'
Secondly, staff are recruited locally, with English the second language of
key personnel, who come to Uxbridge to be trained. 'We are very proud that
as a company we have no expatriates,' says Mr Manecki.
'In developing the eastern European market, it is a case of finding people
of the right calibre, which is a time-consuming and difficult business. You
want a product or marketing manager, or even a sales rep, and in many
instances that is an unknown animal. Marketing skills have never really been
required under the old communist regimes.'
The third important feature of the approach is dealing directly with the
patient wherever possible. 'We are ground-breaking here in eastern Europe,'
Mr Manecki says. 'In the past the central purchasing authorities had no real
understanding of the product and we had no contact with the end users. But
reaching the patient is the essence of our business.
'We are not just interested in selling products per se to our customers. We
spend a lot of time getting to know their needs and striking up as close a
relationship as we can.' This includes support services such as freephone
advice.
Mr Wetherell says the strategy is first to approach surgical opinion
leaders. 'From them you would understand the kind of need that they see and
their units would be where the new patients are. You have to start with new
patients before you can reach existing patients.'
ConvaTec makes 300 variations of its main products to meet individual,
rather than national, requirements. But it does have to comply with
different regulatory regimes and runs its own regulatory office. Receiving
payment, Mr Manecki says, is not the problem that it might be for some
exporters because of ConvaTec's structure of local offices. 'The trading
that we are doing is essentially internal.'
In eastern Europe, as elsewhere, sales growth is influenced by the extent to
which the product's cost is reimbursed by the state, which largely
determines the number of patients who use it and the frequency of
replacement. Usage varies greatly but, for example, a British colostomy
patient might use two pouches daily at a cost to the health service of about
Pounds 1,000 a year.
ConvaTec will not disclose the scale of its investment in eastern European
or the timescale for profitability. But Mr Manecki says: 'These are not
markets where we are in for a quick profit - we see ourselves as being in
these markets for a long time.'
Mr Wetherell says the biggest hurdle is not such problems as regulatory or
bureaucratic regimes but people's reluctance to admit they have had this
type of operation and ignorance of how its consequences can be managed. 'The
real challenge is educating the universe.'
