FT  08 OCT 93 / Thatcher role alleged in arms-for-Iraq affair
LADY THATCHER was drawn into the arms-for-Iraq affair yesterday when the
Scott inquiry disclosed evidence for the first time that as prime minister
she appeared to have approved the export of British machine tools used to
build up the Iraqi military capability.
A memorandum in December 1988 from a senior Whitehall official to Lord
Trefgarne, the then minister for defence procurement, reported that the
government had approved the export of 50 lathes which intelligence had
indicated were to be used for making shells and missiles.
'The prime minister agreed that in order to protect the intelligence source
the licences already granted should not be revoked,' said the memorandum,
which was written by Mr Allan Barrett, a Ministry of Defence official.
The Scott inquiry obtained the document from the Ministry of Defence, which
with the rest of Whitehall and ministers has been told by Mr John Major, the
prime minister, to co-operate fully.
Lord Justice Scott's office said last night that the involvement of the
former prime minister had not been referred to in any of the documents
provided by her advisers or Downing Street. Lady Thatcher, Mr Barrett and
Lord Trefgarne are to be pressed to provide an explanation.
It also emerged that the document was not made available by Whitehall during
the trial last year of three executives of Matrix-Churchill, the Midlands
based machine tools company whose exports are the subject of the memorandum.
The three executives, one of whom, Mr Paul Henderson, had worked for British
intelligence, were charged with breaching export controls. Their defence
argued that they had done so with the full knowledge of the government. The
trial collapsed following an admission by Customs and Excise that they could
no longer sustain a case against them.
Mr Kevin Robinson, solicitor for Mr Henderson, said last night: 'I cannot
understand why the document was not disclosed at the trial.'
Mr Henderson described the apparent withholding of the document from his
trial as 'disgraceful'. He said that in February 1989 his company had
exported further machine tools for munitions. A third batch was approved
just before the invasion of Kuwait.
Lady Thatcher is due to give evidence to the Scott inquiry in early
December.
The MoD said last night it had no comment as to why the document had not
been available to the Matrix-Churchill trial.
