FT  15 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Improving the World Bank
THE WORLD Bank is never going to be loved. With a portfolio of Dollars 140bn
invested in 1,800 projects and programmes, it is too powerful for that. It
can hope only to be respected. But to win that respect, it must be both open
and tough, open about its failures, tough on its shareholders and, most of
all, itself. With its 'agenda for improving development effectiveness', the
bank is taking steps in the right direction.
The bank's prime aim of poverty reduction can, in the words of its
president, Mr Lewis Preston, be attained only 'by restoring or accelerating
economic growth and by focusing on policies and programmes that specifically
benefit the poor'. The bank tries to turn such benign intentions into
reality via its lending.
To Mr Preston's credit, he decided to find out how well the bank's lending
was working. The answer, it turns out, was not very well. The proportion of
operations in progress that had 'major problems' had risen from 11 per cent
in 1981 to 20 per cent a decade later. In agriculture, 25 per cent of
projects were in difficulty. The bank's Operations Evaluations Department
judged only 63 per cent of completed operations to be satisfactory in 1991,
a sharp decline from the 85 per cent achieved in 1981.
This looks dreadful. So, in many ways, it is. But oversimplification must be
avoided. It would be easy for the bank to improve its performance by
avoiding innovative, risky or complex projects, particularly in the poorest
countries. Furthermore, many failures are to be explained by adverse global
developments, such as deteriorating terms of trade and high real interest
rates. Also important has been the poor state of many borrowers' economies.
The debt crisis inflicted serious damage, for example, though these
difficulties usually reflected and, in turn, contributed to wider economic
mismanagement.
Nevertheless, the bank does bear much of the blame. It is simultaneously a
financial intermediary, a dispenser of largesse and a supplier of advice.
All these objectives have to be served by its lending operations. Conflicts
inevitably arise. In practice, effectiveness has too often been subordinated
to the desire to expand lending and remain on good terms with clients, who
are also shareholders.
The bank's proposed solutions are to move the management of country
portfolios to centre stage in its dialogue with borrowers; to foster
'genuine partnership' with borrower agencies; to ensure the participation of
the poor; to restructure ongoing operations when necessary; to simplify
project design; to improve the management of operations; and to enhance the
role played by operations evaluation. It also aims to redirect internal
incentives towards rewarding successful progress in projects, from project
approval.
This is fine, so far as it goes. But it does not go far enough. The bank
cannot force governments to do what they do not want to do. Similarly, it
cannot give countries honest and effective government. What the bank can do
is decide whether a particular government or borrower is worthy of support.
If the conditions for effective use of resources do not exist, the bank must
walk away, explaining clearly both to the client and to a wider audience why
it has decided to do so.
This will take courage. But it will also demand greater openness. The bank
needs to see an informed public opinion as its friend. Some of the bank's
critics will never be mollified. But many in both developed and developing
countries want the bank to succeed in its prime goal of helping reduce
poverty. They also recognise that developing countries need honest and
effective government, implementing sensible policy. If the bank stands
firmly for that, it will deserve respect. If it is seen to stand for that,
it will receive it.
