FT  23 JUL 93 / Management: Culture vultures - Cigna's UK operation has
reaped the benefits of re-engineering
CONTRARY to the gospel preached by several re-engineering evangelists,
experience has taught Susan Kozik not to start the process without first
launching a programme of culture change, especially for middle managers. She
and her colleagues confound conventional wisdom in other ways, too -
including how they handle people who resist change.
Kozik is a vice-president of Cigna, a US insurance company, and a leading
member of its internal re-engineering team. Since 1989 she has seen at close
quarters the varying success of re-engineering in the insurer's 10
divisions. They all have projects either completed or under way, but the
methods used have changed considerably in that time.
In particular, emphasis has been shifted to beginning cultural change a few
months before the start of a re-engineering programme. 'In some of our
earlier efforts we had not held enough meetings of all staff in time to
prepare them for the new language and thinking of re-engineering,' Kozik
says. Without this and other cultural initiatives such as the introduction
of team-based pay incentives, change tends to be rejected quickly when it
does arrive, Kozik says. It then takes far longer to reap any benefit from
re-engineering.
Cigna's experience with cultural change has been put to good use over the
past two years in its UK arm, Cigna Employee Benefits. In mid-1991, four
months before it started to introduce cross-departmental business processes
in place of a functional hierarchy, staff began meeting Kozik's group twice
a day to learn about re-engineering and teamwork. Later, teams of staff were
rolled out and put to work in newly designed business processes. The
meetings were used by staff to review work done and to set goals.
Since then Cigna's UK operation, which specialises in group health
insurance, has turned six separate business functions into two processes
based on pre- and post-sales activities. The time it takes to give a quote
has been cut from 17 days to two, and staff who used to process between 35
and 40 claims a day are now working through 75 to 90 a day. As a result of
this - and a move from the south-east to a lower-cost site in Greenock,
Scotland - more than Pounds 1m has been shaved off costs. The unit's
underwriting loss of Pounds 2m in 1992 is set to become a profit of more
than Pounds 2m this year.
It is not solely because cultural change came first that things have gone so
well.
Cigna has other ways to tackle managers who dig their heels in. First, all
managers are interviewed by the re-engineering team before a decision to
start change is taken. They are asked what they think about change and their
attitudes are carefully recorded.
Not everyone can be persuaded. Once the UK team had decided to go ahead, in
spite of the expected resistance from particular people, it accomplished
something novel to the parent company.
'The easiest thing to do with senior managers who do not like re-engineering
is to go round them,' says Roger Dockett, managing director of the UK
operation. 'But we have actively sought to put people most resistant to
change in some of the project's first positions of responsibility. We did
lose about 5 per cent of staff this way, but we have won over a lot more.'
Dockett says that two senior managers had their jobs changed very early on.
'At first they felt very threatened because decisions they were used to
making every day were being taken by much more junior staff. Now they
realise that as leaders of a whole process they have much more opportunity
to influence the organisation.'
Another way of increasing staff commitment would also raise a few eyebrows
in the UK. The initial process design was fairly cursory, and in some cases
non-existent. Cheerfully, Dockett says the abiding principle has been 'do
it, test it, fix it'.
The first time this was tried in the post-sales part of the business two
people, each from administration, claims and accounts were taken from their
desks and seated together round a different desk. Management's instruction
was simply to carry on with their jobs. A few days later the group was
processing far more claims.
Allowing a cross-functional team to design a process shows a measure of
respect for junior staff that is not immediately apparent in all other
companies trying to re-engineer themselves. Kozik says that some of the US
divisions of Cigna were scared to let more junior staff embrace the changes
in this way. 'After our first programmes we learnt that you can trust the
teams. Management who tried to hand down changes were missing out on the
most knowledgeable group of people. For smaller process changes we now allow
staff to design the new processes. For broader changes we use the teams as a
source of ideas.'
Both Kozik and Dockett say that, if staff are working in processes that they
have built, many cultural changes follow more naturally - such as pride,
process ownership and a team mindset. It is an effective way to change staff
attitudes without stand-alone cultural seminars and training programmes.
Cigna has also made 15 per cent of individual salaries related to the
performance of the team. That figure, too, was decided by more junior staff.
Kozik says: 'Too many top managers assume that staff do not want to risk
their salary. Why not go out and ask them how much they want to risk?'
By contrast, Cigna's first re-engineering project in the US 'did not discuss
reward systems early enough', Kozik says. 'We had introduced teams but not
team goals. Whether teams will go the extra mile for the customer depends on
monetary and non-monetary rewards.' Kozik does not pretend that Cigna's UK
re-engineering is the only way to approach the subject. 'You cannot clone
re-engineering. This is not something you can learn from a book. It's about
people and personalities.'
Previous articles in this series appeared on May 24, June 2, 11, 18, 24,
July 5 and 12.
