FT  20 OCT 93 / Arts: Tchaikovsky's 'Cherevichki' - Wexford Festival
If some of us knew anything about this obscure Tchaikovsky opera, it was
probably just that it was called something like 'The Tsarina's Slippers'.
Even that turns out to be wrong: the footgear at stake is elegant travelling
boots. On hearing that Vakula the Smith, whose mother is the sexy old witch
Solokha, needs to get hold of those cherevichki to win the hand of Oksana,
however, ENO regulars can guess that the libretto was drawn from the same
Gogol story as Rimsky-Korsakov's Christmas (Gogol's title). The latter was
premiered ten years later, in 1895.
'Vakula the Smith' was Tchaikovsky's name for his first version (1874); the
new label came with the definitive, much-revised score. That is what
Francesca Zambello has staged for Wexford (in the original language), with
admirable resource, plenty of colour, seven Russian and Ukrainian leads, a
Russian conductor, and what seems to be half of the town's kids as little
demons, wood sprites, village children and court pages. Bruno Schwegl's
designs, wittily economical, conjure up a fine, wintry fairytale nimbus.
Not only Miss Zambello's clever imagination keeps the opera bubbling, but
also Alexander Anissimov's light, confident hand with the music. If
Tchaikovsky's score is less brightly enamelled than Rimsky's, it is also
more developed, more humanly expressive and often earthier too. The comedy
reveals a more sympathetic ear for folk accents - indeed, the composer
rarely sounds as close-to-the-ground Russian as he does here. The visiting
Slav singers make the most of that. Especially in the grossly Gogolian scene
where Solokha is beset by a succession of grizzled lechers: in Rimsky's
opera that is only a cartoon, in Tchaikovsky's a lusty tour-de-force.
Roman Tsymbala's husky hero and Marina Levitt's fresh heroine, lyrical and
wilful; Valentina Cherbinina's ripely irresistible witch-mother, with
rolling eye and a hairdo with curved horns, and Leonid Boldin's lubricious
old Devil; Vladimir Matorin's stentorian bass for Oksana's father, a
patriarchal ram, and Wjacheslav Weinorovski and Anatoly Lochak as
Schoolmaster and His Excellency Potemkin (notably refined singing in his
couplets) - all get their teeth firmly into their roles. Keith Latham's
Mayor lives up to their enthusiastic style.
By comparison the orchestra sounded slightly backward, and Anissimov too
polite about following his singers; stage and pit occasionally slipped out
of synch. But one should not look this gift horse in the mouth: with all its
trappings, quite opulent by Wexford standards, it prances and curvets to
splendid effect.
Sponsored by Goodbody Stockbrokers &amp; AIB Capital Markets. Festival continues
until October 31
