FT  23 JUL 93 / Personal Viewpoint: Folly of promoting ethnic divisions
Talk is cheap - that is the familiar ex-pression. But for the Bosnians talk
has been anything but cheap. For well over a year, we have committed
ourselves to negotiations with a criminally brutal enemy because western
powers insisted that they would not allow an unjust outcome and that they
were prepared to enforce a just peace agreement.
As we gird ourselves for the next painful stage of resistance, we can look
back and clearly see what has made all the negotiations to date both
fruitless and dishonourable. We can thus define the circumstances under
which they can be more efficacious in the future.
So far, the negotiating process has been so flawed as not only to produce an
unjust outcome but actually to encourage further war. The reasons for this
flaw and the means to correct it are as follows:
1. Crimes and aggression have been committed against our people and republic
in the past under the convenient cover of negotiations. Negotiations should
no longer be abused and misused to undermine peace, and should only proceed
on the basis of an effective ceasefire guaranteed by the international
community;
2. The international community cannot morally, legally or diplomatically
sanction negotiations while the 'gun of genocide' is held to the head of the
Bosnians. This only encourages abuses by Serbian nationalist forces and
erodes the credibility of the international community.
The sieges and heavy weaponry around our cities must be removed or
neutralised. Humanitarian relief must be delivered, and the international
community must not allow the supplies to be blocked or looted.
3. The government of the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be
confronted across the table by its ultra nationalist enemies while all
leverage is in their hands. This only emboldens extremists.
Such negotiations bolster those accused of war crimes, delegitimise
moderates, democrats and those committed to pluralism, encourage
fragmentation, and place the victim at the mercy of the aggressor.
The international community must be prepared to confront the aggressors if
they do not honour their commitments. At the minimum, the international
community must not obstruct or hinder the self-defence of the Bosnians.
4. Similarly, the international community must be prepared to implement
immediately any negotiated settlement.
5. Negotiations should be held within Bosnia and Herzegovina - preferably in
Sarajevo. This would increase accountability and discourage violations of
ceasefires and the denial of humanitarian assistance.
6. Negotiations and peace agreements should not exonerate war criminals.
Such a result would be immoral and illegal, and would backfire by
encouraging extremism and strengthening the hand of those who would
challenge peace. Criminals must be prosecuted.
It is unfortunate that the co-chairmen - in particular, Lord Owen - allowed
themselves to be drawn into killing off the Vance/Owen plan and giving undue
credibility to the 'Milosevic/Tudjman partition plan'. This predicament is
in part due to Lord Owen's acceptance of the proposition that Serb
extremists cannot be challenged and that war criminals may be legitimised as
peace negotiators. In turn, this has encouraged extremism and opportunism
among certain Croatian elements at the expense of moderates.
Most critically, if the co-chairmen continue down this flawed path they will
realise that, as they have abandoned the Vance/Owen plan and embraced the
partition, they will inevitably have to adjust their mediation position to
reflect almost any position promoted by the stronger party.
The Milosevic/Tudjman partition plan is acknowledged to be unjust. Just as
certainly, it is not durable. However, one argument that we can expect to be
advanced in its favour is the pseudo-humanitarian one.
We will soon be told that the main rationale for its implementation is the
alleviation of the suffering of the Bosnian peoples. But the partition would
in fact only worsen the refugee situation, promote instability, and create
new battle lines. Extremism, irreconcilable national hatreds, and fascism
would be encouraged and legitimised for decades.
The folly of promoting ethnic divisions under the auspices of the United
Nations should be reason enough to discard this ill-advised plan. Even as
the casualty lists in civilian areas under Serb bombardment grow, reading
like a roll-call of the republic's nationalities, all the members of the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including Serbs, Croats and Moslems,
have embraced a rejuvenated peace plan for a 'federation' of the republic.
The republic will have a decentralised form of government, with each group
having parity at the federal government level. The individual units of this
federation (provinces) would be established on the basis of economic,
geographic, communications, historical and cultural criteria and would not
be seen as constituting 'ethnic enclaves'.
The federal model will promote the republic's future as a pluralistic,
democratic, and secular nation. While it may be difficult in the immediate
future fully to restore our nation to its multicultural tradition, this
federal system will encourage reconciliation and pluralism, and not allow
ethnic divisions permanently to scar our country.
The author is the ambassador to the United Nations for Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Articles by Mate Boban, Bosnian Croat leader, and Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian
Serb leader, appeared on July 22 and June 9 respectively
