FT  05 AUG 93 / VW calls crisis board meeting: Pressure grows on chairman as
group faces loss of at least DM700m
VOLKSWAGEN directors with the power to hire and fire its top management have
been summoned to a meeting tomorrow to discuss industrial spying allegations
against senior executives and worries that the group will record a loss this
year.
The company said there was no reason to suggest that the job of production
director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, was in doubt. General Motors,
his previous employer, has accused Mr Lopez of carrying out industrial
espionage. The meeting is due to begin at 5pm GMT tomorrow.
News of an extraordinary sitting of the supervisory board came shortly after
a statement from VW yesterday that it is to cut a further 3,000 jobs in
Germany by the end of 1994.
Earlier this year, the company said it intended to reduce the payroll at its
six domestic plants by 12,500. More than 5,000 workers have gone since then,
and a further 10,000 jobs will disappear in the next 17 months.
Analysts said the group faced a loss of at least DM700m (Pounds 272m) this
year, as VW executives continued to back away from their earlier, persistent
claims that it would break even despite a first-quarter deficit of DM1.25bn.
Observers calculate turnover could fall by 10 per cent this year, while VW's
own profit forecasts are based on a decline of 5 per cent - a target which
company officials describe privately as 'over-optimistic'.
'It is clear that our earnings forecast cannot be attained if the drop in
sales is larger,' Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman, said in an interview.
With his own confident forecasts in doubt while Mr Lopez and three members
of his new cost-cutting team are under criminal investigation, Mr Piech
faces increasing pressure.
He drew fire last week from politicians and business leaders for a clumsy
attack on GM with xenophobic overtones. His attempts to fight back in what
he calls a 'war' with GM and its German subsidiary Adam Opel led to
accusations that he was damaging Germany's reputation. Mr Gunter Rexrodt,
economics minister, intervened personally with an offer to mediate.
The VW supervisory board, including representatives of Germany's leading
banks, unions and the state of Lower Saxony, which owns almost 20 per cent,
has so far been solidly behind Mr Piech and his team.
A recent meeting between a small group of management and supervisory board
directors decided that it would withdraw support for Mr Lopez only if he
were ultimately found guilty.
Mr Piech, who has unequivocally bound his fate to that of his Spanish
colleague, is expected to tell the meeting tomorrow evening of Mr Lopez's
'stupendous performance' so far.
On Tuesday, Mr Klaus Volkert, representing the Volkswagen workforce, said he
would withdraw his backing if charges seemed likely against Mr Lopez.
The group's North American subsidiary said yesterday sales of Volkswagen
cars in the US last month were down 46 per cent on July last year. With
total deliveries to customers of 25,000 vehicles, sales in the first seven
months of the year had fallen 48 per cent.
Mercedes-Benz said its July sales in the US were up 45 per cent. In the year
to the end of last month sales were down 12.6 per cent at 34,590.
