FT  01 JUL 93 / Iraqi supergun 'could have fired tonne of anthrax'
A BUSINESSMAN yesterday described how he helped MI6 track down components
for an Iraqi supergun capable of firing a tonne of anthrax at Israel's
capital.
Mr David James, chairman of Eagle Trust, said he had held meetings with the
intelligence service during the weeks leading up to the seizure by Customs,
in April 1990, of eight 1,000mm diameter tubes destined for Iraq.
Mr James dismissed suggestions that MI6 might have known before 1990 that
British companies were manufacturing supergun components and engaged in a
cover-up. He told the Scott inquiry that such claims would not be consistent
with the 'behaviour pattern' or 'enthusiasm to pursue everything' of the
individuals he dealt with.
The inquiry heard that MI6 had been involved in a Europe-wide effort to hunt
down supergun parts.
Mr James said the initial contact with MI6 took place at his instigation in
March 1990 after his suspicions had been aroused by three tubes, destined
for Iraq, which he had examined the previous January at Walter Somers, the
Eagle Trust subsidiary. He explained how an MI6 contact, referred to as Mr
Z, at once showed a keen interest in the tubes but seemed disappointed when
told of their dimensions.
MI6 explained that the details he had given were incompatible with the
dimensions of the 'monster' gun they were looking for with other European
intelligence agencies, but that the tubes might be part of a prototype for
this model, Mr James said.
MI6 said the larger gun would be capable of firing a tonne of anthrax a
distance of about 1,400 miles, bringing Tel Aviv within range of Baghdad.
Mr James said Mr Z had later given 'whoops of joy' when inquiries with
banking contacts had put him on the trail of the 1,000mm tubes for the
larger gun manufactured by Sheffield Forgemasters.
He also revealed MI6 had provided special equipment which enabled about
1,000 pages of Walter Somers documents to be photographed covertly and
supplied to the intelligence agency.
Pressed on why he had not told MPs of his dialogue with MI6 when he was
interviewed in December 1991 by the Commons trade and industry committee, Mr
James said it was partly to protect his source and out of concern for his
safety.
In a separate session the inquiry heard that Lady Thatcher tended - when
prime minister - to take the side of those arguing for arms sales to go
ahead during inter-departmental wrangling over particular export deals.
Mr Robin Fellgett, a Treasury official, said Lady Thatcher would not
necessarily accept Treasury concerns about extending credit to a particular
arms buyer.
