FT  13 NOV 93 / Foreign Exchange: Dollar falls further against yen
The US dollar continued its slide against the Japanese yen yesterday amid
nervousness over next Friday's meeting between US President Bill Clinton and
Japan's prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa and the continued repatriation of
funds by Japanese investors, writes Conner Middelmann.
However, trading volume was relatively modest with many US traders absent
for a long weekend after Thursday's Veteran's Day holiday. Holiday
conditions were seen to exaggerate price swings amid a thin flow of hard
news.
The dollar slumped as low as Y105.85 from an intra-day high of Y106.65 and
is expected to retest support at Y105.90 in the near term. While fundamental
factors - the moribund Japanese economy against the US recovery - do not
warrant a depreciation of the dollar against the yen, heavy flows out of
foreign assets into Japan have favoured the yen all week, traders said.
'The Japanese economy is extremely weak and that's causing liquidity
problems for corporates and institutions who are having to sell overseas
assets and repatriate the funds,' said Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at
IBJ International.
Stronger than expected US retail sales data propelled the dollar above DM1.7
to an intra-day high of DM1.7035. However, as follow-through buying failed
to materialise the currency slid lower and was given a further downwards
push by by lower than expected consumer confidence data. The dollar closed
at DM1.6915 in London and dropped as low as DM1.6815 in late inter-bank
trading.
Some dealers expect the dollar to get a lift against the D-Mark if the
Bundesbank's next round of securities repurchase agreements produces a
larger drop in the repo rate than this week's mere one-basis-point decline.
Sterling also had a volatile day, jumping nearly two pfennigs against the
D-Mark on stronger than forecast trade data but erasing most of the gains in
the afternoon as traders took profits and squared their books ahead of the
weekend. Late dollar-sales also dragged sterling down against other
currencies. After nudging against DM2.52, sterling slipped back to close at
DM2.5075, up only slightly from Thursday's close of DM2.5000. However, in
erratic after-hours trading it jumped back to test its earlier highs around
DM2.52.
The Italian Lire shrugged off the successful passage of Italy's 1994
austerity budget in the Senate and closed at L979.7 against the D-Mark,
little changed from L979.6 on Thursday.
