FT  30 SEP 93 / US relaxes controls on high-tech exports
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday announced a sweeping liberalisation of
export controls on computers and other high-technology products and an
increase in subsidised export financing. He set a goal of raising US exports
from about Dollars 700bn (Pounds 455bn) in 1992 to Dollars 1,000bn by 2000.
The long-awaited initiative was developed by Mr Ron Brown, US commerce
secretary, and Mr Ken Brody, chairman of the US Export-Import Bank.
Mr Clinton said at a White House ceremony: 'I don't believe a wealthy
country can grow much richer . . . without expanding exports.'
The initiative was ordered by Congress, which forced the setting up of a
trade promotion co-ordinating committee. This made 65 recommendations,
putting much emphasis on boosting exports by small and medium-sized
businesses. These are expected to do most of the decade's job creation.
The reforms to the export licensing regime alone will reduce regulation on
Dollars 35bn of exports. The proposed liberalisation should significantly
increase the threshold of performance for computers that can be exported
without special licences.
Immediately, exports of computers with performance up to 194m theoretical
operations per second (MTOPS) will be decontrolled for all countries except
the former eastern bloc, China and a few other destinations. This frees
exports of computer workstations and high-performance personal computers.
Then, if there is agreement from members of Cocom - which co-ordinates
policies on restricting the export of products with potential military and
strategic value - controls would be removed from exports of computers with a
performance of up to 500MTOPS.
This second phase of liberalisation would decontrol a much broader range of
computer equipment including multi-processor servers, high-end workstations,
minicomputers and some mainframe computers.
In a move expected to smooth the way for Cocom approval of the plans, the US
will also propose the removal of prior export licensing requirements for
most telecommunications products.
The administration has also updated its definition of supercomputers, which
are used in research laboratories, raising the performance threshold of a
supercomputer from 195MTOPS to 2,000MTOPS. Today's most powerful
supercomputers have performance levels of over 20,000MTOPS. The new
definition will exclude a wide range of computers from export controls.
In export financing, the administration will mount a stronger challenge to
competitors. Mr Brody said Eximbank would switch funds from other programmes
to spend Dollars 150m a year on subsidies. This could produce Dollars 600m
in new sales.
