FT  03 AUG 93 / Unions claim victory in fight over tests: A look at
concessions over education reforms
TEACHERS' unions yesterday claimed to have won their bitter and long-running
dispute with the government over the national curriculum in England and
Wales.
The announcement by Baroness Blatch, the education minister, that Sir Ron
Dearing's recommendations had been accepted was hailed by union leaders.
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general secretary of the National Association of
Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers, described it as a 'spectacular
victory'.
The struggle over the curriculum, laid out in the 1988 Education Reform Act,
culminated this year in boycotts of national tests for 14-year-olds and
seven-year-olds.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, appointed Sir Ron to review the
curriculum in April in an unsuccessful attempt to pacify the unions.
Legal challenges also failed. Wandsworth, the Conservative-controlled London
borough, took the NASUWT to court, claiming that teachers were under a
statutory duty to implement the tests.
But both the High Court and the Court of Appeal ruled that the dispute was
legal because the union was objecting to the workload caused by the tests,
and not the tests themselves.
Following the Wandsworth judgment the other two large teachers' unions, the
Association of Teachers and Lecturers and the National Union of Teachers,
launched boycotts of their own.
Mr Patten announced a partial climbdown in May by slowing down the timetable
for the introduction of further tests. This received a lukewarm reaction
from union leaders and failed to avert a boy-cott.
In June Mr Patten was heckled by delegates at the annual conference of the
National Association of Head Teachers. Heads cannot legally join the boycott
but they made calls for the tests to be abandoned.
They also widened the dispute by campaigning strongly against
school-by-school league tables.
League tables were not part of Sir Ron's remit but Baroness Blatch yesterday
announced concessions on this issue also. Plans to publish league tables of
school performance based on tests taken by seven-year-olds and 14-year-olds
have been abandoned. National figures will be published in aggregate form
and parents will be entitled to know their own children's results, but there
will be no formal league tables.
The government had originally planned to publish tables for both age groups
this year.
League tables based on tests for 11-year-olds have not been ruled out.
However, these tests are still only at a 'pilot' stage and will not be made
compulsory until 1995.
The other changes drastically reduce workload, and strike at the heart of
the apparatus set up since 1988.
The changes include:
The curriculum will be slimmed down with tests restricted to the core
subjects of English, mathematics and science until 1996. Sir Ron made clear
that he expected these slimmed down tests to remain the norm after that
date. Plans for national tests in technology, modern languages, history and
geography would be abandoned.
Prescribed curriculum work to take up a smaller proportion of total lessons
 -85 per cent to 90 per cent of time for children up to the age of seven
(who will concentrate on a prescribed core of reading, writing and
arithmetic), reducing to 75 per cent for 14-year-olds.
The number of 'statements of attainment' used to measure children's progress
will be greatly reduced. At present, according to Sir Ron, children must be
assessed on about 8,000 different tasks during their school career. He said
this was excessive and teachers would now be allowed discretion on which
tasks need to be assessed.
Plans to alter the national curricula for English and technology have been
abandoned until 1995-96 at the earliest to allow teachers some stability
while the new testing arrangements are introduced.
Teachers' assessments will be given equal standing to tests and Sir Ron
recommends that teachers' own assessments should be quoted alongside results
from national tests in school prospectuses.
The streamlining for the curriculum will require changes to the orders
governing the teaching of each individual subject.
Consultation will continue 'until the end of the year' on whether all 10
subjects should be reviewed simultaneously or if this should be carried out
in two stages.
Sir Ron also announced that he is to consult further on three other issues
which were not attacked by the boycott, but could also entail big changes to
the structure of the 1988 act.
The '10-level scale' which the curriculum uses to assess all children, from
the ages of seven to 16, may be abandoned. This attempts to use one scale to
show the levels all children had reached and to chart their progress over
the years. Sir Ron suggested that categorising all children on such a narrow
scale might have been over-ambitious.
Sir Ron will also consult on extra forms of vocational education for pupils
between the ages of 14 and 16.
This proposal was not in his original remit but fits with the proposal to
cut the amount of prescribed academic curriculum time and could lead to
significant policy development from the original 1988 plan.
