FT  17 FEB 93 / Back from the brink of despair: John Gapper examines
improved sentiment among UK building societies after a worrying year
There is an air of relief among British building societies as they prepare
to disclose their results for last year, one of the worst in the UK housing
market. Fears that the industry's foundations were threatened have receded.
'I think it is a minor miracle that we have survived as well as we have,'
says Mr Mark Boleat, director-general of the Building Societies Association.
The slump in the housing market - which brought a wave of house
repossessions and bad debts - seemed last year as if it could provoke losses
among medium-sized societies, though the fears have proved unfounded. That
would have led societies into unknown territory. Some society chief
executives talked of rejecting their traditional role of merging with
loss-makers to save them. An erosion of public confidence appeared possible.
A taste of the problems inflicted on societies based in the vulnerable south
of England housing market will be disclosed tomorrow when the
Gloucestershire-based Chelsea Building Society is expected to report sharply
reduced profits. Other large societies such as Bristol &amp; West, which lent
heavily in 1989 and 1990 to borrowers who have had difficulty meeting
mortgage repayments, will follow in the next month.
Britain's exit from the European exchange rate mechanism on September 16
calmed the worst fears. The UK's 110 societies, descendants of the
'terminating' societies formed in the 18th century by individuals saving to
buy houses, were given a respite. The fall in base rates from 10 per cent to
7 per cent between September and December 1992 let them raise income by
delaying cuts in rates on existing mortgages, while reducing savings rates
promptly. 'We were saved a bit by Black Wednesday,' says Mr Boleat.
This windfall aside, it was a hard year for societies in the south. House
prices in the region fell by 9 to 11 per cent, while base rates remained
high for the first three-quarters of the year. As a result, some 68,500
properties were repossessed in Britain, compared with a tenth of that number
a decade earlier. A further 352,000 owners were at least six months in
arrears with their mortgages in December.
The fall in southern property values strained the insurance policies which
nearly all the societies hold to insulate them against repossession losses.
These protected them as long as properties stayed above 75 or 80 per cent of
their original value, but the limit was often breached in the south.
Premiums have risen sharply because insurers estimate that they have lost
Pounds 3bn on mortgage indemnity in the past three years.
The most chastening experience has been that of the larger societies which
merged with distressed smaller societies in 1991. Consolidation through
mergers has gradually reduced the number of societies - which numbered 289
in 1980 - and appeared virtually risk-free. Larger societies expanded their
branch networks and market share by taking on sound mortgage assets that
were well covered by reserves.
The increasing risk of mergers emerged last year. Some large societies found
they had taken on loan books in a far worse state than they imagined.
Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester, the sixth-biggest society, merged with the troubled
Portsmouth in June 1991. 'The provisions we had to make against the
Portsmouth were vastly in excess of what a reasonable person could have
expected,' says Mr Andrew Longhurst, Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester chief
executive.
Such experiences have prompted larger societies to be more cautious about
taking on others. Mr Jim Birrell, chief executive of the Halifax - the
largest society - says it is unhealthy for societies to assume they will be
rescued no matter what they do. 'It is wrong for individual members of an
industry to think whatever problems they get into will always be taken over
by others,' he says.
This attitude marks a change for an industry that has supported its weaker
members to preserve public confidence. Because societies hold the savings of
many relatively unsophisticated investors, they are vulnerable to runs on
funds if they appear weak. This is despite the fact that their average ratio
of capital to assets is 11.8 per cent - well above the international minimum
of 8 per cent set by the Bank for International Settlements.
Ms Rosalind Gilmore, the building societies commissioner who regulates the
industry, has already emphasised that she sees nothing wrong in a society
with strong reserves dipping temporarily into loss. She has received a
chorus of support from chief executives. 'There is no reason why a society
which is well managed and secure, which happens to make a loss one year,
should have to close its doors,' says Mr Longhurst.
The prospect of more than one medium-sized society making a loss nonetheless
caused some nervousness among chief executives last year. In the event, the
south's problems have been balanced by the widening of margins late in the
year, and by the performance of societies lending in the more resilient
northern market. The Northern Rock Building Society, based in
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, has already announced a 37 per cent rise in pre-tax
profits for 1992.
The profits of the 25 largest societies are now expected to fall only 7 per
cent on average. Yet although the immediate crisis appears to have passed -
and house prices seem to be stabilising - societies in some ways face an
even harder task this year. They will have to struggle to increase profits
in a stagnant housing market, with about half the transactions of the late
1980s to attract fee income, and stiff competition for savers' funds.
Mr John Wriglesworth, building societies analyst at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew,
says societies are facing pressure on both sides of their balance sheets in
the coming year because of the fall in base rates.
On the deposit side, it will be hard to attract retail funds because of
higher yields on equity investments. They also face competition from the
government, which needs to attract funds through National Savings to help
finance a projected annual public deficit of Pounds 50bn. The difficulty of
attracting retail deposits under these conditions is already evident.
Societies only had a net retail fund inflow of Pounds 295m in 1992 compared
with more than Pounds 5.8bn in the previous year.
On the lending side, they will face competition from lenders offering
cheaper mortgage rates. This is because centralised lenders such as the
Household Mortgage Corporation have unfettered access to wholesale funds
that are now cheaper than societies' retail funds. Societies are limited to
borrowing 40 per cent of funds on wholesale markets under the 1986 Building
Societies Act. 'Banks and other lenders will be rushing back into the
mortgage market. The societies are going to be forced to squeeze their
margins if they do not want to lose market share,' says Mr Wriglesworth.
The last time other lenders competed so hard for mortgages was in the
mid-1980s, when societies' share of mortgage lending fell from 72.1 per cent
in 1986 to 50.6 per cent in 1987. But the level of housing transactions
meant there was a lot more business to go around. Societies now face much
lower sales: there were only 1.1m transactions in England and Wales last
year, compared with 2.1m at the peak in 1988.
The fall in transactions reduces societies' profits because each purchase
can attract an additional Pounds 1,000 or so in fee income on products such
as life insurance. Yet only a modest recovery in house sales is expected,
while the rise in arrears last year means bad debt provisions on
repossessions are likely to stay high. Provisions for last year are expected
to reach about Pounds 2bn, compared with Pounds 1.2bn for 1991.
The upshot is that while societies are relieved that 1992 did not match
their worst fears, they face a tough climate over the next few years. Those
that expected to follow Abbey National's 1989 share flotation, and abandon
mutual ownership, are now more cautious. The advantages of not having to
answer to shareholders during a period of subdued profitability has struck
some of them forcibly.
'Mutuality has been important to us in the past year,' says Mr Peter White,
chief executive of the Alliance &amp; Leicester. 'We have been able to take a
long-term view without having to look over our shoulders every few months.'
He is not the only chief executive to emerge from last year with renewed
respect for societies' traditional strengths. But the year to come may hold
just as stiff a test.
