FT  16 NOV 93 / Figures show US growth accelerating: Biggest rise in output
since last November
US factory output rose a sharp 0.8 per cent in October, providing further
evidence of the accelerating pace of US economic growth.
In its most buoyant assessment of industrial trends since late last year,
the Federal Reserve yesterday also said output rose 4.4 per cent in the year
to October, and revised figures for September to show a gain 0.4 per cent
rather than the 0.2 per cent initially reported.
Output was boosted by a vigorous rebound in production of motor vehicles and
parts, which rose 3.9 per cent in September and 7.3 per cent in October
after four months of stagnation.
The rise in overall production - the largest since November last year -
exceeded Wall Street forecasts but prompted little reaction in share prices
as investors awaited the outcome of tomorrow's congressional vote on the
North American Free Trade Agreement.
The Fed also reported a sharp rise in the rate of industrial capacity
utilisation to 82.4 per cent, the highest rate since the peak of the
previous business cycle in mid-1990. Capacity utilisation is now 0.5
percentage points higher than its long-run average, which is one reason why
some investors fear upward pressure on inflation.
'The figures are consistent with economic growth at an annual rate of 4 per
cent in the current quarter,' said Mr Richard Berner, chief economist at
Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
However, growth was likely to decelerate early next year because 'job growth
was not sufficient to support the current very strong growth of consumer
spending'. The sustainable annual pace of growth was only 2.5-2.75 per cent,
he said.
The surge in vehicle production is likely to be temporary partly because it
reflects a rebound at General Motors, the largest US car company, following
weakness during the summer when production was depressed by disputes with
parts suppliers.
Excluding vehicles industrial production rose 0.4 per cent last month and
0.3 per cent in September.
However, production of durable goods generally was strong, reflecting recent
falls in long-term interest rates.
Production of consumer durables other than cars rose 1.3 per cent last
month; production of information-processing equipment was up 0.9 per cent.
