FT  06 DEC 93 / International Press Review
FRANCE
The cartoon on the front page of Saturday's Le Monde said it all. It showed
a bride and groom brawling outside a town hall. Her dress emblazoned with
'Volvo' and his suit with 'Renault'. In the background, two gleeful Japanese
businessmen crack open a magnum of champagne.
Le Monde had no doubt whom to blame for last week's debacle when Volvo's
shareholders vetoed its long-planned merger with Renault, the French
state-controlled car company. The Swedes themselves were the butt of its
fury. 'The people of Sweden would do well to reflect on the consequences of
the failure of the merger for the future of their country in Europe,' it
thundered.
Liberation, the liberal-left daily, blamed one Swede in particular - Mr Pehr
Gyllenhammar, who last week resigned last week as chairman of Volvo when the
merger collapsed.
' 'PG' is loathed by the Swedish business community, and the main reproach
against him is his love of France,' it said.
However, the paper also blamed the French authorities for their 'lack of
tact' during the negotiations: 'To the Swedes, France is the most
nationalistic and protectionist European country, as illustrated by its
stance on Gatt,' said Liberation.
Even France-Soir, the racy evening paper, agreed. It suggested that Volvo's
shareholders, alarmed by the recent fiasco of the Air France dispute, had
been frightened by the prospect of their company falling into the clutches
of the French government.
As for the future. . .
Les Echos, the financial daily, mooted Fiat of Italy as a possible partner
for Renault, while La Tribune Desfosses sketched a darker scenario for Volvo
by warning that 'its new partner will probably be a predator, to whom the
Swedes will no longer be in a position to say No.'
SPAIN
The Spanish government's message that the country's rigid labour market
regulations are being overhauled in line with those in the European Union is
not getting much of a hearing in the domestic press.
The government has not 'challenged' the unions, it has 'declared war' on
them, said ABC, the big conservative daily, conveying a message of
watch-this-space for sustained industrial unrest. For good measure, it added
that the reform programme was 'far from being a global solution to the real
problems of the economy'.
The young El Mundo went one further. Accusing the government of running
roughshod over accepted political norms, it trumpeted: 'The government
unilaterally breaks the labour framework of the (post-Franco political)
transition.' El Mundo also firmly backed the unions with its message that
they have a duty to retaliate - which they intend to do, with a 24-hour
national stoppage next month.
El Pais, the top-selling newspaper and normally a stalwart supporter of the
government, put the final nail in the coffin. Alone among the press, it
discovered that the cabinet was divided over the reforms. Its scoop was that
the interventionist and regulatory ministers had kept the free-marketeers in
the cabinet at bay and made the reforms less liberal than had originally
been intended.
IVORY COAST
The Ivorian press has had a new lease of life with the declining health of
its octogenarian president, Mr Felix Houphouet-Boigny. Many dailies and
weeklies (21 in all) have surfaced since the president returned from a Swiss
cancer clinic in November, and are being financed by rivals for the
presidential succession. Newspapers are crammed with political machinations
and debate, but they are strangely silent on the most critical question of
all: Mr Houphouet-Boigny's state of health.
'Is he dead, is he alive?' asks Notre Temps (Our Times), the most outspoken
of Abidjan's weeklies. It does not know. Mr Houphouet- Boigny has not been
seen since his return. He has not spoken to the nation; there are no health
bulletins, indeed no announcements at all, from his palace.
Ivorians, however, are sure that they are witnessing the end of a era. The
collapse of commodity prices has impoverished the world's largest cocoa
producer, and tough negotiations with the International Monetary Fund were
being predicted by the opposition daily, La Voie.
The government mouthpiece, Fraternite Matin, still finds cause to celebrate
33 years of 'Bridges, Roads and Schools' in a special pullout prior to
independence day tomorrow. It wishes Mr Houphouet-Boigny a speedy recovery
and prints many photos of the president looking relaxed and healthy in
happier times.
Most papers, however, are devoting their attention to the political battle
between Mr Alassane Ouattara, the prime minister, and Mr Henri Konan Bedie,
the speaker of parliament, both of whom aspire to replace the ailing leader
until elections in 1995. Racist overtones have alarmed the 4m immigrants
(one-third of the population) who live in the Ivory Coast.
In the wake of anti-immigrant riots last month, a headline in Le Belier (The
Ram) screamed: 'A foreigner to be head of state? NEVER'. The article
attacked the prime minister, who is half Burkinabe and was educated in
Burkina Faso and the US. It called on 'patriots of pure blood to denounce
Ouattara's attempted constitutional coup'. Newspapers supporting the prime
minister attack the Bedie camp as 'fascists'. Given that both men belong to
the ruling party, their duel marks an ignominious end to a regime whose
mottoes were 'dialogue and brotherhood'.
BRAZIL
The homecoming of Brazil's most wanted fugitive, Mr Paulo Cesar Farias,
accused of corrupt fund raising for ex-President Fernando Collor, has
generated intense press coverage.
Mr Farias, who was arrested in Thailand last week, was subjected to
Brazilian press overkill. The Folha de Sao Paulo, the country's most popular
broadsheet, published a plan of the Thai prison which housed 'PC', as he is
generally known, and then a minute-by-minute summary of his 21-hour flight
back to Brazil. TV Globo also dwelt at length on the flight, highlighting Mr
Farias' request for a whisky and ice.
Such blanket coverage reflects popular anger at the corruption allegations
which forced the resignation of Mr Collor last year. Brazil now faces a
potentially far-reaching investigation into the country's Congress, where
over 30 politicians have been accused of taking bribes for helping approve
construction contracts in the government's budget.
Zero Hora, a tabloid based in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, led
on Saturday with the headline: 'He's back] And now he threatens to talk',
referring to suggestions from Mr Farias' family that he has information on
politicians and businessmen which could be delivered to the tax authorities.
In the present atmosphere of paranoia among politicians facing a seemingly
endless stream of corruption allegations, these threats are taken seriously.
But there is also an increasing sense that, with Congress discredited and
the press in full cry, radical groups will capitalise on the uncertainty for
their own ends.
COLOMBIA
Drug chief Pablo Escobar had been a 'bad news' front-page personality since
the murder of justice minister Rodrigo Lara in 1984. Colombia's papers
competed to celebrate his death with striking headlines and editorials such
as 'The end of a nightmare' and 'At last he fell'.
The headline 'Relief throughout the country' also reflected a sense of
relief among the press: Escobar was charged with the murder of the editor of
El Espectador, one of the main national dailies, and the paper's offices
were bombed. Escobar also organised the kidnapping of several journalists,
one of whom was killed.
The special task force which pursued Escobar around Medelln for more than a
year - and was criticised for not catching up with him sooner - received
generous coverage, as well as medals.
Sensitive to foreign opinion, the Bogota papers devoted considerable space
to monitoring how the world's press registered Escobar's death.
Congratulations from the US were prominently displayed.
The good news theme was continued by economic writers, who highlighted the
rise in share prices, and predicted that the removal of Escobar would make
Colombia more attractive to foreign investors.
