FT  08 JUL 93 / International Company News: Bank of Ireland seeks IPounds
100m to buy US stock
BANK OF Ireland yesterday announced an IPounds 100m (Pounds 94m) rights
issue to allow it to repurchase Dollars 125m (Pounds 83.3m) of US preference
stock, which was becoming expensive to fund, while strengthening its equity
base.
The 1-for-6 rights issue at 150p per share was the first among London-listed
banks this year, despite speculation before the announcement of the
full-year results in May that others would be forced to bolster their
capital.
The announcement caused some weakness in the share price of Allied Irish
Banks, the other main Irish clearing bank, but analysts said there was a
clear reason for Bank of Ireland's move, and it was unlikely to be followed
by others.
The rights issue was disclosed by Mr Howard Kilroy, chairman, at the bank's
annual meeting.
Mr Kilroy also said that Bank of Ireland First Holdings, the US subsidiary,
which reported a Dollars 2.7m deficit in the first quarter, would incur a
similar loss in the second period.
The bank estimated that the issue of 67m ordinary shares would dilute
earnings per share by about 0.6p, but that it would save about IPounds 7m
per year in the cost of paying interest on the two tranches of US preference
shares.
It intends to retire Dollars 75m adjustable rate preference stock, and
Dollars 50m preferred stock held by the US Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. This would cost IPounds 85m, and the remaining equity would
strengthen its capital base.
Mr Paul D'Alton, chief financial officer, said the rights issue had been
prompted by the high cost of carrying the US preference stock, and the fact
that the bank's share price had been performing well in the past few months.
'There is an opportune set of circumstances, and we believe that we can put
the proceeds to good use,' he said.
Mr D'Alton emphasised that the bank intended to use the new equity in 'a
sensible and responsible' manner to strengthen itself.
The bank estimated that its tier 1 ratio of core capital to risk-weighted
assets would rise to 7.3 per cent, from 6.6 per cent at the March 31
year-end.
Its equity to assets ratio would rise from 4.2 per cent to 4.8 per cent.
The bank said it intended to maintain the dividend at 9.83p on the enlarged
capital.
It said this represented a 6.5 per cent increase, taking into account the
scrip element of the rights issue.
COMMENT
Bank of Ireland's share price only slipped 9p to 241p as the market absorbed
the relatively clear logic of a modest rights issue. There seems slim danger
of the bank using its equity to expand assets recklessly when most of it is
already earmarked to retire US preference shares with a high and rising
cost. The vexing aspect for other banks is the light it sheds on weak ratios
of equity to assets elsewhere. After an interlude in which several have
propped up capital ratios by issuing preference shares, Bank of Ireland's
move shows that the thirst for equity may not be postponed indefinitely.
