FT  30 JUN 93 / Government aims to retain N-power option
THE government is committed to retaining the option of nuclear power for
Britain, provided that the industry can operate economically and meet
rigorous standards of safety and environmental protection, Mr Tim Eggar, the
energy minister, said yesterday.
Speaking at a London conference organised by the UK nuclear power industry,
Mr Eggar pointed to some of the questions that will be addressed in the
review of the nuclear industry which the government plans to launch later
this year.
Mr Eggar said that a key question was whether new nuclear stations could be
commercially viable in the UK.
He said: 'The nuclear generators tell me that they can now build a new
nuclear station to come on stream in the early years of the next century,
which will produce power at a price competitive with that prevailing in the
electricity market, without any subsidy from government or taxpayer. The
review could test that ambition and examine the prospects for securing
private-sector involvement in the financing of new capacity.'
Mr Eggar said that other factors affect the competitiveness of nuclear
power, such as the environmental implications, security of supply benefits
and the need to maintain rigorous safety and environmental standards in the
industry.
The review would also look at the existing arrangements for covering the gap
between electricity prices in the market and nuclear's exceptional costs,
such as the nuclear levy.
Mr Eggar stressed that he had not yet made any final decision on the terms
of reference for the review.
The review is crucial to the future of the UK nuclear power industry, which
is at present in limbo with only one new station being built and several
stations reaching the end of their lives.
Mr Eggar has been urged to order a wide-ranging review so that nuclear power
is not judged solely on its economics and high costs.
Europe will witness a renewed interest in nuclear power by the end of this
decade, according to Mr Remy Carle, the chairman of the World Association of
Nuclear Operators.
Mr Carle, a deputy general manager of Electricite de France, told the
conference that many reactors will need to be replaced between 2000 and
2010, and work will have to begin in the 1990s.
