FT  19 FEB 93 / Japan closer to an enhanced UN role
JAPAN may become a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council
after a wide-ranging review of the Council's structure, Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, UN secretary-general, said yesterday.
'There is a lot of possibility of Japan having a permanent seat, but it is a
decision of the member states,' Mr Boutros Ghali said at the end of a
four-day visit to Japan.
The country's case for a permanent seat was also backed by Chancellor Helmut
Kohl of Germany, who begins a visit to Tokyo in a week's time.
Mr Kohl told a Japanese television interviewer that it was natural that
Japan should become a permanent member, following changes to the make-up of
the Council, to reflect the rise of Asian economic power.
Germany itself is seeking a permanent seat on the Council.
Mr Boutros Ghali's comments may well rekindle debate over reform of the
Security Council, which has 15 members and five permanent members. The UN is
canvassing its 180 members their views on the subject.
Any reform must be backed by the five permanent members, at least nine of
the overall membership, and two-thirds of the General Assembly.
It could, however, be subject to a veto, perhaps from Britain or France,
neither of which is enthusiastic about Japanese permanent membership. It
might also open up a flood of applicants from other states claiming such
status.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, recently supported reform of
the Council through agreement among its members, which would allow Japan a
permanent seat.
His remarks provoked a sharp response from the British government, a
permanent member, which is concerned it may lose its seat under a
restructuring.
Mr Boutros Ghali seemed intent on wooing Japan, partly because a greater
Japanese involvement in the UN might ease some of the organisation's
financial pressures.
The secretary-general said he would welcome Japanese peacekeepers as part of
the UN operations in Mozambique, as a step towards Japan deepening its
involvement with the organisation.
Japan's involvement in peacekeeping activities was not, however, a
precondition for it gaining a permanent Security Council seat. Japan's first
peace-keeping unit took up its post in Cambodia last September, after years
of agonising over whether such a role was appropriate under a pacifist
constitution.
