FT  17 SEP 93 / VW halts Pounds 560m finance package for Skoda
VOLKSWAGEN yesterday cancelled a complex DM1.4bn (Pounds 560m) investment
financing package for Skoda, its Czech subsidiary, hours before the deal was
due to be signed in London.
The move, which threatens to bring VW into conflict with international banks
and worsen strained relations with the government of the Czech Republic,
highlighted the intensity of the scramble to cut costs at the troubled
automotive group.
The package, negotiated with the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the World Bank's International Finance Corporation and a
private banking consortium led by Dresdner Bank, was no longer needed, VW
said.
The participating banks, were stunned by the last-minute decision. At a
dinner arranged by Dresdner Bank in London last night to celebrate the
signing, bankers were told by VW finance officials that the group's
investment plans were being drastically reconsidered in the light of its
parlous financial state.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, is believed to have telephoned Mr Vaclav
Klaus, the Czech prime minister, yesterday, to assure him that VW's
commitment to Skoda remained unaltered by the decision.
It was not clear if the VW supervisory board, which must usually be
consulted on important investment decisions, had been informed.
'It was an honest step, even though it was taken at short notice,' said Mr
Otto Ferdinand Wachs, a group spokesman. The company could have signed and
then cancelled it, he added.
He credited Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW's controversial
production director, with improvements to manufacturing processes which had
helped make the loan unnecessary.
'This is a positive move which will improve profitability both at Skoda and
group level,' Mr Wachs added.
However, the group had previously signalled that it was seeking to
rationalise the number of basic car platforms on which the models of its
four makes - VW, Audi, Seat and Skoda - are based.
This rationalisation programme has now affected the group's plan to
introduce a second model range to Skoda in the late-1990s and to more than
double the production capacity of the Czech carmaker to more than 400,000
cars a year.
It was unclear to bankers at last night's dinner how VW now intended to
proceed with its investment plans at Skoda. Bankers were also unsure about
their general financial exposure to the group.
Under current plans VW was expecting to spend DM7bn at Skoda this decade. It
is understood that only around DM500m has been paid out so far this year.
The planned total has been cut to about DM4bn.
Interim results of an investment review, due to be considered by the
company's supervisory board in November, showed that productivity
improvements at Skoda meant investment requirements would be 'considerably
lower' than thought, the company said.
The VW statement said further cuts lay ahead for other parts of the group,
but Mr Wachs could offer no details, he said, because the review was
incomplete.
A similar review last January resulted in a DM7bn cut in medium-term
investment plans for the VW vehicles business. Spending for this year alone
was halved to around DM6bn, and other investments were postponed.
The cancellation is likely to cause more unease in the German government. It
has been disturbed by the threat of damage to the national reputation by the
storm surrounding Mr Piech and Mr Lopez, under investigation for several
months on suspicion of industrial espionage against General Motors of the
US.
Earlier this week VW was obliged to provide an emergency cash injection of
DM1.5bn for Seat, its Spanish subsidiary, after 'unexpectedly' discovering
that it was heading for a DM1.25bn loss this year.
The discovery has dashed all hopes of the group's reaching break-even this
year.
