FT  09 SEP 93 / International Bonds: Success for World Bank's Dollars 1.25bn
global offering
THE World Bank had the stage to itself for the successful launch of its
ninth dollar global bond offering yesterday, as the rest of the
international bond market paused after the heavy issuance on Tuesday.
The World Bank's Dollars 1.25bn offering of 10-year global bonds was priced
to yield 10 basis points over the yield on the 5 3/4 per cent US Treasury
due 2003, at the lower end of the indicated range.
This is the tightest yield spread over US Treasuries which the World Bank
has achieved on its 10-year dollar global bonds, according to the joint lead
managers, Lehman Brothers and Nomura International.
This partly reflects the general tightening of spreads in the market as well
as the fact that the offering was significantly over-subscribed. Yesterday's
issue is likely to be the World Bank's last global dollar bond until next
autumn.
The tight spread and the balanced distribution worldwide also show that the
World Bank has achieved the main aims of its global bond programme which was
launched four years ago. They were to achieve a truly global distribution
and a single world price for its bonds.
'The widespread sales reflect the realisation of the global bond concept,'
said Mr Peter Horvath, senior financial officer in the World Bank's
financial operations department.
Just over 40 per cent of the offering was placed in Japan and eastern Asia,
and the remainder was sold in virtually equal amounts in Europe and the US.
The bonds were trading at 99.53-99.58 yesterday, representing a narrow
bid-offer spread of just five basis points.
Another goal of the global bond programme has been to raise the World Bank's
profile within the US, and the large US allocation in yesterday's offering
indicates that this has been accomplished. 'The World Bank is now in the
same category as US federal agencies,' said Lehman Brothers.
Meanwhile, Chinese finance ministry officials were in London yesterday on
the last leg of their international roadshow to publicise the People's
Republic of China's forthcoming Y30bn five-year Eurobond offering.
The offering, via Nomura International, is likely to be launched this
morning, and the bonds could be priced to yield between 75 and 85 basis
points over the yield on underlying Japanese government bonds.
This is China's second Eurobond offering - it raised DM300m through a
five-year deal in 1987 which has since expired - and also marks its return
to the international bond market since the Tiananmen Square massacre in
1989.
Mr Zhao Xiaoyu, divisional head of the finance ministry's foreign affairs
department, said the offering's aim was to re-establish China's name in the
international bond market.
The proceeds of the issue will be kept in yen and will be used to finance
various infrastructure projects. The repayment of the bonds would be
incorporated into the budgets of those projects, said Mr Gao Jian, deputy
director at the finance ministry's state debt management department.
China has an indicated investment grade rating of BBB from Standard &amp; Poor's
and Baa1 from Moody's. Moody's is understood to be reviewing its rating
following a meeting with Chinese finance ministry officials.
Elsewhere, Dhana Siam Finance and Securities Company was the second Thai
borrower in less than a week to tap the Eurodollar sector with a convertible
bond. The issue is part of a general drive to widen the ownership of Thai
shares. An official at the lead manager CSFB said the bonds will be priced
early next week.
