FT  14 MAY 93 / Gonzalez eases pre-election pressure
THE pressure on Spain's currency became too much yesterday. Devaluation may
have been the only option, but it might prove to be the smartest move yet
for the embattled socialist government since the prime minister, Mr Felipe
Gonzalez, three weeks ago, called a snap general election for June 6.
Political opponents will see the move as a defeat and a humiliation. The
government has been insisting it would not devalue and that the peseta was
correctly valued within the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary
System.
Analysts in Madrid agreed yesterday that the Bank of Spain had little option
but to ask the European Community's monetary committee for the realignment.
The Bank of Spain has been buying pesetas forward to see off speculators,
and its reserves  - which are believed to have fallen from more than Dollars
60bn (Pounds 39bn) last autumn to less than Dollars 20bn now if its futures
contracts are taken into account  - are badly depleted. The central bank and
the finance ministry decided to seek a realignment the moment pressure began
to build up yesterday. 'There was just too much ammunition out there,' said
one senior Madrid banker. 'It was inevitable,' said Mr Ignacio Gomez
Montejo, chief economist at brokers FG.
He believed the move would damage the government's election prospects,
especially since Spain has devalued three times since last September. It
would help bring down interest rates quite rapidly this year but, he added:
'It's too late to help the government in the election. Three devaluations in
nine months is a (political) disaster.'
'It was unavoidable but it's not a disaster,' said Mr Miguel del Valle,
chief of research at Banco Central Hispano, who said he thought the peseta
would not depreciate too far at its new parity and that it might even
appreciate.
That view is supported by Mr Carlos Sebastian, chief economist at brokers
Iberagentes.
He said the peseta was, at worst, 5 per cent overvalued at around Pta73.50
to the D-Mark, but that the markets had worried that should the conservative
opposition People's party win the election, it might take the currency out
of the system altogether.
Being forced out of the ERM would be a political calamity from which the
prime minister could not recover. As it is, the obstacles confronting him
between now and June are daunting. Ironically, devaluation could help him to
deal with them. An official unemployment survey today was uppermost in the
minds of the authorities when they decided to devalue yesterday.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, the finance minister, mischievously leaked the survey
results last night after the devaluation of 8 per cent was announced.
The survey reports 253,000 new unemployed in the first quarter of 1993,
pushing total unemployment to a record 21.7 per cent.
This is bad election news. But the most serious worry now for the Bank of
Spain, is that employers may no longer feel pressured to deal firmly with
high wage demands. The few agreements that have been signed in the spring
wage round so far have been close to 7 per cent.
While the inflationary effects of the devaluation are unlikely to be severe,
given the recession and the slump in consumer demand, April inflation
figures published yesterday were disappointing for the government.
They showed a 0.4 per cent increase in consumer prices in April, bringing
year on year inflation up from 4 per cent in March to 4.6 per cent last
month. But devaluation will also allow voters to get used to the idea before
election day that interest rates really are falling. Following last night's
announcement that the Bank of Spain would cut its official intervention rate
from 13 per cent to 11.5 per cent, commercial banks are likely to follow
suit.
Mr Montejo said the official central bank intervention rate was likely to
fall to 11 per cent by August.
The government will be able to argue, too, that it has dealt with crippling
interest rates and an overvalued currency. In fact, the new parity of
Pta79.11 to the D-Mark gives the Spanish currency a comfortable cushion.
While it floated briefly yesterday, it was trading at around Pta76 to the
German currency.
Pressure on the peseta has been caused by Spain's rapidly growing current
account deficit  - 3.3 per cent of GDP last year, it was in surplus until
1988 when a consumer boom began to suck in imports.
Already, Spain's exports have begun to pick up in the wake of the last two
devaluations.
It remains to be seen how well the socialists manage the fall-out from the
devaluation. Until yesterday, it seemed Mr Gonzalez had overcome the
political divisions in his party and that, despite a surge in support for
the opposition, the socialists would win the most seats in what is likely to
be a hung parliament. That would enable him to form the next government.
What is important now for the government is time. Spain's socialists are not
about to be blown away like their French counterparts. This will be the
worst weekend of the campaign for the prime minister, but there are still 24
days to the election. He still has everything to play for.
