FT  23 APR 93 / Saatchi directs the Yeltsins' debut from wings
A SLICE of life in the Yeltsin household broadcast earlier this week on
Russian television instantly became a big talking point. It was something
akin to the reaction of the British on seeing the family life of the royal
family for the first time three decades ago. But how natural was it?
Saatchi and Saatchi, the advertising agency credited with past successes for
the British Conservative party, thinks it may have been in part their work.
Speaking yesterday for the first time about the part the agency has played
in assisting Mr Yeltsin in his referendum campaign, Mr Steve Hilton, a
Saatchi executive, said he had worked with a Russian agency in the weeks
before the campaign and made a series of recommendations about Mr Yeltsin's
image - recommendations which seem to have been heeded.
In association with Gallup Poll and basing his recommendations on group
discussions with Russian citizens in half a dozen cities, Mr Hilton wrote a
memorandum last week which advised the Russian leader to play to his
perceived strengths.
'People saw him as strong: so we advised him to put himself forward as a
strong leader for a strong Russia. He was seen as manly and as simple,
straightforward.'
The film of the Yeltsins at home featured all of these characteristics.
Another of the Saatchi-Gallup findings was that the Russian Congress of
People's deputies was deeply unpopular.
'We found nobody with a good word to say about them. So we advised that
Yeltsin could be very negative about them; much more negative than would
have been the case in a western campaign.' Mr Yeltsin, and his ministers and
aides, have represented the Congress as Communists who want to turn the
clock back to the worst days of the Soviet Union.
'We thought that this should be a very Russian campaign,' said Mr Hilton.
'We advised that there should be a lot of endorsements from famous people,
like actors and actresses, so that the idea of voting for Yeltsin would be
fashionable.'
Mr Yeltsin has the wholehearted backing of the intelligentsia and the
artistic circles of Moscow - meeting them in the Bolshoi theatre and being
welcomed on platforms by famous actresses.
'We didn't have much time,' says Mr Hilton, who had worked on last year's UK
Conservative campaign for months before the general election. 'And I thought
at first that it was almost a lost cause. We weren't able to do poster and
television campaigns: all we could do was to recommend themes which Mr
Yeltsin and his supporters could stress in speeches and in briefings to the
media.'
The Saatchi effort was spearheaded in Moscow by Mr Hilton, who travelled
throughout Russia with Mr Gordon Heald of Gallup to listen for himself to
the opinions of Russians. In overall command in London was Mr John Maples, a
former treasury minister who, since his defeat in the last election, has
been head of Saatchi's government communications worldwide division.
