FT  08 FEB 93 / Hospitals decision due this week
MINISTERS are due to complete decisions on the future of London's hospitals
this week in the face of conflicting pressures.
In a government-commissioned report Sir Bernard Tomlinson recommended
hospital closures that would cut 2,500 beds in the capital, transferring
resources to the family doctor and community services. There are indications
that the government, worried about possible public reaction, is considering
deferring or diluting the closure recommendations. But many National Health
Service managers believe the consequences of delay would be worse than
pressing ahead.
Dr Martin McNicol, chairman of the NHS Trust Federation - which represents
trust hospital boards - says in an article today that London's hospital
service is 'crumbling financially and the fabric will soon follow'.
Londoners, says Dr McNicol, faced the loss of 'cathedrals of care' that had
looked after many generations of the capital's population. But the reasons
for this were cogent. The lost hospitals needed to be replaced by a service
more responsive to the requirements of patients.
Dr McNicol's comments, written with Dr Fiona Moss, consultant physician at
the Central Middlesex Hospital, appear in London After Tomlinson, a
collection of articles by leading medical and other figures published today
by the British Medical Journal.
Many of the contributors support Tomlinson's proposal to transfer resources,
and see the report as an opportunity to restructure health provision in
London. But there are several warnings that the new community-based
infrastructure must be properly financed if hospitals are to close.
Dr Bobbie Jacobson, director of public health for the City and Hackney
Health Authority - whose biggest hospital, St Bartholomew's, is resisting a
closure recommendation - says that without adequate funding for better local
services 'the Tomlinson report will simply be a further exercise in cutting
health services to Londoners'.
Ministers are considering a rescue plan to retain Bart's as a smaller,
largely specialist hospital, and may be planning to phase other closures
over a long period. Delay would, however, leave financial problems in the
London hospital service unresolved.
Surgery plans, Page 12
