FT  19 FEB 93 / UK Company News: DTI considers disqualifying Edencorp
Leisure directors
THE Department of Trade and Industry is considering action to disqualify
directors of Edencorp Leisure, which went into receivership in 1991, from
acting in such a capacity for any other company.
The DTI made the statement following the publication of a report on events
surrounding the collapse of the group run by Mr Michael Wallace, a former
show business promoter.
The report investigated possible manipulation of the 1989 results, the
payment of fees without board approval and Mr Wallace's indebtedness to the
company.
Edencorp was brought to the Third Market in 1989. A series of acquisitions
followed in Portugal and the UK.
After reassuring shareholders on the company's gearing position, Mr Wallace
sold a large block of stock in 1990. He was forced to resign when it was
discovered he had received substantial unauthorised loans, totalling Pounds
600,000, from the company, the financial position of which was far from
stable.
In December 1990 Edencorp's shares were suspended at 12p. Mr Wallace resumed
control of the company in May 1991, but it was put into receivership in July
that year.
The report strongly criticised Mr Wallace, chief executive, and Mr Godfrey
Cook, finance director and company secretary, for their conduct.
The investigation found that Mr Wallace had withdrawn large sums without the
board's knowledge or approval, and without regard to the interests of
shareholders. Mr Cook had been negligent.
Ernst &amp; Young, Edencorp's auditors, and Mr Wallace also come in for
criticism in respect of the 1989 accounts, which were unqualified.
Advance sales of vouchers worth some Pounds 200,000 were included in the
1989 year, when the group reported net profit of Pounds 783,000, instead of
being deferred to future years. 'This leads to the conclusion that sales,
and consequently profits, were over-stated by at least Pounds 200,000.'
'It follows that the auditors' report that the group accounts gave a true
and fair view of the group's profit for the period is called into question,'
the investigators say.
They criticised Mr Wallace's role in the decision to include the advance
sales in the 1989 accounts. 'In our view Wallace improperly exerted pressure
to achieve the Pounds 900,000 profit target.'
The investigators also question the payment of a finder's fee of Pounds
140,000 paid to an acquaintance of Mr Wallace, related to an acquisition.
'The circumstances of the payment cast doubt on its propriety. Even if
genuine, it was, in our view, excessive.'
Although it is unlikely that any criminal actions will result from the
investigation, the report has been passed to two regulatory bodies: the
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, and the Securities
and Futures Association.
The receivers, Touche Ross, are believed to have sold all the assets of
Edencorp and unsecured creditors are not expected to receive anything.
