FT  10 APR 93 / Once more up to the brink: Spain's Socialists meet today to
try and resolve a damaging split
Mr Felipe Gonzalez is an old hand at brinksmanship. The Spanish premier
resigned as leader of the Socialist party in 1979 when it refused to drop
Marxist doctrines. He later returned to acclaim. In 1986, he threatened to
resign as prime minister if Spain voted in a referendum against staying in
Nato. The tactic paid off.
Today, Mr Gonzalez, prime minister for nearly 11 years, may put the gambit
to another difficult test. A scandal over allegations that the Socialists
illegally funded their 1989 general election campaign has prompted a
damaging dispute between Mr Gonzalez and the party apparatus. The premier is
once again suggesting that he might be forced to resign from the party
leadership.
The party has been shaken by its poor showing in recent opinion polls. Mr
Gonzalez was invited to a secret meeting of moderate ministers and regional
party leaders last week to hear a series of complaints about the party
administration and the government's reluctance to stimulate economic
recovery.
As the party executive committee begins a crisis meeting in Madrid this
morning, its members are playing, in the words of El Pais, the country's
leading newspaper, 'not only with their credibility . . . but probably their
very existence'. If Mr Gonzalez goes - regarded as unlikely - the Socialists
face a heavy defeat in elections which must be held by the end of November.
If, instead, senior party officials resign, it could badly hurt the
organisation of the campaign. Either way, the Socialists' dominance of
Spanish politics may have been weakened in the past five days.
It has all happened very quickly. A month ago the Socialists were just
another governing party faltering in the polls ahead of an election. There
seemed plenty of time to recover. But it has been a long month. In a poll in
El Pais, support for the Socialists dropped to the same level as the
conservative Partido Popular, hopeless outsiders a few months ago. Official
statistics, meanwhile, showed that unemployment had risen to a record 3.04m
and the economy had fallen into recession.
Worse, tax inspectors confirmed two years of newspaper reports that senior
Socialists had run a group of bogus consulting companies through which they
received money from big business. The takings are believed to have helped
finance the 1989 election campaign. A few days later Mr Gonzalez was booed
at a university campus near Madrid.
Last weekend a Spanish news agency asked him if he planned to seek the
resignations of the deputy party leader, Mr Alfonso Guerra, and its chief
administrator, Mr Jose Maria Benegas, over the financing scandal. They deny
any personal or party involvement in the affair. No, the prime minister
said. 'I have not even been tempted to try to personalise this except in
regard to myself . . . As a political leader my job is to take
responsibility.
'We will have to trust in the courts because people have a right to know
(the truth about the scandal). But I believe people want us to assume
political responsibility.'
Mr Gonzalez's comments set off a week of ferocious party infighting. He
appeared to imply that if someone did not own up to the scandal and resign,
then he might. The prospect worried the financial markets. The Bank of Spain
was forced to intervene to support the peseta.
Mr Benegas and Mr Guerra, left-wingers who are contemptuous of the prime
minister and his centrist cabinet, saw Mr Gonzalez's statements as a direct
threat to their power. Late last Monday, seeking to defend themselves, they
released a letter of resignation sent by Mr Benegas to Mr Gonzalez on April
1.
It did not mention the scandal. Instead, it was a strongly worded appeal for
support against what he and Mr Guerra, a former deputy prime minister,
believe is a conspiracy of moderate ministers to take control of the party.
Publication of the letter had the desired effect. The issue - political
responsibility for a possible crime - gave way to a call for party unity.
Battle lines formed between the party apparatus and the government's
moderates, including Mr Gonzalez.
If this is a mess, then Mr Gonzalez is largely to blame. He has ignored the
party for years to concentrate on economic management and foreign affairs.
Now he cannot even count on a majority on the executive committee.
Should he resign as party leader, he would remain as prime minister but
would not stand in the forthcoming election. Without him the Socialists
would probably lose heavily.
As a result, most political analysts doubt he will go. But resignations from
within the party will also be difficult to secure. The only departure that
would have much political effect is Mr Guerra's. But he is a professional
political administrator and determined to stay.
A possible solution is a fudge, in which an upright Socialist figure,
possibly the young Basque leader Ramon Jauregui, is asked to head a
committee of respected figures to 'oversee' the current party machine
through the elections.
A compromise solution, however, would resolve only the problem of party
unity and not the financing scandal facing the Socialists. This could become
even more damaging as newspapers leak further details of the allegations.
Such considerations could affect the timing of an election. Mr Gonzalez has
so far favoured waiting until the last moment - late November - in the hope
that the economy recovers. But he may be tempted to act more quickly. On
April 20 the prime minister is due to give his state of the nation address
to parliament and if the scandal is shoved aside in the interests of party
unity today he may use the occasion to call an early general election.
He will certainly be aware that the Socialists cannot afford another week
like this. For the first time in a decade it is they, and not the
conservatives, who are in disarray. Unless they can put their house in
order, they may find their electoral fortunes suffer the same devastating
reversal as their French counterparts.
