FT  27 MAY 93 / Lifeboat launched amid liquidity storm / A look at why the
Bank of England paid a heavy price to rescue a number of banks
IN the summer of 1991 the normal calm of the Bank of England's majestic
Parlours, where its governor and directors have their offices, was
disturbed.
Mr Brian Quinn, director in charge of banking supervision, had become
concerned that there was a threat to the stability of the UK banking system.
He did not believe that the unprecedented loan losses being suffered by the
UK's big clearing banks would put them at risk of failing, but he was less
sure about their smaller brethren.
The Bank was in a dilemma. It is a cornerstone of UK supervision policy that
banks which behave imprudently should be allowed to fail. The theory is that
without this discipline, banks' managers would tend to take excessive risks.
But there are exceptions to this rule. The Bank is prepared to act as a
lender of last resort to prop up an ailing bank if it believes there could
be a threat to the financial system which would have serious economic
consequences.
In July 1991, after the Bank closed Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, the corrupt international bank, a number of big banks,
financial institutions and local authorities began to withdraw wholesale
deposits from small and medium-sized banks.
This created a liquidity problem for these banks. They did not have enough
cash to meet their short-term needs, but at this stage they did not appear
to be insolvent. However, if confidence in an institution collapses, a
liquidity problem can soon become a crisis if there is a run on the bank.
The London interbank market was receiving only the faintest hints about the
scale of the problem. But Mr Quinn and his colleagues in the supervision
department were convinced that it was acute, since financial institutions
and professional lenders were visiting him daily to tell him that they were
withdrawing their funds from smaller banks.
The most vulnerable of the smaller banks were those with an exposure to the
property market, since commercial and residential property prices were
plummeting.
The Bank estimated that 40 banks were at risk. It talked to the Treasury and
decided to intervene.
It believed that the collapse of a series of small banks could shake
confidence in the UK financial system and big international banks might
start to withdraw deposits from UK clearing banks - and that could pose a
real threat to the system.
So the Bank decided to risk several hundred million pounds of its capital.
Because it felt able to cope with this level of risk it did not receive any
guarantee from the government.
It did not make loans directly to the ailing banks. It provided indemnities
to the UK's big clearing banks, which provided credit lines to the affected
institutions.
A handful of small banks received these Bank-guaranteed loans, which ran to
several hundred million pounds but considerably less than a billion pounds.
City Merchant Banks, part of fund management group Invesco MIM, and National
Home Loans, a mortgage provider, are both believed to have been
beneficiaries.
But the Bank had made one miscalculation. What had started as a liquidity
crisis for some banks escalated into a solvency problem.
As the recession continued, borrowers from these banks ran into difficulties
and loan losses increased, wiping out their equity. During 1992, the Bank
withdrew authorisation to take deposits from three banks and placed
restrictions on 12 banks.
As a result, the Bank became aware that it faced losses on its financial
lifeboat, which it quantified as Pounds 25m in 1991 and Pounds 90m last
year. It believes the price was worth paying.
