FT  19 FEB 93 / UK Company News: McLeod Russel launches hostile bid for
Wheway
MCLEOD RUSSEL Holdings, the paints producer and distributor, yesterday
launched a Pounds 14m hostile bid for Wheway, the struggling environmental
engineering group.
Wheway shareholders are being offered one McLeod share for every 10.
McLeod's shares yesterday fell 2p to 100p; Wheway's rose 1 1/2 p to 9p. The
offer values each Wheway share at 10p.
The two companies have been in talks since last September. However, McLeod
decided to go hostile after failing to reach agreement on price.
Mr Nigel Openshaw, McLeod chairman, said: 'Wheway has had a for sale sign up
for months. We have tried not to rub their noises in it, but this is a
generous offer and we cannot wait any longer.'
Wheway responded by urging its shareholders to take no action. Mr Brian
Long, who was recently appointed chief executive, said: 'We need more time
to reflect on possible alternatives.'
He made it clear that the company wanted to merge with a 'robust partner',
but first wanted to see if it could get a better deal for shareholders.
The company is already talking to other interested parties about a possible
merger.
Wheway, in need of refinancing after its costly move out of heavy
engineering, last year turned in a Pounds 3.5m loss after making a Pounds
2.8m pre-tax profit the previous year.
Its share price has fallen from more than 140p in 1989 to its current level
of 9p.
At the year-end its net borrowings were Pounds 16.3m, giving gearing of more
than 105 per cent.
McLeod, which has a 2.99 per cent stake in Wheway, increased its pre-tax
profit from Pounds 4.42m to Pounds 5.18m for the year to September 30.
It said an enlarged group would benefit from a rationalisation of costs and
the development of Wheway's clean air and environmental engineering
businesses.
The enlarged group, on a pro forma basis, would have had a combined annual
turnover of more than Pounds 123m.
Pro forma combined net assets and borrowings would have amounted to Pounds
57.4m and Pounds 6.2m respectively.
