FT  02 APR 93 / Wellcome's AZT sales threatened
MORE than a third of Wellcome's AZT sales could be at risk if the
preliminary conclusions of the Concorde trials published today are accepted
by the medical community.
The trials, the results of which are contested by Wellcome, suggest AZT does
not improve mortality in HIV-positive patients who have not yet shown
Aids-related symptoms. The trials do not challenge the effectiveness of AZT
in treating patients with Aids and Aids-related complex.
AZT's worldwide sales were Pounds 213m in 1991-92, representing 12.5 per
cent of Wellcome's sales. For the first six months to February this year
they were Pounds 131m out of a group turnover of Pounds 1.025bn.
Analysts had expected AZT sales to increase because of the growing number of
Aids patients, and also because of Wellcome's ability to convince more
asymptomatic HIV-positive patients to take the drug, also known as Retrovir.
Today's report is likely to undermine such forecasts, particularly in the
UK, where analysts have been more bullish about the company's prospects.
Wellcome estimates that 38 per cent of patients in the US taking AZT are
asymptomatic. The remainder have Aids or Aids-related complex. There are
between 125,000 and 150,000 US patients on the drug.
The potential asymptomatic market, if AZT had proved effective, was huge.
Wellcome estimated last year there were up to 600,000 asymptomatic patients
in the US alone. Analysts estimate there are about 1.5m people infected by
HIV in the developed world.
Wellcome has had considerable difficulty convincing asymptomatic patients to
take the drug because of side-effects, in particular anaemia, and lack of
clear data about the drug's efficacy in such patients.
Dr Jonathan Gelles, the pharmaceutical analyst with Wertheim Schroder in New
York, questioned the potential damage of the Concorde study.
He said: 'We came to the conclusion some time ago that the drug will be
restricted to those who have the disease. The current share price discounts
10 pieces of bad news.'
Wellcome shares have tumbled by about Pounds 1.50 to 760p since last week
when the company announced healthy results but signalled that margins were
being squeezed. However, because of the tight security surrounding today's
Lancet article, the share price was relatively stable, slipping only 19p to
743p.
