FT  07 DEC 93 / World Trade News: Break expected in dark cloud over
Caribbean resorts - Canute James on the region's hopes of a better tourism
season after three bad years that began with the Gulf war
Caribbean tourist resorts are expecting better times in the high season,
which begins next week, after the hard times that began with the Gulf war
three years ago and have continued with the recession in the industrialised
economies.
Planners of the industry in the more than 30 member countries of the
Barbados-based Caribbean Tourism Organisation say that signs of economic
improvement in the leading markets such as the US, Canada and Europe
indicated that the flow of tourists next year will be higher than the
expected 22m stay-over and cruise ship visitors of this year.
Tourism brings significant relief for often hard-pressed treasuries, and the
industry is expecting visitor expenditure next year to be about 5 per cent
higher than the estimated USDollars 10bn (Pounds 6.7bn) of this year.
The hoped-for improvement would be due as much to whatever improvement there
is in recession-hit economies, as to a more business-like approach by the
resort countries. Hoteliers once looked anxiously at the weather reports in
North America and Europe, hoping a bad winter would force shivering hordes
southward in search of the sun. Once fiercely competitive with one another,
the resort countries have now implemented a multi-million dollar advertising
programme to market the region as whole to potential visitors from North
America.
There are, however, many problems which could still frustrate the hopes for
better times. Most of these, such as air access to the region, are outside
the control of the industry's administrators. Pan American Airlines and
Eastern Airlines, which were big carriers between the Caribbean and North
America, have collapsed. Although American Airlines has scheduled additional
flights to Caribbean destinations, it is unlikely that any airline will
continue for long with routes of marginal profitability.
Equally damaging for the industry is the realignment of international
currencies. Caribbean hotel rates are US dollar-denominated. A depreciation
of European currencies against the US dollar makes the Caribbean less of a
bargain to European tourists. Potential visitors from the US may also
consider a European holiday a better buy.
The Caribbean is also facing new and growing competition for the US tourist.
Several states in the US have stepped up their promotion and marketing as
safer and cheaper alternatives to a foreign holiday. A domestic holiday can
be appealing to prospective tourists in the US because it does not carry the
uncertainties of factors such as currency changes.
A further problem is crime. The CTO said this year the level of crime had
been increasing in most resorts. Attacks on tourists in several countries,
and the murder of two in the past two years in Jamaica, have caused concern
among the administrators of the industry in the region, who fear, with good
reason, that adverse publicity would deter prospective visitors.
Some Caribbean governments have concluded that their economies are not
getting enough out of tourism. This led some unilaterally to increase the
tax on cruise shipping companies for each visitor who disembarks. The
members of the CTO wanted a uniform minimum head tax of USDollars 10, but
some members balked after the cruise lines objected. After some confusion
and confrontation with the shipping lines, a common minimum passenger tax of
Dollars 5 effective next April, rising to Dollars 10 in October 1995, has
been agreed.
There is also growing concern at the extent to which local sectors and
services benefit from tourism. 'What we in the Caribbean have to do is to
develop linkages and so benefit more from tourism,' says Sir Neville
Nicholls, president of the Caribbean Development Bank.
'There is too much concentration merely on seeing tourism or activity in the
tourism industry as essentially hotel-based. While that is the core, it's
the linkages to tourism - agriculture, services, transportation and so on -
which need to be emphasised.'
The overriding concern in the industry is that the quality of the product
must be protected, and earnings increased, while the region improves its
ability to attract tourists who may turn to increasingly competitive
alternatives such as Mexico and the Pacific. After all, tourism now accounts
for one in every four foreign dollars earned by the resort countries of the
Caribbean.
