FT  01 MAY 93 / Warsaw clear to privatise 600 ventures
POLAND'S beleaguered ruling coalition won a vital victory yesterday when the
country's parliament passed a mass privatisation bill, securing the
government's future and giving the go ahead to its policy of market reforms.
The legislation provides for the transfer to the private sector of about 600
companies at once and the distribution of shares to the public.
The privatisation scheme, expected to be approved by the Senate and
President Lech Walesa, failed to get a majority last month and the fate of
Ms Hanna Suchocka's coalition government hung on the result of yesterday's
vote.
The plan, first mooted in 1991, foresees the establishment of 20 or more
foreign managed investment funds. Shares in these will be distributed at a
nominal charge to all adult Poles who apply.
The funds are to remain for 10 years, after which the shareholders will
decide whether to wind them up. SG Warburg has been advising the
privatisation ministry on the scheme.
The World Bank has made access to successive tranches of a Dollars 450m
(Pounds 292.2m) loan conditional on implementation of the scheme and
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) funds are available
to finance the plan.
Privatisation is one of many paths the government is following to reduce the
state sector which at the end of last year still had 7,342 enterprises.
Hundreds of state companies have been leased to management and workers and
scores sold to foreign and domestic investors. Some 40 per cent of
industrial output is already produced by the private sector.
Mr Janusz Lewandowski, the privatisation minister, who threatened to resign
if the scheme failed to go through, said after the vote it would 'permit
hundreds of companies to be restructured, give them access to western
markets, to new technologies and cheap credits'.
'This is good news, it means that a lot of things can start moving again,' a
western banker said yesterday The 215 to 178 vote victory only became
possible after the government had made concessions to the SLD, the 58 strong
group of former communists in parliament. Yesterday 38 of the SLD group
either voted for or abstained, opening the way to further tactical alliances
with Ms Suchocka's cabinet.
The government now enjoys the support of a mere 187 votes in the 460 seat
Sejm after the small PL farmers' group left the coalition in a difference
over agriculture this week.
The concessions to the SLD included opt-out rights to state sector
enterprises chosen for inclusion, handing shares in 10 the funds to 3.6m
pensioners and public servants as compensation for wage cuts made in 1991
and later declared illegal by the courts and lastly strict definition of the
rights and duties of foreign managers.
The plan had nevertheless been criticised by the right-wing opposition
parties as well as the PSL farmers party for giving too great a say to
foreign investment banks and consultants over a big part of the country's
industry.
