FT  21 MAY 93 / Survey of London Docklands (4): New mood of realism as
market stirs again - Housing
THE story of the rise and fall of docklands is neatly encapsulated in the
experiences of its housing market.
In the late 1980s, the vision of glitzy, futuristic apartments, their yuppy
inhabitants swilling chilled wine behind unwelcoming, electronic gates
appeared to say it all - despite the fact that nearly two-thirds of all
house sales went to local residents on more modest means.
Docklands was perceived as the front-edge of a brave new world, built on a
booming financial services market in which the smart but inexperienced could
make big bucks and buy a swanky home just a few minutes drive from the
office in the Porsche Carrerra.
But the bubble burst and with it went the over-confident, over-mortgaged
newcomers who had been ready to pay up to Pounds 600,000 for a new lifestyle
and a private mooring. The values of homes built for trading, rather than
for living in, collapsed and the story turned sour.
It was not a story exclusive to Docklands but, somehow, the calamity seemed
all the worse, given the promise which had been held out by its creators and
promoters.
A recent report from Ancer, the property consultants, showed just how bad
things became. Last year, it says, only 230 new residential properties were
sold in Docklands - well under a third of the total sold in 1990 and the
lowest number recorded in more than a decade.
At the worst point, the London Docklands Development Corporation calculated
that around 1,500 completed homes were looking for buyers, approaching 15
per cent of the the total number completed since the LDDC arrived.
Prices, on average, have fallen by between 30 and 35 per cent across the
board, not only an indication of collapsing demand but of the absurd,
temporary overheating which hit the market in the latter stages of the
1980s' boom.
A new mood of realism means that apartments like those at Clippers Quay,
originally valued to be sold at Pounds 195,000, are being sold now for
Pounds 120,000.
Now, after a prolonged period in which owners and developers have licked
their wounds, there are some signs that the worst is over and that the local
housing market is again stirring.
Caution, however, is now the overriding theme. Mr Mike Bignell, the LDDC's
head of property marketing, says there was a surge in interest among buyers
at the very start of the year but it tailed off in March - 'it's been up and
down. We are still waiting to see if there has been any significant
improvement again,' he says.
There is also some evidence that, once again, interest is beginning to rise
among foreign investors, who played a role in the market during the late
1980s.
At the same time, it appears that sales of residential property for
investment purposes are accounting for a growing proportion of those
transactions which are taking place.
Investors can expect a gross rental return of up 12 per cent on their
property, against a realistic return on more central London properties of up
to 9 per cent, according to one local agent.
Some of the property experts are already proclaiming the Docklands revival
is underway. Ancer reports a 'sudden surge' in sales, with clear signs of
renewed strength after four years of weakness. But however optimistic the
noises, there is little doubt that any increase in activity will take a
considerable time to work through in terms of rising prices.
After the knocks of the late 1980s and early '90s, the LDDC is gearing up
for renewed activity in its role as vendor of development land. Over the
next year it plans the phased release of 13 development sites, a significant
increase on the previous twelve months.
The return of private developers is seen as essential, given the
ever-present dangers of housing estate 'ghettos' if development is left only
to the public sector. A mixed community of housing remains the driving
philosophy for the area.
The LDDC is negotiating land deals in several locations, including a key
site at Beckton. It is also releasing a development site in the same area by
organising a competition among builders.
Price alone will not be enough to win. A developer will be selected on the
basis of the proposals submitted, with attention paid to the type of housing
and the time-scale envisaged among other factors - 'we are not yet ready to
consider tendering sites,' says Mr Bignell.
Builders are certainly renewing their interest in the area, albeit
cautiously. Having sold nearly all the properties on its Hithe Point
development, Barratt London has started work on Sovereign View, a former
wharf on Surrey Docks, which will provide 275 homes and apartments. Prices
will start as low as Pounds 65,000.
Fairview New Homes is also building in Docklands for the first time,
developing 113 low-cost starter homes on a 2.4-acre waterside site at Timber
Wharves, Isle of Dogs.
Prices on the development, which has yielded the first land deal of such a
size for four years, will start as low as Pounds 39,000.
There are also some housing association schemes under way, a sector of the
market which for a time has represented the only meaningful development in
the area.
The LDDC is now, above all, looking for a period of equilibrium in local
housing. It wants to place the emphasis, initially, on low-cost housing and
will then release what it describes as higher quality locations as market
conditions permit.
It is particularly excited about the prospects for developing an urban
village to the south of Royal Victoria dock.
The LDDC envisages 300 housing units being built over the next two and half
years and - in a rolling programme - wants to see 7,000 homes and a complete
community in place within seven years. The infrastructure is already in
place.
Such schemes point to the way ahead. There are few who believe that the
return of super-luxury property developments is, once again, just around the
corner.
A great many fingers have been burned in the last three or four years and
Docklands realises that it will not be in its own interests if the local
housing market is exposed to another damaging debacle. According to Mr
Bignell, 'this time round, it is all going to be much more down-to-earth.'
