FT  29 OCT 93 / State schools increase presence near top of A-level results
survey
STATE schools have made strong improvements in this year's A-level results,
as shown in the Financial Times survey to be published in full tomorrow.
While big-city independent day schools continued to dominate the upper
levels of the survey, 23 state schools appeared in the top 200 - up from
three last year.
Most were grammar schools, with particularly good performances from schools
in Buckinghamshire, Essex and Kent. However, three comprehensives -
Hasmonean High in Hendon, north London, Dame Alice Owen's in Potters Bar,
Hertfordshire, and Cherwell in North Oxford - reached the top 200.
Single-sex schools continued to do well, with the highest-ranked fully
co-educational school coming only 29th. The top-ranking school overall was
St Paul's, an independent day school for boys in Barnes, west London.
Boarding schools were the most serious casualties. Hampered by falling
enrolments, which saw the total number of boarders in the UK drop by 6 per
cent last year, boarding schools' average A-level scores were well behind
those of independent day schools.
However, the most prestigious boarding schools were unaffected. Eton and
Winchester retained their places in the top 10 for overall A-level results,
and more surprisingly entered the top 10 of the FT's table of
'value-for-money' boarding schools for the first time.
'Value for money' is measured by dividing a school's average A-level score
by annual fees. Both schools achieved their places in spite of charging high
annual fees (Pounds 12,270 for Winchester and Pounds 11,934 for Eton,
against an average Pounds 9,350), confirming a trend - identified by the
survey - of parents having to pay a premium for exceptional results at
boarding schools. Of the top 100 boarding schools in the survey, 87 charged
above average fees.
The reverse was true for independent day schools - 78 of the top 100 charged
fees below the average of Pounds 5,150 a year.
The FT surveyed all independent schools in England and Wales, and also the
top 1,100 state schools identified by the Department for Education in its
survey of performance in 1992.
Unlike previous surveys, the FT list ranks schools according to their
A-level 'score' in accordance with the points system used by the
Universities Central Admissions System, taking into account all grades
achieved at both A-level and AS-level, rather than only the top A and B
grades.
