FT  12 FEB 93 / Leading Article: GM's signal
FOR ONCE Corporate America can feel grateful to the Financial Accounting
Standards Board. By requiring companies to account more prudently for
healthcare costs, it has obliged them to send a powerful signal to
Washington just when Democratic politicians are itching to have companies
provide new mandated social service benefits. No doubt General Motors had
good financial reasons for writing off Dollars 21bn at a stroke, instead of
spreading the cost over 20 years, as the FASB also permits. But the
announcement of such a huge write-off, coming alongside similar, if smaller,
write-offs at Ford and other big corporations, is a timely reminder that
healthcare insurance imposes a substantial employment tax on US companies.
Healthcare costs in the US are about 50 per cent higher than the
international norm at 12 per cent of GDP. The system relies heavily on
employers to provide health insurance. The result of this explosive
combination can be seen in the transformation of the motor industry's cost
structure: Ford now spends as much on medical care as on steel for its
vehicles. The financial burden falls heavily on mature industries, since
they have a larger population of retired workers to support. Meanwhile many
employees of small businesses, which cannot afford large bills for
healthcare, go uncovered.
Against that background it is hardly surprising that big American industry
has become an impressive exporter of American jobs. In an increasingly
global labour market, excessive healthcare costs are a competitive
disadvantage. And small business, the chief engine of job-creation in the US
over the past decade, worries about the potential cost of any future move to
compel all companies to provide healthcare insurance. A radical break in the
link between healthcare and employment is thus a challenging priority for
the Clinton administration.
The problem for big US companies is not unique. High social costs in the
German motor industry are causing jobs to disappear eastwards. Even in
Japan, where on Tuesday the government formally asked industry not to shed
labour, the lifetime employment system is imposing a pressing cost burden in
the worst recession since the first oil shock. But Toyota this week was
reporting declining profits, unlike GM, which was cheered at the prospect of
reducing its losses. Ultimately, the quality of the cars is vastly more
important than the relative burden of social costs.
