FT  18 NOV 93 / Arts: The Grub Street Opera
Henry Fielding (1707-1754) managed more in one lifetime than most people
could in several. He was a playwright, a novelist and then, when his
libertine desires outstripped his failing capacities, a magistrate. He wrote
The Grub Street Opera in 1731, when it was banned by the Prime Minister. The
Magnificent Theatre Company presents it at the Lilian Baylis Theatre in what
it claims is the first staging. A fine, genial and good-humoured evening it
makes, too, all partridges and bumpers of ale.
Fielding comes over as a sharp lyricist and a facile plotter. In fact, the
plot is a cipher, and hardly matters. The opera has 60 airs, spontaneous
soundbites of song which punctuate the action. There are songs in praise of
roast beef and ale, preparation for the orgies of consumption in his novels;
and a deliciously rhymed paean to tobacco which leaves most current West End
lyricists out of puff.
Grub Street was an area of London near Moorfields full of 'scabrous hacks'
and hired scribblers. The Grub Street Opera teems with the extinct
worldliness of the 18th century. Alongside the usual imprecations - 'Lookye
. . . Egad . . . Pshaw' - Fielding trades in perfidy, reputation and rank.
All his characters are intelligent and capacious.
The production, directed by Ben Crocker, fizzes along, but fails to find
anything worth caring about, and has to jump-start itself after every song.
The travelling set is a simple, inventive raised platform strewn with
playbills and billets-doux. The acting, particularly from Richard Pocock as
the resident fop, is precise and deliciously overdone. The cook wears an
apron of quilted poultry and brandishes a rolling pin, the maids twitter,
the butler curses and the parson drinks: a perfect Georgian symmetry.
At the centre is Sir Owen Apshinken, a Welsh gentlemen slowly drinking
himself asunder to escape his shrewish wife. Their frisky son, Master Owen,
all flounce and flutter, chases the maids but runs out of ideas when the
chase is up. Below stairs, an entire petty larceny of servants cheat their
way through life.
Behind Grub Street lies Fielding's satire of the dim George II, the
pretentious Queen Caroline and their lecherous son Frederick Prince of
Wales. Since the satire has not been altered to suit the present times, the
strength and scandal of Fielding's original has been lost. But on this form,
and theirs, the royal family should be grateful Fielding stopped writing two
and a half centuries ago.
Lilian Baylis Theatre, EC1 (071 837 4104) until Nov 27; then on tour
