FT  23 NOV 93 / Business and the Law: Airlines opt to fly on a wing and a
prayer - Compensation leaves travellers cold
Japan's airlines broke ranks last November to become the first in the world
to lift the ceiling on compensation paid to the victims of international air
disasters. Ten Japanese airlines led by Japan Air Lines abandoned the
compensation cap of Dollars 140,000 for each passenger which they had
adopted under the 1929 Warsaw Convention.
The JAL initiative followed 21 years of failed industry attempts to raise
compensation limits governed by the convention and the 1966 Montreal
Agreement, which sets a limit of Dollars 75,000 for each passenger for
flights to and from the US. Warsaw Convention limits range from Dollars
10,000 to nearly Dollars 140,000 and are seen as too low and an
embarrassment to most airlines and their insurers in the event of a crash.
Although JAL seemed under pressure to break the ceiling for international
flights after lifting the ceiling for domestic flights in 1982, and having
paid out average settlements believed to be in the region of Dollars 850,000
a passenger to the victims of the 1985 JAL Boeing 747 crash, it was widely
thought the Japanese decision would force other big airlines to follow suit.
Aviation industry observers predicted public pressure would force other
airlines to act. A year later, however, no airline has followed the Japanese
initiative.
According to Mr Peter Martin, aviation lawyer with London solicitors Frere
Cholmeley Bischoff who pioneered the revised conditions of carriage for JAL,
the main excuse offered by the airlines for sheltering behind the
anachronistic Warsaw and Montreal compensation limits is that the insurance
costs of removing or raising the compensation ceiling would be prohibitive.
He says airlines are reluctant to go to the insurance market for quotations
as they fear they can't afford it. But in fact airlines ought to be able to
obtain cover from the market at a reasonable price.
First, with an average of 1,000 deaths a year from aviation accidents
against 300m passengers carried, the risk is very small. Second, insurance
represents about 1 per cent of fixed costs split 50/50 on hull insurance and
liability cover. So the increased cost of raising the limits as a percentage
of operating costs is likely to be very small.
However, he accepts that the airlines' reluctance to approach the market
must be seen in the context of generally increased premiums as insurers take
advantage of a rising market. According to Willis Corroon Aerospace, a
leading buyer of airline insurance, many airlines which renewed their
policies on October 1 paid steep increases. On average, international
airlines are facing increases of about 60 per cent in the cost of insurance
cover.
Airlines have also held back from unilateral action to raise or remove
limits pending the outcome of several European and airline trade association
initiatives.
In February, the European Commission indicated that it was interested in
promoting a special contract for European airlines which would raise limits
to Ecu 300,000 or Ecu 500,000. Again, airlines are concerned about the
insurance costs.
The European Civil Aviation Conference undertook its own study and
recommended an increase in the limits from Ecu 100,000 to Ecu 250,000 to
take account of inflation over 22 years. Insurance costs are said to be the
stumbling block.
The International Air Transport Association has advised its airline members
that before they can begin discussions about bilateral or multi-lateral
special contracts to bypass compensation limits, anti-trust immunity is
required from the US competition authorities.
Official IATA policy is that MAP3, the third Protocol to the Montreal
Agreement, should be brought into force. MAP3 would raise the Montreal limit
from Dollars 75,000 to Dollars 130,000 and allow its sovereign signatories
to set up 'supplemental compensation plans' (SCPs). This would give rise to
a two-tier system: airlines would be responsible for the first Dollars
130,000 for each passenger; and the SCP would provide compensation above
that amount for which passengers would pay an enforced levy.
The practical view, however, is that MAP3 is a dead letter. MAP3 cannot come
into force until it has been ratified by at least 30 states, which is
regarded as unlikely unless the US supports the move. Washington's position
on compensation is unclear, but it is generally accepted within the industry
that the US will not now ratify MAP3.
There is some support for the Japanese initiative in the US but airlines
emphasise they cannot discuss the possibility of raising or removing the
ceiling on compensation without anti-trust immunity, which is not available.
All these delays in acting to change the outdated limits mean that if there
is a big air disaster it will be followed by protracted litigation and by
settlement delays.
The 1988 Pan Am disaster at Lockerbie provides a good example, Mr Martin
says. Five years after the disaster the issue of compensation is still
unresolved. The New York Second Circuit Court of Appeals has not yet ruled
on Pan Am's appeal against a finding that it was guilty of 'wilful
misconduct'; if found guilty compensation could be paid exceeding the
Montreal limits.
The industry is lucky that there have been no big air accidents this year,
he says, but statistically one is overdue.
The beauty of the Japanese scheme is that it ought to significantly cut the
delay in obtaining compensation by removing the need to litigate in most
cases. Victims and their families will be able to negotiate settlements
directly with airlines which will take responsibility for recovering money
from aircraft and engine manufacturers.
Mr Martin says it is astonishing that airlines do not act individually or
collectively. It is inconceivable that US anti-trust authorities would take
action against airlines discussing measures to benefit the travelling
public. And he insists insurance must be available on the world market at a
reasonable price.
Perhaps the biggest disappointment of the past 12 months is that the
Japanese initiative appears to have left the travelling public cold.
In theory, the absence of any limit on liability or higher limits ought to
have a big impact on consumer choice and could offer airlines that adopt it
a competitive advantage. The problem is that airlines cannot easily
advertise the concept that in the event of a death, some airlines will pay
more compensation than their competitors.
Surveys of the factors influencing choice of airline among business
travellers show that the public is more interested in efficiency -
convenient scheduling, punctuality, and speed of check-in - than with
security, liability, and insurance. Until that changes, world-class airlines
will be free to hide behind compensation limits not available to other
industries of comparable size and profitability.
