FT  07 MAY 93 / Asil Nadir in Cyprus: Lost - a friend, a fortune and
political clout
IT WAS Mr Turgut Ozal, the former Turkish president, who prodded Mr Asil
Nadir to go the last time he flew to London, two years ago. On that
occasion, Mr Nadir was arrested at Heathrow airport.
With Mr Ozal's death on April 17, Mr Nadir may have lost his most powerful
friend and ally in Turkey. It must have been clear long before the latest
episode, though, that Mr Ozal was no longer prepared to back him as he had
in the past.
Mr Ozal's role in the Nadir saga is central to understanding the way Turkish
business works. During Polly Peck's liquidity crisis in 1990, there was
little enthusiasm for the 11th hour effort by the government in Ankara to
line up bridging finance. That operation was driven by President Ozal. The
bail money made available for Mr Nadir was also rustled up by Mr Ozal.
He had used investments by Mr Nadir to inject competition into Turkish
industry. He encouraged Mr Nadir invest in newspapers which lost huge sums
but provided a badly needed boost in the late 1980s to Mr Ozal's flagging
poll ratings.
But Mr Nadir's political connections and financial strength in the Eastern
Mediterranean are far weaker than they were three years ago, shortly before
Polly Peck International foundered. Even in northern Cyprus, where Nadir's
reputation among local inhabitants remains strong, there were signs
yesterday that the ruling administration was distancing itself from him.
Turkish officials said yesterday they were studying Mr Nadir's case.
Ankara's one concern is that Mr Nadir does not try to come to Turkey with
which, unlike northern Cyprus, the UK does have an extradition arrangement.
Like Turkish officialdom, the business community had since distanced itself
from Mr Nadir. 'He never had any real friends in Turkey, but what really
hurt was how quickly the few friends he did have disowned him,' says a
former employee. This sense of betrayal is likely to dominate his thoughts
as he plans his future.
If he was a powerful business figure in the area once, his empire is in
tatters. Moreover, with the sale of his Turkish newspaper titles he is no
longer able to influence opinion. Only in northern Cyprus, where his Kibris
daily sells around 10,000, does he have a vehicle.
Mr Nadir's fall from grace is unlikely to have much direct impact on the
Turkish economy. Turkish banks were always more wary of Mr Nadir than their
foreign counterparts. He felt and was always made to feel an outsider.
In a development that is particularly galling for Mr Nadir, many of his
former business rivals are now picking off his assets at prices well below
their book value, as the Polly Peck administrators attempt to wind up their
operation in the area.
The disposals of the Polly Peck businesses in Turkey, and attempts to seize
assets in northern Cyprus, have also eaten into Nadir's influence. According
to one former associate: 'The reason he had influence in the past was that
he had a lot of money. He doesn't have that any more.'
But one friend of Mr Nadir said: 'If there is one thing he was never short
of, it is charm. There's no way back as a businessman but as a politician,
well who knows?'
