FT  23 OCT 93 / Kashmiri conflict destroys a 'paradise': Why prospects for a
peaceful settlement appear more remote than ever
THE siege of the Hazratbal mosque, the holiest Moslem shrine in Kashmir in
northern India, is the result of four years of violence and four decades of
political dispute.
Neither the separatists hiding inside the white marble buildings nor the
Indian troops surrounding them are in any mood to compromise. The militants,
who seized the shrine a week ago, want to walk free with their heads held
high. The authorities want surrender. There seems little scope for a
negotiated settlement.
What is true for the siege, seems tragically true for Kashmir as a whole:
the uprising which started in late 1989 and which the security forces have
tried to suppress with brutal force has almost killed hopes for a peaceful
resolution of south Asia's most serious conflict.
The violence is prompting the international community to look at Kashmir
with renewed urgency, out of concern for the fighting and for the damage
done to relations between India and neighbouring Pakistan.
Much of Kashmir today is in the grip of a military-style occupation by at
least 150,000 Indian soldiers and paramilitary troops, who have replaced the
local Kashmiri police in front-line security duties.
A mainly-Moslem population of 8m is ruled by a Hindu-dominated
administration. Civilian officials go about their work under armed guard.
In Srinagar, the capital, and in other towns, there are sand-bagged bunkers
at strategic points. Barbed wire is as common on the roadside as Kashmir's
famous wild flowers.
Wooden houseboats which until the late 1980s took thousands of visitors
across Kashmir's limpid green lakes are now rotting at their moorings. Once
a Mogul poet wrote: 'If there is paradise on earth, it is here, it is here.'
If he came today, he might think himself in hell.
Destruction is everywhere: Sringar's Lal Chowk, the main market, is scarred
by the blackened ruins of buildings set alight during disturbances earlier
this year - by the security forces, according to the residents who fled
their homes in terror. Elsewhere are the remains of a 200-year-old mansion,
burnt down by militants. It was once meant to be converted into a museum;
now it stands as a memorial to violence.
The human tragedy is even worse. According to police figures, some 7,500
people have been killed since the start of 1990, including 635 members of
the security forces.
Militants put the Kashmiri death toll, including insurgents and civilians,
at 20,000. The police allege militants spread terror by murder, kidnapping,
robbery, extortion and rape. They also kill each other in bloody inter-group
conflicts.
The record of the security forces is also violent: international human
rights groups have documented scores of cases of brutality, including
killing suspects on arrest and in custody, rape and torture.
Just this week, Mr Mukhar Ahmed, a 25-year-old Kashmiri journalist, was
arrested and interrogated for 13 hours. Trembling with fear, he showed marks
on his ears where he said he was given electric shocks and bruises on the
soles of his feet where he said he was beaten. His face was pale with pain;
his eyes black and sunken.
The Kashmir dispute began with the bloody partition of India in 1947, when
Kashmiri hopes for independence were ignored as Pakistan and India divided
the territory.
In 1949, the two countries agreed with the United Nations that the status of
Kashmir should be determined by a plebiscite - but it has never been held.
In 1972, India and Pakistan signed an agreement in the resort town of Shimla
to the effect that Kashmir was a bilateral issue - so third parties,
including Kashmiris and UN officials, no longer had a say. Indian officials
argue the time for plebiscites is past and Indian-held Kashmir is 'an
integral part of India.' Pakistan describes Indian-held Kashmir as disputed
territory, which it claims for itself.
Just as government attitudes have hardened so have the views of Kashmiris.
As a vegetable trader in Srinagar says: 'We want the bloody Indians out.
Once we could have lived with them. But now it is too late.' Mr Mahmood
Rahman, a senior official of the local state government, admits that 'the
alienation of Kashmiris is getting worse'.
Indian officials blame Pakistan for fomenting militancy by sending money,
arms and trained terrorists. But the roots of insurgency lie much deeper -
principally in the fact that this isolated mountain land has been
independent for long periods of time and, in common with other peoples
united by history and culture, Kashmiris now want to assert their
independence.
Most want to form a new state, though a significant minority, including some
powerful Pakistan-backed militant groups, would prefer to acceed to
Pakistan.
Nationalist feelings has been heightened by religious differences: the
global rise of Islamic militancy has given courage to Kashmiri insurgents
and eroded Kashmir's tradition of Hindu-Moslem tolerance.
Over the years, Delhi has been caught between promoting democratic politics
in Kashmir and suppressing anti-Indian political activity. The result is
that about half urban Kashmiri youths are unemployed and so are fertile
ground for militancy.
Kashmiri political leaders take heart from recent global political changes.
'The old order is crumbling. Like the Soviet Union broke up, India may also
break up,' says Professor Abdul Gani, a representative of the All Party
Freedom Conference, a newly-formed umbrella organisation of Kashmiri
political groups.
Mr Gani suggests putting Kashmir (including Pakistani-held territory) under
UN administration for five years followed by a plebiscite.
For Mr Rahman, the state government official, such suggestions are anathema.
'These people want to go back to 1947. We cannot go back on history.'
