FT  23 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Watts Blake shuns Sibelco offer - Defence
document says bid substantially undervalues company
WATTS BLAKE Bearne, the world's biggest supplier of ball clay to the
ceramics industry, yesterday published its defence document recommending
shareholders to reject the Pounds 87m bid for the company from Sibelco.
The company said that the offer price of 420p a share substantially
undervalued the group, which was expected to increase pre-tax profits by
almost a fifth this year to not less than Pounds 8.6m (Pounds 7.25m).
The total dividend was forecast to rise in 1993 by 12 per cent to 12p.
Sibelco, a Belgian producer of silica sand for the glass industry,
effectively controls 45.2 per cent of the company's shares having agreed to
acquire the combined stakes of Ceramics Holdings, controlled by the Lebanese
Gargour family, and Quarzwerke, a privately-owned German silica sand
producer.
Sibelco previously was a member of a concert party with Ceramics Holdings
and Quarzwerke. This arrangement ended earlier this year when the Gargour
family decided to sell its Watts Blake shares.
Mr John Pike, managing director of Watts Blake, said yesterday that M&amp;G
Investment, its next largest shareholder with about a 7 per cent stake, had
decided that it would not accept the Sibelco offer.
'We believe other independent shareholders will follow M&amp;G's lead', said Mr
Pike.
Sibelco has said that it was a Stock Exchange requirement that it must make
a full offer for the company, following the purchase of the Ceramics and
Quarzwerke stakes, that had prompted the bid rather than a desire to take
over Watts Blake.
The Devon-based company which has been digging ball clay out of the Bovey
Basin near Newton Abbot since 1710, said that the offer price of 420p put
the group on a prospective exit p/e of 15.8 times, on forecast earnings of
26.5p for 1993.
This was considerably less than the sector averages for other companies
supplying industrial and building materials. It also allowed no premium for
a business which controlled 60 per cent of ball clay production in the UK,
25 per cent in Germany and between 25 and 30 per cent in the US.
The company supplied 40 per cent of ball clay used by European sanitaryware
manufactures and a third of the US sanitaryware market and was the
substantial supplier of ball clay to the Far East market. It also claimed to
supply a quarter of the European and US floor tile markets.
Mr Pike said that the company had increased profits in eight of the past 10
years and raised dividend payments every year except one, when they were
maintained.
