FT  02 JUN 93 / Survey of Shanghai (9): Grand plans for a revival - Tourism
Shanghai may have seen better days, but for many tourists this matters
little. They have come for a faint whiff of the city's chequered history
before it is swept away by a plastic wave of karaoke bars, characterless
hotels, discotheques, nightclubs, entertainment centres, revolving
restaurants and American-style fast food outlets.
The Shanghai authorities have grand plans to revive the city as a magnet for
tourists. These plans perhaps owe less to preserving what was good about the
past than to mimicking what has worked elsewhere on the Pacific rim. Prepare
for a Shanghai Disneyland]
In the end what will matter most is money. Shanghai tourism officials make
no secret of the role which tourism can play in the city's modernisation.
'Tourism is one of the pillars of Shanghai's tertiary industry and economy,'
says Mr Dao Shu Ming, director of the Municipal Tourism Administration.
'Our economic plan puts the tertiary sector first, and tertiary industry
includes tourism, finance and trade, and also real estate.'
Tourism is already one of the engines of Shanghai's recovery, an employer of
100,000 people and an indirect contributor to the livelihood of thousands
more.
Figures speak for themselves. In 1992, the city received 1,253,000 visitors
from abroad, an increase of 27.6 per cent over the previous year.
Direct revenue from tourism showed an even more spectacular leap, reaching
Dollars 580m, up by 107 per cent on 1991, reflecting the impact of a number
of newly opened luxury hotels.
Mr Dao expects that tourism to grow by about 14 per cent a year, with direct
revenues reaching about Dollars 1bn at the end of the current five-year plan
in 1995. This will form about 20 per cent of China's projected total
receipts from foreign tourism in mid-decade.
He also forecast that by the year 2000 China would be earning about Dollars
10bn a year from tourism (excludings domestic tourism which is also
booming). Shanghai's contribution would be about half of the national total.
While this is quite ambitious, there is no doubt that Shanghai will gain
mass tourism appeal by the end of the decade.
Among projects are:
a Dollars 2bn scheme to develop a giant entertainment centre on the east
bank of the Huangpu river to be known as 'Fudu World'.
Overseas Chinese from Thailand are involved in this joint venture which will
comprise the biggest nightclub in Asia and other attractions, including a
Chinese theme park.
the Dollars 2bn transformation of 12 square kilometre Hengsha island at the
mouth of the Yangtze into a tourism resort with three or four golf courses,
hotels and nightclubs.
construction of at least two more golf courses in the Shanghai area as an
attraction for Japanese and other Asian tourists who comprise the bulk of
the city's visitors.
construction (already under way) of a 400 metre television tower, the
tallest in Asia, which will give sweeping views of Shanghai itself and the
Yangtze river delta.
re-development of the city centre to revitalise Shanghai's commercial hub as
a further lure for tourists. Several smart joint venture department stores,
funded by wealthy Shanghai emigres, have recently opened their doors on
Nanking Road.
Mr Dao is confident that Shanghai will have the hotels to handle the
expected wave of tourists.
The city's 93 hotels, including seven five-star establishments, offer 24,600
rooms; more hotels are on the way.
Occupancy in 1992 reached 72 per cent. This year, occupancy rates have been
averaging nearly 80 per cent.
If there is a serious drag on the development of tourism it lies in
Shanghai's decaying infrastructure and somewhat limited airport facilities.
Flights into Shanghai are heavily overbooked and the airport itself is
poorly equipped; although efforts are being made speedily to upgrade
facilities and provide additional flights.
Shanghai is the base for two airlines - Eastern and Shanghai Airlines - as
part of China's plan to decentralise its airline industry and introduce a
modicum of state-sponsored competition. Eastern now has 69 aircraft,
including the Airbus, and is extending its network to include Singapore,
Bangkok and Seoul.
Among other projects aimed at enhancing Shanghai's tourism are two
'superhighways'': one south to scenic Hanghzhou, the capital of Zhejiang
province, and the other west to Nanjing, capital of Jiangsu.
These motorways will reduce pressures on Shanghai itself by allowing the
quick movement of tourists back and forth to other important regional
centres.
Mr Dao is confident that well before the end of this decade infrastructure
problems, such as inadequate roads and rail systems, will be solved.
'As far as infrastructure is concerned, we describe this period as the
darkness before the dawn,' he said.
