FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (5):
Working together to create new products - Research and development and
marketing departments need to focus resources
AS research and development costs increase, the need to focus resources
becomes ever greater. 'R&amp;D departments must join the marketing department in
matching scientific expertise with market opportunities,' said Dr Trevor
Jones, Wellcome's director of research, development and medical, UK.
Market pressure on the world's pharmaceutical companies to find effective
new drugs is increasing. According to the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers'
Association, the US industry is spending some Dollars 12.6bn worldwide on
R&amp;D. To achieve a 15 per cent return on investment, which is the minimum a
company might expect given the risks, a 10 per cent per annum compound
growth in sales (currently Dollars 231bn) is demanded when there is downward
price pressure.
Companies most likely to be long-term winners in an increasingly aggressive
and competitive R&amp;D environment are those with effective R&amp;D management
which can make full use of the new technologies to discover new compounds
and utilise the skills of the marketing department from early stages of the
conception of an idea.
One such company is Wellcome, which believes the success of a pharmaceutical
company depends fundamentally on the quality of its R&amp;D and marketing
activities and the interaction and synergy between them.
The three phases involved in the development of a product, according to Dr
Jones, require good commercial input and this becomes more quantified and
more important as each phase progresses.
A good example of where marketing and R&amp;D can work together is on
5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, said Dr Jones. The lipoxygenase pathway is
generally responsible for inflammatory disorders and is known to be involved
in inflammation, whether it is inflammatory bowel, asthma, allergic
rhinitis, psoriasis and arthritis. Dr Jones questions where the focus is on
such products 'These are all inflammatory conditions so if a drug works here
at an early stage I want the marketing department to focus my attention on
which of these areas is likely to be the one to go for, because, otherwise
it is shotgun therapy.
'That is where I need someone to work with and agree together the focus
beyond the the discovery in the first phase,' he said. 'If it's asthma,
because it's a big pathway, my first task is to go to volunteers to see if
it works. It's then up to me to get to Phase II. That's when I need the
marketing department to give me a design and business case, because I am
going to start spending the Pounds 50m/Pounds 100m.
'The goals have changed considerably in the past five to 10 years,' said Dr
Jones. 'If a drug is not going to make Wellcome more than Pounds 50m by year
three, we are not going to do it.'
Dr Rolf Krebs, chairman of Boehringer Ingelheim and former head of Bayer
R&amp;D, said: 'Boehringer Ingelheim has no problem in choosing compounds. We
are currently in the process of setting up and testing a properly
functioning development process.
'You don't need to go for the big markets any more. You can go for niche
indications. People formerly feared to go into small markets. But it's zero
therapy, you don't know the size of the market. It depends on the economics
of the countries and the severity of the disease. It makes you look at
marketing and development in a different way.'
Dr Krebs points out that the total cost of Dollars 200m includes the
failures divided by the successful. 'You have to realise that if competing
in a highly competitive market you need a high therapeutic standard and need
far more marketing. It takes three to nine years to establish a drug. If you
have a lower therapeutic standard, but a completely new product, you need
less marketing. That may well allow you to be more profitable in niche
markets.
'The changes in technologies opens up niche markets for new drugs and this
may be acceptable in the future. If you have indications with high
therapeutic benefit you can get higher prices, and lower promotional costs.
That could make niches very attractive.'
Boehringer Ingelheim in the future will look at the medical properties of
the compound and then decide what areas they are interested in - it may have
a wide range of compounds. 'I've told the marketing people this could
happen. They have to re-organise themselves because marketing is no longer a
stable function,' said Dr Krebs. 'We may have to jump from indication to
indication'.
The view taken at Ciba-Geigy is that they will work only in areas where
there is an unmet medical need, where there is room for improvement and
where there is internal know-how.
Dr Max Wilhelm and Pierre Douaze, head of pharmaceuticals at Ciba, said: 'We
don't necessarily have to have marketing expertise. If we don't and the
market is really there we can build up expertise. We have a target of
SFr300m by five years for any drug - if not we question the development.'
They said the figure in the US is about Dollars 250m otherwise they will
license out products, especially if it is a product aimed at general
practitioners that would stretch marketing resources.
'At Astra the therapeutic areas were not chosen,' said Dr Claes Wilhelmsson,
executive vice-president of R&amp;D. 'They just developed - the medicine chose
for us. Science leads us. If we have our own competence, we will develop. We
are not going to start up areas which are not in our own field.'
Astra is prepared to adopt areas. Three years ago the company was not in
cancer, but isinto it now. Immuno-suppressors have taken it from the
respiratory field to cancer. 'We look for medicines where there are
therapeutic needs and try to develop completely new ideas rather than me-too
compounds. For example, we haven't developed an ace-inhibitor - we licensed
one in from Hoechst,' he said.
Alan Archer is editor of Financial Times Pharmaceutical Business News
