FT  27 MAR 93 / World Stock Markets: Switzerland pauses after scaling new
peaks - Analysts divided on the outlook for one of Europe's best performing
markets
Has the upper limit been reached? That headline, on a recent research
circular on the Swiss stock market, is certainly the question on investors'
minds these days.
The Swiss market was one of the best performers in the world last year, with
the all-share Swiss Performance Index (SPI) advancing 17.6 per cent to
1,238.6 at the year-end. It has got off to a brisk start this year too, with
a 6.4 per cent rise up to this week. But in the past few days it has
stalled.
'In the short term, we are going to be in a correction phase,' Mr Beat
Philipp, head of research at Bank Vontobel in Zurich predicts, and many
others agree.
There is also a consensus that the market is unlikely to fall much, if at
all. 'As long as interest rates can go down, there will be no more than a 5
per cent decline,' says Mr Bernard Tschanz, head of research at Credit
Suisse.
Analysts differ, however, on whether the Swiss market is likely to
outperform others this year. 'The upward trend is still there, but we do not
expect the market to outperform other European markets again this year,'
says Mr Serge Ledermann, head of Swiss research at the Geneva private bank
Lombard, Odier.
Mr Philipp and others are more optimistic, citing the defensive quality of
many leading Swiss equities, the positive risk premium (stock market
earnings yield over bond yield) in the Swiss market and the expectation of
lower interest rates.
The market's strength so far this year has come mainly from the declining
trend in interest rates. Reflecting that trend, the SPI bank index has risen
by a handsome 11.6 per cent. Also, investors have been buying a wider range
of equities than they had bought for many years.
Some of the best performing shares have been in the second division of
quoted companies. The new MILO index of shares of the 50 companies ranking
after the 18 in the SMI blue chip index has gained 14.2 per cent.
Cyclical stocks, many of which figure in the MILO list, have had a
particularly good run. The SPI machinery and construction indices have both
jumped by more than a fifth, partly reflecting recognition of the big effort
many of the leading companies have made in the past couple of years to
improve efficiency.
Of course, investors were also hoping that these companies would soon be
benefiting from an end to recessionary conditions in European economies, but
that prospect seems to be receding into the future. Recent profit reports
from leading industrial companies have made clear that the outlook remains
bleak.
Mr Percy Barnevik, president of ABB Asea Brown Boveri, for example, said at
the group's press conference two weeks ago that he could only hope for 'some
improvement' in 1994 and a real upturn in 1995.
Brown Boveri bearer shares, which had run up from SFr3,590 at the beginning
of the year to SFr4,040 on March 11 when the results were published, have
since eased to SFr3,920.
A more substantial shock came from Georg Fischer, the foundries group which
has been carrying out major restructuring in the past year. The bearer
shares raced up from SFr655 on January 4 to over SFr800 in early February in
anticipation of an early profits recovery. But then the group, which is
highly dependent on the German motor industry, warned that its 1992 profits
would be 'significantly below' the 1991 level, and the shares have since
settled back to around SFr750.
'We think many of these companies are now overvalued,' says Mr Wolfgang
Strub of Swiss Volksbank. Others agree that the rush to cyclicals was
premature.
However, with the continuing downward trend in interest rates, liquidity
will continue to flow into the market. Most analysts think that bank and
insurance company shares are still attractive, even after their substantial
price rises in recent months.
Then the normal tendency would be to head for the defensive stocks. Nestle,
a favourite in this category, is likely to continue to attract interest
following the publication this week of increased profits and the
announcement of a simplified share structure to appeal to international
investors.
The prospects for shares of the other defensive favourites - the big
pharmaceutical companies, Ciba-Geigy, Roche and Sandoz - are less clear.
Like pharmaceutical companies everywhere, they are suffering from
uncertainty over what will emerge from the US government's health policy
review.
The SPI chemical and pharmaceutical index is off 3 per cent since the
beginning of the year, even though the companies themselves are doing well.
Mr Tschanz takes a fairly relaxed view of the potential political problems.
He thinks the shares of the big three are fully priced at the moment, 'but
if they fall further, investors should buy them'.
Others suspect that investors are discounting the worst possible outcome
from the US policy review and that once the uncertainty about it is removed
the cloud over the shares will clear.
Mr Ledermann, on the other hand, thinks that the heyday of the
pharmaceuticals is over. 'We think that Swiss companies are well
diversified, have big research budgets and make lifesaver products. That
should enable them to do better than many of their competitors, but the era
of super performance is finished,' he predicts.
As pharmaceuticals account for roughly 30 per cent of the capitalisation of
the Swiss market, the outcome of this issue is likely to be decisive in the
market's performance this year.
