FT  17 SEP 93 / Record number of tourists visit Britain
A RECORD 18.5m tourists visited Britain in the 12 months to March, 8 per
cent more than the previous year - and the British Tourist Authority said
yesterday that it was expecting even higher numbers this year.
The authority's forecast for this year, contained in its annual report, is
based on figures for the January-to-June period when there were 8.5m
visitors, up 10 per cent on the same period last year.
Launching the report, Ms Adele Biss, who chairs the authority, said: 'We are
forecasting an even stronger year to come as we reap the benefits of
devaluation and the move away from simple sun-bathing to the more fulfilling
holidays that Britain offers.'
Spending by tourists in the year to the end of March grew less dramatically,
increasing by only 7 per cent to Pounds 7.9bn. Tourists have bought cheaper
holidays, cut short their length of stay and taken advantage of heavy
discounting by the tourist industry, the authority said.
Ms Biss added that Britain was still perceived as an expensive destination
'so delivering value for money will continue to be paramount'.
Travel from North America was up 18 per cent last year on 1991 - but tourism
from the US that year was hit badly by the Gulf war. The number of Americans
has still not recovered to 1990 levels. Growth in visitors from south-east
Asia was strong, with tourists from Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore
increasing by 22 per cent and from Japan by 21 per cent.
Of the nearly 10m tourists from other European Community countries, France
and Germany provided the greatest number of visitors: there were 2.5m
tourists from France (up 8 per cent) and 2.3m from Germany (up 6 per cent).
The authority said it had raised a record Pounds 26m from the industry for
tourism promotion worldwide. For every Pounds 1 spent on marketing overseas,
up to Pounds 56 in extra tourist expenditure was generated.
The authority, which last year had an income of more than Pounds 46m,
reported that it now promotes Britain in 65 countries and has recently set
up new offices in Milan, Lisbon and Johannesburg. Overseas staff dealt with
more than 1.5m enquiries and a further 600,000 were handled by the British
Travel Centre in London. Research showed that one in four overseas visitors
to Britain gets information from the authority before setting off, it said.
Sir John Egan is to become chairman of the London Tourist Board. Sir John
will remain as chief executive of BAA, which owns and runs the three London
airports. He takes over from Sir Hugh Bidwell, who is stepping down to spend
more time as deputy chairman of London Forum, the private-sector body which
promotes the capital.
