FT  08 FEB 93 / Survey of Iran (2): Suspicion on all sides - Foreign Policy
'SOMETIMES they appear with a deceitful smile, saying that they like Iran
and wish to establish ties. They are telling lies. Past experience has shown
that they are lying. They have a dagger hidden behind their backs and the
other hand is ready to plunder. We know their true nature.'
Ayatollah Khamenei, Iran's spiritual leader, articulated recently what is a
widely-held view in Iran of western nations and their intentions. Not
everyone would voice it so dramatically, but even among Iranians who have
long association with the US and Europe there is an ingrained readiness to
interpret western actions in the most conspiratorial way.
From Washington, elsewhere in the west and in parts of the Middle East there
has been a scarcely less instinctive willingness to view Iranian intentions
as subversive and destabilising. Mr Robert Gates, until recently director of
the CIA, thinks it probable that Iran is trying to acquire a nuclear weapon,
while the governments of Algeria and Sudan believe Tehran is funding and
encouraging Islamic fundamentalists in their countries.
The depth of suspicion on all sides makes it difficult to achieve the
progress in areas of mutual interest which President Rafsanjani and his
aides say they wish to make. There is no doubt that Iran's political
leadership has done its homework on the relationship between economic
development and foreign policy. It understands how much it needs access to
capital and technology if war damage is to be repaired, the economy
modernised, and jobs found for the large numbers of young people coming onto
the market every year.
But squaring that with the spiritual and political imperatives bequeathed by
Ayatollah Khomeini will always prove difficult for the more pragmatic
members of the Iranian establishment. Foreign policy in Iran is not made by
a single person, group or organisation. Because of that it can be subject to
domestic political rivalries, lack of management control and opportunism by
radical factions.
The example of Abu Musa island, close to the Strait of Hormuz, offers
analysts plenty of scope. At a time when Iran was being conciliatory to the
Gulf Arabs, its officials on Abu Musa - sovereignty of which is shared with
the United Arab Emirates - threw out some teachers who it claimed were a
threat to security. From there the situation deteriorated with the UAE
taking the issue to the UN and Iran frightening its neighbours again with
increasingly belligerent statements and claims of full sovereignty over the
island.
It could be that the whole episode stemmed from an unauthorised action by
Iranian officials on Abu Musa from which the government could not easily
dissociate itself. It could equally be that Iran wanted to remind the Gulf
Arabs of its presence. Tehran will not quickly forget that it was Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait which funded Iraqi President Saddam Hussein during the
Iran-Iraq war and indirectly provided the weapons used for the destruction
of Iranian cities and villages. No word has been uttered by the Arabs about
reparations, although the huge sums being spent by those two countries on
new weapons is being noted.
Iran is also sensitive to the refusal of the Gulf Co-operation Council
(Saudi Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates and Qatar) to
involve it in any of the security arrangements for the region, such as the
Damascus Declaration which would have given Egypt and Syria a role in the
defence of the Gulf. Tehran continues to be unhappy with Saudi Arabia's oil
production policy, believing that it is doing America's bidding by keeping
oil prices relatively low.
Taken together it is unsurprising that the Iranian regime should feel that
the US and its regional clients are attempting to exclude or marginalise its
political and economic role. It is a policy that the Iranians are bound to
resist and there are indications that an additional line of response has
been to encourage where possible the rash of territorial disputes between
GCC members in the past year.
Iran should not be surprised that other countries feel threatened by it,
however much Mr Rafsanjani's officials insist that it intends to export
nothing more subversive than ideas. Islamic fundamentalism is gaining
adherents in the Middle East and does pose the single most easily
identifiable threat to several regimes. The question all these regimes seek
to answer is how much the process is being aided by Tehran.
In Sudan and Lebanon there is a clear Iranian presence. The Iranians make no
secret of their support for Hammas in the occupied territories and their
total opposition to the US-sponsored Middle East peace process. They are
privately very contemptuous of the Gulf monarchies and are trying hard to
expand political and commercial ties with the central Asian republics.
Iran has bought weapons from China and made overtures to North Korea. Its
list of activities may be in keeping with a wholly independent foreign
policy, but not one likely to promote closer relations with western nations.
Seen from Tehran, that is not Iran's problem. If there is agreement on
anything in Iran, it is that other countries must adjust to the reality of
the Islamic revolution.
At the same time Iran will be acutely sensitive to anything which hints at
paternalism, neo-colonialism or even criticism of its domestic affairs,
especially if related to human rights. And it sees nothing contradictory in
sentencing to death a British author accused of blasphemy.
The importance of the Iranian market at a time of world recession has
encouraged western governments to adjust to these difficulties except, as in
the case of Britain, when the issue of Salman Rushdie so angered public
opinion that it was bound to drive a wedge between the two countries.
Lack of a firm reassurance by Iran about its current intentions towards Mr
Rushdie will continue to hinder the chances of any improvement.
Such incidents seem likely to remain an unpredictable element in Iran's
dealings with the rest of the world and will continue to jeopardise the
prospects for more durable relations.
