FT  15 MAY 93 / Palestinians set out demands
THE Palestinians are unlikely to attend a further round of Middle East peace
talks without Israel first lifting its closure of the West Bank and Gaza
Strip and accelerating the return of Palestinian deportees in south Lebanon,
a Palestine Liberation Organisation spokesman said yesterday.
Mr Jamil Hilal, director of PLO information, said 'very obvious, practical
steps' would be required from Israel before the Palestinian delegation could
return for a tenth round of talks in Washington.
The ninth round finished on Thursday with no signs of progress and no date
set for a resumption. Optimism at the start of the three weeks of talks
foundered when the Palestinians rejected first an Israeli, then a US-drafted
document aimed at bridging differences on a statement of principles to guide
negotiations.
Mr Hilal said the PLO leadership in Tunis had been angered by the US
proposal, the first direct American intervention in the talks since their
inception, which he called 'identical to the Israeli position'. The Israeli
delegates were yesterday still examining the document, which sets out a
formula to govern talks towards Palestinian autonomy in the occupied
territories.
Mr Hilal also said the Palestinians were disappointed by the US, Egypt and
the Gulf states for a failure to deliver on promises made before the latest
round of talks and which had finally persuaded the Palestinians to attend.
Chief among these was an apparent undertaking to return more of the 400
Palestinian deportees in south Lebanon and, from some Gulf states, to
provide at least Dollars 70m (Pounds 45m) in immediate aid for Palestinian
institutions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Mr Hilal said: 'These steps
and others will have to be taken, as a minimum, before the Palestinians will
return to the table.'
The next focus of Arab diplomacy bearing on the talks will be a foreign
ministers' meeting of all the Arab parties, probably in Amman early next
month. The Palestinians will seek a common declaration from the Syrian,
Jordanian and Lebanese ministers for a set of conditions which must be met
before talks can resume.
