FT  29 JUN 93 / (CORRECTED) FT Exporter (18): Risky states offer some
prospects - The potential for sustained expansion of sales / Latin America
Correction (published 14th July 1993) appended to this article.
LATIN AMERICA is dominated by three main economies, those of Brazil,
Argentina and Mexico, for each of which the US is the main foreign trading
partner, with Germany the principal European supplier of goods.
The region contains six other substantial and growing economies - Chile,
Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador and Venezuela - of varying economic
performance and potential.
Most of South America's economies are capable of lurching from relative
prosperity and stability one year to economic crisis the next, but of the
three main economies Mexico and Argentina perhaps offer the greatest
potential for exporters with an eye for sales growth over the next 18
months.
Brazil has to tackle domestic problems, the resolution of which hinges on a
successful conclusion to the protracted Brady plan debt negotiations. As a
result, it could be some time before it offers good prospects of sales
growth to exporters.
Mexico is the largest importer of the three, with total imports in 1993
expected to exceed Dollars 58bn (Pounds 37.6bn). Semi-manufactures,
chemicals and medicinal intermediate products may amount to Dollars 33bn,
with capital equipment imports forecast to reach Dollars 13bn, and consumer
durables Dollars 8bn. Around 80 per cent of these products are sourced from
the US, and the North American Free Trade Association (Nafta) accord should
cement this dominant position. Payment delays average two to three months.
Mexico has a soaring current account deficit which will reach Dollars 29bn
in 1993 and is forecast to swell to Dollars 35bn in 1994. The trade
liberalisation measures of the 1990s and the structural reforms, including
privatisation, have been responsible in part for this. However, because
capital investment inflows have been so strong - around Dollars 15bn is
forecast for 1993 - total debt servicing of around Dollars 11bn in 1993
should be comfortably manageable. The peso has remained strong because of
high domestic interest rates, currently 14 per cent, and this, in turn, has
encouraged companies to finance capital expenditure with equity, rather than
bank loans. Germany, with 5.7 per cent of Mexico's imports, and France, with
2.5 per cent, are the country's main EC trading partners.
Argentina, with a GDP of Dollars 283bn, growing at 6 per cent a year, and a
low inflation rate by historical standards, of 12.5 per cent, is enjoying
increasing economic success. The main doubt is the large current account
deficit, the growth of which is being exacerbated by the government's
determination to fix the peso at par with the US dollar. This affects labour
costs which will have to fall to relieve pressure on the country's
competitiveness.
Imports, at Dollars 14.5bn in 1992, are growing at more than 20 per cent a
year, although the sharp cut in the expansion of M1 money supply so far in
1993 (13 per cent in 1993 from 49 per cent in 1992) should force households
to adjust their expenditure to a dwindling supply of domestic credit. Of the
Dollars 17.8bn of imports expected in 1993, around Dollars 6.4bn will be
manufactured product imports. However, payment delays are tending to worsen
 -currently up to four months in 1993 from three months in 1992.
Export credit agencies continue to offer a fairly generous volume of cover.
Germany's Hermes, for instance, is believed to have more than Dollars 180m
of short term cover, and the US Export-Import Bank (EximBank) has
underwritten around Dollars 70m of short term commitments.
This month, the UK Trade Secretary, Michael Heseltine, announced in Buenos
Aires the resumption of ECGD medium term cover for Argentina, commenting
that the move had been made possible now that Argentina had negotiated its
official and commercial bank debts, and was 'a recognition of the country's
success in implementing its economic reform programme'.
Elsewhere in the region, the other key economies in terms of GDP and
population size are Colombia (population 36m; GDP Dollars 50bn); Chile
(population 14m; GDP Dollars 40bn); Peru (population 22m; GDP Dollars 47bn);
Venezuela (population 20m; GDP Dollars 64bn); Ecuador (population 11m; GDP
Dollars 14bn) and Bolivia (population 7.5m; GDP Dollars 6.75bn). Exporters
and trade financiers are currently likely to find Bolivia, Ecuador and
Venezuela less satisfactory markets than Chile, Peru and Colombia.
Bolivia is facing a high trade deficit, lengthening payment delays - from
three months last year to current levels of around five months - and a
worsening relationship with the IMF as its structural adjustment programme
falters in the shadow of the forthcoming elections.
Ecuador is contending with high inflation, high currency risk, low foreign
exchange reserves, worsening exchange transfer delays, increasing political
unrest, and high foreign debt: its debt to GDP ratio is now over 100 per
cent.
Venezuela is struggling to handle a big public sector deficit, a high
current account deficit, a debt to GDP ratio of 58 per cent, and an
over-reliance on petroleum product exports.
Chile, meanwhile, has introduced structural reforms necessary to reduce its
debt and improve its internal domestic finances. Inward investment has
boomed as the Government has embarked on a determined privatisation
programme, and mineral and food exports were growing rapidly until falls in
world prices began to dent prospects of further growth in 1993.
Nevertheless, import volumes are set to maintain their growth. Imports now
total Dollars 11bn, of which capital equipment comprises Dollars 2.6bn and
energy products a further Dollars 1.3bn. Germany is the EC's main exporter
providing 6.5 per cent of all imports. While the current account is in
deficit to the equivalent of 4 per cent of GDP (Dollars 1.6bn), this is
readily financeable, and, with Dollars 12bn of projects under active
development, export credit insurance is widely available among most of the
main credit insurers.
Colombia, with imports running at Dollars 7.5bn per annum (of which
intermediate goods comprise Dollars 3.5bn and capital equipment Dollars
1.7bn) is a sound market into which EC exporters are selling vigorously at
the present time. With high foreign exchange reserves (Dollars 7.3bn),
import cover at eight months and transfer delays at less than two months, it
is now producing few problems for credit insurers.
However, potential problems loom. Inflation is stubbornly high at 25 per
cent, and next year's presidential election, already vigorously contested in
the media, is creating political uncertainty. In turn, the latter is
delaying decisions on Colombia's two main domestic policy issues - how to
diversify the economy away from its reliance on oil, and how to improve the
productivity of Colombia's ailing State Oil Company, PDVSA, where
privatisation proposals are on hold.
Peru may be a more attractive target for exporters from the EC. Following
the recent election of President Fujimori, it is set for a period of
stability and growth. With a population of 22m and a GDP of Dollars 46bn,
now growing at 3.1 per cent a year, it offers useful prospects, particularly
for exporters associated with the power, construction and the fishing
industries. These are the expected growth sectors as privatisation plans
release pent-up demand.
Although Peru does have a high foreign currency debt - its debt to GDP ratio
is on the high side at 47.8 per cent - servicing at 2.4 per cent of GDP is
not a daunting problem in the light of the capital repatriation taking
place, following the election. Foreign investment is likely to be attracted
by plans not only to privatise the two electricity utilities, but also the
mining conglomerate Centromin, and the telecoms authority EntelPeru.
Many bankers feel that Peru is well placed to settle its Dollars 7.5bn Paris
Club rescheduling this year, and could then draw down its recently approved
IMF extended fund facility as well as Dollars 1bn of World Bank loans. A
Brady Plan restructuring is expected to be negotiated towards the end of
1993. EC export credit agencies are reassessing their country limit
availabilities for Peru, following the improvement in the country's economic
prospects.
James Fairrie is a trade finance specialist
CORRECTION
PDV SA of Venezuela was wrongly referred to as the state oil company of
Colombia on page XV of FT Exporter (June 29). The Colombian national company
is Ecopetrol.
