FT  10 MAY 93 / Whaling countries seek an end to ban
YESTERDAY was 'whale meat day' at the Kujira-ya restaurant in Shibuya,
central Tokyo. For Y100 (58p), customers could buy a lunch of the dark red,
fat-free meat that would normally cost them Y1,200 or more.
That offer is part of the Japanese government's campaign to remind its
people of their 'whaling tradition' as delegates gather for the 45th annual
meeting of the International Whaling Commission, opening today in Kyoto.
The meeting of the 39 member countries, the first in Japan for a quarter of
a century, promises to be one of the stormiest. It inherits the unresolved
dispute from last year's meeting in Glasgow, when Norway announced it would
start commercial whaling this spring, despite the IWC's 10-year moratorium.
As the meeting opens, some Norway's whaling boats are already at sea, more
than 100 miles inside the Arctic Circle, and plan to kill up to 800 whales
whether the IWC gives permission or not. Norway can claim it is not flouting
international law because it shrewdly launched an official objection when
the IWC ban began. But its stand has roused opposition to its application to
join the European Community, which has an anti-whaling policy.
This year Japan has said it too may return to the hunt: it wants to take
2,000 whales a year. It has joined Norway in lobbying for an end to the ban,
and has hinted that it could withdraw from the IWC if this week's meeting is
dominated 'by emotion and not by scientific evidence'.
The Japanese whale-eating tradition is not as firmly entrenched as the
government sometimes suggests - whale became a popular source of protein in
the harsh years immediately following the second world war, but it fell from
30 per cent of total meat consumption in 1965 to 1 per cent in 1985, and has
fallen further since Japan observed the ban.
The IWC ban, which both Japan and Norway observed from 1987, has not stopped
them hunting whales. Thanks to a clause permitting 'scientific whaling',
Japan has continued catching 240-330 a year, and Norway around 100 a year.
However after scientists remove the stomachs for analysis, the meat goes
straight to local restaurants.
However, opposition to commercial whaling is divided, a handicap to
effective lobbying. Some, including prominent international scientists,
appear to accept the principle of 'sustainable' hunting, but share the
concerns of the IWC's Scientific Committee that it is hard to estimate whale
numbers accurately, and that not enough is yet known about their habits to
set quotas safely.
Others are opposed to commercial whaling on the grounds that killing by
harpoon is cruel - Britain is firmly in this camp. Conservationist
countries, led by the French, are bringing their own proposal to Kyoto: the
creation of the world's largest 'whale sanctuary' around the Antarctic, to
include much of the Japanese whaling waters.
Neither the sanctuary nor the lifting of the ban appears yet to have enough
support to be carried at this week's meeting. But with a year to prepare for
this confrontation, neither side has come to Kyoto in a mood for compromise.
