FT  12 MAY 93 / Japan to reaffirm UN commitment
MR Kiichi Miyazawa, Japan's prime minister, is expected today to deliver a
strong reaffirmation of the country's commitment to the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, as opposition demands for an immediate
pull-out intensified.
The Japanese government has been under extreme pressure since the killing
last week of a civilian policeman in an ambush, and Mr Miyazawa has been
advised to make an address that shows the government is both concerned about
the safety of the peacekeepers and is committed to the UN operation.
However, the National Police Agency, which has responsibility for the 75
civilian police officers sent to Cambodia, continued to argue yesterday with
the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (Untac) over the
duties given to Japanese officers.
Officials at the NPA say Japanese police, who are not carrying arms, have
been given inappropriate responsibilities such as acting as bodyguards and,
in some cases, have not been given sufficient water or provisions by the UN
authorities.
Relations between Untac and the NPA have been strained since about eight
Japanese police officers returned to Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital,
without official approval after the killing of the Japanese officer. The
police officers have since returned to their posts.
A Japanese television news programme poll of 690 people last weekend found
that 52 per cent believe the police and 600 military personnel should be
withdrawn, while 37 per cent believe they should remain in the country.
The killing of the officer has stirred debate over whether the conflict in
Cambodia now fits the five principles which supposedly govern Japanese
participation in international peacekeeping operations. One of those
principles is that a ceasefire agreement is in place, and opposition parties
say the Cambodian ceasefire has collapsed.
Meanwhile, a six-member advance party left Tokyo yesterday for Mozambique,
where 48 Japanese military personnel are due to assist in another UN
operation.
The other members of the group are due to leave before the end of this month
and will co-ordinate transport operations.
Mr Goh Chok Tong, Singapore's prime minister, yesterday suggested that China
will not be a significant military threat to the region over the next five
years, but he warned that the country's rapid economic growth could be
accompanied by an expansion of military ambitions in about 20 years' time.
In a meeting with Mr Toshio Nakayama, the director-general of Japan's
Defence Agency, the prime minister said that the US-Japan-China triangular
relationship had to remain stable to ensure that China had no incentive to
build up its military capability.
