FT  02 OCT 93 / A life on the Islington waves . . .: Lucy Kellaway discovers
why today's young sea cadets find drill such a thrill
TUCKED IN behind the elegant squares of landlocked Canonbury, in north
London, is a ship. This great vessel with its muster stations, its control
room, its metal bunks, and its velvet and gold officers' mess, is in perfect
working order and sets sail twice a week. On board are 40 inner-city youth
saluting, stomping up and down and bellowing orders as if a gale was
whipping around.
This is Islington's Sea Cadet Corps. Banned by the council from parading in
Islington's parks and from recruiting members in the borough's schools, the
unit is happy underground in its converted London Electricity Board
substation on Canonbury Road.
All over the country there are some 16,000 boys and girls between 10 and 18
who each week put on their sailors' hats and shine their shoes until the can
see their faces in the toe caps. They shake tin cans for good causes, play
in military bands, have their uniforms inspected, learn old-fashioned,
patriotic values and, if they are lucky, go to sea on their very own ship,
the TS Royalist.
Even more out of kilter with civilian 1990s Britain are the grown up
volunteers. By day they are lorry drivers or firemen, but at night are
fearless leaders, immaculate in their sea dress and commanding the
unquestioning obedience of their ship's company.
Lt Cmdr Bev Johns, Islington's commanding officer, is in the construction
trade. He designed and built the Canonbury ship, and spends nearly every
evening and weekend on sea cadet business. He is married to the movement:
his handsome wife is his First Lieutenant, his grown up daughter, his Petty
Officer.
The three of them run a tight ship. Kind and supportive to good boys and
girls, they brook no opposition. Aspiring cadets are told what they are
letting themselves in for from the outset: 'We are on first name terms here,
and my first name is spelt S-I-R', Johns tells each newcomer.
Those same 'first name' terms apply to his wife and daughter: everyone on
board is aware of their rank and behaves accordingly. Anyone who does not
tow the line is told by Johns: 'Knuckle under son, or it's O-U-T'. He tells
with satisfaction how he has recently done a little pruning among the older
cadets who were 'getting stroppy, not turning up, or not turning up in
uniform'.
There was no sign of stroppiness among the ships company on the Tuesday
night I visited. At precisely 20.00 hours a bugle sounded and Lt Cmdr Johns
and I joined the ship's company on deck. 'One minute to colours' someone
yells. 'Ships company turn right and left'. With perfect military timing
about three dozen boys and girls do as they are told. Some giggle a little
as I collide with a retreating flag bearer, but most are looking straight
ahead, intent on the job in hand. Eventually, with a good deal more shouting
and stamping, flags are hoisted, and the order 'Colours completed]' goes
out.
The bugle sounds again, and the company disperses into classes, to practice
in the band, to learn the history of the sea cadets or to prepare to climb
the greasy pole to the next rank up.
Upstairs in the officers' mess, which is modelled on Nelson's cabin in the
Victory, a nine-year-old in full uniform stands ramrod straight, staring in
front of him. 'Sir]', he salutes as he places a plate of wafer biscuits on
the table.
'He's my mascot', says Johns. 'He first came here with his older brother,
and used to be a real S-O-D, but look at him now.'
Of the 40 cadets in his unit, Johns reckons only five or six have what he
calls a 'proper family life'. For the rest he acts by turn as a surrogate
father, a welfare officer and a vigilante. 'We've had everything here', he
says. 'Females who've been sexually abused, males who've been sexually
abused, children with burn marks.' He has an effective way of dealing with
fathers who beat up their children. 'A young boy came here with a cut on his
head. I decided enough is enough, and summoned two of my sergeants and we
went round to see him. I said 'If your son has one mark on his body, we'll
be round to repeat whatever you have done to him.'
After tea and biscuits in the mess we descend the precarious ship's ladder
so that I can chat to the cadets themselves. The band's deafening rendering
of When the Saints Go Marching In is interrupted, and Petty Officer Johns
lines up a selection of cadets to be interviewed. 'You] You] You]' she
barks, picking out a selection and making sure each rank, sex and race is
represented. They stand to attention in a line of declining seniority, and,
like the Queen, I pass along saying a few words to each one.
Most said they joined because relations or friends were in the cadets,
although one girl had been inspired by a visit to the Royal Tournament, and
another had 'read an advertisement in a book'. All said they liked the
drill, the band, the trips, the camping, the uniform. One 11-year-old simply
liked 'evryfink'. They showed badges with pride: one has earned a cooks
badge, another the badge of electrical engineer.
Indeed, they like it so well, that almost all want to join the Royal Navy or
the Marines, so that they can go on being sea cadets forever.
The Islington sea cadets, it seems, are in blissful ignorance of the fact
that navy and the marines are in retreat, and that the Wrens are to be wound
up altogether. One boy said he was doing an arts and design course as a fall
back, although most seemed to think that a future at sea was waiting for
them.
Whatever the cadets themselves think, the movement's top brass has long
ceased to justify its existance in terms of creating future sailors. The sea
cadets, which are partly funded by, yet independent from, the navy, hope
that their fortunes can wax even while those of the navy wane.
Captain Peter Grindal, a retired naval officer who has been running the
cadets for a year, has a master plan for a nautical, rather than military
youth organisation with a powerful social conscience. He has called in the
image consultants, the advertising agencies, and the public relations
experts, in the hope of increasing the number of cadets, and filling the
movement's coffers with private money at the same time.
The advertising people have come up with the idea that being a sea scout is
'Serious Fun'. According to Grindal the serious bit involves teaching them
to to 'dress properly, stand still and do as they are told'. It is about
teaching young people 'willing obedience and then as they get older teaching
them to lead'. The fun part is the messing about on boats and the
camaraderie.
'We want to attract people for whom we can do the most, and that means the
people who have the least. We give them a sense of belonging when they don't
belong to anything else'.
The cadets themselves are not just recipients of charity, but donors of it
too. At Stoke Newington a group of 20 boys and 18 girls are to be found
weeding and scrubbing graffiti off the local war memorial, and running bingo
sessions at a nearby old peoples' home.
In spite of the good civilian work, the cadets remain heavily dependent on
the navy for both money and magic. Should the Navy decide it can no longer
afford to supply the Pounds 7m or so every year, the cadets would have to
shake their tin cans very hard indeed. And should one day the uniforms go,
one wonders if they would all turn up week after week if they could not
indulge in the fantasy of the regiment at sea.
