FT  07 OCT 93 / International Company News: Swedes split over 'foreign
invasion' - Surge in inward investment has sparked debate
THE RESURGENT argument in Sweden this week over the merger of Volvo's car
and truck operations with Renault of France has highlighted a wider debate
about a growing trend of foreign influence in Swedish industry.
Volvo's plan to hand over its automotive business to Renault, in exchange
for a 35 per cent share of the merged company, has excited most comment
because of Volvo's position as the traditional champion of Sweden's
impressive industrial base. But anxiety over the fate of Volvo has been
fuelled by a perception that it presages a flow of control of industry out
of a country weakened by three years of recession.
The bid by Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), which like Volvo has suffered
heavy losses recently, to combine forces under the Alcazar project with
three other European airlines is a prominent example. Although only
one-third Swedish owned, SAS is headquartered in Stockholm and, until last
week, was led by a Swede, Mr Jan Carlzon. He has already stepped down at SAS
and if Alcazar goes ahead, Stockholm will become no more than a branch
feeder to the new alliance's main hubs elsewhere.
Less obvious, but no less significant, has been a dramatic surge in foreign
investment in Swedish companies in the last year through the Stockholm stock
exchange. The relaxation of restrictions on foreign buyers of Swedish shares
 -the last of which were scrapped at the beginning of this year - and the
sharp devaluation of the Swedish krona have combined to produce
unprecedented levels of overseas investment.
In the first eight months of this year, foreigners accounted for 28 per cent
of the SKr186bn (Dollars 23bn) turnover on the stock exchange, pushing up
the foreign share of the market's total capitalisation to some 24 per cent.
In 1991, the level was just 10 per cent.
The impact on many of Sweden's blue-chip companies has been striking.
Foreigners hold 44 per cent of the capital in Ericsson, the
telecommunications company, compared with 27 per cent at the end of last
year.
In Astra, the pharmaceuticals giant, the level is now 38 per cent; in SKF,
the ball-bearing maker, it is 34 per cent; and in Electrolux, the white
goods manufacturer, 26 per cent. In Scandinaviska Enskilda Banken, foreign
holdings have jumped from 3 per cent to 15 per cent this year.
Inevitably, perhaps, this trend has produced an emotional response among
many Swedes, which culminated in a revealing outburst last week at a private
gathering by Mr Leif Ostling, president of the truck maker Scania. He called
the Volvo-Renault deal a tragedy, condemned Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, the Volvo
chief, as 'Sweden's biggest destroyer of industry' and said Swedes were
'spineless' for not speaking out.
But while many acknowledge a similar gut reaction, the considered analysis
of the government, trade unions, business organisations and shareholders is
very different.
The centre-right government of Prime Minister Carl Bildt, the Social
Democratic opposition and the labour unions continue to support the
Volvo-Renault merger. Nor did it escape notice at Volvo that Saab, the
carmaking sister company of Scania, has only survived because of a 50 per
cent share taken by General Motors of the US, which now runs the company
under a British chief executive.
Aktiespararna, the small shareholders' association which opposes the
Volvo-Renault deal, is doing so because of its doubts about the valuation of
Volvo assets in the merger and worries about the privatisation of Renault,
not the principle of Volvo becoming a junior partner to the French company.
'In principle we are for an international society - an open society with no
borders where you can move your capital as you want,' says Mr Lars-Erik
Forsgardh, president of Aktiespararna.
Mr Bjorn Karlin, head of an organisation that promotes shareholding, points
out that Sweden has until recently had relatively low levels of foreign
investment for a country with such a large number of international
companies.
With local capital investment at a low ebb because of the recession, and
with a need for Sweden, which is applying to join the European Community, to
integrate more closely into the European economy, Mr Karlin says foreign
ownership is widely supported.
'You will not find any real opposition in political and business circles.
Our companies have an urgent need for risk capital and the money is not
available in this country,' he says.
Moreover, Swedish companies have themselves been eager acquirers of foreign
companies in recent years - notably in the forestry sector.
Previous mergers, like the combination of Asea with Switzerland's Brown
Boveri and the merger of Avesta with the stainless steel division of British
Steel to form Avesta Sheffield, have led to strengthened groups in which
Swedish interests have remained prominent.
Of course, as in the case of Volvo, there are worries that jobs will leak
abroad when Swedish companies come under foreign influence or control.
But Mr Per-Olof Edin, chief economist at LO, the blue-collar trade union
federation, takes a sober view of this, explaining that the LO accepts that
companies must act in their own interests, not those of the country.
'Yes we are all sad about Volvo. But if you are rational you have to accept
the necessity of the merger. We in Sweden have been too dependent on Volvo
and Saab. In the long run employment will fall in these sectors. It has a
better chance to be managed smoothly this way. Our members are better off in
this new situation.'
