FT  06 AUG 93 / Bosnian Serbs ready for the final assault: General's
campaign has been a mixture of brilliance and brutality
GENERAL Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander whose forces have this week
been tightening their siege of Sarajevo, appears to be indulging his
uniquely macabre sense of humour.
In flagrant defiance of the UN ban on flights over Bosnia, the general tours
Serb positions in the hills around the battered capital in a Gazelle
helicopter.
Swaggering in his peaked world war one cap, he thumbs his nose at the
western countries' talk of air strikes against his forces, and boasts about
how he has saved up Sarajevo for last.
Gen Mladic, who has masterminded the Serbs' campaign to carve an 'ethnically
cleansed' mini-state out of Bosnia with a mixture of brilliance and
brutality, has consolidated control over strategic heights around the
Bosnian capital, with its 380,000 trapped inhabitants.
Serb guns, tanks, and soldiers have now cut off the last route used by the
mainly Moslem Bosnian army to smuggle ammunition, weapons and supplies to
their besieged city.
What, it must be asked, can he and his fellow Bosnian Serb leaders want?
After all, they already control 72 per cent of Bosnian territory, and the
mainly Moslem Bosnian government of President Alija Izetbegovic has all but
admitted defeat by bowing to the republic's ethnic partition.
Gen Mladic has never been ambiguous about his aim. He has publicly advocated
the 'total military defeat of the Moslems' as the only means of achieving
peace in Bosnia. If achieving that means securing the fall of Sarajevo, it
seems, then so be it. In that sense, the siege of the capital is the
centrepiece of Gen Mladic's military strategy.
The men who claim to be his political masters, however, have sometimes given
voice to different priorities.
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, in particular, appears still to be in
a hurry to sign a peace agreement in the belief that it will prompt the
easing of sanctions on what remains of Yugoslavia.
In turn, he may be applying political pressure on Mr Radovan Karadzic, the
Bosnian Serbs' political leader, to appear more pliant in the Geneva peace
negotiations.
Hence, perhaps, Mr Karadzic's announcement yesterday ordering Serb forces to
withdraw from key heights overlooking Sarajevo and open two roads leading to
the city - with the stated aim of forcing Mr Izetbegovic to abandon his
boycott of the talks.
Gen Mladic's reaction, at least for public consumption, was derision.
He scoffed to UN officers: 'Once the Serb flag is flying, we never take it
down. The UN flag can fly alongside but below the Serb flag.'
In reality, it is unlikely that Gen Mladic is totally at odds with Mr
Karadzic. Instead, the apparent split between them on this as on previous
occasions may be a convenient ruse aimed at sowing confusion among the
Serbs' western adversaries. Mr Karadzic himself has made no secret of the
fact that he, too, has designs on Sarajevo itself.
To back up their claims to at least part of the capital, Serb officials have
been circulating fictitious maps purporting to show that Serbs comprised a
majority in many city districts. The international mediators, Lord Owen and
Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, appear to have been persuaded that Serbs have an
historical claim to part of Sarajevo.
Before the war, however, according to pre-war statistics collated by
municipal authorities, Moslems represented the biggest group in each
municipality,
But there are differences of emphasis at least between the Gen Mladic and Mr
Karadzic.
Gen Mladic is said to have been irked by Mr Karadzic's pledge in the Geneva
negotiations to hand over territory to the Moslems. According to diplomats,
Mr Karadzic has agreed that the proposed Moslem republic should cover 30 per
cent of Bosnian territory, as insisted on by the EC and UN mediators.
