FT  24 FEB 93 / UK Company News: Far-flung markets fatten Unilever -
Operating profits rise 18.3% outside Europe and the United States
UNILEVER'S long-standing commitment to far-flung markets in the developing
world paid off handsomely last year, when operations outside the United
States and Europe emerged as its star performers.
Operating profits in its 'Rest of the World' sector rose 18.3 per cent from
Pounds 420m to Pounds 497m (Dollars 705.7m), measured at average exchange
rates, while sales increased 15.3 per cent to Pounds 5.34bn.
The operating margin widened from 9.1 per cent to 9.3 per cent, the highest
of any of the group's regional sectors.
The results were boosted by particularly strong showings in central and
south-east Asia and parts of Latin America. Unilever increased volume growth
by more than 10 per cent in 15 countries across the region, and by more than
five per cent in eight countries.
Mr Michael Perry, chairman, said he saw many further opportunities for
growth, particularly in the Middle East, Vietnam and China, where Unilever
recently began making skin care products.
In Europe, operating profit stagnated at Pounds 1.24bn on sales of Pounds
14.5bn - which compared with sales of Pounds 13.8bn the previous year -
while operating margins narrowed from 9 per cent to 8.5 per cent.
The company said the flat results were entirely because of exceptional
items, mainly related to restructuring costs, and to disposals, notably of
the 4P packaging subsidiary and agri-business activities. Heavy investment
in eastern Europe also held back margins.
Although professional markets, such as food service, had suffered from
recession, consumer products had held up better in Europe. Personal products
and foods in Mediterranean markets had an 'outstanding' year, while ice
cream and tea had performed strongly and frozen foods had shone in Italy.
The economic decline in Germany had been sharper than Unilever had expected
six months ago, although it expected an upturn by the end of the year.
However, Mr Perry was cautious about prospects in Britain, where there was
no sign of any improvement in trading conditions and volume growth remained
difficult.
He said sterling's departure from the exchange rate mechanism last autumn
was 'inevitable and desirable' and would help Unilever's British plants to
compete more effectively. But he foresaw no rapid, large-scale shift in
sourcing to the UK.
In the US, operating profit recovered strongly after a poor 1991, from
Pounds 336m to Pounds 385m on sales up from Pounds 4.77bn to Pounds 4.85bn.
Margins improved from 7 per cent to 7.9 per cent.
Mr Perry said the US food business had enjoyed strong volume and profit
increases, although Ragu spaghetti sauce had suffered from fierce price
competition.
Prestige perfumes and personal products did well in the US, but mass markets
proved difficult although demand began to pick up by the end of the year.
Unilever acquired 22 businesses last year for a total of about Pounds 310m,
which will add Pounds 440m to sales on a full-year basis. It made 21
disposals, which raised about Pounds 210m excluding the proceeds from 4P,
most of which were received in January last year.
