FT  07 AUG 93 / Pupil staying-on rate lags competitors
A SMALLER proportion of those aged 16 to 18 stay in full-time education in
the UK than in any of its leading industrial competitors, the Department for
Education said yesterday.
The department's figures compare participation in education in eight
European Community countries, as well as Australia, Canada, Japan, Sweden
and the US. They show that full-time participation by 16 to 18-year-olds as
a whole is only 40 per cent in the UK, while the rate for other countries
varies from 47 per cent in Italy, where the school-leaving age is 14, to 89
per cent in Germany.
Earlier this week Sir Ron Dearing - who heads the government's review of the
national curriculum - announced that he was to consult on introducing more
vocational education for 14-year-olds in an attempt to encourage children to
stay in training for longer. He pointed out that in France, Germany and the
Netherlands, more than 25 per cent of children above the age of 14 go to
schools specialising in vocational education.
The latest figures are likely to add impetus to Sir Ron's call for reform,
which was endorsed by both employers and teaching unions.
Full-time participation by 16-year-olds in the UK is only 57 per cent - only
Italy has a lower rate, with 54 per cent. Canada has the highest rate at 100
per cent and Germany has a rate of 99 per cent.
The UK has the highest participation in part-time education - such as
evening courses and training courses with employers - at 31 per cent. Once
part-time education is included, the UK has a total participation rate of 71
per cent, ahead of Italy (65 per cent), Spain (61 per cent), and Australia
(69 per cent).
The data shows that the total staying-on rate in the UK improved by 6
percentage points from 65 per cent in 1982 to 71 per cent in 1990. Yet
stronger improvements were registered by France, up 16 percentage points,
and Spain and Belgium (14 points).
Rates of participation increased more for women than for men in every
country except Spain.
All countries saw staying-on rates decline each year after the age of 16.
This effect is most marked in the UK, where only 23 per cent of 18-year-olds
stay in full-time education. In Germany the figure is 80 per cent, while
none of the other EC countries surveyed has a rate of less than 41 per cent.
According to the department, the UK's staying-on rate has improved by about
10 percentage points since 1990. This is partly due to the 5 per cent fall
in the number in this age group.
Labour said that high unemployment had also encouraged children who would
prefer to look for a job to stay in school. The department attributes the
rise in staying-on to new vocational qualifications.
International Statistical Comparisons of the Participation in Education and
Training of 16 to 18-year-olds. DfE Analytical Services Branch, Mowden Hall,
Staindrop Road, Darlington, Co. Durham, DL3 9BG. Free.
