FT  27 AUG 93 / VW and the Lopez espionage affair: Fascinated rivals watch
'miracle man' self-destructing - Kevin Done uncovers some private thoughts
on the VW affair in other boardrooms / The Industry
VOLKSWAGEN'S rivals are watching with horrified fascination as the top
management of the leading European car producer threatens to implode.
The group's components suppliers, which are bearing the brunt of
Volkswagen's frantic attempts to cut costs, react vitriolically in private
towards the new regime in Wolfsburg headed by Mr Ferdinand Piech and Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua.
In public they are more circumspect. After all, Volkswagen is one of their
biggest customers.
The fate of Volkswagen leaves no part of the motor industry untouched. It is
the world's fourth largest vehicle maker, behind only General Motors, Ford
and Toyota. For eight years in succession it has sold more cars in western
Europe than any other carmaker and in the process has established a clear
lead over its rivals.
It is the main European standard bearer in the world motor industry and
Europe's best attempt yet at creating a global carmaker with manufacturing
operations stretching from eastern Europe to Mexico and Brazil, South Africa
and China.
In different parts of the world it has formed significant alliances with
other giants in the industry, most importantly Ford in Latin America and
Europe and Toyota in Europe and Japan.
It is a key customer of many of the world's leading components suppliers
with purchases of parts and materials worldwide totalling DM53.8bn (Pounds
21.5bn) last year. The tremors from Wolfsburg travel round the world.
The unanimous view among rival carmakers and top suppliers is that Mr Lopez
cannot last much longer. And most are beginning to doubt that Mr Piech will
survive Mr Lopez's departure. The credibility of both as the corporate
leaders of one of Europe's biggest industrial concerns - whatever their
abilities as engineers - is in tatters.
More important, beyond the personalities there is concern among suppliers
about the symptoms of mismanagement and misguided strategic thinking that
may be common to both VW and General Motors, Mr Lopez's former employer, as
they seek to put their respective houses in order through short-term miracle
fixes from the messianic bearer of some new holy grail for cutting costs.
First the personalities. 'I think Lopez is a dead duck,' says the chief
executive of one of the world's biggest automotive components producers and
an important supplier to Volkswagen. 'I don't think VW can keep him. I think
Piech will go too.'
The head of a rival carmaker in Europe says of Lopez, 'the smartest thing
would be to suspend him and wait for the prosecutors and the courts to
finish their investigations.
'But Piech thinks he needs Lopez to help to turn VW round. Piech is a
zealot. He sees himself as the saviour.'
Competing carmakers give Mr Piech credit for having identified the causes of
VW's underlying problems, but not for his autocratic management style, which
is seen as rule through fear.
'He has identified the main areas that need fixing,' says one chief
executive. 'Their costs are too high, they have too many people, their
plants are over-facilitised, they have too many costs in Germany, and their
material costs are not competitive.
'But you cannot just order it to be done. It needs a softer touch. You have
to take more people along with you. VW is still a magic marque and they have
reservoirs of technical ability.'
The chief executive of another carmaker in Europe remains astonished at the
size of the reported financial package given to Mr Lopez and the impact that
will have in VW and in the industry. 'For that money you are paying a
miracle worker. Then his colleagues will say, you are paid to work miracles,
you fix it.'
Among some of the biggest components suppliers there is also concern at the
way in which first General Motors, and now Volkswagen are trying to batter
down their purchasing costs.
The rhetoric in the industry is all about reform of the old adversarial
relationships between the vehicle makers and their suppliers.
Some have taken the reforms seriously, forming long-term relationships with
key suppliers, giving the suppliers responsibility for research and
development but also giving life-time contracts building on shared
continuous improvement. Chrysler is now the shining example for the success
of this approach.
The Lopez approach is seen by suppliers as having the same rhetoric, but in
reality the old approach is unchanged.
'There is shock and confusion at suppliers. We have contracts where we have
spent millions of D-Marks, where we have shaken hands, but where there were
no formal signatures. And Lopez came in and said he was putting the business
out for new tenders,' says one leading VW supplier.
'Lopez got carried away with himself in the US, he was given the role and
mantle of saviour,' says a chief executive in the components industry.
'Both VW and GM must now act to regain the confidence of their suppliers.
Their approach hurts, because suppliers cut corners, they will not invest
for the vehicle makers. There will be recalls, assembly lines shut down and
customer dissatisfaction.'
In the bare-knuckle fight with GM over Mr Lopez and industrial espionage, Mr
Piech has cast himself as the saviour of the European car industry, but his
performance to date has won few converts among his peers.
