FT  12 NOV 93 / Tense debate on austerity grips Beijing
CHINA'S tense debate over curbs on an overheating economy surfaced in the
official press yesterday with a spirited defence of the austerity-reform
programme of Senior Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji.
Chinese newspapers featured prominently remarks by a deputy governor of the
People's Bank claiming success in the austerity campaign as the Central
Committee of the ruling Communist Party was due to begin discussions in
Beijing of a new reform programme.
Mr Dai Xianlong, the central bank official, said bluntly: 'In recent months
China's financial departments have been blocking evil ways while opening
correct roads.' Mr Zhu and his team at the central bank, who have been
presiding over a squeeze on credit in an effort to combat inflation, have
been accused of stifling state enterprises, some of which are having
difficulty paying workers.
Reports circulated in Beijing that Mr Zhu is in trouble politically for
having pushed too hard with his economic stabilisation programme. But while
there is no doubt he has offended powerful officials in the state sector and
the provinces, there appears no alternative to his prescription for the
economy.
This combines a squeezing of credit to 'hot money' areas such as real estate
with a re-direction of funds to infrastructure, combined with determined
efforts to reform China's inefficient financial system.
Mr Dai's remarks seem designed to claim victory for bringing the economy
under control (inflationary pressures eased slightly in September), and to
offer reassurance that the central bank is sensitive to the plight of state
industry.
He said that, starting in August, the central bank had eased credit
restrictions. In the first 10 months of the year banks had provided Yuan
30bn (Pounds 3.4bn) more in loans than in the same period last year.
Mr Zhu, who also doubles as central bank governor, is certain to face sharp
questioning at the Central Committee meeting over hardship caused to the
state sector. The session is expected to last until the weekend, although
true to tradition no details of when it would actually meet or how long it
would sit have been released officially in advance.
The plenum will approve sweeping reforms in finance, taxation, trade and
investment. Among important reforms is a new federal tax system designed to
improve sharing of revenues between the centre and the provinces.
Mr Dai blamed lax policies earlier in the year for allowing an explosion in
credit which had helped to fuel inflation. Money in circulation in June on
an annualised basis had grown 54 per cent, the highest monthly rise ever. Mr
Li Guixian, the previous central bank governor, was sacked in June and
replaced by Mr Zhu Rongji. Among Mr Li's patrons was Premier Li Peng, who
suffered a heart attack in April, and is undergoing a long convalescence.
The unusual public criticism of the previous regime at the central bank
indicates that below the surface the leadership has been engaged in some
stirring argument about implementing Mr Zhu's austerity package. He
announced a 16-point plan in July to combat inflation and bring order to
China's chaotic finances. Pressure was exerted on faltering state industries
by squeezing credit.
