FT  16 OCT 93 / Finance and the Family: Mercury puts its faith in blue chips
 -Unit trusts
THE NAME British Blue Chip conveys an air of solidity. That is certainly the
aim of Mercury Fund Managers, which sees the fund as the flagship of its
unit trust range.
The trust has been run by Barry Woolf, the investment director of MFM (a
division of Mercury Asset Management), since June 1992. He stresses that
investment at MFM is a team effort, and adds: 'The record of the trust is
75-80 per cent due to the team and 20-25 cent to the individual.'
Woolf says the effective launch of the trust was in May 1987 when the merger
of the various components of the Mercury group led to the conversion of the
old Colemco trust into a blue chip fund.
To Mercury, 'blue chip' means companies with a market capitalisation of
Pounds 1bn and above. Accordingly, around 90 per cent of the portfolio tends
to be invested in stocks in the FT-SE 100 index. 'Since any UK investor
would want to hold the bulk of their investment in such stocks, we see this
as a core equity fund for private investors,' says Woolf.
The fund is relatively concentrated, typically holding around 45-50 stocks.
Since it is invested in large company stocks, there is no liquidity
constraint; the portfolio could easily grow sharply from its present Pounds
200m without Mercury having any problems in buying the shares it wants.
Investment strategy flows from a group overview about the prospects for
various individual sectors; stocks are then selected within that sector
framework. 'We are prepared to take quite significant bets on individual
sectors,' says Woolf.
As of October 1, the sector breakdown was: consumer groups (38 per cent),
financials (22 per cent), others (16 per cent), capital goods (15 per cent),
cash (5 per cent) and oil &amp; gas (4 per cent).
'We take the view that the recovery in the UK is going to be a slow
process,' says Woolf. So, although the trust is overweight in capital goods,
it is invested mainly in 'solid/high-quality companies' with a diversified
range of products, such as GEC, BTR and RTZ.
Another sector which the trust has favoured is financials, because of the
sensitivity to low interest rates of banks, insurance and property
companies. Financials should also see the benefit of cost cutting
programmes, and of a reduction in their bad debt problems.
Among the consumer stocks, the trust has stepped back from the high street
stores and food retailers and has invested heavily in media and leisure
groups. Woolf says he is encouraged by the number of UK companies which are
demerging in order to enhance shareholder value, citing examples such as
Rothmans International and Pearson (which owns the Financial Times).
In addition, he says the fund looks for companies with an above average
dividend yield, where the dividend is well covered. 'High-yielding shares
with a low level of dividend cover may effectively be fixed interest stocks
over the next few years,' he argues; that is because of the minimal
prospects for dividend growth.
The 10 largest holdings in the portfolio as of October 1 were: Zeneca,
Shell, BTR, GUS, Pearson, Prudential, Glaxo, Sun Alliance, Rothmans
International and TSB.
The trust has an excellent long term performance record, with growth of 87.9
per cent over the five years to October 1 (offer-to-bid with income
re-invested: source Micropal). That places it eighth out of 118 funds in the
UK equity growth sector over the period; as the graph shows, the fund has
also outperformed the FT-A All-Share index over the same period.
Over three years, the fund is above average, ranking 54th out of 137. Only
over the past year does the fund's relative performance slip, with the trust
finishing 133rd out of 145 funds.
Woolf points out that this period saw a sharp rebound in small company
shares with the All-Share Index outstripping the performance of the Footsie.
'The principle that I want to instil into the unit trust team is one which
has led to the strength of our pension fund business,' Woolf says. 'If we
can perform a bit above average on a consistent long term basis, we will
always end up in the right part of the league table.'
He believes the tide is turning once more in favour of blue chip stocks, and
feels the market was undiscriminating in its race to buy smaller company and
cyclical stocks. Now, it will become more choosy and start looking for
quality companies.
Charges. The initial charge is 5 per cent and the annual is 1.5 per cent. At
present, the bid-offer spread is around 6 per cent. Both accumulation and
distribution units are available. Distributions are paid twice a year and
the present yield is around 3.1 per cent.
Minimum investment is Pounds 1,000, or Pounds 50 a month via the savings
scheme. British Blue Chip can be bought via a Mercury Pep with no additional
charge, and the same minimum investment levels.
