FT  30 NOV 93 / The IRA Connection: Commons backs lines of communication
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, yesterday received the
overwhelming backing of the House of Commons for the lines of communication
that he admitted had been established between the government and the IRA.
Ministers were relieved to hear no criticism from Mr James Molyneaux, leader
of the Ulster Unionist party. Mr Molyneaux reserved his anger for Mr Kevin
McNamara, the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, whom he accused of acting
as a spokesman for Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing.
The government also received crucial support from its right wing. Mr Andrew
Hunter, chairman of the Conservative backbench committee on Northern Ireland
and a prominent supporter of the union with Northern Ireland, said Sir
Patrick had acted 'entirely correctly and honourably'.
The Labour party also supported the government's approach. Mr McNamara
referred to the government's 'recent mishandling of these matters', but said
it should not deter ministers 'from believing that risk-taking is essential
if progress is to be achieved'.
Opposition to the government came mainly from a combination of the
Democratic Unionists, led by the Reverend Ian Paisley, and Labour
leftwingers. This was reflected in the votes of 16 Labour MPs who joined
eight Northern Ireland unionists in opposing Mr Paisley's suspension from
the Commons.
Mr Dennis Skinner, the Labour leftwinger, told Sir Patrick: 'In this
democracy, when ministers say that they are doing one thing and yet behind
the people's backs they are doing another, then there is a question of
honour and resignation.'
To Conservative protests Mr Skinner insisted: 'You ought to do the
honourable thing and resign.'
Mr Ken Livingstone, another Labour leftwinger, recalled that he had faced
condemnation from successive Northern Ireland secretaries and from former
prime minister Baroness Thatcher when he held talks with Sinn Fein.
The Reverend William McCrea, Democratic Unionist MP for Mid-Ulster, said the
IRA and Sinn Fein had been 'playing the government along'.
Mr Doug Hoyle, Labour MP for Warrington North, said he and the people of his
town wanted peace. 'But there was a feeling of outrage and revulsion there
that contacts took place with Sinn Fein two days after the bombing in
Warrington in which two small boys died and 56 people were injured - and one
of those boys was still fighting for his life,' he said.
The government received the support of Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of
the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party, who told Sir Patrick:
'You were right to enter the deliberations you entered into. Had you not
done so, it would have been a dereliction of duty on your part.'
