FT  07 APR 93 / N. Ireland electricity share sale: Last non-nuclear power
company to be privatised in June
THE government is to privatise Northern Ireland Electricity in June amid
City expectations that it will seek to raise between Pounds 300m and Pounds
400m in the flotation.
Following this sale of the last non-nuclear power company in the public
sector, the next step in the government's privatisation programme is
expected to be the disposal of its remaining shares in British Telecom.
Yesterday's NIE announcement reinforced City speculation that the BT sale
will be in late July.
The government yesterday launched the privatisation of NIE, the first
flotation to be targeted specifically at the Northern Ireland public, with a
series of television advertisements featuring Finn McCool, the legendary
Irish giant.
The offer for sale will be in early June, with share trading expected to
start in the week beginning June 21.
Potential investors will have to wait until mid-May before the company
publishes its pathfinder prospectus, including accounts for the year just
ended and profit forecasts. The share price will be announced in early June.
Mr Simon Linnett, a director of N. M. Rothschild, advising the government,
said yesterday he could not yet say how much the government would realise.
But he expected the order of magnitude to be 'about the same' as the Pounds
350m realised last year through the sale of the four Northern Ireland
generating plants.
The disposal of NIE, which procures, supplies and transmits electricity
throughout Northern Ireland, represents the penultimate stage in the
government's privatisation of non-nuclear electricity companies. The final
stage is likely next March when the government is expected to sell its
remaining 40 per cent stakes in National Power and PowerGen.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said yesterday that one of
the government's objectives was to widen and deepen share ownership in
Northern Ireland. At least half of the shares will be available to small
investors who, like institutional investors, will be asked to pay for the
shares in instalments over about a year.
About 570,000 customers in Northern Ireland will be mailed directly about
the flotation along with another 750,000 potential investors in Great
Britain. UK institutions will be given presentations in April and May. The
initial allocation to them will be reduced if there is substantial demand
from small shareholders.
NIE customers will be eligible for incentives including bonus shares and
bill-discounts if they register with the NIE share information office.
Non-customers who register will be eligible for bonus shares, although on
less favourable terms. Four banks - AIB, First Trust Bank, Northern Bank and
Ulster Bank - have been appointed to operate share shops.
Investors will also be encouraged by Finn McCool who, according to Irish
folklore, bestrode the Giant's Causeway around 250BC. In one of two
television commercials, McCool is shown emerging amid lightning and crashing
boulders from a cliff-face.
Investors in the rest of the UK will have to be content with newspaper
advertisement images of McCool, as television advertisements are not being
shown outside Northern Ireland.
Picture, Page 11
