FT  05 JAN 93 / International Company News: Exposed Japanese regional banks
lean on the centre - Ambition led some out-of-town institutions to take on
customers others rejected
HYOGO Bank has been typical of Japan's regional banks, lending to local
companies based in the western prefecture of Hyogo and taking care of their
business in Tokyo.
This has been a cosy relationship, secured by cross-shareholdings and a deep
sense of local loyalty - Hyogo companies would naturally turn to Hyogo Bank.
However, once-conservative regional banks developed ambitions far beyond
their local boundaries during the late 1980s bubble. They and their
affiliates were big lenders to Tokyo and Osaka property developers, and
ventured abroad, providing funds to companies ranging from Olympia &amp; York to
the GPA group, the aircraft leasing company, which borrowed from at least 16
Japanese regional banks.
The risks of this rapid expansion, particularly the exposure to the domestic
stock and property markets, are increasingly obvious. Hyogo Bank, whose
deposits fell 16.5 per cent in the first half and whose short-term deposits
have fallen by an estimated 50 per cent over the past year, is now receiving
intensive care from three large banks - Sumitomo Bank, Long-Term Credit Bank
of Japan, and Industrial Bank of Japan.
Hyogo, whose 10 largest financial affiliates have outstanding loans
estimated at Y1,600bn (Dollars 13bn), many of them property-related, is also
receiving a little help from the Bank of Japan. Along with the Finance
Ministry, the Bank of Japan is sending managers to oversee the reform of
Hyogo. The central bank has also provided loans at the official discount
rate of 3.25 per cent, allowing the troubled bank to profit from the
difference in market rates.
The share price of Taiheiyo Bank, a Tokyo-based regional institution, rose
Y40 to Y339 yesterday after reports that the central bank was providing
similar assistance. Taiheiyo, which turned to property developers in its
quest for expansion, had previously sought assistance from its leading
shareholders, a group of four commercial banks, Sakura Bank, Fuji Bank,
Tokai Bank, and Sanwa Bank.
It is unclear exactly how many other regional banks are receiving or in need
of assistance, but a Bank of Japan official confirmed that extra loans were
being provided to troubled banks. One sign of the problems is that
provisions or write-offs of non-performing loans by 13 regional banks around
Tokyo rose 3.4 times during the half to the end of September, according to
the district financial bureau.
This ever-increasing burden arises from the ambition of some out-of-town
institutions to compete with the big city banks. This has left the regional
institutions, or their affiliates, with customers these larger institutions
rejected. As a result, regional banks were prominent lenders to bankrupts,
ranging from Nanatomi, a stock and property speculator with debts of Y300bn,
to Ms Nui Onoue, the 'bubble lady' of Osaka, who had investments of Y890bn
at the height of her seance-inspired onslaught on the stock market.
Regional bank officials hope that the new loan and land collateral purchase
agency to be established by the banking industry this month will relieve the
burden. The Regional Banks' Association says the banks will not need public
assistance: 'We don't think there will be a serious crisis among regional
banks. We think the problem can be solved.'
One solution is to encourage mergers. The Finance Ministry recently approved
a merger between two regional banks in the north-east, Ugo Bank and Akita
Akebono Bank, which had reported a 98 per cent fall in pre-tax profit last
year following huge appraisal losses on securities holdings.
The Finance Ministry says there are too many regional banks, 130 in all, 64
first-tier and 66 second-tier, and that a streamlining is necessary. Mr
Tsutomu Hata, the former finance minister, had encouraged smaller banks to
look for partners, warning that financial deregulation would put them under
extra competitive pressure.
Meanwhile, regional banks have become a popular theme for financial industry
specialists at foreign securities houses. Analysts are attempting to
spotlight the most vulnerable institutions, while recommending those
institutions which remained conservative during the bubble era and have
better profit prospects than their big city cousins.
The healthier regional banks tend to be based in areas which experienced
strong growth, without reaching the speculative heights of Tokyo or Osaka.
There are concerns that some of these regional cities are only now beginning
to experience the burst of the bubble, but those banks which did not stray
far from the traditional client list generally appear to have strong balance
sheets.
An important test is the level of unrealised gains on the banks' securities
holdings. Mr Paul Heaton, financials specialist at Smith New Court Japan,
estimates that about 11 of the first-tier regional banks will still have
unrealised gains on stocks if the Nikkei average falls to 7,000. However,
seven banks will have these gains wiped out if the market hits 13,000.
The figures are less attractive at the second-tier regional banks, 15 of
which have no unrealised gains if the the index hits 16,000, and nine of
which are showing losses below 18,000. The Nikkei average closed yesterday
at 16,994.08.
In Japan, these unrealised gains are perceived as an important part of the
bad debt strategy, and a bank with a large portfolio of non-performing loans
and severely diminished unrealised gains is seen as particularly vulnerable.
Lending by regional banks to international property developers highlights a
curious characteristic of the Japanese system.
The participation of smaller institutions in international deals often
followed an introduction from a larger bank, which implicitly or explicitly
guarantees that the loan would be repaid. It is unclear how much lending is
covered by informal agreements, but these 'understandings' explain why some
regionals are relaxed about exposure to troubled international companies.
