FT  07 JUN 93 / People: Reischl occupies his UK listening post
The significance of German supermarket chain Rewe's surprise acquisition of
a minority share in Budgens was underlined at the end of last week with the
appearance of its chief executive, Hans Reischl, as a non-executive on the
board of the small UK retailing chain.
'We are very fortunate that he decided not to delegate the job, but to do it
himself,' says Budgens director Christian Williams.
Before arriving at Budgens, chief executive John von Spreckelsen, together
with Williams, had turned around a Bremen supermarket chain, KAFU-Wasmund,
which was subsequently sold to Rewe. Williams says that the two had,
however, not met Reischl at that stage. 'He was the big boss; he delegated
jobs like that.'
Rewe's 26 per cent stake in Budgens, which has just 100 stores, has
attracted considerable interest in the food industry.
Why does Reischl accord it such importance? Williams points out that it is
the first foreign investment made by the private group, which operates 8,000
stores and has a 15 per cent market share of its domestic market.
'I suppose this is one way of establishing a substantial listening post and
getting an idea of what the UK grocery market is all about. After all, the
company would find it difficult to buy a 26 per cent stake in Sainsbury's or
Marks &amp; Spencer,' comments Williams.
Williams believes that Budgens is more advanced than its continental
European competitors in certain areas - including its fully automated
warehousing and its delivery trucks, which store food at three different
temperatures.
Reischl, who speaks good English, should have no language difficulties at
Budgens. Von Spreckelsen is a German national, and Williams, whose mother
tongue is Danish, also speaks German. Both also have experience of the
German market.
Stephen Bellamy, a director of New Zealand investment company BIL
Securities, which sold its Budgens stake to Rewe, and who has sat on the
Budgens board in a non-executive capacity since the end of 1991, has so far
not stepped down.
