FT  13 DEC 93 / A new lightness to his touch: Lionel Barber examines the
reception given Mr Jacques Delors' white paper at the European Union summit
Mr Jacques Delors can afford to smile today. His white paper on employment,
growth and competitiveness received a better-than-expected reception at the
European summit in Brussels; and there was the added satisfaction of seeing
off most of his critics, including Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor.
Here was a rare victory for the president of the European Commission after
the setbacks of the past 18 months. Not for the first time, he carried the
day with a combination of intellectual force and political cunning which
papered over ideological divisions and produced a semblance of unity.
The test will come when EU leaders must deliver on the summit promise of an
'action plan' which aims to strengthen Europe's declining competitiveness in
relation to the US and Japan, while at the same time tackling the short-term
unemployment crisis.
What is clear is that EU leaders no longer treat the white paper as an
academic exercise. Last month, the number of people under 25 who were out of
work in the EU reached 15.2 per cent, with 28 per cent in Ireland, 30 per
cent in Italy, and 37 per cent in Spain. 'There is the risk of a social
explosion,' admitted a senior Brussels official.
A glimpse of the potential for unrest came on the first day of the summit
when thousands of Belgian trade unionists marched in the streets in protest
against the package of wage freezes and BFr75bn (Pounds 1.39bn) of social
security cuts put forward by the coalition government of Mr Jean-Luc
Dehaene. Similar protests have taken place in Italy and Spain.
The chief advantage of the white paper is that these fragile governments can
use it as 'political cover' for unpopular measures at home. Its central
message is that, while there are no miracle cures, there is safety in a
collective approach.
In fact, the white paper eschews Brussels-led legislation in favour of a
menu of non-binding options which take into account each member state's
national needs, all within a framework of measured labour market
deregulation, macro-economic stability and (relatively) modest spending on
new infrastructure projects.
On this hands-off approach, a previously hostile Mr Clarke declared on
Saturday: 'It is an impeccable statement.'
Mr Delors's new lightness of touch marks a further evolution in his
thinking, away from the centralising tendencies which marked his early years
as Commission president and which lay behind the drive for a single European
market by 1992.
It also signals a shift towards the right in the debate over what might be
called the future economic philosophy of the European Union. This debate
pits the Anglo-Saxon model of labour market deregulation, wage restraint and
curbs on trade union power against the more consensual model of social
partnership which has underpinned the post-second world war economic order
in Europe, but which is now under increasing strain.
By endorsing the white paper, EU heads of government have signalled a
decisive tilt in favour of deregulation, toward the arguments which European
industrialists have been putting forward with increasing firmness in recent
weeks.
Thus summit leaders endorsed a lifting of restricitons on hiring and firing
of workers. They recognised that wages for non-skilled workers must fall and
they conceded that employers' social security contributions must be reduced
in order to increase the attractiveness of hiring labour.
Two summit incidents point to a shift in attitudes. When Greek ministers
complained about wage restraint, they found themselves under attack from the
British, Dutch, Germans and no lesser figure than Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the
Spanish prime minister and one of Europe's leading socialists.
The second occurred in Mr Delors' own remarks, in which he noted the
compatibility between the contents of the white paper and Beating the
Crisis, the paper on competitivness put out by the European Round Table, the
forum for leading industrialists.
'The white paper is somewhat to the right of what Delors actually believes,'
said one aide, 'but he realised that he had to make the shift in order to
win support from the leaders.'
Yet it would be a mistake to assume the Commission president has compromised
on his core views. In the new age, he wants the right to permanent
re-training and education to be universal; and he demands 'solidarity' with
the 40m people living in poverty in Europe. As he said before the summit: 'I
can change my opinions, but I will not change my principles.'
This partly forms the background to the most divisive arguments on the white
paper: his proposal for borrowing up to Ecu20bn (Pounds 15.06bn) a year to
help to fund trans-European transport and energy networks costing some
Ecu250bn by the year 2000; another proposal for 'information highways' for
telecoms, priced at Ecu150bn; and one for Ecu174bn worth of environmental
projects.
In the Commission's view, the private sector alone cannot cover high-risk,
high-cost projects such as the high-speed train between Lyon and Turin; nor
can the European Investment Bank, without a likely increase in its capital
base. Hence the plan to raise Ecu8bn a year through 'Union bonds', to be
issued by the EU itself, with the EIB as agent.
The Delors proposal was an attempt to play on the heads of governments'
inclination to offer a sweetener to the bitter medicine elsewhere on offer.
Ever resourceful, he avoided following his French socialist colleagues calls
for Community loans to create a New Deal-type public works programme for
Europe. Instead he based his arguments on the Maastricht treaty's explicit
provisions for trans-European networks based on the need to improve European
competitiveness.
The argument that the development of trans-European networks has nothing to
do with the white paper's goal of creating 15m new jobs by the year 2000 did
not fool EU finance ministers, led by Mr Clarke and Mr Theo Waigel, his
German colleague. Peeved at not being able to 'fillet' the Delors paper
themselves, the finance ministers complained, too, that the proposals for
more EU-wide public borrowing ran counter to national efforts to curb budget
deficits.
Some summit observers identified a 'power-grab' by the Commission at the
expense of the EIB, which is often criticised for being too slow on
approving funding for major infrastructure projects. 'Delors is trying to
create a new investment bank in Brussels,' said one European treasury
official.
The compromise was to set up groups drawn from national governments and
industry to study trans-European network projects as well as the new
information technologies, while remitting final decisions to the ministers
of finance. 'All these projects of Mr Delors are a dead issue,' said a
German official.
This judgment may be just as premature as the political obituries which were
written for Mr Delors just over a year ago, before his native France voted
narrowly in favour of the Maastricht treaty which he had defended. However
much he may give the impression of carrying Europe's woes on his shoulders,
he remains as inventive as ever in spotting the political trends of the
future.
The question is whether, having unburdened himself of his magnum opus, it is
now time to depart the Brussels stage, either to enter the campaign for the
French presidency in 1995 or to take time off for the intellectual pursuits
which he claims he misses.
On Saturday afternoon, Mr Delors betrayed irritation when asked whether the
white paper was his 'swan-song'. If that was the case, he would have left
long ago, he declared.
Inside the Commission, however, there is a distinct fin de siecle
atmosphere. Mr Delors' authority is no longer what it was. With his final
two-year term expiring in a year, successors are dusting off their
credentials, including Sir Leon Brittan, the EU trade commissioner, who
could be on the verge of clinching a Gatt world trade deal.
The Brussels summit showed that Mr Delors has lost little of his prize
fighters instincts; but like all heavyweight champions he now must choose
the moment to go.
