FT  28 APR 93 / Business and the Environment: Preserving a profit - The
owners of a Natal game reserve believe conservation can only work if it pays
Zibane Mazibuko illustrates one of Africa's rarest cliches: he is a
poacher-turned-gamekeeper.
Not long ago, this 33-year-old Zulu with broken teeth and ragged clothes,
who speaks seldom and smiles less, was poaching game from the Phinda
Resource Reserve in South Africa's Natal province.
Today, he says his future depends on keeping the animals alive: for they
attract the tourists who bring scarce cash to this forgotten corner of rural
Zululand. Thanks to them, Mazibuko has landed a contract to make 150,000
bricks for the new Phinda game lodge; he reckons he can earn R1,800 (Pounds
370) a month from his new business, far more than he could bag as a poacher.
The owners of Phinda, the South African-based Conservation Corporation,
could not have paid for a better advertisement for their philosophy of
wildlife conservation - a people-based approach to conservation, which is
slowly gaining ground in Africa as game reserves come under ever greater
threat from hungry, poor and angry local populations.
Kevin Leo-Smith is manager of Phinda and a director of the Conservation
Corporation. He and his colleagues - brothers Dave and John Varty, who have
already made a fortune from their brand of ethically-sound conservation -
believe they have found a model to guarantee the survival of wildlife in
Africa.
'The old notion of a game reserve where you put up a fence and chuck the
people out is flawed,' says Leo-Smith. 'You need to make sure the cash flows
through that fence.' Local people must share not only the natural resources
of the reserve - they must be allowed to gather wood for cooking, grasses
for thatching, palm sap for wine-making and indigenous herbs for use by
witch-doctors - but they must benefit from its development.
'We're aiming to use the economic 'exciter' of the lodge to attract
(development and investment) funds, and make sure they get circulated
locally so that local people understand that their future is invested with
us - and that gives them an interest in conservation,' Leo-Smith concludes.
In other words, they intend to turn all the poachers into honorary
gamekeepers. The alternative, says Leo-Smith, is untenable: to live in a
perpetual state of siege, keeping poachers out by force (the status quo in
most other African reserves).
So the motivation for Phinda is more practical than ethical: and therein
lies its best chance of success. For Leo-Smith and the Vartys practise a
capitalist approach to conservation. They believe conservation can and must
be made to pay - especially in South Africa, where a new black government
will probably divert subsidies from state reserves (widely viewed as white
playgrounds) to fund black social development.
Conservation Corp has raised R83m in equity funds, 40 per cent of it from
foreign investors such as Hambros Bank and the Getty family trusts, to
invest in Africa's undervalued wildlife assets, which they argue can be
exploited to produce returns which are attractive and ethically sound.
That means making not only traditional 'social investments' in surrounding
communities - building schools, clinics and housing for employees - but,
more importantly, providing venture capital for local businesses which must
prove commercially viable to survive. Phinda's managers know charity is a
poor substitute for sustainable development: they will provide management
training, marketing advice, cheap loans, equity where necessary - but the
entrepreneurial drive must come from the community.
Mazibuko, the brickmaker, is only one of Conservation Corp's pilot
entrepreneurs. When he was caught poaching, he was so poor he could not pay
the fine imposed by the local tribal court: one cow, the currency of rural
Zulu society. So he worked off his sentence making bricks for the reserve.
Later, Phinda set him up as an independent brickmaker, with two rudimentary
moulding machines and a contract for the new lodge. Phinda provides the raw
materials, and passes all the profit (2 cents per brick) along to Mazibuko,
after a 1 cent per brick repayment on the machinery. He pays his labourers
out of profits and dreams of expansion once the lodge is built. Phinda gets
bricks over a third cheaper than from commercial suppliers.
Not far from Mazibuko's brickworks, Thomas Nkomo - another reformed poacher
 -makes charcoal according to a traditional African method. Where before he
stole wood from the reserve, now he clears unwanted bush for Phinda, and
uses it to build a six-foot high circular pyre. The pyre smoulders for 17
days, yielding 800 5kg bags of highly marketable 'environmentally-friendly'
charcoal.
Nkomo's equity partner, a Phinda game ranger, sells the charcoal for R3.40
per bag. It costs R1.20 to produce, with costs held down further by the fact
that Nkomo's labour is paid through a drought relief scheme funded by a
local development agency.
But if charcoal and brickmaking are at least marginally viable, Phinda's
Sondela entertainment centre could prove really lucrative. Phinda sold 168
R100 shares in Sondela to finance (with the help of a R25,000 interest-free
loan) a centre where, for a nominal fee, employees can enjoy soccer, karate,
body building and ballroom dancing, buy take-away food and drinks and have
their photo taken by a local photographer.
Phinda aims to ensure that Sondela shares pay an 80 to 100 per cent annual
dividend, to popularise the idea of share ownership in a hostile
environment; loan repayments will be deferred until the project makes
sufficient profit.
Leo-Smith admits that Phinda does not put large amounts of its own money
into these schemes, though he says the reserve supports 10 per cent of the
local population (directly or indirectly). But Africa is littered with large
and expensive development schemes which, inevitably, fail; spending small
sums well, on commercially viable development - the Phinda method - is far
more difficult than pouring shareholder funds into charity projects which do
more for the donor's self-image than for the recipient's prosperity.
