FT  02 JAN 93 / What astrologers don't know: Dominic Lawson offers a New
Year prediction: most pundits will be wrong again
EVERY New Year brings with it a curse, and it is always the same one: the
curse of New Year forecasts.
The nation's stage army of pundits forms a queue to tell us what will happen
to the stock market, which world leaders will be up, and which down, where
house prices will be a year from now, and all the other matters beyond our
control. It is dross, from first to last. The only advantage is that we do
not have to read any of it, and can save dramatically the amount of time we
spend reading newspapers.
We can be sure of one other thing: the forecasts will be over-optimistic.
Last year not one of our leading economic forecasters predicted that the
British economy in 1992 would continue to shrink. While the Treasury's own
predictions were notably hubristic, independent pundits scarcely covered
themselves in glory. This, at least, was entirely predictable: human nature
is optimistic, and in the 20th century this has been translated into a
passionate conviction that every succeeding year must bring progress, that
our civilisation can only wax, never wane.
It is in any case an artifice to assume that the affairs of man move in
yearly cycles - the only objective difference between December 31 and
January 1 is that one is a bank holiday and the other is not. More
particularly, the Gregorian calendar bears no particular relation to the
earth's cycle. Our New Year comes in the middle of winter, when nature is
still deep in hibernation. Since the Church of England has broken
conclusively with the world-wide Catholic Church by declaring that women
shall be priests, it might as well go the whole rationalist hog and break
with Pope Gregory's calendar. Then we could celebrate the new year on an
agreed first day of Spring, along with the birds and the bees.
This is not, I hasten to add, an appeal to move to a calendar based on the
astrologers' system of planetary and solar influences. I am at least at one
with the Pope in his anathematising of astrology, if not his declaration
that to follow those spurious charts is a mortal sin.
In the tide of forecasts that wash over us each new year, the astrologers'
predictions represent the scummiest flotsam and jetsam, horoscopical
detritus. I find it depressing that the Daily Mail, probably the most
influential newspaper in Britain, should have devoted its centre pages for
most of the past week to promoting the claims of a bald, bearding astrologer
called Jonathan Cainer, who says he has developed something called
'Astroanalysis - a unique new way of seeing what the stars hold'.
Cainer previously predicted the futures of the 1m or so readers of Today
newspaper, now tells the considerably more numerous readers of the Daily
Mail that '1993 is the year that will change your life.' This is because
1993 will see 'Neptune and Uranus meet in the sky for the first time in
nearly 200 years - a rare and important conjunction which has the potential
to change our world dramatically.'
I am particularly interested in his predictions for Capricorn (December 23
to January 20): 'So much has changed in your home life you no longer feel
sure where your personality ends - and where your need to be all things to
all people begins.'
My daughter was born a week and half ago, on December 23, and unlike Cainer,
I have no idea what her character is. Had she been born a day earlier, she
would have been a Sagittarian, just like her dad, another Sagittarian. It is
just as well we didn't have her induced.
It would be wrong to think that astrology columns are the province solely of
the tabloid newspapers. Superior glossy magazines, such as Vogue and Harpers
and Queen have them. So too does the supposedly serious Sunday Times.
Indeed, recently I received a letter from the Sunday Times' astrologer,
offering to explain to me the higher points of her art. Apparently
'something' had told her that I was about to publish in The Spectator the
sort of article about astrology which might have brought her 'profession'
into disrepute. On this occasion, I am afraid, her charts have let her down.
I have one question for her. Why do astrologers base their charts on the
moment of birth, rather than the moment of conception? After all, that is
when the earth is really supposed to move.
Dominic Lawson is Editor of The Spectator.
