FT  11 DEC 93 / Government stands by pension plans
The government pledged its full backing yesterday to the principle of
personal pensions in spite of the announcement earlier this week of an
inquiry into the sale of up to 400 000 policies.
Mr Anthony Nelson, Treasury economic secretary, said that, in the main,
policy holders should not be alarmed: 'We are not talking about fraud or
theft; the security of personal pensions is not in doubt.'
The minister said that the recent study showing that rules regarding
personal pensions were not followed in four out of five cases did not alter
the government's support.
In an interview with the Financial Times, he said: 'The government will
continue to support the personal pension since for many people it will
remain an attractive means for providing for retirement. It would be quite
wrong for us to discourage them.'
The government has faced embarrassment over the inquiry into the sales of
personal pensions to people transferring out of employers' schemes. During
the late 1980s ministers stressed the benefits of personal pension plans
because of their flexibility.
Mr Nelson said: 'My overriding concern is the interests of those who have
taken personal pensions and we have to ensure that they are not
disadvantaged by mis-selling.' He added that providers would have to respond
to those who had been disadvantaged by allowing them to adjust their
personal pension or to rejoin their occupational pension.
Mr Nelson specifically ruled out any review of the Financial Services Act.
He said that, far from indicating a failure of the system, the recent
disclosure of abuse in the sale of personal pensions showed the
effectiveness of the current regulations.
'We have to improve the system and learn from our mistakes. But this is not
a failure of the regulatory system.'
The minister made clear that he expected providers of personal pensions to
produce 'full disclosure of the costs and implications so people could make
a careful comparison of what was on offer'.
He said 'the full-scale study' by the Securities and Investments Board, the
City's chief watchdog, into the extent of the mis-selling of personal
pensions would establish the extent of the problem . 'SIB is undertaking a
thorough review of the selling rules and will then co-ordinate an action
plan to provide redress to those that are disadvantaged,' he said.
The SIB has said that it will also investigate the sale of personal pensions
to people contracting out of the state earnings related pensions scheme.
OFT presses insurers, Page 6
Retiring hurt but wise, Page 10
