FT  27 NOV 93 / International Company News: Volkswagen heads for DM2bn loss
Volkswagen, Europe's leading carmaker, is heading for a DM2bn (Dollars
1.1bn) loss this year, Mr Ferdinand Piech, chairman, admitted yesterday.
Group capital spending budgets are to be cut by an average DM2bn annually
over the next five years to help recovery. At the same time, VW aims to save
around DM3.6bn in wage costs over the next two years with the introduction
of a four-day working week in Germany, Mr Piech said.
But he gave no indication of when he expected the group, which includes the
VW, Audi, Skoda and Seat brands, to return to profit. The group made a net
profit of DM147m in 1992.
The parent company, VW AG, would break even this year after a profit of more
than DM400m in 1992, Mr Piech said.
The predicted recovery had quickly run out of steam, the company said. Group
results were hit by 'unplanned' losses at Audi, deficits in the Asia Pacific
region and North America and the 'extremely critical' developments at the
Spanish subsidiary, Seat.
Mr Piech, who until midsummer was confidently forecasting the group would be
turned round this year after an 87 per cent profits dive in 1992, placed
most of the blame for the slide into the red on events at Seat.
Continuing negotiations with Spanish union and government officials on the
closure of Seat's Barcelona factory and the loss of 9,000 jobs there, gave
ground for 'the greatest concern', Mr Piech said.
The group planned to spend DM600m on restructuring the Spanish business,
adding to the burdens of the DM1.25bn loss already announced, and a planned
DM1.5bm cash injection to save it from collapse.
VW's rolling five-year capital investment programme in the automotive
business, already reduced from DM50bn to DM45bn earlier this year, will be
cut to just DM35bn for the period to the end of 1998, officials said.
Spending on the financial services divisions is to be cut from DM34bn to
DM30.5bn.
VW also claimed yesterday that independent investigations had found no proof
to support suspicions of industrial espionage against Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua, the ex-General Motors director who joined VW last March.
But an abbreviated version of a report by auditors KPMG Deutsche Treuhand,
distributed yesterday, said investigators had failed fully to clarify the
events in late March when, according to VW, 20 cartons of Mr Lopez's
'personal' papers were shredded on his orders.
Carefully-worded VW statements said no evidence had been found that 'secret'
data from GM or Adam Opel, the US group's German subsidiary, had been
'available or used' at the company.
Mr David Herman, Opel chairman, yesterday accused VW of 'diversionary
manoeuvres' and manipulating and confusing public opinion.
In a statement prepared on the basis of recent selective leaks from the KPMG
report, he said VW was trying to mislead the public by acting as a judge in
its own matter.
Mr Herman pointed to Mr Lopez's contradictory sworn statements and criminal
investigations against him, and said the VW board had known for some time
that he and his followers - despite denials - 'actually had cartons of
material moved to Wolfsburg'.
VW yesterday would not answer questions relating to the suspected theft of
GM or Opel secrets by Mr Lopez or his colleagues.
