FT  22 NOV 93 / People: Germans' turn at Europay
Kurt Richolt, who was dismissed from the board of Commerzbank in May, is to
be the new chairman of Europay International, the Brussels-based group
formed last year by the merger of Eurocard and eurocheque, writes Katharine
Campbell.
Richolt, 54, will chair the board which is comprised of senior executives
from 17 member countries including eastern Europe. It is effectively a
non-executive role and he will work on average a little more than one day a
week.
He replaces Bernard van Eldik, a 64-year-old Dutchman who played a leading
role in the Eurocard/eurocheque merger completed in September 1992. The
organisation, whose biggest competitor is Visa International, claims to be
the biggest card group in Europe with 80m cardholders.
Europay's secretary general Mark Van Wauwe explains that with a British
chief executive, Ron Williams, and a previous Dutch chairman, it was felt
that the Germans, who have three seats on the 25-strong board, were due a
turn.
In an unusual move, Richolt, who had been on the board of Commerzbank since
1982, was dismissed after Germany's third largest bank made provisions of
DM300m as a result of the collapse of the Danish insurance company Hafnia.
The last time a board member of one of the big German banks was dismissed is
believed to have been 1980.
Van Wauwe highlights Richolt's varied international experience as well as
his grasp of English, Spanish and French. 'He has been selected and his
appointment has been agreed by the whole German banking community,' he adds.
The three Germans on the board come from Hypo Bank, the savings and the
co-operative banking associations.
While Van Wauwe contends that it was 'the unions' who insisted on Richolt's
departure, Commerzbank says it was the decision of the whole supervisory
board. Although the bank lost sizeable sums in lending to the likes of
Olympia &amp; York, it was decided to establish accountability in the Hafnia
case because of the size of the exposure to a company that was not a
worldwide industry leader. Richolt was the board member with area
responsibility for Scandinavia.
