FT  03 AUG 93 / Leading Article: A fresh start in schools
IT IS TOO soon to say with certainty that Sir Ron Dearing's report on the
national curriculum and its assessment will bring an end to the confusion
over testing in English schools. But the report contains many of the
ingredients needed to address the justified concerns of the critics of the
current arrangements. It also appears to hold fast to the basic and
necessary principles of the government's education reforms.
The national curriculum, compulsory testing and the publication of school
league tables are central to raising the standard of British education. The
curriculum provides a set of educational targets which parents have a right
to expect teachers to work towards. Testing at 7, 11, 14 and 16 measures
achievement in meeting those targets. The publication of test results in
league tables allows parents to compare school performance and provides a
spur to schools that are failing to deliver.
The government's reforms ran into difficulty largely because of confusion
over the purpose of testing. Simple tests were needed to assess individual
pupil achievement so that school performance could be compared nationwide.
Their creators tried to devise tests that could also diagnose individual
pupils' needs, so increasing their complexity. The result was complicated
tests requiring a complicated curriculum to sustain them. Teachers concerned
about the use of test results in league tables were able to unite more
moderate colleagues, parents, governors and even some of the government's
advisers against the unwieldy and over-prescriptive structure.
Level of achievement
Sir Ron has gone to the heart of the problem with his proposal to focus
tests on establishing the level of achievement of pupils throughout the
country. Other purposes of testing, such as the diagnosis of individual
pupils' needs, should be left to teachers. He also sensibly recommends that
the compulsory tests should concentrate on basic skills: English,
mathematics and science. These changes would create shorter and sharper
tests, making it harder for teacher unions to protest over the workload
involved.
They also allow the national curriculum to be slimmed down to occupy less
than 90 per cent of the timetable in primary schools, and to three-quarters
in secondary schools. Even at these levels, the curriculum will still
dominate the day-to-day business of the classroom, perhaps excessively so.
However, Sir Ron's report restores flexibility to teachers and allows
freedom to tailor the timetable to pupils' individual needs.
Price of peace
The government has wisely accepted Sir Ron's proposals without
qualification. The decision raises questions over the future of Mr John
Patten, the Education Secretary. Currently suffering from a viral infection,
he stood fast against such concessions only a few months ago.
Because of that intransigence, the price of buying peace has risen. In
accepting Sir Ron's recommendations, the government had to go one step
further by abandoning league tables for the tests at 7 and 14. There is
justification for this step. What matters to parents in choosing a primary
school is the achievement of children leaving it at 11 to go on to secondary
education. At secondary level, it is performance at the minimum
school-leaving age of 16 that is important.
There is a danger, however, that this will be seen as a retreat on the
principle of publishing league tables. The proposals announced yesterday
offer the basis for a fresh start in school education. But they should not
mark an end to the process of change which is so badly needed to raise
standards in Britain's schools.
