FT  20 OCT 93 / Vauxhall to enter credit-card market
VAUXHALL MOTORS, a subsidiary of General Motors, has become the first UK car
manufacturer to enter the credit-card market, launching a British version of
the GM card currently available in the US.
The card, to be issued in association with HFC bank, will offer customers a
discount of up to Pounds 2,500 towards the cost of a new Vauxhall car.
Customers will be able to choose either a Visa or MasterCard general-purpose
credit card, and will pay no annual fee. The annualised percentage rate of
interest will be 19.9 per cent, compared with 22.9 per cent at Barclaycard,
which has 8.8m cards in issue, and 23.9 per cent at National Westminster
bank, which has 4m cards.
Since the GM card was launched in the US in September 1992, almost 8m people
have become cardholders. There are a further 800,000 in Canada, where it
became available last June. GM said the card had helped sell over 70,000
vehicles.
Cardholders will receive a rebate of 5 per cent of the value of all
purchases made with the card, up to a maximum of Pounds 500 a year. These
rebate points can be put towards the price of a new vehicle, up to a maximum
of Pounds 2,500 for any one car. The points will also apply to balances
transferred from other cards to the GM card, which is due to become
available in the new year.
Mr Charles Golden, chairman and managing director of Vauxhall, said the aim
was to strengthen the relationship with existing Vauxhall customers and to
give the company an advantage in attracting customers.
The card could signal a strengthening of competition in the UK credit card
market. MBNA American bank has announced its intention to set up a European
headquarters and issue credit cards in the UK.
Company car drivers will have the option of turning their discount points
into vouchers that can be used in some shops, hotels and restaurants, rather
than towards a reduction in a new car. This part of the scheme will take
effect next April.
GM Europe will be monitoring the progress of the card in the UK with a view
to possible expansion into Europe, but Vauxhall made the point that the UK's
pattern of credit card use is closer to the US pattern than is the case
elsewhere in Europe.
The Consumers Association welcomed the card for its competitive interest
rates rather than for the 'gimmick' of the discount on a new car.
Editorial Comment, Page 19
