FT  18 SEP 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Artist who followed his muse to
success - Ann Marriott meets a potter who would not compromise
WITH a turn of his potter's wheel, artist Martin Homer left behind a
lucrative business supplying London's top stores for a creative independence
in rural Worcestershire.
Having reached an enviable position in a tough creative market, Martin
swapped it all for a one-man concern centred on a school for potters based
at his oast-house home.
'I make what I like and hope somebody else will like it too,' he said. The
same philosophy - artistic integrity versus market necessity - has doubtless
driven many small businesses to the wall. But Martin's tale is one of
success.
In the mid-1970s he led a team of potters supplying Liberty's but quit to
concentrate on his own creative work, which he sold through his own shop. It
proved to be an excellent choice. His job satisfaction increased, sales
turnover doubled within two years and profits benefitted from dispensing
with middlemen.
After Martin left Birmingham Art School at 20 in 1965, he supplemented what
he earnt from selling pots with part-time teaching. For 20 years he taught
at Walsall Art College in the West Midlands. During that time he established
himself as a potter. An important early step was to find an agent who
secured an entree to Liberty's.
Martin's first workshop was in the dining room of the tiny cottage that he
and his wife Tina rented for Pounds 1 a week in the late 1960s. Later he
moved his kiln to a lean-to shed he erected himself with materials provided
by a friend.
In 1970 he rented a bigger workshop in Tenbury Wells, Worcestershire, for
Pounds 1 per week from a local ceramics enthusiast. As the business, which
he called Workshop 20, expanded Martin took on two assistants.
By 1980 Martin knew he would have to simplify his production process and
standardise his products to keep up with demand. He was unwilling to make
this creative sacrifice, so he called a halt. His remaining assistant was
ready to form his own business and Workshop 20 closed.
In 1976 Martin had opened a shop in Ludlow, called the Potters Shop, with
another potter. Each potter sells only his own work, each has his own space
and they keep separate books but all expenses are shared.
'Owning the shop gave me the freedom to make expensive, creative pieces.
When I was wholesaling, shops just wanted standard ranges of mugs and jugs,'
Martin said. His clientele has built steadily and buys items as works of
art. 'If anyone needs a jug, they can go round the corner to Woolworths and
buy one. They buy mine because it is an individual, hand-made piece,' Martin
said.
His work, which ranges from Pounds 3 to Pounds 300, is hand thrown. He still
makes jugs, each with their own character and ranging 'from the fat,
pot-bellied to the tall and sensuous'.
His speciality is a technique known as 'sprigging', which dates from the
17th century. The sprigs - clay pictures in relief that are made from
traditional moulds ranging from geese, rabbits and mice to a stylised sun
and ears of corn - are stuck to biscuit-fired pots with liquid clay. They
adorn mugs, jugs, butter and cheese dishes and bread crocks.
In 1977, flush with the success of the shop, Martin and Tina bought a
converted oast house in a state of disrepair and a sitting tenant. A small
payment gave them vacant possession and in 1979 they moved in and started
the renovation project.
The house gave the couple a second string to their bow - it is big enough to
run summer art schools. These started immediately in 1979 - 'We fed them
well and they didn't mind the absence of window sills,' Tina said.
The summer schools offer courses for eight potters and 10 painters at a
time. A garden producing organically grown vegetables helps provide lunch
for the group, which is billeted with local families. Courses cost Pounds
269 inclusive a week. Between them the two businesses provide a comfortable
living for a family of five.
Martin teaches the potters and hires tutors for the art students. The school
attracts foreign students for courses of varying length. 'Lots of people
come year after year and become good friends,' Martin said.
Martin Homer School of Pottery and Painting, Lower Aston House, Aston Bank,
Knighton-on-Teme, Tenbury Wells, Worcs. WR15 8LW. Tel: 058-479-404.
