FT  27 FEB 93 / Switzerland's regional banks continue to feel the squeeze: A
persistent inverted yield curve has led to a spate of mergers and takeovers
PERHAPS one reason why the Swiss do so well in business is that they do not
hesitate to be blunt - even cruelly, publicly blunt - with each other.
Recently Mr Markus Lusser, president of the Swiss National Bank,
demonstrated this quality anew at Biel where he went to address the leaders
of the country's 160 regional banks.
It is no secret that many of Switzerland's regional banks are in trouble.
One went spectacularly bust a year-and-a-half ago, creating what no one ever
expected to see in this country, a queue of deposit holders vainly waiting
to get their money back.
Most of the rest of these small, locally rooted banks have been badly
squeezed by an inverted yield curve that prevailed in Switzerland for nearly
two years, leading to a spate of mergers and takeovers.
Now, just as the sector's leaders are beginning to see light at the end of
the tunnel, Mr Lusser has come along and blocked the exit.
It was not enough to design a strategy for recovery, he said. Instead,
regional bank managers should ask themselves whether, given the chance, they
would start up afresh in the present climate. If not, they should look
around for a merger partner or go into voluntary liquidation.
Not surprisingly, regional bankers were upset. 'It was not very sensible to
talk like that. He said nothing positive,' Mr Roland Boeschenstein, deputy
director of the Association of Regional Banks, says.
The regional banks do not figure large in the overall scheme of Swiss
banking; their combined assets of SFr84bn (Pounds 38bn) at the end of last
year were roughly a third the size of those of Union Bank of Switzerland,
the country's largest.
But they see themselves as pillars of local communities, with a better
understanding of local needs than the big universal banks. 'Swiss people
like to deal with a bank they can feel comfortable talking to,' Mr
Boeschenstein says.
Others suggest that this is a nostalgic view. Mr Beat Philipp, banking
analyst at Bank J. Vontobel in Zurich, argues that the regional banks have
lost their role. 'The problem is that social structures have changed. People
still live in the villages, but they work and bank in the cities.'
Mr Michel Petitpierre, head of research at Pictet &amp; Co in Geneva, adds that
many regional banks themselves broke ties with their local communities in
the 1980s, aspiring to lend to bigger businesses. And that is how some,
including the Spar und Leihkasse Thun, which went bust in October 1991, got
into trouble.
Even if most of the regional banks did fold, Switzerland would not, like
Britain and some other countries, become virtually bereft of locally
controlled financial institutions outside the capital.
The country has a full network of cantonal banks, mortgage and small
business specialists whose assets are backed in whole or in part by their
cantonal governments. They still account for about a fifth of all financial
institutions' assets and are growing.
And there is a surprisingly buoyant network of 1,158 Raiffeisen, village
co-operative banks that work on a very intimate and careful basis with local
farmers and tradespeople.
The regional banks have seen their assets fall from SFr93.5bn in 1990 to
SFr84bn last year. But Raiffeisen assets jumped from SFr33.8bn to SFr36.7bn
in 1991, and the group's association says they grew again last year.
'I doubt that many people would cry over the disappearance of the regional
banks,' Mr Philipp says.
