FT  13 JAN 93 / International Company News: Kodak stock up sharply on
outside appointment
SHARES in Eastman Kodak, the photographic products company with a lacklustre
earnings record, rose sharply yesterday following news that it had appointed
a chief financial officer from outside the group with a reputation for
turning around poorly-performing businesses.
He is Mr Christopher Steffen, 50, who resigned before Christmas as chief
financial officer of Honeywell, the controls business. He will succeed Mr
Paul Smith, 57, who retired last month.
Honeywell's stock fell substantially on his departure, while Kodak's soared
Dollars 3.25 to Dollars 45 on Wednesday following his appointment. It rose a
further Dollars 2 5/8 to Dollars 47 5/8 at close of trade yesterday as Wall
Street analysts raised their ratings and earning estimates for the group.
This is the first time in two decades Kodak has gone outside the company to
fill a senior executive position, and analysts took this as a sign it will
start taking a more aggressive approach to its difficulties.
The group has suffered for years from stagnant demand in its core
photographic products business, while diversification into new fields,
notably its Dollars 5.1bn 1988 takeover of Sterling Drug, has failed to give
revenues and earnings a sustained lift. The company has taken six
restructuring charges in the past seven years.
However, under Mr Kay Whitmore, chairman since 1990, Kodak has started
demonstrating a more urgent pace of change in recent months.
In November it announced plans to sell three non-core businesses, including
its Atex computer systems operation, as part of a scheme to divest 10
operations. The company has declined to comment on market rumours that it
may be preparing a substantial round of job cuts.
Mr Steffen, who joined Honeywell in 1989, is credited with playing a
significant role alongside Mr James Renier, the chairman, in improving that
company's performance. He had previously worked in senior positions at
Chrysler,the car manufacturer. He will start at Kodak on February 8.
Mr Alex Henderson, an analyst with Prudential Securities, said he had raised
his earnings estimate for the company in 1993 from Dollars 3.65 a share to
Dollars 3.85, and in 1994 from Dollars 4.10 to Dollars 4.40. Analysts
forecasts for 1993 are currently pitched around Dollars 3.85.
