FT  09 FEB 93 / Arts: Contemporary contrasts in style - Weekend concerts
The BBC Symphony Orchestra's current series of Royal Festival Hall concerts
 -low-priced, informally presented, imaginatively planned, and (as ever)
simultaneously broadcast on Radio 3 - seems to be catching on. Friday's
programme, conducted by Mark Wigglesworth, placed music by Messiaen and the
53-year-old Dutch composer Louis Andriessen side by side. It was well
attended and well received - as indeed it deserved to be: the mixture was
uncommonly lively, stimulating, even perhaps a touch troubling.
The revised version of Andriessen's De Snelheid ('Velocity') was given its
premiere. This is a 'process' piece - the composer's own phrase from his
introductory chat with Steve Martland - and an attempt to create complex
effects of fast movement through contrasts and conflicts of pulse and metre.
From the start a regular beat knocked out on woodblocks provides the musical
foundation. Three differently disposed instrumental groups then proceed to
build upon it in cross-cutting patterns, and the base-beat itself eventually
increases in speed, so that a sense of larger momentum is produced out of
proportion to the sum total of all the jiggling, bouncing - and loudly
delivered - component parts.
The experience will probably have given greatest pleasure to those who like
brash, rock-related sounds bashed out without falter or finesse, and those
who enjoy following the tidy working-out of a self-set conceptual problem.
Andriessen admirers know what to expect, and if a non-admirer complains that
other musical qualities seem non-existent in De Snelheid, he or she is
probably missing the point.
It made for a curious and fascinating contrast to follow this 20-minute
stretch of 1990s high-tech musical brutalism with the 80 minutes, opulent
colour resources, swooning melodic delights and picturesque mysticism of
Messiaen's Turangalla symphony. Wigglesworth, who had led a sharp-cut
account of the Andriessen, here revealed one or two chinks in his
conductor's armour: for while the slow movements were unfolded with suitably
rapt control of pace, the fast ones were persistently smudged and spotted by
out-of-synch orchestral ensemble.
Another set of contrasts was in store in the same hall two evenings later:
Pierre Boulez, conducting the Parisian Ensemble InterContemporain in
Messiaen's 1988 chamber-piece Un Vitrail et des oiseaux and then the
Philharmonia in the 1937 orchestral version of the song-cycle Poemes pour
Mi, brought to the music exactly the combination of spot-on rhythmic
precision and pinpoint applications of colour lacking from Wigglesworth.
Comparison is no doubt improper (for the one conductor is, after all, a
senior musical figure of enormous experience and the other a hugely
promising junior) but inevitable. The exhilaration of Poemes pour Mi was
dangerously increased by the singing - scoreless, totally absorbed in word
and musical phrase, totally transported - of that perpetually astonishing
artist Maria Ewing. Hers is not the weight of voice Messiaen had in mind
when writing it; a vast Isolde-like outpouring is needed to sweep across the
batteries of brass. But by the sheer imaginative force, variousness and
intensity of her delivery she contrived to re-invent both the music and her
singing of it.
This was altogether a rich concert: 'difficult modern music' of the kind now
supposedly passe and unpopular yet offered with cracking zest to a Festival
Hall full of youthful enthusiasts. Boulez also conducted the Ensemble in the
first performance of his revised Derive 2, a coruscating scherzo-movement
buzzing with the animation and flow of fast-moving conversation; and devoted
the centre-part of the programme to Elliott Carter. Final fascinating
contrast: between the knotty excitements and fiercely argued intellectual
exuberance of Carter's Oboe Concerto and Three Occasions and the heady
ecstasies of Messiaen - two composers born (in 1908) only 24 hours apart.
This Ensemble InterContemporain-Philharmonia concert is being broadcast
tonight on Radio 3.
