FT  06 MAR 93 / Finance and the Family: When it pays to be bold - The
gearing policy of Scottish Mortgage has proved profitable / Investment
Trusts
IN THE WORLD of investment trusts, names can mislead. Although Scottish
Mortgage and Trust is based in Scotland, it has nothing to do with
mortgages. Instead, it is one of the 'big ten' international general trusts
dealing in a range of equity and bond markets round the globe.
The name originated in 1909 when the trust was set up by a firm of lawyers -
an offshoot of which became Baillie Gifford, the Edinburgh-based investment
management group which runs Scottish Mortgage's portfolio. The aim was to
buy fixed-interest securities issued by Far East plantations. But when it
found there were not enough plantations of the right quality to back, it
moved into other fields.
What sets Scottish Mortgage most apart from the other international trusts
is its willingness to take relatively bold decisions over gearing -
borrowing money to invest in shares and other instruments. Gearing makes
sense in the long term, since shares outperform other investments; in the
short term, it can require a strong nerve. When share prices fall,
borrowings still have to be repaid at face value.
The high gearing policy made life difficult for the trust in 1987, as the
graph shows. When the stock market plunged on Black Monday in October that
year, Scottish Mortgage underperformed the FT All-Share index dramatically.
When markets are rising, however, the trust does disproportionately well: it
was second in the international general sector over the year to March 1,
with a gain of 32.1 per cent (mid-market to mid-market with net income
re-invested). Over ten years, it was sixth (out of 17) in the sector, with a
rise of 419.6 per cent.
The trust raised two stepped-interest debentures in the 1980s. One was timed
brilliantly for the start of the bull market in 1982; the other, taken out
in the summer of 1986, was less felicitous.
In 1987, Scottish Mortgage also arranged an Dollars 80m (Pounds 56.3m)
multi-currency facility; that was replaced with a Dollars 75m facility in
1992. But, rather than invest in shares, the trust took advantage of the
'positive yield curve' whereby returns on bonds are higher than short-term
interest rates.
'We reached the view that the mid-1990s would be very favourable for bonds,'
says manager Maxwell Ward. 'There is a near-absence of inflationary
pressures. We perceived that short-term interest rates had already fallen in
the US and Japan without pulling long rates down; we were also on the
threshold of lower short-term rates in Europe.'
So, on top of the other gearing, the trust raised a further Dollars 75m
which it invested in US Treasury bonds. 'We borrowed at 4.9 per cent in
dollars and invested in Treasuries at 7.9 per cent,' says Ward. A similar
view has led the trust to invest Pounds 70m of its short-term borrowings in
gilts.
As of December 31, 17.1 per cent of Scottish Mortgage's assets were in bonds
and other liquid asset instruments. The rest were in UK equities (49.6 per
cent), Europe (13.4 per cent), Pacific (10.7 per cent), America (6.9 per
cent) and Japan (2.3 per cent).
Compared with the international indices, that leaves the trust underweight
in both Japan and the US. Ward says he views both markets as valued quite
fully and is very concerned about the technical position of the Tokyo
market. But he sees Europe as good value because of falling interest rates,
and feels the non-Japanese Far Eastern markets offer the best prospects for
economic growth.
Because of personal equity plan requirements, the trust has to keep 50 per
cent of its assets within the UK and European Community. In addition, a
substantial UK holding is needed to pay the dividend (Scottish Mortgage has
a commitment to maintain its dividend in real terms).
Baillie Gifford picks Scottish Mortgage's investments via a three-stage
process. An investment policy committee decides on broad strategy and the
investment manager then makes the detailed asset allocation. Finally, the
individual stocks are picked by teams which focus on four areas: UK,
continental Europe, the US and the Far East. The trusts's ten largest
investments at December 31 were J. Sainsbury, Tomkins, Alacatel Alsthom,
Shell, Bass, Hanson, Astra, Tesco, Societe Generale and Lloyds bank.
The trust likes to have relatively concentrated portfolios. Overall, it has
111 holdings, 50 in the UK. 'If you like the stock, you should have a
substantial holding,' says the 43-year-old Ward, who joined Baillie Gifford
in 1971, ran Scottish Mortgage's UK portfolio from 1981 and has been in
overall charge since 1989.
Lewis Aaron, investment trust analyst at SG Warburg Securities, says:
'Scottish Mortgage is a little light in North America for our liking, but it
has delivered the goods and, at the current discount, looks attractive.'
Key facts. On February 28, the trust's total assets were Pounds 1.042m. Net
assets were Pounds 807m, equivalent to nav per share of 223.8p. On March 2,
the share price of 193p put the shares on a discount of 14 per cent,
according to NatWest Securities Ltd. The market capitalisation was Pounds
696m and the yield was 2.7 per cent. Baillie Gifford's fee is 0.045 per cent
of net assets per quarter, plus 7.45 per cent a year of attributable
earnings.
Board. This is entirely non-executive. Sir Michael Herries, the chairman
since 1984, is a former chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland. Other board
members are Geoffrey Ball, chairman and chief executive of CALA; George
Gwilt, a former managing director of Standard Life; Ian Irwin, chairman and
chief executive of Scottish Transport Group; Fred Johnston, executive
chairman of Johnston Press; Lord Sanderson of Bowden, chairman of the
Conservative party in Scotland; and Jack Shaw, a deputy governor of the Bank
of Scotland.
Savings plan and Pep details. The only charge on the savings scheme (apart
from government stamp duty) is a Pounds 10-plus-VAT fee when investors want
to sell shares. The minimum monthly investment is Pounds 30 and Pounds 250
for a lump sum.
The Pep has an initial charge of Pounds 30 plus VAT, and a half-yearly
charge of Pounds 15 plus VAT. Dealing commissions are 0.2 per cent. The
first two withdrawals in a tax year are free; subsequent withdrawals cost
Pounds 10 plus VAT.
