FT  29 MAY 93 / EC work hours pact near
EUROPEAN Community plans to limit the working week to 48 hours are set to be
agreed next week, following high-level negotiations between the European
Commission and the British government, whose opposition has blocked the
proposal for three years.
UK officials confirmed yesterday 'it is likely that we will not vote
against' the working time directive when employment and social affairs
ministers meet in Luxembourg on Tuesday.
Britain last year secured a partial opt-out, giving it a 10-year grace
period to implement the 48-hour week, whereas its 11 partners would have to
comply within three years. But the UK would, for the first time, have to
give legal protection to workers who do not want to work more than 48 hours,
and to bring in legislation on mandatory time off.
Throughout the long tussle over this flagship of the EC's Social Charter,
the British government has insisted it would not accept any obligation to
limit working time, either now or in the future, claiming the measure would
add Pounds 5bn to the costs of UK industry.
But following talks between Mr Padraig Flynn, EC social affairs
commissioner, and British ministers, Mr John Major, the UK prime minister,
is understood to have sanctioned abstention on the directive.
The UK, however, is still fighting for total exclusion from the rules for
all work at sea, and for doctors in training.
Britain will also come under pressure on Tuesday over EC plans for mandatory
works councils in big, trans-European companies.
Its 11 partners are agreed in principle to go ahead with the measure under
the social protocol of the Maastricht treaty if Britain - which is exempt
from these more ambitious provisions - continues to hold it up.
The directive would oblige companies with more than 1,000 workers in more
than one member state to set up elected works councils, which would have to
be consulted on investment, relocation and jobs plans.
The UK is flatly opposed to obligatory consultation of workers, but is
negotiating in micro-detail through the directive's provisions, keeping open
the option of an eventual compromise.
