FT  03 JUL 93 / Westland is owed Pounds 385m over failed Arab deal
A LONG LEGAL tussle between the British helicopter group Westland and three
Arab governments moved a significant step forward yesterday when a
Geneva-based arbitration tribunal put the damages owed to Westland at Pounds
385m.
The dispute, which has been continuing since 1980 under the auspices of the
International Chamber of Commerce, is about the collapse of an
Egyptian-based helicopter manufacturing project.
The award figure is equivalent to more than 10 times Westland's annual
pre-tax profits. However, the company said last night: 'We must wait and see
where we go from here.'
Westland's action was against the Arab Organisation for Industrialisation,
the governments of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates and the
Arab British Helicopter company.
It appeared likely that the three Gulf states would appeal against the
damages award.
Yesterday's ruling left a question mark over Pounds 90m of the damages
figure. According to the tribunal, Westland owed the joint helicopter
venture Pounds 30m at the time of its collapse, and accumulated interest on
the debt since then is put at Pounds 60m.
The tribunal already decided in Westland's favour two years ago, holding
that the AOI and the three states were liable for damages for breach of
contract.
The project, launched in 1978, involved the setting up of manufacturing
facilities in Egypt for Westland Lynx military helicopters. That was be done
through Arab British Helicopter, a joint venture with the AOI, whose
partners were Egypt and the three Gulf states.
However, the partnership broke up in the wake of the 1979 Israeli-Egyptian
peace treaty and the subsequent ostracism of Egypt by other Arab
governments. The project fell through, leaving Westland stranded after
investing in the new facility.
Under the original contract, the four partner countries were to have bought
the first 250 helicopters produced at the plant, with further production
destined for export.
Westland indicated yesterday that proceedings could continue.
