FT  29 JUL 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee producers meet to thrash
out cartel details
LATIN AMERICAN coffee producers today begin a two-day meeting in Rio de
Janeiro to thrash out details of the exporters' cartel through which they
hope to drive up prices from the present depressed level.
They have already succeeded in lifting world market values from the recent
20-year lows by agreeing to withhold 20 per cent of scheduled shipments.
Today's gathering will define the statutes, location and budget of the new
producers' association. This is intended to fill the gap left by the
collapse in July 1989 of the export quota system operated by the
International Coffee Organisation, following which world prices, already
depressed at the time, slumped by another 60 per cent.
Delegates at this week's meeting will also consider the price level at which
stocks would be released to the market. Mr Jair Coser, president of the
Brazilian Federation of Coffee Exporters, has suggested that it could be
between 80 and 90 US cents a pound, a range reported to be favoured by
Colombian producers.
That target is modest compared with the Dollars 1.20 to Dollars 1.40 range
the ICO, a producer-consumer group, was attempting to defend until 1989.
The Brazilian private sector has proposed that the amount retained be
reduced to 10 per cent if the price rebounds partially, but that idea was
given a lukewarm response when put on Tuesday to Mr Jose Eduardo de Andrade
Vieira, minister of industry and commerce, according to Mr Coser.
However, Brazilian officials, influential in negotiations because they
represent the world's biggest exporter, appear to be keeping an open mind.
'The possibility exists' of a trigger scheme, said Mr Gilson Ximenes,
director of the National Coffee Department of the ministry.
The Rio de Janeiro meeting is a lead up to a gathering of all of the world's
major coffee exporters scheduled for August 16-17 in Uganda. The final
accord is scheduled be signed September 16 in Brasilia and retention
initiated in October.
Discussions on a producers' association to regulate stocks and try to boost
international prices began after the collapse earlier this year of talks
aimed at revitalising the ICO.
Individual countries are already outlining domestic retention schemes, which
the cartel is likely to police with the help of an international auditing
firm.
