FT  09 OCT 93 / Property: Black Wednesday's positive side - Cadogan's Place
PROPERTY Vision's review of the market, issued to celebrate the firm's first
10 years, sees an almost-biblical cycle of seven years' growth followed by
three of recession. The 1980s' property boom brought wonderful business for
the developers of new homes; the gentrification of outer-central London
(Battersea, say, or Islington); and an extraordinary demand for country
houses (met partly by barn conversions) and farmland. Money from selling
houses in London, often to foreigners, fuelled the rush to the country,
where prices spiralled to unrealistic levels.
The collapse in 1989 was fast as talk turned from 'gazumping' to 'negative
equity.' Sellers could not believe the fall and held out for prices which
buyers would not (and still will not) pay. Agencies crumbled through lack of
business. But the Black Wednesday devaluation of sterling brought manna from
heaven. Foreigners came to London and bought, once again releasing people
eager to buy in the country - if only there were houses for sale.
The trend is upward, Property Vision says, but not sharply so. Selling a
four-bedroom house off Kensington High Street in west London buys an old
vicarage in Wiltshire, with money to spare for re-decoration. The graphs for
such prime properties have run in tandem, except that houses in the country
rose faster and peaked earlier late in the 1980s than those in London.
The situation is back to when Property Vision was founded in 1983 as a way
to find good houses and negotiate reasonable prices for buyers at a time
when all the advantages lay with vendors and estate agents. Now, buying and
re-location agents are as established as estate agents. The firm's latest
success has been to buy the Easton Grey estate in Gloucestershire for around
Pounds 4m, quietly, before it came to market. The vendor's agents were
Knight Frank &amp; Rutley.
                         *       *       *
RENTING flourishes in today's market, thanks to the security for the
landlord of assured shorthold tenancies and the hesitation, first, of
purchasers to buy and, now, of vendors to sell. Cluttons London Residential
estimates that a 10 per cent yield is feasible on good London properties but
adds, wisely, that it is better to forego the last Pounds 20-30 rent a week
than lose a good tenant.
In Hampshire, John D. Wood (0962-842 4742) is offering Tichborne Park near
Alresford. This property has a lake and moat fed by the River Itchen, plus a
butler/chef and gardener, at a guide price of Pounds 5,000 a month.
                         *       *       *
THE AUTUMN CROP of houses for sale suggests that, at last, potential sellers
are acting, perhaps unable to delay their own moves for another year. If it
is an interesting property, they can be sure of many buyers' interest. In
Scotland, Knight Frank &amp; Rutley in Edinburgh (031-225 7105) is selling the
lightkeeper's houses at St Abbs Head, Berwickshire, for the Commissioners of
Northern Lighthouses: a cottage, two flats, outbuildings, walled garden and
no end of bird life. Offers over Pounds 90,000 for a twitcher's delight.
Near Stranraer, in south-west Scotland, the price of Lochnaw Castle - for
more than 600 years, the seat of the Agnew family - has been cut from Pounds
475,000 to Pounds 250,000, for a quick sale. The agent is Savills (031-226
6961) and the vendor is the Lochnaw Castle and Estate Trust, set up by an
Australian branch of the family to restore the castle. But funds are short
and the vendor hopes the buyer will complete the job. The castle comes with
a loch producing 400 trout a year, 200 acres of woodland, and a walled
garden built for therapy by soldiers recovering from the wars with Napoleon.
                         *       *       *
ONE FOR sailors: Dolphin House, a fine nautical property between Cowes and
Ryde on the Isle of Wight, is on offer for over Pounds 380,000 from Humberts
(071-629 0909) or Christopher Scott in Newport, Isle of Wight (0983-721778).
It has its own inlet from the creek with mooring, slipway, pontoon, boat
store and workshop. * * * ONE FOR the green-fingered: a substantial house at
Sissinghurst, Kent, where Vita Sackville-West made her great garden at the
castle (now owned by the National Trust). Knight Frank &amp; Rutley in Tunbridge
Wells (0892-515 035) offers the Court on the edge of the village, a
half-timbered and brick house dating to the 17th century.
Included are a cottage that was once a chapel, a barn (which the vendors,
Judith and Martin Miller, who publish the Antiques Price Guide, have made
into offices) and five acres. For Pounds 495,000, here is the chance to
create a garden to rival that of the neighbours.
                         *       *       *
THE NORTH-WEST offers more house for your money. Jackson-Stops (071-589
4536) is selling Netherby Hall in Cumbria (and almost in Scotland). Listed
Grade II, and mentioned in the writings of Sir Walter Scott, it began as a
medieval tower house - for many centuries, the best way to survive on the
Scottish borders - and is now a confection of 17th, 18th and 19th century
styles.
It has a Scottish baronial entrance tower, fine Georgian doorways and
plastered ceilings, and 17th century panelling that is probably Flemish. For
Pounds 850,000, you get the house, two cottages and 32 acres.
                         *       *       *
THE BIRTHPLACE in West Sussex of the poet Shelley is available for Pounds
2.5m from Jackson-Stops. Field Place near Horsham (and Gatwick airport) is
listed Grade I. The house is a handsome, late-17th century brick facade on
typical half-timbered Sussex construction with a wing built in stone.
Shelley was born there in 1792.
Its immaculate recent restoration revealed a great hall and won a Europa
Nostra award last year, while its 217 acres include a lake. Among the
outbuildings are a 15th century barn, Tudor stables, and two '17th or 18th
century hovels.'
