FT  10 JUL 93 / London Stock Exchange: Shares fail to hold on to early gains
AN EARLY strong performance by the UK equity market was gradually eroded
yesterday leaving the blue chip issues marginally lower on the day. The
deterioration came amid renewed suspicions that the big international
institutions could be moving money out of leading UK equities and into the
German market.
Second line and smaller stocks proved much more resilient, however, closing
with good overall gains on the session. Gilt-edged stocks closed with gains
of  3/16 .
The FT-SE 100 index ended the day a net 2.7 lower at 2,843.2, while the
FT-SE Mid 250 index settled 10.4 higher at 3,236.8. Over the week, the
senior of the two indices fell 14.5 while the smaller index managed a
2-point rise.
The market began the session in fine form, with Wall Street's overnight
strength, renewed gains across most European bourses and talk of a possible
reduction in UK interest rates triggering an early mark up.
An opening gain of 7.5 on the FT-SE 100 was extended to one of 12.3, the
day's high-point, shortly after midday. Thereafter, London's initial
positive sentiment began to waiver and bouts of profit-taking in the cash
market and the Footsie future, reacting to a neutral opening by Wall Street,
put pressure on equities.
The rate cut stories were backed up in the market by news that at least
three of the leading London broking firms - James Capel, SG Warburg
Securities and SG Strauss Turnbull - had reduced their year-end base-rate
forecasts. Warburg's strategy team said that with gilt yields falling and
inflation indicators generally encouraging 'it is hard to be particularly
bearish from current levels,' although it cautions 'there is still no sign
of any clear upward momentum developing in analysts earnings estimates'. On
the rate cut hopes, Strauss's Ian Harnett said: 'It's not a question of
whether there's a rate cut, but when.' He sees the market as reasonably
priced at present but warned that 'the market will be below these levels by
the end of September.'
BT shares were unnerved by two critical press stories and hints that a
bearish review of the company is about to be published by a London broker.
There was plenty of activity in the insurance areas, where Sun Alliance
continued to respond to hints that Transatlantic, jointly owned by Liberty
Life and UAP, could have been adding to their 'strategic' holding.
