FT  30 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Green cloud hangs over
Ecuadorean oil sector - Raymond Colitt reports on a wave of protest that has
potential investors worried
Only months before the Ecuadorean government is to invite foreign oil
companies to bid for new exploration blocks in the country's Amazon region -
potentially worth billions of dollars - a new wave of protests by
environmentalists and indigenous groups has investors worried.
The latest in a series of actions against oil companies in the region came
earlier this month as several aboriginal communities filed a civil law suit
against the US oil company Texaco.
The Indians of various tribes in the Amazon forests are demanding of Texaco
an indemnity in addition to legal costs of at least USDollars 50,000 for
each of the affected inhabitants of the area, which could run into thousands
of people. Separately the plaintiffs are to claim clean-up costs that may,
according to some estimates, reach hundreds of millions of dollars.
Texaco is accused of negligence, recklessness and intentional damage in its
exploration and production activities. These are alleged to have increased
the risk of cancer, respiratory and gastro-intestinal illnesses and to have
caused other personal injuries and property damages.
According to Mr Cristobal Bonifaz, a lawyer for the Indians, Texaco did not
always employ technologies and practices that met industry standards. For
example, toxic substances, he said, were not disposed of properly, but were
rather 'dumped' into pits, rivers and bogs or burnt without any pollution
control. Mr Bonifaz adds that the environmental damage in Ecuador's Amazon
region far exceeds that caused by the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska three
years ago.
Texaco has not operated in the fields of the Oriente, as Ecuador's Amazonian
region is called, since 1990, when its contract with the Ecuadorean
government expired and it withdrew after 20 years as the principal operator
from a consortium with the state-owned Petroecuador.
The US petroleum company denies the allegations and argues that the case
should have been filed in Ecuador, where Petroecuador is legally
established. Yet the plaintiffs argue that the defendant is legally a
resident of New York and that all decisions regarding operations in Ecuador
were essentially taken in the US.
Meanwhile, Texaco awaits the results of an environmental audit initiated by
the Ecuadorean government itself to determine exactly what environmental
damage has been caused and what the reparation cost might be. The results of
a study conducted by a Canadian environmental consulting firm are expected
soon. Ecuador's minister of energy and mining, Mr Franciso Acosta, says that
he will not sign any new contract with Texaco - which seeks to commercialise
petrol within Ecuador - until the environmental review has been completed
and Texaco has renewed its commitment to abide by it.
The validity of the audit has been questioned by environmental groups in the
US and Ecuador because of the lack of public access to information, the
exclusion of local communities from the process and the terms of the audit,
which were set by Texaco and Petroecuador.
Laws and regulations that might substantiate specific infractions against
Texaco are scarce. Ecuador has only recently adopted environmental
regulations specific to the petroleum industry. Yet first the court for the
southern district of New York must be signed to hear the case.
That considerable environmental damage has been caused in the Oriente is
beyond question. Countless acres of rain forest have disappeared, water and
soil have been polluted by oil spills and animal habitats have been
destroyed. According to a government estimate nearly 17m gallons of oil has
leaked out of the Texaco-operated pipeline.
Preliminary results from an independent study by the US-based Institute on
Economic and Social Rights indicates that in areas in which Texaco operated
there is evidence of the presence of toxic substances like benzine and
toluol in excess of levels deemed tolerable by the US Environmental
Protection Agency.
Yet the company maintains that its emergency clean-up efforts were effective
and that oil spills, often due to natural disasters, represented only a
small percentage of the total amount transported during 18 years of
operation.
Texaco is not the only company accused of environmental improprieties. Only
days before the legal suit against Texaco, members of the Cofan tribe -
armed with spears and shotguns - forced drilling to be suspended at a
Petroecuador site.
The Cofanes demanded that the exploratory work within a national park and
close to their tribal lands be halted. Especially indignant at President
Duran Ballen's decision to allow resumption of exploratory work after having
previously suspended it because of environmental concerns, they contended
that they were not consulted about the activities as is required by law.
Confrontation is certain to continue as the Cofanes insist that Petroecuador
withdraw from their lands. Petroecuador has already had to shut down one of
its most promising sites - Tiputini Panacocha, also located in the national
park - following a decree by the government's environmental agency in
response to supposed damage.
Despite assurances to potential investors by the energy minister,
potentially interested oil companies are wary of increasing confrontation by
indigenous peoples and environmental groups that might lead to costly legal
battles and an image problem at home.
