FT  23 OCT 93 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: A puff of fresh air on Tiwi beach
IT MAY have been the sun, or it may have been the joint of Malawi gold - a
blissful and saintly substance - on which I had been puffing. Either way,
last Sunday afternoon on Tiwi beach, south of Mombasa, found me in a mood of
transcendent happiness. Mellow-yellow from tip to toe. Yet locked in the
grip of a powerful idea.
Before I describe the idea, I ought to tell the story that had planted it in
my head: a story about pygmies in the Central African Republic.
Sometimes at night, when their fire is low, these pygmies cover their bodies
with phosphorescent mould and dance on the forest floor. Some years ago a
French film crew showed up to make a TV special about the pygmies. The
French had heard about this phosphorescent dance and wanted to film it, but
the pygmies weren't interested. There was no reason for the ceremony; they
would be dancing just for show.
The film crew persisted. They upped and upped their offer until the pygmies
agreed to dance. The pygmies rubbed on some mould and went through the
motions. An interviewer approached a pygmy. 'Tell us what the meaning of
this dance is,' he demanded, wielding his microphone. The pygmy shook his
head. The interviewer persisted. 'This is very important. What is the dance
about?' At last the pygmy solemnly replied: 'This is a dance we are doing
for money.'
I love that story because it celebrates simplicity. It cuts through the
flimflam, boils things to their essence. As a result, on Tiwi beach, I was
gripped by the notion that the biggest thing wrong with this sad and weary
planet is that we think that our problems, many of them complex, can only be
resolved by complex solutions. This strikes me as a fallacy that could
strangle us.
Here is an example. A lot of people are horrified at the way we are chewing
up species. It is thought that more than 5,000 species are becoming extinct
annually. We are running out of time even to catalogue this living wealth.
Yet we dither and we faff.
The challenge sounds monumental. Yet its solution could be simple - just
collect these threatened species and throw them in the freezer. Gregory
Benford, who teaches physics at the University of California, writes, in
Earthwatch magazine, that we ought to collect samples of plant and animal
species from threatened habitats and freeze them in liquid nitrogen for
long-term storage. Just post them to the future. The cost would not be
great, perhaps a few billion.
'Because gene pools will shrink in a ravaged environment,' says Benford,
'reintroducing diverse traits from frozen tissue samples could help species
bloom anew. With such a Library of Life, we may be able to recover lost
ecosystems ..
'For us to imagine and anticipate the Library of Life's potential uses would
be as hard as it would be for the Wright brothers to imagine a moon landing.
Many biotechnological feats will emerge within a few decades - many ways of
reading and using genetic 'texts.' But no advanced 'reader' and 'editor' can
work upon lost texts.'
Pondering this idea, on Tiwi beach, led me to conclude that other problems
could be solved, painlessly and quickly, by keeping things simple.
Drugs? Legalise the lot of them. Efforts to combat drug-taking are costly
and futile, so let us cut out the humbug. We let people drink or smoke
themselves to death, or kill themselves in cars, so why not the druggies? We
should not be sentimental.
Crime? I would treat all minor crime seriously and all serious crime with
vengeance. I am in favour of capital punishment. The arguments against it
are flimflam.
My reverie on Tiwi beach came to a brutal end when a young girl ran up with
an item of hot news. She said: 'Things are looking tricky. The tribe that
lives on the hill has just declared war on the tribe that lives near the
beach. Those who live on the hill but are presently at the beach are
returning to the hill, while those who live at the beach but are presently
on the hill are returning to the beach. What should we do?'
I said: 'There is bound to be a solution - something incredibly simple. We
must jettison all flimflam.'
But I couldn't think of a thing.
