FT  13 JUL 93 / Probe widens as secret GM papers are found: Prosecutors look
for link to VW production head
GERMAN prosecutors are looking for links between Volkswagen's controversial
new production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, and secret
General Motors' documents found in a Wiesbaden apartment, according to legal
officials.
The investigation of the US group's claims that Mr Lopez and junior
colleagues took confidential information with them when they defected to VW
this spring took a new turn yesterday after confirmation from Adam Opel,
GM's German subsidiary, that the discovery included details of a top-secret
model it was planning.
It also emerged that Mr Jorge Alvarez Aguirre, who lived in the apartment
until recently, was formerly involved in Opel's new model policy through his
job as head of Opel's advance purchasing department.
Mr Alvarez was one of two Opel employees who switched to VW shortly after Mr
Lopez, head of global purchasing at GM, joined the German company in March.
A further five members of his US team also moved to VW at around the same
time.
'It is not only a question of the papers we found. We also have to see if
there is proof that Mr Lopez has anything to do with the matter,' Mr Georg
Nauth, spokesman for the Darmstadt prosecutor's office, said yesterday.
Interviews with VW and Opel employees were continuing, but the issues raised
by the Wiesbaden discovery made it 'hard to say' how long the investigation
would last, Mr Nauth said. There were many questions to be answered. For
example: 'If Mr Lopez had asked to see or saw the papers.'
Four boxes of documents had been discovered, 'which did not belong where
they were found', Mr Nauth added. He refused to confirm that they included
details of Opel's most important current project - a cheap mini-car
codenamed the O-car. But that was not to say reports to that effect were
wrong, he noted.
The O-car is due for launch in the second half of this decade. The concept
bears a striking resemblance to a projected 'people's car' announced since
Mr Lopez's arrival by Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman.
Opel's plans for a super-lean works to make the vehicle, provisionally
earmarked for Hungary, also closely match those unveiled recently by Mr
Lopez for his homeland in the Basque country, northern Spain. Mr Lopez
played a leading role in developing Opel's project, and it was his
disappointment that it would not be built in Spain which led to him leaving
GM and being appointed head of production at VW.
VW, which last week stated that the Basque works would not be built 'at this
time', yesterday repeated its claim that none of the documents was secret. A
lawyer speaking for Mr Alvarez made a similar claim although he admitted he
had not seen the papers.
GM cautious on third quarter, Page 22
