FT  16 JAN 93 / Frenchman to become chairman of Euro Disney
MR Robert Fitzpatrick yesterday resigned as chairman of Euro Disney, which
has faced speculation about its performance since the opening of the
FFr4.2bn (Pounds 510m) EuroDisneyland theme park outside Paris last April.
He will be succeeded by Mr Philippe Bourguignon, 42, a Frenchman who
orchestrated the development of hotels and property around the park. He
joined Euro Disney in 1988 from Accor, one of France's largest hotel and
leisure companies.
The news was greeted by a jump in Euro Disney's share price. The shares
closed 28p higher at 778p in London and FFr2 higher at FFr66 in Paris.
Euro Disney denied that the departure of Mr Fitzpatrick, 52, was related to
reports that the park was failing to meet its targets for attendance and
merchandise sales. It said Mr Fitzpatrick wanted to hand over to an
indigenous European management team, having completed the park's launch.
There had been speculation about his future at Euro Disney since September
when he ceded part of his responsibilities by making Mr Bourguignon
president in his place and becoming chairman. Mr Fitzpatrick plans to set up
a consultancy in Paris but will remain on Euro Disney's management board.
Mr Fitzpatrick formerly worked for Walt Disney, the US leisure and
entertainment group that owns 49 per cent of Euro Disney. He became
president of the European company in 1987.
One of the more off-beat tasks he undertook at Disney in the US was dressing
up as Goofy, the cartoon dog, and going around the Magic Kingdom theme park.
He explained that all Disney employees did a spell in animal costume to meet
the public and understand the business.
EuroDisneyland is the most expensive leisure complex yet to be built in
Europe. It was originally expected to attract 11m visitors in its first
year.
The company has refused to disclose specific figures, but it recently
confirmed that the park, which was visited by 7m people in its first six
months, would probably fall about 500,000 below target for attendance in its
first full year.
Merchandise sales and occupancy levels at EuroDisneyland's five hotels have
also fallen below expectations.
Euro Disney has cancelled plans for further property development around the
park because of the precarious state of the Paris property market. This has
led to a shortfall in projected capital gains, thereby increasing its
financial costs.
Euro Disney recently ann-ounced a pre-tax loss of FFr399m for the year to
September 30. Analysts expect heavier losses for the current financial year
which will, for the first time, include the slack winter months.
London stocks, Page 13
World stocks, Page 19
