FT  27 OCT 93 / Arts: Feckless talent - Dance
DOUG Elkins is a wacky klutz with a fabulous talent and no sense of
structure. This American dance-maker first brought his work to Dance
Umbrella in 1991; last weekend he and his company returned. Watching his
work is bewildering. Two years ago, I suspected that he was the most
marvellous young dance-maker to have come along since Mark Morris; now I am
sure that he is. I am also sure, however, that he never bothers to turn his
dances into choreography.
Almost any phrase in Elkins's work is a hilarious but thrilling fusion of
contrasting traditions. Sometimes, he adds yet another layer of contrast by
setting these dances to music from another culture (eg Indian) or era (eg
Handel). His dancers are a complete mix - skinny or plump, short or tall,
long-haired or bald - and the dances he gives them may be straight, gay,
neither or both. Ironies abound; campness too. Yet the image he sets onstage
is one of happy consensus, in lively harmony with the music.
In these respects, Elkins is a classical artist. His work places itself at
the ends of several traditions, and occasionally suggests that he knows his
own kinship to George Balanchine, Merce Cunningham, Paul Taylor, Twyla
Tharp, Mark Morris, and others. The resemblances occur in fleeting
references that enrich his work. Much more obvious and important are the
basic virtues that his dances often show: seamless phrasing, steady current,
rhythmic pulse. His dancers look like folk having a good time in a bisexual
New York club and like artists attending to niceties of musical detail and
dance style.
I like best his suite of Latin dances, A Cerca de la Escuelita. What rare
bliss to find a choreographer alert to the metres of the cha-cha, the mambo
and more. None of these dances were pure Latin, but all of them were much
closer to true Latin style than any of what is practised on the professional
ballroom circuit. More Wine for Polyphemus, though the programme dates it as
new this year, incorporates material we saw two years back. Now, as then, my
jaw drops at the impudent musical wit with which Elkins mixes charleston,
the twist, breakdance and ballet to Joan Sutherland's recordings of Handel
arias.
You watch these ingredients being so uncannily assembled, your senses
ravished by first impressions, you tingle with anticipation - and then you
watch this young chef pour his cooking down the drain.
In 1991, I hoped that Elkins's feckless failures of construction simply
suggested that he had not yet got round to addressing larger matters of
choreographic craft. In 1993, it is but all too plain that Elkins thinks
that not being organised is cute. His ordering of them is full of
oh-gee-is-this-a-live-show attempts at simulated clumsiness. Though his
dances are no end of fun to watch moment by moment, they win only a
spattering of final applause. Too flip.
His work has made me blink tears of sudden wonder, and laugh aloud with
incredulous joy. Of the rare calibre of his talent, I have no doubt.
Ultimately, however, it filled me with despair.
*****
Shobana Jeyasingh is an Indian choreographer who lives and works in Britain.
Her dancers employ the traditional Indian vocabulary of the Bharata Natyam
style, but she uses modern Western music and many structural features of
modern Western choreography. This season has invited Richard Alston to make
a piece for her six dancers.
Alston is the finest maker of sheer dances in Britain today, and watching
his Delicious Arbour, choreographed to Purcell music, is a marvellously
ironic experience. For these dances both revitalise Bharata Nyatyam - and
yet are clearly not Bharata Natyam. They feel utterly Alston - while looking
utterly unlike anything he has made before.
The ironies of Delicious Arbour lie mainly in its rhythms and its
musicality. Alston has applied features of Indian dance metre to the radiant
baroque measures of Purcell, sometimes moving slow against a faster beat, or
in rapid embellishments around a slower beat, but always revealing its inner
processes. Its beauty is that Jeyasingh's six dancers seem to claim Purcell
as their inheritance.
Jeyasingh herself has choreographed Romance - with footnotes. But her
refined and clever organisation of traditional dance material seldom takes
off as sheer dance, or creates a stage world of its own. When Alston uses
her dancers, they look girlish, shy, but sharply individual. In Jeyasingh's
material, they look like studious, inhibited acolytes.
