FT  30 OCT 93 / State schools begin to gain on private sector: . . . But
fee-payers dominate the league tables. John Authers and Gillian de Bono
study the FT schools survey
BRITAIN'S state schools have been gaining academic ground against the fee
paying sector, according to this year's FT-1000 survey of Advanced Level
examination results published with the Weekend FT today.
Although private schools still dominate the upper reaches of our league
table, 23 state schools made it into the top 200, compared with only three
last year. More significantly, some famous and expensive independent schools
failed to achieve A-level scores as good as those of the top state schools.
Essex girls at Colchester County Girls' High, the top state school at no 37,
showed a clean pair of heels to those of Benenden, Cheltenham Ladies'
College, and Roedean. Lower down the list, John Hamden grammar school in
High Wycombe in 411th place, still beat respected boarding schools such as
Blundell's and Sedbergh.
This year's survey has also raised controversial questions about what type
of school is most likely to get the best results. It suggests that, with
impressive exceptions, day schools do better than traditional boarding
schools and that single sex schools do better than co-educational schools.
But one of the most striking revelations from the publication of exam
results is the success - in one area at least - of the despised selective
system, based on grammar and secondary modern schools.
While most of the country was converting these '11-plus' schools into
comprehensives, particularly under Margaret Thatcher when she was education
secretary in the early 1970s, Buckinghamshire retained selection at aged 12.
Now it boasts not only the top state boys' school in the FT-1000 survey, but
average results well ahead of those for the country as a whole. Last year's
government figures put the county's A level performance in fifth place out
of 108 education authorities. Our survey suggests it has done even better
this year.
But was good performance by the cleverest children achieved at the expense
of the less fortunate - those who used to be stigmatised as '11-plus
failures'? It seems not. Buckingham gets excellent results from pupils with
a wide range of abilities, including those who fail the grammar school exam.
In High Wycombe, for example, The Royal Grammar School (66th in the
FT-1000), was up with famous names in the independent sector, such as
Dulwich College, Charterhouse, Shrewsbury, and Haileybury. Last year it
gained more places at Oxford and Cambridge than any other state school.
However, the town boasts two other successful grammar schools and, more
remarkably, several secondary moderns (now called 'upper schools') with good
examination results. Because our league table is based only on A-levels, it
does not show the upper schools' success. But in GCSE exams, taken at 16,
some of these schools finished ahead of comprehensives in neighbouring
Milton Keynes.
So the latest evidence from the FT-1000 and the government's exam statistics
suggest that the selective education system which Britain has been
dismantling during the last 25 years can be successful for a wide range of
ability - under certain conditions. The figures for Buckinghamshire also
illustrate a more general truth - that where state schools achieve good
results, the independent sector tends to be pushed into second place.
It might be objected that High Wycombe, like some other places with good
state school results, is inhabited by the ambitious middle classes whose
children would do well in any system. Our survey shows, for example, that
the best performing comprehensive schools are those which serve areas where
affluent and educated people live, such as north Oxford, or Sunningdale in
Berkshire.
In Buckinghamshire, Andrew MacTavish, head of John Hampden, confirms that
many parents who work for international companies have moved to the Wycombe
area on the advice of their employers.
Wycombe, situated in the leafy Bucks commuter belt, is indeed attractive to
prosperous parents. But it is not wealthy enough to explain such outstanding
results. Unemployment has followed the decline of the town's traditional
furniture industry, and a strong influx of immigrants means that it is not
without 'inner-city' problems.
The good rating of Wycombe's grammar schools in the FT-1000 no doubt
reflects the fact that parents send their children from a wide radius,
including the far corners of Berkshire and Surrey.
Weak competition from local independent schools also helps. It seems that in
this area, the dream of many idealists of the 1950s and 1960s has been
fulfilled: they hoped then that strong middle class demand for improved
state education would make private schools unnecessary.
But the middle classes always want the best for their children, which in a
selective system, means grammar schooling, good A level grades and a
university degree. What happens to the others? In High Wycombe the answer
might be that they go to the Sir William Ramsay upper school.
In that case their prospects would be quite good. Last year 34 per cent of
the school's GCSE exam entries resulted grades A to C, equivalent to a pass
in the old GCE O-level. This was close to the average for the whole of the
UK and much better than the performance of Milton Keynes's comprehensives,
which accept children with a much wider range of abilities. There, the
average is only 23 per cent. Two other upper schools in Wycombe, St
Bernard's, which is Roman Catholic, and Wye Valley, also managed to better
the nearby comprehensives.
If the entire Wycombe area is viewed as one big comprehensive school, to use
an analogy suggested by Bill Richards, head of Sir William Ramsay, then in
1992, 52 per cent of pupils win at least five GCSEs at grades A to C. The
average for the whole of the UK last year was 38 per cent.
Sir William Ramsay has even started a sixth form, once an unimagined
development for a school intended only to take the 70 per cent of pupils who
did not make the grade at the age of 12.
Although such successes might encourage those Conservatives who want to
return to some form of selective education system, recent attempts in
several counties to reintroduce selection, have run into fierce local
opposition.
In Wycombe, however, there is equally fierce local commitment to selection.
Heads of the area's 13 schools agree this stems from the council's battle in
the mid 1970s with Shirley Williams, then Labour education secretary, to
preserve the grammar schools.
Ever since that successful rearguard action, the Conservative county council
has wanted to prove that its system works and can win popular support. In
Buckinghamshire, a Conservative vote is a vote for selective education. It
was the only county in England to retain a Conservative council after the
May elections this year.
As Richards points out, this popular support could not have been won only on
the basis of A level results by grammar schools. If parents believed that
exam grades were achieved at the expense of sub-standard education for the
rest, there would have been strong pressure to change the system.
So it is instructive to look behind the examination results, at the
strategies which the education authority has used to fulfil the ideals, as
it saw them, of the 1944 Education Act. This envisaged a harmonious
relationship between three types of schools, grammar, secondary modern and
technical based on selection.
First, the authority has promoted a traditional ethos in all its schools. In
Wycombe, all schools enforce uniform and discipline strictly.
Second, it has formed a sixth-form consortium of Wycombe schools which
allows pupils of one school to take lessons at another. This emphasises to
pupils who miss the grammar school boat that they have a second chance.
The idea is that each school should play to its strengths. Grammar schools
offer academic A-levels, while upper schools such as Cressex and Sir William
Ramsay have introduced new vocational qualifications, intended to persuade
less academically able 16-year-olds to stay in education. Upper school
pupils are now more likely to take A-levels, as they can do so without the
disruption of moving to a new school.
Third, co-operation has been encouraged below the sixth form, to give
children who under-perform at 12 a second chance. Late developers can be
transferred to the grammar school. Thus, many children who fail their
12-plus exam, win good A level grades in the grammar school.
Fourth, the authority administers the applications and entries for all
schools in the area, even including the Royal Grammar which has opted out of
the authority for financial reasons. This reduces wasteful competition for
ther best pupils and makes forward planning easier.
Fifth, in Wycombe, the authority has kept the traditional division between
the sexes in its grammar schools, in spite of the shift to co-education
elsewhere, even in the top independent boarding schools.
Does this segregation help to explain the area's good results?
Certainly our survey shows that, on average, single sex schools get better
examination grades in both state and independent sectors.
But there is much debate about the significance of this result. Do boys and
girls really learn better without the distraction of the opposite sex? Or is
it merely an historical accident that schools with an established record of
academic success tend to have remained single sex?
Muriel Pilkington, head of Wycombe High, champions the traditional view that
girls can flourish better in classrooms without boys, who, she says, tend to
be less mature.
If girls want to meet boys, they can do so after class, since Wycombe High
and John Hampden face each other across a road.
Nevertheless, many parents dislike segregation by sex, as the shift to
co-education in other parts of the country amply attests. And this is only
one reason to be cautious about Buckinghamshire's laboratory of
'traditional' education, despite the achievements.
However enlightened and flexible the system may claim to be, dividing young
children by academic 'success' and 'failure' can be cruel.
In Buckinghamshire, these words were formerly used in letters sent by the
authority to the parents of every 12-year-old.
At Sir William Ramsay, pupils appear happy, well-disciplined, and by no
means the dejected or embittered failures which mythology might suggest.
Five out of six prefects say they want to go to university, an ambition
which seems quite realistic.
Meanwhile, the school's cricket captain says: 'We were rained off last
summer, but we'll beat the Royal Grammar this year. Just you wait and see.'
And yet, and yet . . . in spite of all this optimism and fighting talk,
pupils and teachers attest to intense pressure on children to 'succeed' by
winning a place at grammar school.
One of the prefects at Sir William Ramsay who is aiming for university,
unwittingly summed up the argument, which will always remain against
selection: 'Of course if I was good enough, I would go to RGS. But I wasn't
good enough.'
