FT  30 SEP 93 / Commercial property 'set for recovery'
A NEW MOOD of optimism has gripped lenders to the commercial property
industry, a survey shows today.
More than half of the banks and financial institutions questioned by
Chesterton Financial, the property advisers, and CSW, a property magazine,
expect to see an improvement in the market over the next six months, while
88 per cent are optimistic about prospects over the next 12 months.
The survey shows a striking rise in confidence, with optimists on prospects
for the next six months outweighing pessimists by 30 percentage points. In
January the pessimists outweighed optimists by 23 percentage points.
The survey is based on responses from 61 institutions, of which 52 per cent
were British, 18 per cent were from the rest of Europe, 12 per cent from
north America and 8 per cent from Japan.
Bankers are now more hopeful of a slowdown in the rate of receiverships, bad
debt provisions and loan covenant breaches. More than a third of the
institutions - compared with 23 per cent in January - said their property
loan books were in better shape than their overall loan books, The number
perceiving them to be worse fell from 43 per cent to 16 per cent.
Bankers are more optimistic about bad debt provisions, with 32 per cent
expecting a lower rate of provisions over the next 6 months compared with 13
per cent in January. For the full year just 15 per cent expect an increase
in bad debt provisions while half expect a fall.
The number of receiverships is also set to decline, with 62 per cent of
those surveyed expecting a decline over the 12-month period.
The number of borrowers who have breached their covenants has stabilised
over the past six months at 17.9 per cent compared with 18.6 per cent in
January.
Retail property was the most popular sector for new lending, being the first
choice for 71 per cent of institutions. Offices and industrial property were
the first choice for 16 per cent and 12 per cent respectively.
The west Midlands was the most popular region for lenders for the fourth
consecutive time, followed by the south-east. Chesterton said the increased
popularity of the south-east might be due to a growing feeling that its
economy was pulling out of the recession faster than other regions.
Chesterton warned, however, that the bankers' increased optimism would not
lead to a broad-based recovery until they were prepared to expand their
lending beyond top-quality properties.
Commercial Property Lending Confidence Barometer. Chesterton Financial, 54
Brook Street, London W1A 2BU. Free.
