FT  25 AUG 93 / International Bonds: Activity slows ahead of Bundesbank
decision
ACTIVITY in the international bond market slowed considerably yesterday as
the Bundesbank's council meeting approached. The German central bank is
widely expected to cut interest rates when it meets tomorrow.
Syndicate managers said that investors were also keeping their powder dry in
order to take up the global bond issues by sovereign borrowers which are
expected to be launched in the coming weeks.
They also reported that a German regional bank could soon launch a 10-year,
zero-coupon bond denominated in lira to benefit from favourable swap
opportunities from the Italian currency into D-Marks.
The few deals which did emerge yesterday were concentrated in the Eurodollar
sector, as issuers took advantage of continued investor demand for senior
floating-rate assets denominated in dollars.
As a result, Spintab, the Swedish domestic mortgage association owned by
Swedbank, was able to increase its five-year offering of floating rate notes
(FRNs) by Dollars 50m to Dollars 250m.
The notes, which were priced at a slight discount to par, had a yield at
issue of 29 basis points over six-month London interbank offered rate
(Libor). The bonds were not freed to trade by yesterday afternoon.
An official at the lead manager, Kidder Peabody, said that the offering
represented a significant improvement in Spintab's funding costs. The all-in
cost to the issuer on yesterday's offering was 33 basis points over Libor,
compared with an all-in cost of 80 basis points over Libor on its Dollars
300m offering of five-year FRNs launched in February.
He added that the deal's good reception indicated that Scandinavian banks
were returning to favour with international investors after the industry's
financial difficulties during the past few years.
Kidder Peabody also arranged a Dollars 100m, five-year offering of FRNs for
BankAmerica Corp, for which it was the sole lead manager. The coupon of 25
basis points over three-month Libor was in line with yield spreads on
BankAmerica's existing international FRN offerings.
The City of Stockholm launched a swap-driven transaction in the Canadian
dollar sector. It raised CDollars 100m, which was believed to have been
exchanged for dollars, through an offering of five-year Eurobonds.
The bonds, which have a coupon of 6 3/4 per cent, were re-offered at 99.10
to yield 50 basis points over the 6 1/2 per cent Canadian Treasury due 1998.
When they were freed to trade, they were quoted at 99.10 bid.
