FT  22 JAN 93 / International Company News: Time Warner redeems stock
TIME WARNER, the leading US media and entertainment group, yesterday said it
would redeem Dollars 2.5bn worth of convertible preferred stock.
The share buy-back provides firm evidence of the company's previously-stated
intention to reduce its bank debt and the cost of preferred stock dividends,
both of which have been a heavy burden on the balance sheet.
Prior to yesterday's announcement - which will lead to the redemption of 45m
shares of Time Warner's Series D preferred stock - the company had a total
of Dollars 6.5bn of preferred stock outstanding. Dividend payments for this,
which was issued as a result of the 1989 agreement by Time to merge with
Warner Communications, cost the company Dollars 579m in 1991.
Following the Dollars 2.5bn redemption there will still be Dollars 1bn of
Series D and Dollars 3.1bn of Series C preferred stock outstanding. The Time
Warner board yesterday also authorised the future repurchase of the 20m
remaining shares of Series D stock.
The funds for the Dollars 2.5bn buy- back have come from Time Warner's
recent issue of a Dollars 1bn debenture and some Dollars 1.5bn of other debt
securities.
Mr Gerald Levin, Time Warner's newly-named chairman, said the repurchase
would have a positive impact on operating results and would also reduce the
future number of potential outstanding common shares.
The redemption price per share of the 45m Series D 11 per cent convertible
exchangeable preferred stock is Dollars 53.85 plus 53.47 cents of accrued
and unpaid dividends to the redemption date, making for a total of Dollars
54.38 per share.
Time Warner, which has moved to lower its gearing since Mr Levin became sole
chief executive, has other plans to reduce its debt burden. These include
the possible sale of up to Dollars 3bn of non-strategic assets over coming
years.
In late 1991, Toshiba and C. Itoh of Japan committed a total of Dollars 1bn
to buy a 12.5 per cent stake of TWE, Time's film, cable programming and
cable operations assets.
On Wall Street, the price of Time Warner's common stock rose Dollars 1/4 to
close at Dollars 32 3/8.
