FT  02 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Electoral reform reopens opposition
wounds
TENSIONS within the Labour party over electoral reform began erupting
yesterday, threatening an internal row that is set to grow through the
summer and foreshadow a fierce debate at the party's autumn conference.
The conclusions of the party's Plant inquiry, which on Wednesday backed by a
narrow majority the supplementary vote method for electing the House of
Commons, provoked a backlash from supporters of the existing
first-past-the-post system.
Mr George Foulkes, MP for Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley, said: 'To be
able to implement any change it will be necessary to gain power through the
present electoral system. Having done so, it would be madness to then occupy
Parliament with legislation which would make it likely that Labour would
never again form a majority government.'
In contrast, supporters of proportional representation hailed a historic
breakthrough.
'We have got something to build on which I'm very positive about,' said Mr
Jeff Rooker, MP for Birmingham Perry Barr and a member of the Plant
committee which voted by 10 votes to six for the principle of change.
Conservatives were delighted that for once it was not their internal battles
making headlines. Liberal Democrats were not sure whether to woo a party
newly converted to electoral reform or to tease a party taking only the most
tentative of steps forward.
But more pertinent - at least in the short term with talk of election pacts
far away - was the silence from the Labour leadership and most of the shadow
cabinet.
The Plant report has created a dilemma for Mr John Smith, the Labour leader.
He wants to hold his party together, yet address the pressure within the
movement for modernisation. None of his lieutenants were yesterday prepared
to speculate publicly on possible ways out.
Nor is it clear how Labour's ruling National Executive Committee might vote
when the report is debated at the end of the month.
Most members have been studiously non-committal while the Plant committee
has been deliberating, and will remain mute until the report is published to
coincide with the NEC meeting. 'This thing is completely wide open,' said a
senior party official.
The only certainty is that tensions run to the top of the party. Mrs
Margaret Beckett, deputy leader and Plant committee member, fought valiantly
against any move from first-past-the-post - and will continue her campaign
at the NEC. She may table a minority Plant report.
At the other extreme, Mr Rooker voted against supplementary vote at the
Plant committee's meeting on Wednesday because the system was not truly
proportional.
Pro and anti factions do not fall into neat left-right or
reformist-reactionary categories. Two of Labour's more progressive
frontbenchers, Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair, are cautious about
electoral reform. Both will consult with Mr Smith before making public their
views.
What are the options for Mr Smith? He could embrace the report's conclusions
and then try to win first at the NEC, and then at October's party
conference, but confrontations with trade union leaders and Labour members
would be likely.
He could reject the supplementary vote scheme (supported on Plant by only
nine votes to seven) but accept the principle of change. A further
consultation exercise could then follow, but at the cost of yet more
damaging rows.
Or he could reject the principle of change and face a continuing battle with
the reformists. Another option, touted among Labour MPs at Westminster, is
to make reform conditional on a referendum. But a row would still not be
avoided, after the energy the Labour leadership has invested in opposing a
referendum on Maastricht.
Mr Smith knows that yesterday's skirmishes were only the beginning.
