FT  09 OCT 93 / Arts: Operas from Terezin - Two works composed in the
notorious Nazi concentration camp
OVER THE past week Radio 3, in conjunction with BBC-2, has been offering a
short season of music from Terezin, the notorious Nazi concentration camp
near Prague. It was appropriate that a double bill of operas connected with
the camp should be staged by Mecklenburgh Opera at the Queen Elizabeth Hall
on Thursday (as part of the London South Bank's Czech festival), since its
composers - Hans Krasa and Viktor Ullmann - belong to a lost generation of
Czech musicians.
Terezin (Theresienstadt) was, of course, nothing more than a cynical ploy, a
showpiece which in June 1944 the Nazis duped the International Red Cross
into believing to be some kind of 'paradise spa'. Existence in Terezin was
different from that of other concentration camps: it had a rich artistic
life and, ironically, was the only place in the Third Reich where Jewish
musicians could compose and perform. But in reality it was a transit camp
for Auschwitz, where both Krasa and Ullmann died late in 1944.
Krasa's Brundibar (receiving its first British performance) and Ullmann's
Der Kaiser von Atlantis made a stimulating, contrasting programme. Though
the children's opera Brundibar originated outside the camp, it became a hit
there, notching up 55 performances. Ullmann's music, on the other hand, was
composed in the camp but banned, probably for its seditious portrayal of the
demented Kaiser Uberall, and not premiered until 1975 in Amsterdam.
Mecklenburgh Opera, winner of the 1991 Prudential Award for opera, was
making its South Bank debut. Both works were effectively staged on the same
small, sloping platform by the group's director of productions, John
Abulafia. Christoph Baugh's sets for the sparkling Brundibar were cut-out
Czech gingerbread buildings.
The story tells of how the children Pepicek and Anicka (John Addison and
Catherine Hopper) are persecuted by the 'evil dictator' Brundibar, an organ
grinder, but rescued by a trio of animals. The symbolism is obvious, the
optimism unbearably poignant, the score bittersweet and bubbly. Soloists and
chorus were all drawn from the excellent New London Children's Choir (words
in Abulafia's singing translation were admirably clear).
In contrast, Der Kaiser von Atlantis is explicitly anti-war and strongly
satirical - the action takes place 'somewhere'. Mecklenburgh Opera staged it
in 1988; this was presumably the same production, but with a largely
different cast. Gwion Thomas (Loudspeaker) stood out as a sardonic
Cabaret-style compere. Richard Halton made a neurotic Emperor, Brian
Bannatyne-Scott a morose Death, Rebecca Du Pont Davies an amusingly robotic
drummer and Robert Horn an athletic Pierrot, lyrical in the Soldier's love
music. Maureen Brathwaite sang sweetly as the Girl from the enemy camp with
whom he falls in love.
Anne Manson, Mecklenburgh musical director, led the performances capably.
Though Ullmann was a pupil of Schoenberg's, this eclectic score seems to owe
more to Weill and Stravinsky. It is exhilarating but  - given the grim
conditions of the work's composition - difficult to judge dispassionately.
