FT  13 APR 93 / Safety checks ordered at N-sites: Tomsk-7 contamination
worse than first reported
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin has ordered safety checks at every nuclear
installation in the country after an explosion at the closed city of Tomsk-7
released plutonium and contaminated largely uninhabited forestland.
Prof Alexei Yablokov, the president's adviser on health and the environment,
said the checks would be conducted by the official atomic supervision
agency, which had previously not been allowed into military sites like the
Tomsk-7 complex.
'There will of course be resistance to this but it will be much more
difficult for these comrades to resist from now on,' he told the Financial
Times. He expected the checks would be completed this year. Asked whether
Russia had the resources to fix problems that would be uncovered, he
replied: 'Of course not, but at least we'll know where things are not
normal.'
Germany and Japan have suggested that help for making nuclear installations
safe should be included on the agenda of tomorrow's meeting of Group of
Seven ministers, meeting in Tokyo to discuss assistance for Russia and
former Soviet republics.
Mr Yablokov could not give any estimates of the damage because he was still
waiting for results of tests on samples of earth and snow. The head of the
atomic supervision agency was also on the spot to work out how much
plutonium, one of the deadliest substances to man, had escaped.
The latest reports however suggest that around 120sq km had been
contaminated by a variety of radioactive substances. The area included a
small settlement called Georgievka and far more than the 'small stretch of
road' initially reported. The tank which exploded, because of a build-up of
pressure due to human error, contained up to 500 grammes of plutonium, part
of which escaped into the atmosphere.
In a rare film of the Tomsk-7 chemical plant and adjacent reactors involved
in nuclear weapons production, Ms Dilbar Klado, a Russian TV journalist,
managed to capture shots including a plutonium storage facility with rusting
windows and broken window panes which had been covered up with wood. She
suggests the damage was due to a previous, unreported explosion.
She also had evidence that plans were under way to start building a national
repository for plutonium but that the building work had been stopped after
complaints by local environmental activists.
But in a testimony to security at the facilities, she said that when her bus
had strayed off the beaten track because of poor visibility, guards had shot
at it.
