FT  27 SEP 93 / Hussein set to postpone Jordan's multi-party poll
KING HUSSEIN of Jordan strongly hinted at the weekend that he will postpone
the kingdom's first multi-party elections, but said he hoped they could be
held within 'a few months' - perhaps at the same time as elections under the
Palestinian-Israeli agreement.
The king told foreign correspondents at a palace dinner that he would
announce a decision on whether to proceed with the November 8 poll by
Wednesday. He said no decision had been reached, but added: 'There is a
likelihood of a postponement for a limited period of time.'
Campaigning was well under way when the Palestinians and Israel announced
their surprise deal on mutual recognition and limited self-rule in the
occupied territories late last month. The breakthrough threw Jordan's plans
into confusion by raising the question of how many of Jordan's hundreds of
thousands of Palestinians would be eligible to vote in the Palestinian poll
 -and whether they should be permitted to vote both there and in Jordan.
King Hussein said those Jordanian Palestinians eligible to return to the
occupied territories could choose where to vote, but stressed that 'if a
Jordanian votes for the Palestinian self-rule authority, he cannot vote
here'. He emphasised that Palestinians wishing to remain, and vote, in
Jordan would be able to do so.
The king said he did not wish the election to become a referendum on the
PLO-Israeli deal. Many Jordanians fear this risks dividing the country while
details, such as the number of Jordanian Palestinians eligible for return to
the occupied territories, remain unsettled. 'We have great concern that the
election campaign will disintegrate into whoever is for and whoever is
against what has happened,' he said.
King Hussein, however, appears anxious that any postponement should not be
seen as diminishing his commitment to enlarging democracy in Jordan. He said
he hoped the poll could be held 'simultaneously with, or shortly after' the
Palestinian election, which is due by next July.
King Hussein said such a decision would be reached only after consultation
with all political factions. Many East Bankers - non-Palestinian Jordanians
 -are keen to postpone the poll until it is clear how many Palestinians will
return to the occupied territories. Jordanians of Palestinian origin
constitute a substantial majority of the kingdom's 4m people.
The king characterised the Palestinian-Israeli deal as the sole option for
peace in the region. He did not disguise his shock at not having been
consulted during PLO-Israeli talks, but saw no alternative to backing the
deal. 'I could have scuttled the deal very easily but I could not have lived
with myself,' he said.
He said he hoped to see progress soon on the Israeli-Syrian track of the
peace talks to follow Jordan's agreement on a joint 'agenda' of principles
to guide their bilateral talks. But he stressed that Jordan would not await
progress on the Syrian track before progressing substantively on its talks
with Israel. 'It doesn't keep us from moving ahead at all,' he said.
