FT  14 JAN 93 / Aid group to pinpoint effects of recession
THE EXTENT to which the recession is handicapping the work of Britain's
voluntary sector is to be examined by the Charities Aid Foundation.
The CAF - which advises charities on investments and is a leading source of
research on the sector - has commissioned a survey of 400 charities, from
the largest to local voluntary organisations, in 20 places around the
country.
Charities will be asked how their income compares with two years ago from:
individual donations; legacies; corporate support; income from the sale of
goods and services; and local and central government grants and fees.
The survey comes when charities are finding demand for their services
outstripping income growth. Previous research has shown little real increase
in charitable giving in recent years, although many of the biggest charities
have managed to expand their income against the general trend.
Mr Michael Brophy, executive director of the CAF, said: 'There are
indications that the overall decline in income growth is now beginning to
affect some of the biggest charities as much as the others. The survey will
provide information on the extent of this trend.'
As a number of charities prepare to take on additional responsibilities with
April's community care reforms, there is growing concern that attempts in
the 1980s to encourage substantially greater support for charity appear to
have failed.
Voluntary-sector leaders have developed plans for a national marketing
campaign - modelled on successful precedents in the US and Canada - to
promote the general concept of charitable giving. Ministers have, however,
decided against helping to finance it and it is unlikely to get off the
ground.
Mr Jacques Delors, EC president, has assured voluntary organisations in
Northern Ireland that they will be consulted on the reform of EC structural
funds and other social policy developments. That follows a visit by the EC
president to the province late last year.
Mr Quintin Oliver, director of the Northern Ireland Council for Voluntary
Service, said that by agreeing to formal consultation with voluntary
organisations Mr Delors had acknowledged 'that the voluntary sector in
disadvantaged areas has a key role to play, especially in Northern Ireland'.
