FT  21 JUN 93 / Monday Interview: Cowboy in tune with the music - Maurice
Oberstein, chairman of the British Phonographic Industry, talks to Michael
Skapinker
As the cameras recorded a parliamentary committee's denunciation of UK
compact disc prices last month, a 64-year-old in an ankle-length coat and
fur-trimmed cowboy hat picked his way through the television cables at the
back of the room.
The UK music industry was under attack, and Maurice Oberstein - the New
York-born, Queens Park Rangers-supporting, cricket-loving chairman of the
British Phonographic Industry - was there to put the case for the defence.
'Unsubstantiated tommy-rot, lies and deceit,' was his response to the
national heritage committee's assertion that the large record companies and
retailers were overcharging CD buyers. During the parliamentary hearings
last April, his constant interruption of Gerald Kaufman, the committee's
chairman, added to Oberstein's reputation as the most eccentric figure in an
industry not short of non-comformists.
In the music business, opinion about Oberstein is divided. Some believe his
antics and extensive collection of hats make good copy and television
pictures, ensuring that the industry's voice is heard. Others think
Oberstein makes them look ridiculous.
The conflict mirrors the music industry's divide between the irascible,
creative types who find and promote new acts, and the corporate lawyers and
accountants who populate the boardrooms. What confuses many about Oberstein
is that he is a lawyer whose behaviour makes many of the creative types look
like models of propriety.
In his office at the Berkeley Square headquarters of music group PolyGram,
where he is executive vice-president, Oberstein dons a blue cap for the FT's
camera. His brightly coloured waistcoat is decorated with horses - another
passion. Eric, his English setter, sleeps on the floor beside him.
When the picture-taking is over, however, the cap comes off, the clowning
stops, and he puts on as fluent and shrewd a performance as can be found in
the industry.
Oberstein, unlike many of his colleagues, does not resent the way the music
business has been singled out for attack. The announcement last month that
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission is to investigate the music industry
is, Oberstein says, a recognition of its importance.
'We're in a star-studded business where our artists make the news - if they
get married, if they get divorced. We now find everything about our industry
is newsworthy,' Oberstein says.
So the criticism is a compliment? 'It is. An MMC inquiry would have been
unthinkable a number of years ago because it would have been a minor affair.
Today we're recognised as a major business.'
The MMC's focus will be the copyright act's restrictions on parallel
imports, enabling music companies to prevent others from bringing their
products into the UK. Music lovers will suffer if the restrictions are
loosened, Oberstein argues. Music companies will concentrate on the
best-selling albums and abandon more specialised recordings.
'If you have a free flood of imports, the independent record dealer won't be
able to compete with W H Smith and co. Who will be able to import? Only the
biggest, who have the cash to buy in quantity. The independent dealer in
your neighbourhood will disappear.'
The independent record shops are used by the music companies to push their
new acts and promote young talent. 'W H Smith and Woolworth do not stock our
new, developing artists - and it's not their job to. They're high street
general merchants,' Oberstein says. The disappearance of independent dealers
would lead to a sharp reduction in musical diversity, he says. This has
already happened in the US where there are far fewer independent outlets.
'This is not a doomsday scenario that I'm making up. This has happened in
every place dominated by the mass-marketeer. We, at PolyGram, have over
18,000 titles with which we service the UK record dealers. Our United States
company, for a market five times as big, has 10,000.'
British music companies need their profits, Oberstein adds, to ensure they
maintain their level of creative output. Although the UK music market
represents only 8 per cent of the world total, about a quarter of recordings
sold worldwide have some UK content - whether it is the performer, producer
or some other contributor.
But with nominations for the industry's Brit awards this year going to
veteran performers, such as Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart and Elton John, how
much new talent are the UK companies finding?
Oberstein defends ageing musicians. There are veteran performers in other
creative industries, such as film. 'Nobody leapt up from their chair at the
Oscars and said: 'My God, Clint Eastwood's been around for 10,000 years,
look at that wrinkled man,' ' he says. 'I see nothing wrong in our artists
having longevity. The population that we, the record business, are selling
to is an older population. We're losing teenagers as a proportion of the
population worldwide.'
He concedes, however, that the past decade has been a relatively barren
musical period. It has to do with the relationship between singers and
songwriters, which has undergone several changes since he went to work for
his father's independent record label in the 1940s, which he later sold and
joined CBS.
When he arrived in the UK to work for CBS in 1965, Oberstein says, he found
that most British performers were singing tunes already made famous by
Americans. American artists turned out music written for them by
songwriters.
'Then the Beatles came along and changed the world, in that you had an
extension into the major rock music business of the singer-songwriter. We
always had it with folk artists, we always had it with Woody Guthrie. We
always had it with people who were protesting in one way or another.
'But we never really had the artist-writer-performer. We had major artists,
like Frank Sinatra, but they were singing other people's songs. The Beatles
unleashed - fortunately, in Britain - that whole culture of
performer-writer. We had the Rolling Stones - they wrote. We had The Who.'
The performer who could not write songs began to disappear. Artists who
recorded songs written by someone else were ridiculed in the music press.
The songwriters who couldn't sing began to be ignored. But not all singers
could write to the Beatles' standards and by the end of the 1970s, far less
new music was appearing. Oberstein says the industry has to regain the knack
of bringing together performers who cannot write and writers who cannot
perform.
But is there any future selling music to an ageing population? There might
be fewer teenagers in the developed world, but they are the customers of the
future. Does it not worry the industry that teenagers are devoting more of
their time and money to computer games and other leisure pursuits, and less
to music?
'I suspect that, when radio came along, people said: 'Oh my God, now the
record industry is going to disappear because people are going to listen to
radio.'
'But we shouldn't take for granted that music will survive. We have to work
at it. We have no monopoly on the home entertainment dollar. But there's no
reason why we shouldn't get our share.
'When all the kids on Thursday, Friday, Saturday are at raves, at dances,
they aren't dancing to a video game, or a video of Terminator II or watching
Lennox Lewis on pay TV. We ain't going away.'
For one thing, Oberstein insists, music will always play its part in the
romantic life of the young. 'You don't make love in the back seat of a Ford
with a video game in the background.'
PERSONAL FILE
1928 Born New York. Educated Clarkson University, New York State (chemical
engineering), and New York University (law).
1965 Chief manufacturing engineer, CBS Records UK.
1975 Managing director, CBS Records UK. Chairman in 1978.
1983-86 Chairman, British Phonographic Industry.
1985-93 Chairman, PolyGram UK.
1991 Second term as BPI chairman. Executive vice-president, PolyGram
International.
