FT  21 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Race on for new herpes drug - Paul Abrahams
considers the battle between Wellcome and SB
YESTERDAY'S barrage of clinical data from SmithKline Beecham and Wellcome
was only the first salvo in the struggle to succeed Zovirax, Wellcome's
best-selling herpes and shingles treatment.
The drug, the world's eighth top-selling medicine, is expected to generate
revenues this year of Pounds 745m, achieving a growth rate of 27 per cent.
Its growth, however, is set to slow. Zovirax's German patents expired this
year, while those in the UK and US run out in 1995 and 1997.
Those developing Zovirax successors include Wellcome itself, with Valtrex,
also known as valaciclovir; SmithKline Beecham with famciclovir; and
Bristol-Myers Squibb of the US and the Japanese group Nippon Shoji with
Usevir or BVaraU.
Zovirax has always been a tempting target but efforts to develop successors
have been held back by the toxicity of most anti-viral drugs.
This safety problem was highlighted last week when Nippon Shoji halted
Japanese supplies of BVaraU after only a month on the market.
Three patients taking the medicine had died because they were simultaneously
receiving fluorouracil, an anti-cancer agent.
The company closest to launching a competitor is SmithKline Beecham.
Famciclovir has been submitted to regulatory authorities around the world
and should be licensed for the treatment of shingles in the first half of
1994. A submission for genital herpes is likely to be made in the next few
months, with a possible launch at the end of next year.
The fiercest battleground between Wellcome and SmithKline Beecham could be
the market for post-herpetic neuralgia, the long-term pain that occurs in
about 30 per cent of shingles patients.
Although Zovirax is effective in treating the immediate pain associated with
shingles, its effectiveness in long-term neuralgia is not fully established.
Data presented yesterday by SmithKline Beecham suggested famciclovir was
effective in this area.
The marketing battle between the two companies for the immediate treatment
of shingles will be technical and hard. Lehman Brothers, the broker,
estimates worldwide sales of the Zovirax shingles application could be about
Dollars 500m (Pounds 330m) a year.
SmithKline Beecham sales representatives will be able to point to clinical
trials published last month that compared its drug with Zovirax against
shingles. The data showed famciclovir was no more effective than Zovirax,
but only needed to be taken three times a day. One of Zovirax's weaknesses
is that it needs to be taken five times a day.
Famciclovir will also have the benefit of SmithKline Beecham's huge
salesforce, which outnumbers that of Wellcome.
The company may also price aggressively. SmithKline Beecham's recent launch
of Paxil, its anti-depressant, was notable by this tactic. However, the
group's ability to undercut in the US may be limited, because Zovirax's
American price is already low.
Wellcome's sales teams will attempt to counter SmithKline Beecham by
pointing to Zovirax's safety record. It has been used by more than 30m
people over the last 15 years. In the clinical trials, famciclovir appeared
to generate a higher incidence of nausea and headache than Zovirax.
Meanwhile, the window of opportunity for SmithKline Beecham may be narrow.
Wellcome is rapidly developing its own successor compound. Data about the
drug was presented for the first time yesterday and showed it was more
effective than Zovirax for long-term pain associated with shingles. Another
trial for genital herpes showed Valtrex twice a day was as effective as
Zovirax five times a day.
Wellcome expects to submit Valtrex for approval to treat shingles during the
first half of next year. Since the compound is so similar in structure to
Zovirax, the drug should have few safety problems and could be licensed
quickly.
Lehman Brothers believes Valtrex could be launched in some markets by the
end of next year. Submissions to treat genital herpes are likely at the end
of 1994 or beginning of 1995. Such early launch dates would leave little
time for SmithKline Beecham to establish its drug.
Lehman Brothers estimates famciclovir will not capture more than 25 per cent
of the shingles market. Its share of the genital herpes market is unlikely
to exceed 15 per cent or about Dollars 75m. This means famciclovir annual
sales will be about Dollars 200m in 1996.
The additional marketing by the two companies could expand the market. A
recent study suggested only 28 per cent of shingles patients receive
anti-viral therapy.
Analysts reckon Zovirax sales could reach Dollars 1.5bn within three years,
while those for Valtrex could achieve Dollars 150m. On the basis of these
estimates, the herpes and shingles market could grow from Dollars 1.15bn
last year to Dollars 1.9bn by 1996.
The struggle between SmithKline Beecham and Wellcome could have two winners.
