FT  26 AUG 93 / GPA near to signing GE rescue agreement
ADVISERS to GPA Group are confident that the aircraft leasing company will
sign its rescue deal with GE Capital, the financial services arm of General
Electric of the US, within the next few days. The agreement will separate
GPA's Dollars 5.2bn (Pounds 3.48bn) borrowings from its assets.
A new company, to be called GE Capital Aviation Management, will be
responsible for the leasing business of GPA and GE's subsidiary Polaris
Aircraft leasing. Its executive chairman is expected to be Mr Tony Ryan,
GPA's chairman and founder, who will work with a chief executive appointed
from GE.
Mr Patrick Blaney, who was recently promoted to GPA's board after attempting
to remove Mr Ryan as chairman, is likely to take charge of the old GPA.
The two companies will be based at GPA's Shannon headquarters in the
Republic of Ireland, although Polaris will continue to have an office in San
Francisco.
GE is now confident it has a watertight agreement to manage GPA's fleet  -
it has already agreed in principle to buy Dollars 1.35bn of GPA's aircraft -
without being liable for the debt.
The deal should have been signed last month. It was delayed by fears that GE
could be held responsible for GPA's liabilities.
Under the terms of the agreement GPA has effectively delegated the
day-to-day management of its 470 aircraft to GE Capital Aviation Management.
A limited number of specified claims by GPA's core shareholders underwriting
the deal and by the group's banks are being waived. GPA is confident this
will enable it to meet interest and principal debt repayments to both its
secured and unsecured creditors from leasing revenues generated by the new
subsidiary of GE. But if it cannot do so, creditors will have no recourse to
GE.
Mr Ryan is to be joined at the new GE subsidiary by Mr Jim King, GPA's vice
chairman, Mr Colm Barrington, GPA's commercial director and Mr Phil Bolger,
who has been largely responsible for running the leasing business. Mr John
Tierney will remain finance director of the old GPA. Mr Maurice Foley, GPA's
deputy chairman, is also expected to stay on at GPA until March when he will
become a non-executive director.
