FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Personal and Portable Computers (21): Tougher
times for pirates / A look at networks' hidden benefits
PERSONAL COMPUTER networks look set to change forever the way that software
is sold and used. While networks offer computer users many big advantages,
there are also some hidden benefits for computer and software manufacturers
about which you will probably not hear so much.
To start with, PC networks give computer companies control over what is
being done with PC software throughout an office or department - and in
particular they restrict software piracy.
For years, it was common practice in many companies to buy a single copy of
a popular PC package such as WordPerfect or Lotus 1-2-3 and let a number of
users share it.
For as long, the software industry has been telling users that this was
illegal. It has tried to educate the business community about software
licensing and piracy issues. Now, the advent of widespread PC networking
gives it a chance to exert effective control over software use.
The breakthrough has been achieved by the introduction of 'network-aware'
versions of stand-alone PC software products. For example, a
network-configured version of a spreadsheet can identify the serial numbers
of all other versions of that software being used at the same time. If it
finds any other machine using a spreadsheet with the same serial number, it
will refuse to load.
Piracy prevention is not the major reason for producing network-aware
versions of software, but it is a useful by-product of the process. It is
also forcing software companies to look at how personal computer software is
sold. Traditionally, software companies would tell purchasers that they were
buying a single 'site-licence'. That licence would entitle the user to
operate the software on only one computer at any one time. It would be all
right to have one copy on your desktop computer and another on your portable
system - provided both were never in use at the same time.
But with the average 'serious' software application costing Dollars 300 to
Dollars 700, many companies found that buying enough software for everyone
who might want to use it was too expensive. In small companies many
individuals deliberately or inadvertently made single copies of software on
more PCs than they should.
The industry is aware that piracy is still widespread and that software
companies are missing out on sales. To combat the problem, companies such as
Microsoft are considering 'site licensing'. The theory is this: companies
which buy a copy of every product for every employee rarely have more than
60 per cent of that software in use at any one time. So they are paying for
more software than they need. Also, some may shy away from implementing a
given software solution altogether due to the cost.
According to Mr Mike Maples, Microsoft executive vice-president for
products, 'site licences' allow all users in a company to install the
Microsoft's Word for Windows word-processor on their PCs - but the company
would pay only 60 per cent of the cost of buying individual licences.
He says software companies would actually sell more product to corporate
customers and that piracy would decline dramatically if this were to become
widespread The software companies could also make money on sales of
additional documentation for extra users and on the supply of training
programmes - which have long been a source of strong profit for those that
conduct them .
These 'soft' solutions to the piracy problem are an improvement on
heavy-handed efforts such as the use of 'key' disks or hardware 'dongles'.
The key disk anti-piracy system required users to have a specially-encoded
floppy disk in the disk drive of their PCs when they wanted to use the
software. This arrangement was fine until you accidentally damaged or lost
the key disk - then you would be unable to use your software.
There have been similar problems with 'dongles' - which are anti-piracy
software devices on a chip. They operate by plugging into a PC's printer
port and send signals to the PC that the dongle is in place and the copy of
the software is legitimate. Dongles have, however, been known to interfere
with printing and are also easy to lose. Software reviewers despise them and
users have no great enthusiasm for them, either. But with improved
network-based control of software registration and an increased use of
site-licensing, neither dongles nor software protection look as if they have
a future.
Finally, it appears that even the US government wants to help end piracy.
Outgoing President George Bush signed an anti-piracy bill late last year
that imposed tougher fines and jail sentences on big-time software pirates.
Software pirating is now a felony - punishable by up to five years in prison
and Dollars 250,000 in fines - rather than a misdemeanour. And US
professional software associations hope that the new legislation will help
curb the estimated Dollars 1.2bn lost in revenues each year to software
piracy.
Although the software industry does not expect the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to leap to attention every time an individual PC user makes an
illegal back-up copy of software, the publicity being given to these changes
in piracy law should make big-time pirates think twice. . Combine that with
an ongoing legal assault on pirates and you have a powerful movement against
the illegal use of software.
Mr Bill Gates, Microsoft chairman and founder, says that he has teams of
people reading computer advertisements from small PC manufacturers all over
the country - and checking with the Microsoft contract department to ensure
that each one which offers the MS-DOS operating system with PCs actually has
a legitimate contract to have it supplied. If not, Mr Gates unleashes the
legal wolves.
So the message in all this is to be much more careful about the software you
put on your PC. The industry is out to get software pirates - and with huge
financial resources, and the backing of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
 -the pirates don't stand much of a chance.
