FT  14 JUL 93 / Grant cut 'could damage tourism'
PLANNED reductions in government funding of the English Tourist Board could
cause substantial damage to the industry, a study by management consultants
Coopers &amp; Lybrand claims.
The report, commissioned by the board with the agreement of Mr Peter Brooke,
national heritage secretary, says the proposed funding cuts will damage
accommodation rating schemes and end national marketing campaigns.
They will also prevent the board from setting up an inspection scheme for
activity holiday centres.
The report recommends that the board establish such an inspection scheme,
but warns that it will need additional funds to do so.
The government has said it proposes to cut the board's grant from Pounds
13.9m a year to Pounds 9m by 1995-6. The board was established by a 1969 act
to encourage British people to take holidays in England and to promote the
improvement of tourist facilities.
Without the board, the report says, there would be a deterioration in
facilities, a fall in the number of people taking holidays in England and a
widening of the balance of payments deficit.
According to the board the English domestic tourism market has been stagnant
since 1972. In the same period the number of UK residents taking holidays
abroad has increased 58.5 per cent.
The report says government support for tourism is necessary because the
industry is too diverse and fragmented to establish a single representative
organisation. It estimates that there are more than 220,000 UK tourist
businesses, represented by more than 30 trade organisations.
The report says: 'Many elements of the tourism product, such as natural
scenery and sites, beaches and museums, are common goods for which no price
is charged and which are managed and maintained by the public sector.' Use
of these facilities by tourists raises other issues which should be of
concern to the government, such as congestion and damage to the environment.
It adds that there is no need for extensive government intervention or for
large-scale funding. Coopers &amp; Lybrand recommends that the government grant
to the board should remain at about the current level.
The Scottish tourist industry earned Pounds 1.75bn last year, the same in
real terms as 1991, the Scottish Tourist Board said yesterday. Tourism from
overseas brought in Pounds 530m last year, up from Pounds 489m in 1991.
Spending by Scottish holidaymakers and visitors from the rest of the UK was
static.
