FT  14 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: 'All an MP should be' - Obituary:
Robert Adley
MR Robert Adley, the Tory MP for Christchurch who died yesterday, was a
passionate railway enthusiast who memorably warned the government that rail
privatisation would be 'a poll tax on wheels'.
Mr John Major led the tributes to Mr Adley's independence as a backbencher.
The prime minister said Mr Adley was 'persistent in championing the causes
in which he believed', while Sir Norman Fowler, the Tory party chairman,
said: 'He was everything that an MP should be.'
Mr Adley himself might have preferred the praise of Major General Lennox
Napier, the chairman of the Central Transport Consultative Committee, a rail
watchdog body, who said his death was an enormous loss to rail users.
'He was a railway buff who understood the importance to Britain of an
efficient network and he canvassed brilliantly to achieve that end,' he
said.
The author of nine books on steam railways, Mr Adley had attracted less
flattering assessments from some fellow Tories, as his longstanding passion
for the railways was channelled into informed and vigorous criticism of the
government's plans to sell off BR's freight business and to inject
private-sector competition into passenger services.
Never a minister himself, his election last year as chairman of the
all-party transport committee at Westminster - despite a government
preference for one of his colleagues - gave him a powerful position from
which to voice his criticisms.
In January his committee produced a damning, if carefully coded, report on
the government's plans for BR, produced in time for the first Commons debate
on the bill. The final report - published late last month - was less
outspoken than had been expected and was more influential because of that.
Not long after it had been agreed, he suffered the heart attack which led to
his death at the age of 58.
During more than 20 years in the House of Commons, Mr Adley's political
causes ranged from passionate and early support for the ANC in South Africa,
to opposition to the government's occasional forays into 'nanny state'-ism.
He also had long-standing interests in the hotel and tourism industries.
In this eclectic assortment, railways were the continuing theme. Only one
other Tory announced his abstention when the rail privatisation bill was
debated by MPs, although several others have expressed vaguer misgivings
both publicly and privately.
Mr Adley's death leaves the unease among Tory backbenchers about the measure
without a clear focus or spokesman.
