FT  09 JUN 93 / Survey of Sheffield (2): Still at the cutting edge - Export
orders for knives by the million
THERE is a waiting list for jobs at Sheffield's youngest cutler. The company
has doubled its sales in the last three years and has just opened a sales
office in Heidelberg, where it expects to undercut German competitors by 30
per cent. Meanwhile, the management buyout team that now runs one of city's
oldest cutlers has doubled turnover in five years and made such advances in
its production technology it now claims the lowest production costs in its
sector in Europe.
Not to be outdone, Sheffield's largest producer of kitchen knives has just
had another record year, taken on more staff and developed a new process for
coating a cutting edge with titanium nitride carbide to keep it sharp five
times longer than its Taiwanese imitators.
Cutting edges are what Sheffield's industry has always been about. The
Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire in the County of York, a manufacturers'
guild empowered by law since 1624 to protect Sheffield's name worldwide, now
has 500 members.
They can be based within 26 miles of Sheffield, but they have to produce a
cutting edge, whether for tableware or tools, consumer markets or industry.
The sector looks in better shape than it has for years.
The popular conception used to be that it had died, with perhaps 30,000 jobs
destroyed by cheap foreign imports and the loss of traditional export
markets in the former British Empire. Rocketing silver prices in 1979 forced
a crisis in sterling cutlery sales and recession then bit, shaking out jobs.
But Sheffield has got over the shock. Making cutting edges is no longer an
industry employing large masses of people, but it has reconstructed itself
to work smarter, using new technology and modern marketing methods.
Arthur Price of England was one of the first cutlery companies to go in for
vigorous marketing, averaging Pounds 500,000 a year on promotion during the
latter half of the 1980s. Campaigns sold the company's products, but they
also promoted the long-term economic advantages of paying for good quality
and the name of Sheffield as its guarantor.
Other Sheffield manufacturers of cutting edges, such as Stanley Tools, are
household names among millions of do-it-yourselfers. Others remain largely
anonymous, mainly making branded kitchen knives for consumer products
companies or 'own-label' items for retailers. Taylors Eye Witness, founded
in 1838, is an example. It never discloses its turnover but employs 200
people.
'We make pen and pocket knives, catering trade and craft knives, scissors,
kitchen knives and tableware for many customers. This diversity has enabled
us to swim against the tide throughout the recession,' says Mr Alastair
Fisher, a director. Confidence is high enough for a September launch of
Taylors Eye Witness's 'European feel' range of top quality stainless steel
cutlery, designed by Robert Welch.
COMPANIES do not, however, have to be ancient to be part of the sector's
success - 'we were interlopers. Originally we were retailers but we didn't
like the quality of what we could get, so in 1983 we decided to go into
manufacture,' says Mr Hugh Foulerton, founder of United Cutlers of
Sheffield.
Some city cutlers were put out when he started paying more than the going
rate to recruit good craftsmen, but local suppliers soon warmed to his
regular orders. He went for high quality niche markets and direct marketing
via quality daily newspapers, cutting out retailers altogether - 'stores
can't afford to stock many lines. They double the price and then add VAT.
Cutting out the middle man means a bigger choice from a wide range of stock,
as well as enabling higher ex-factory prices and, hence, quality.'
He therefore produces and stocks 18 designs in silver or silver plate and
nine in stainless steel, involving 1,500 individual lines and a stock of
nearly 170,000 items.
His big breakthrough came when the falling price of silver enabled United to
get its price for six sterling place settings down to Pounds 1,250. This
sterling price is half that charged by good and within Pounds 300 of what
many charge for silver plate.
'We haven't had a recession or any short time working or redundancies,' says
Mr Foulerton. 'Everyone has been on overtime since last September and we
have just set up in Germany.'
Turnover passed Pounds 1m in 1989 and Pounds 2m last year. All growth has
been financed from profits and sales are now 5,000 pieces of cutlery per
week, with sterling the biggest success. The 28 employees get 10 per cent of
the company's profits between them as bonus. Recruits are picked from a
waiting list and have to agree to a trial lasting up to a week to see if
they fit in. Only two people have been sacked in 10 years.
Similar commitment is apparent at Hiram Wild, which was bought out by its
production, commercial and financial directors from an increasingly
disinterested conglomerate in 1988. Equity backing was from South Yorkshire
Pensions and the Leeds-based venture fund Capital for Companies.
Mr Barry Campbell, production director, says: 'We've hardly felt the
recession. There were a couple of months where we found the going difficult
but we had very successful results last year. I feel really confident.
'We have a basic philosophy. We as directors pay ourselves a wage. We plough
back all profits in reinvestment. The more successful we are, the faster we
can reduce unit costs.'
The payroll has been slimmed down from 240 to 170, but annual turnover is
now Pounds 6m. The company manufactures across the quality range, and has
stayed in low-margin, high-volume production.
'I tell my managers that if they have planned properly the work will flow
through on its own. Their job is to walk round looking at the process and
methods and seeing if they can reduce unit costs. One factory now has the
lowest production costs in Europe,' says Mr Campbell.
Investment in automation and robotics enabled one new machine with one woman
operator to replace six machines and six people. The company can produce a
basic stainless steel spoon for 12p. Last year Hiram Wild sold Pounds
120,000 of such cutlery to hospitals, a growing market.
It also makes cutlery for eight airlines. Margins are thin, but volumes are
high. In-flight cutlery sets average two take-offs before they 'disappear.'
The company is at present pitching for British Airways economy class
business, which got through 15.5m pieces last year. It already supplies BA's
first class cabins.
Meanwhile, the Australian-owned Richardsons Sheffield, manufacturers of the
'Laser' brand of kitchen knives, continues an inexorable progress. It
produces 32m blades a year now, turnover has passed Pounds 25m, 60 per cent
of output is exported, and the payroll of 500 is up from 469 last year.
Mr Gordon Bridge, managing director, reckons the company has 10 months
whenever it brings out a new design or product before cheap, lower-quality
imitations come out in the Far East.
However, he hopes the new titanium nitride carbide coating now being applied
to cutting edges will be hard to copy. The process was developed in
collaboration with Sheffield University and involves high-vacuum technology
and some trade secrets - just the thing for Sheffield to keep its edge.
