FT  14 JAN 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Why the Friesian
Lady is feeling full of beans - Nikki Tait explains how standardised
packaging has helped Sara Lee to sell its coffee
King Edward VII of England once declared that the boundaries of Germany were
defined by the badness of the coffee. In the Ardennes, tradition prescribes
10 cups after dinner while in Turkey, the drink is meant to be 'black as
hell, strong as death and sweet as love'.
So how, in the age of harmonised markets, satellite TV and 'Euro-branding',
does a pan-European supplier market such an inherently nationalistic
product?
Sara Lee, the US consumer products company, thinks it has an answer. The
Chicago-based group, best-known for its cheesecake and bagels, is also one
of the biggest companies in the European roasted coffee market. Its main
rival, Philip Morris, acquired its market position through the single
acquisition of Switzerland's Jacobs Suchard in 1990. But Sara Lee has built
up a European portfolio piecemeal, purchasing almost a dozen coffee
companies over a decade and a half.
This gave the US multinational market shares ranging from 74 per cent in the
Netherlands, where Sara Lee sells the Douwe Egberts brand, to 27 per cent in
Denmark (Merrild Kaffe), 21 per cent in Spain (Marcilla) and 15 per cent in
France (Maison du Cafe). But it also led to a plethora of marketing
arrangements, packaging designs and brand promotion methods.
Sara Lee is the first to admit that coffee is still a 'very locally
determined product', right down to the way consumers prepare it. But in the
late 1980s as the US company weighed up the implications of European
'harmonisation', it was equally clear that there were savings to be garnered
from co-ordinating marketing efforts.
Cor Boonstra, a Sara Lee director and head of the international operations
in Utrecht, makes no secret of the basic problem confronting the company's
roasted coffee business. 'We simply couldn't support the brands properly in
every country,' he says.
It was with these cost considerations in mind that Boonstra first floated
the notion of 'internationalising' the various coffee brands four years ago.
As a result, Sara Lee has come up with the quintessential 'Euro-marketing'
compromise. Its coffee still sells under country-specific brand names but
standardised packaging and a common corporate symbol provide a strong visual
similarity and allow for streamlined promotion.
At the outset, Boonstra realised the danger of putting individual managers'
noses out of joint: 'The problem was that management didn't want to give up
its position (on marketing) in some countries.'
So Sara Lee tackled the management changes fairly gently - leaving the
national marketing teams in place and, for the first 18 months,
concentrating on developing the contacts between them. Only then was an
international development manager brought in.
The more fundamental problem, however, was how to unify the country brands
without making customers feel that they were buying a bland 'Euro-coffee'.
It was at this point that an internal Sara Lee development team alighted on
an old 'Friesian Lady' packaging design, which had been used in the
Netherlands and showed a woman in simple 18th century dress pouring coffee.
Sara Lee felt the symbol conveyed a soothing message, full of 'authenticity'
and 'quality'. So it called in Landor Associates, the international
corporate identity consultants owned by Young &amp; Rubicam, to brush up the
motif prior to introducing the Friesian Lady prominently on all its European
coffee products. This was accompanied by the redesign of the packaging so
that boxes containing the coffee came in standardised sizes with consistent
colours.
Advertising strategy was also brought under one roof, with Sara Lee
switching the coffee account to BBDO - part on the US-based Omnicon group -
on a pan-European basis.
Today, the final elements of this strategy have yet to be put in place.
There are still design changes to be implemented in Spain, Hungary and
Denmark although products in the UK and the Netherlands are largely
completed.
But the cost savings, says the company, have already started to flow. It
cites a TV commercial to promote the 'Manilla' brand in Spain. Much of the
visual imagery and the sound-track backing were re-used in an advertisement
for the Hungarian brands. The net result proved significantly cheaper than
the production of two separate ads.
