FT  20 FEB 93 / Labour's links with unions of 'immense value', finds report
THE long-awaited interim report on the future of the Labour party's links
with the trade unions suggests they are 'a cause for celebration rather than
concern'. It argues strongly that Labour's relationship with the unions
'continues to be immensely valuable to the party'.
However, the document proposes an end to the union block vote at party
conference and the eventual introduction of one member one vote for the
selection of parliamentary candidates and election of the party leader.
But the 15-strong group of senior union officials and Labour MP's was unable
to agree on firm recommendations. Instead their report, to be presented to
the party's national executive committee, sets out a series of options.
A questionnaire will be sent out to trade unions and constituency parties.
They will have until June 10 to respond. The NEC will then decide on precise
proposals and present them for approval at the party conference in the
autumn. But Mr John Smith, the party leader, is expected to comment on the
union-party links at next Wednesday's NEC meeting.
The only member of the review group to oppose the party's present links with
the unions was Mr Tony Blair, Labour's home affairs spokesman.
The report is firm in its proposal to end the union block vote at party
conference and replace it with a system under which the voting entitlement
of each union is divided up among its delegates and cast separately.
It also agrees on the gradual move to a 50-50 voting parity between the
unions and constituency parties in the annual conference, although it
suggests the introduction in the autumn of a 70-30 split between union-party
voting strengths should be retained for the time being.
The group argues strongly for maintaining union links with Labour. It argues
the unions are 'a realistic and stabilising force in the party without whom
on many occasions in the past few decades the Labour party would have torn
itself apart'.
It suggests unions' involvement keeps the party more closely in touch with
'the concerns and preoccupations of people who vote Labour'.
The report also stresses the direct links the unions provide for the party
to 8m trade union members and the organisational strength the unions can
provide at local level.
The group notes that 'a quiet revolution' has been taking place in 'the
public appreciation of the relevance of trade unions.' But it believes
changes are needed to bring 'a new dynamism' to the union-party
relationship.
Blair urges 'moral' approach on crime, Page 4
