FT  15 JAN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Smith persistent over Lamont cash
MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, infuriated ministers and Tory backbenchers
in the Commons yesterday by persistently challenging the use of nearly
Pounds 5,000 of taxpayers' money to defray part of the legal expenses
incurred by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, in evicting a tenant from his
private home.
The Labour leader was accused of indulging in 'innuendo' by Mr John Major,
the prime minister, who insisted that a report by Sir John Bourn, the
Comptroller and Auditor General, showed that 'no impropriety occurred'.
To Labour cheers, Mr Smith retorted that it was not a matter of innuendo but
of public policy. The issue, he maintained, was whether taxpayers' money
should finance the legal affairs of a minister in his private capacity.
Labour backbenchers heckled and jeered Mr Major when he protested that that
Mr Smith had been 'uncharacteristically cheap' in choosing to pursue Mr
Lamont.
An unrepentant Mr Smith claimed that an attempt had been made to hide from
the public the expenditure undertaken on behalf of the chancellor and to
prevent it being scrutinised by MPs.
Calling on the prime minister to recognise the distinction between public
duty and private concern, he said it was clear that the chancellor had
instructed solicitors without referring to any of the government's legal
advisers.
The prime minister emphasised that the report by Sir John Bourn had fully
exonerated the Treasury on the central questions namely 'was it right to
make the payment, and were any rules breached'.
Mr Major said the report confirmed that the chancellor did not ask for
assistance and made no criticism of his actions.
The prime minister told Mr Smith that if he had 'a shred of self-respect' he
would withdraw his remarks.
Mr Smith refused to do so, and later made known that he intended to return
to the issue in a speech criticising the standards of ministerial conduct
and complaining of the 'cosy relationship' which some have established with
top civil servants.
