FT  02 JUN 93 / Heads in attack on league tables
THE NATIONAL Association of Head Teachers yesterday set out its strong
opposition to the government's planned league tables of school performance,
on the eve of a speech to its annual conference by Mr John Patten, the
education secretary,
Mr David Hart, general secretary, said when opening the conference in
Newcastle, that headteachers in England and Wales would continue to object
to 'unfair and misleading' national league tables, even if the government
decided to reform the national curriculum tests on which they were based.
Mr Hart said: 'We are opposed to league tables and the position is not just
for this year . . . We would be opposed to league tables even if the tests
had been reformed next year so that they were satisfactory. We are opposed
to league tables pure and simple.'
This afternoon delegates will debate a motion calling on Mr Patten to
'abandon any plans to press ahead with publication on a school by school
basis'.
An alternative motion 'deplores the league table mentality which has arisen
to provide parents and the media with lists of meaningless examination
statistics and attendance figures'.
Mr Hart said he was under 'enormous pressure' from his members to withhold
results from local education authorities, and reveal them only to pupils,
parents and governors.
'It is outrageous that any government should seriously contemplate league
tables for seven-year-olds,' said Mr Hart, adding that few heads were in
favour of league tables for 11, 14, or 16-year-olds, including GCSE, A and
AS level results.
The three largest teachers' unions are refusing to implement the tests,
which are due to start in secondary schools in England and Wales next week.
The NAHT has called for them to be made voluntary.
He said raw results published in league tables failed to account for a
school's overall performance, the nature of the local community, the needs
of pupils and available resources.
National monitoring of school standards could be achieved by sampling
examination performances, he said.
