FT  17 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tin prices touch fresh 20-year
lows on LME
DESPERATE CONDITIONS in the tin industry were reflected yesterday across the
world as prices in London touched fresh 20-year lows while in Kuala Lumpur
sellers were so appalled by the prices offered that in effect they staged a
strike.
For only the second time in its 40-year history the Kuala Lumpur tin market
failed to fix a price because of a rule requiring a daily turnover of at
least ten tonnes. 'At present unrealistic prices, nobody wants to sell tin,'
Mr Nazir Ariff, managing director of Datuk Keramat Smelting, told Reuter.
London dealers said buyers had been waiting for tin to fall to Dollars 5,000
a tonne, well below most mines' production costs, before putting in any
substantial orders.
At one stage yesterday the London Metal Exchange three months delivery tin
price fell to Dollars 5,070 a tonne, after dropping by Dollars 135 a tonne
or 3 per cent on Monday and Tuesday. In late trading it recovered to Dollars
5,112.50, up Dollars 17.50 from Tuesday's close.
Analysts warned that tin producers faced more hardship. The market was still
suffering from the impact of producer price support schemes that for many
years held prices artificially high and encouraged over-production. This
support ended in 1985 when the International Tin Council's buffer stock
operations collapsed in 1985, leaving 100,000 tonnes of tin stocks
overhanging the market. Since then the Association of Tin Producing
Countries, on which countries accounting for about 60 per cent of production
are represented, has attempted to limit exports, wear down the stocks and
keep prices up.
'There is now widespread frustration among members of the ATPC at the
futility of the export scheme. The feeling is growing that export curbs
should be scrapped and everyone should go out there and produce and export
all they can,' said Mr Ted Arnold, analyst at the Merrill Lynch financial
services group. This would cause prices to fall to a level where marginal
producers would be swept away.
Mr Fidelis Madavo, analyst at the Commodities Research Unit consultancy
organisation, said the tin market was in deficit last year with consumption
184,500 tonnes and production 176,300. There was another 4,000-tonne deficit
in the first quarter of 1993 but stocks, at about 40,000 tonnes, roughly
double the required level, were weighing heavily on sentiment.
He said the ATPC's efforts had been undermined by substantial exports from
China and because Russia, previously a small net importer, was now a net
exporter.
Dozens of tin mines around the world have already closed and last month
Malaysia Mining Corporation, one of the world's biggest producers, said
that, after suffering three successive years of losses, it would close all
its tin mines.
