FT  11 SEP 93 / Books: Time to party with nanny
THE GREEN KNIGHT by Iris Murdoch Chatto &amp; Windus, Pounds 15.99, 472 pages
I GREET a new novel by Dame Iris Murdoch as I used to greet a party when I
was a child. There stands Nanny Iris in front of a table groaning with
goodies: egg sandwiches, crisps, jellies, chocolate biscuits, a huge iced
birthday cake, all to be washed down with delicious fizzy Tizer.
I feel elated and at the same time the slightest bit apprehensive. After
tea, faces wiped, we are made as usual to play Hunt the Thimble, or rather
Hunt the Symbol, her version of the traditional pastime, .
This time she has been exceptionally kind and given us in her title The
Green Knight a clue where to look - it recalls the medieval English poem of
chivalry, Sir Gawain and The Green Knight. In case we've forgotten she
reminds us of the story, also summarised in The Oxford Companion to English
Literature thus:
'Arthur and his court are seated at a New Year's Feast in Camelot waiting
for a marvel when a huge green man enters, bearing an axe and a holly bough.
He challenges a knight to cut his head off on condition that the knight
agrees to have his head cut off a year hence. Gawain accepts the challenge
and cuts the green knight's head off: the knight picks it up and rides
away.'
The standard edition of this poem was edited by Tolkien and is still part of
the Oxford English degree course. Could it be that a certain Professor John
Bayley drew the novelist's attention to it? Or was it the version for
children performed recently at the National Theatre? At any rate she has had
a go at bringing it up to date. A group of people in contemporary London - a
'family' not all of whose members are related to each other by blood - go
through a series of crises that approximate to the main sequence of events
in the poem.
Their London base is a rambling four-storey house in Brook Green occupied by
a glamorous widow in her late 40s and her three nubile daughters, whose ages
range from 16 to the early 20s. I hardly need add that this trio are all
incredibly beautiful and stunningly bright.
The lives of the other characters revolve around them and their mother. The
two older daughters revere a history professor called Lucas, a friend of
their late father's and a scholar of teutonic rigour. Lucas was an adopted
child whose parents shortly afterwards produced a son, Clement, who became
an actor.
Intense sibling rivalry developed between the two brothers leading to much
cruelty; wounding memories persist in their adult life. On a dark night
Lucas attempts to settle old scores by hitting his brother over the head
with a baseball bat while they are on a walk. A stranger intervenes and gets
in the way of the blow, saving Clement's life. Lucas faces criminal charges
after the stranger's death but gets off on a plea of self-defence.
That all seems to be safely in the past until, at the start of the novel,
the sisters notice a tall man in a trilby hat with a green umbrella standing
outside the house keeping up some kind of surveillance. He also appears
outside Lucas's house into which, uninvited and much to Lucas's
discomfiture, he enters. He is the stranger who suffered Lucas's blow and
who is not really dead after all. Decoded he is the Green Knight reappearing
a year after his beheading, and now it is his turn to call the tune.
In spite of the improbabilities in the basic premise, Nanny held me
spellbound as she unfolded her tale. There are far too many twists and turns
in a characteristically complex plot to summarise, anyway it would spoil the
fun.
Just as in the poem we never quite know what to make of the Green Knight, in
his incarnation here, called Peter Mir, he remains a man of mystery. He is
violent, he is passive. He demands retribution, he believes in
reconciliation. He is an over-demanding guest, an absurdly generous host. He
is a Jew, a Russian, a Buddhist, a saint, an angel, a millionaire, a
nutcase. He is so protean as to be virtually incredible - but we accept him
like the policeman in An Inspector Calls for his ruthless harrowing of the
buried guilt in the family he investigates.
The three sisters, Aleph, Sefton and Moy, leading their Chekhovian lives in
this heartbreak house, are among the most attractive of Dame Iris's
creations. To balance them there is an assortment of menfolk and one dog,
Anax, who steals the show in the last chapter; animal loyalty and love
surpassing human.
Whatever this novel is trying to tell us at bottom - it sounds as if it is
another lesson in the problem of transgression and atonement - that remains
as difficult to understand as it does in the 24 previous novels by this
writer. But there is no doubting that her narrative skill continues to be as
inventive and energetic as ever. Once again she has presided over a
wonderful party.
