FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software &amp; Services
(11): Big Idea changes software - A look at the enthusiasm for object
orientation
There is a basic law in information technology. When a new 'Big Idea' comes
along its progress follows a predictable pattern: initially, there is
unbridled enthusiasm from the technologists who advocate it; this is
followed by a process of bandwagon building - as supplier companies'
marketing departments recognise the Big Idea's potential as a way to
increase sales.
Finally, there is an inevitable backlash - as the Big Idea fails to live up
to the inflated expectations pushed by the marketeers. Artificial
intelligence, expert systems, computer-aided software engineering and many
other examples have followed the same pattern.
Object-oriented computing - a relatively new way of designing information
technology systems - could be an exception. As a Big Idea, it is approaching
the end of the second phase - with most manufacturers now claiming that they
offer products which may be described as object-oriented. It is time,
therefore, to look for signs of the backlash.
But, so far, there are no signs that the initial enthusiasm for the
object-oriented approach has started to wane. On the contrary, the bandwagon
is rolling along nicely and the first experiences of the genuine application
of the object-oriented approach are beginning to surface. Generally, the
results appear to be positive.
Mr Kerry Williams, an object-oriented technology specialist with the Swiss
Bank, reports significant success with the approach. 'The bank decided to
move to the technology about two years ago and we have delivered about a
dozen applications using it,' he says.
The applications are mainly concerned with the bank's front office
operations and what Mr Williams describes as applications 'which fill the
vacuum between the front and back office'. He is reluctant to be more
specific because the bank is conscious of the competitive advantage that the
new software brings.
There are a growing number of examples of similar successes using the
object-oriented approach. And if the number of conferences on
object-oriented design, scheduled over the next few months, is an indicator,
the level of interest is increasing and what might be termed a 'paradigm
shift' is in the wind.
Academically-minded purists will disagree but the essence of the
object-oriented approach is deceptively simple. It means thinking about
information processing systems as a set of well-defined components which can
interact with each other. Applications can be constructed from these
components in the same way that a child builds a toy from a set of Lego
bricks.
Any part of an IT system can be viewed as an object - from a complete
application like a sales order processing system down to a simple program
code routine to calculate a date. The object-oriented design approach
provides a formal theoretical base with which to define and build objects.
It also fits well with current pre-occupations in IT systems design such as
the client-server architecture and networked systems.
Advocates of the object-oriented approach claim that it makes building IT
applications much easier because software 'objects' can be directly related
to the 'real' world, rather than traditional software design methods which
concentrate on technology issues.
If successful, the object-oriented approach has profound implications for
the future of software and IT systems in general.
One of the main advantages of object components is that they can be used by
many different applications. This means that a program to prepare data for a
Postscript laser printer can be used by many applications. This technique is
widely used in personal computers which use Microsoft's Windows environment.
Similarly, the same 'spelling checker' program or object can be used by a
word processing package, a spreadsheet and a presentation package.
Inevitably, this means that it becomes more difficult to define exactly what
an 'application' is. Is it a complete 'solution' with all of the program
code required to perform the task 'built in'? Or is it a set of objects
which are brought together to perform the task as required?
A recent paper prepared by the Object Management Group (OMG), an industry
organisation set up to promote object-oriented technology, suggests that
future software applications will conform to the latter model. It uses the
concept of 'electronic brokerage' of software components - akin to the Stock
Exchange - as its starting point: 'We see this affecting software developers
in the first instance. They are looking for ways to put new software
products together by leveraging existing applications,' explains Mr Richard
Soley, technical director of OMG and co-author of the paper.
'An electronic brokerage system would allow them to 'discover' what objects
are available and what they can do. By delivering them electronically or
with CD-ROM, they can assess whether the software is suited to their
purpose.'
Mr Soley says that this has significant implications for software
distribution channels.
'It means that you can distribute software to a mass market with very few
overheads. It also means users can benefit from being able to choose from a
variety of different component objects to suit their needs.'
Such a system does, of course, assume a standard infrastructure to support
software components. The OMG says it is well on the way to building this
infrastructure and has been remarkably successful in persuading the IT
industry to adopt common standards.
'You will see brokerage-type operations beginning to emerge this year and,
within two years, end-user companies will see the effects,' says Mr Soley.
If this forecast is correct, then the Big Idea behind object-oriented
technology could be the one exception that proves the rule.
OBJECT-ORIENTED EVENTS, 1993
Object-Oriented Methods: Do they work in practice?, June 9-11, Swallow
International Hotel, London (Object Trainers: 0491 410222)
Object World, June 14-17 Moscone Center, San Francisco, California. (Object
World:(US) 0101 508 820 4300, (UK) 081 570 2182)
Object Expo Europe, July 12-16, Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre, London
(Object Expo: 0306 631696)
Object World UK, October 13-15, Heathrow Penta Hotel (Object World: 081-570
2182).
