FT  23 APR 93 / People: Liberty carries the torch for Cadbury
Hard on the heels of the appointment of two part-time directors, Liberty has
decided to split the two top executive roles at the upmarket fabric and
fashion group, bringing in Patrick Austen from BTR as chief executive. Harry
Weblin, who is 63, will remain as executive chairman.
John Pugh, finance director, denies the move was solely inspired by
pressures from Brian Myerson, the London-based South African investor whose
attempts to secure voting rights for all the company's shares at last
summer's egm were roundly trounced but who still holds 15.77 per cent of the
voting and nearly 8 per cent of the non-voting stock.
'(Splitting the roles) was on Mr Myerson's agenda, but it was also on
Cadbury's agenda. Moreover, the search was made with a view to Harry's
retirement in a couple of years' time. A happy coincidence,' according to
Pugh, who adds that the search has been going on for 'not quite a year'.
Myerson, meanwhile, who says he was introduced to the new man three weeks
ago but was not directly involved in picking him, thinks he 'has all the
credentials to do the job. I spoke to him this morning and wished him lots
of luck - and I don't I mean that sarcastically.'
Austen, 49, is being hired not for his retailing skills - Weblin, an
ex-Harrods executive, has those - but for his brand savvy and textiles
experience. With 22 years at ICI Fibres under his belt, albeit handling
rather different fabrics from Liberty silk, he moved to Pretty Polly in
1983, just before BTR acquired its then owner Thomas Tilling.
He is credited with the vigorous expansion of Pretty Polly sales. Since 1987
he has been chief executive of the consumer products group of BTR - which
includes brands such as Dunlop and Slazenger - a division which turns over
Pounds 250m annually and employs some 3,700 staff.
And how will the hard-nosed BTR approach go down at the genteel Regent
Street headquarters? 'Any form of discipline is going to be good for the
company,' Pugh counters, while others comment that Austen, a keen golfer and
blue water sailor, is notably more relaxed than some of his erstwhile
colleagues.
