FT  04 SEP 93 / PM tries to keep a sunny disposition: John Major returns
from holiday on Tuesday. Kevin Brown reports on the pitfalls awaiting him
SNUG IN his borrowed Portuguese holiday villa, Mr John Major has had two
uncluttered weeks to reflect on the outlook for the coming year. It will not
have been a relaxing experience.
In the prime minister's absence Downing Street aides are claiming that the
end of the Maastricht tussle will allow a line to be drawn under the
divisions and disasters of last year.
Add in an accelerating economic recovery, say the siren voices, and a
reunited Conservative party would soon be back on course for a fifth
successive election victory.
Mr Major, who returns to Downing Street on Tuesday, will be hoping that the
optimists are right. But he will be painfully aware of the long list of
banana skins lying in wait for a misplaced government foot.
Ironically, after a year in which most of the prime minister's energy has
been directed to overcoming parliamentary rebellions, the Commons may be the
least of the government's problems.
At this early stage of the parliamentary year the only immediate legislative
problem appears to be the British Rail privatisation bill, which the Lords
did their noble best to wreck in the dying days of the last session.
It has become clear during the summer recess that a large number of
Conservative MPs, mainly in the south-east commuter belt, are sympathetic to
the Lords amendment, suggesting that reversing it in the Commons may be
difficult.
Even more worrying for Mr Major, the potential rebels are drawn largely from
loyalists who have refused to join previous rebellions against the
government.
At least Mr Major can console himself with the hope that the loyalists can
be won back if a sufficiently ingenious compromise can be found.
But the hard-core rebels - a shifting coalition of a dozen or so
Euro-sceptics and embittered Thatcherites - remain on the alert for any
opportunity to embarrass the government.
Their best chance may come in December when the European Council meets in
Brussels to plan the future of the European Community in the wake of the
Maastricht treaty and the collapse of the exchange rate mechanism.
Mr Major will be walking a tightrope. He must appear sufficiently
communautaire to avoid backtracking on his vision of Britain 'at the heart
of Europe' while sounding sufficiently sceptical to avoid a renewed eruption
from the back benches.
He must also be dreading the publication of Baroness Thatcher's memoirs, due
next month. Inevitably attention will focus on his part in her downfall.
From Mr Major's point of view the timing could hardly be worse. The party is
already riven by an acrimonious debate on the possibility of tax increases
in the November Budget as part of the government's drive to bring its Pounds
50bn budget deficit under control.
Rightwingers such as Mr John Townend, chairman of the party's finance
committee, have forecast an irretrievable split if Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, decides that higher taxes are essential.
Usually changes in tax rates are a matter for the chancellor after
discussion with the prime minister and agreement on public spending totals
in the cabinet's EDX committee, which starts work in earnest next week.
This year it will be at least as much a matter for Mr Richard Ryder, the
chief whip, who will have to estimate how much indigestion the right can be
made to stomach.
In spite of the problems Mr Major is not entirely a prisoner of events. For
example, the Queen's speech is likely to concentrate on issues designed to
rally the party, such as removing regulatory burdens from industry.
The prime minister is also giving discreet support to candidates on the
centre-left of the party for the chairmanships of the party's influential
backbench committees. The right over-reached itself in winning the majority
of chairmanships last year, but a failure by the centre-left to dislodge
most of the sitting rightwingers would look like a government setback.
Mr Major has other personnel problems too: what to do about Mr John Patten,
the education secretary, and Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry
secretary.
Mr Patten's return after illness has stifled immediate talk of a reshuffle,
but it is still not clear whether Mr Heseltine has fully recovered from a
heart attack in June.
Mr Heseltine is expected to return to the fray at the party conference next
month. But if he is less than fully fit Mr Major may be forced to move him,
perhaps to replace Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman.
However he chooses to approach the choppy waters ahead, Mr Major knows that
his main problem is to demonstrate that he has a firm hand on the tiller.
That is not yet beyond him, but the thought may have spoilt his holiday.
