FT  17 SEP 93 / Japan's Economic Boost: Lower fuel bills and a wider choice
of beers
LOWER bills for gas and electricity, more tree-lined streets and a greater
variety of beers are some of the changes the Japanese public is being
promised in the latest economic stimulus package to be implemented by Japan.
'The worst thing is to do it in little bits like this,' said Mr Takuma
Yamamoto, chairman of Fujitsu, the computer and telecommunications group. Mr
Yamamoto argued that the package should have been adopted earlier and that
the amount being considered was far short of necessary. 'We need at least
Y10,000bn (Pounds 61bn),' he said.
The government's aim in the latest set of measures was mainly to focus on
improving the quality of life of ordinary people by enabling them to better
enjoy the fruits of Japan's economic success, according to its drafters.
But the package failed to deliver the one change which is widely expected to
be the most effective in stimulating consumer demand and revitalising
Japan's flagging economy: a cut in income taxes.
Instead, Mr Hosokawa has allowed the Finance Ministry to retain the option
of combining a cut in income taxes with an increase in Japan's 3 per cent
consumption tax to make up for the lost revenue.
The package focused on efforts to deregulate Japanese industries, pass on
the benefits of the yen to consumers and improve the country's social
infrastructure 'from the viewpoint of ordinary people and consumers'
interests,' according to the government.
Among 94 areas to be deregulated are the easing of rules for beer
production, the liberalisation of mobile phone sales and a change in
Japanese rules governing the standards for food shelf-life and building
materials.
The first is expected to stimulate local economies by encouraging small
brewers to produce their own beers in competition with big producers, while
the shift from the leasing of mobile phones to direct sales is likely to
trigger greater competition in the market, particularly if it is accompanied
by deregulation of mobile phone tariffs.
Measures designed to pass on the benefits of the strong yen to consumers
include a reduction in electricity and gas charges and the expansion of
discount services for family air trips in Japan. The lower utility rates,
however, are probably too modest to do much to redirect spending to other
areas.
The measures are intended to enable Japanese consumers to enjoy the greater
international purchasing power they should in theory have as a result of the
strength of the yen against the US dollar. The Economic Planning Agency
estimates that if the benefits of a Y10 rise in the yen's value against the
dollar are fully passed on to consumers, it would result in a cut in
consumer prices of 1 per cent.
The third pillar of the package focuses on coping with the weak domestic
economy and Y1,000bn worth of measures to improve a social infrastructure.
More government money will aid small companies suffering under the prolonged
slowdown, and to stimulate interest in home building by increasing the
amount of low-interest government loans.
