FT  02 SEP 93 / Arts: Queen's Hall Recital - Edinburgh Festival
THE MORNING recitals at the Queen's Hall are the bread and butter of
Edinburgh's concert programme. On those occasions when (as Richard Fairman
complained in these columns last weekend) the outlines of festival planning
have been blurred by less-than-festival-standard executants, bread and
butter can seem plain fare. But when a recitalist of the quality of the
American soprano Dawn Upshaw enchants an Edinburgh morning audience with her
smilingly candid platform demeanour and frank, forceful artistic
personality, bread and butter becomes ambrosia.
In the style of her first entrance Miss Upshaw states her whole approach: no
swank, no varnish, no prima-donna airs and graces. She essays a line in
'hello and welcome' chat - and, later, encore introduction - which could
become sticky were it not so warmly welcoming in intention.
But in any case, the conjunction of singer, song and voice changes the mood,
and brings the exhilaration: this is an artist ready to explore darker as
well as lighter modes of audience address, capable of deep seriousness no
less than winning brightness. Her voice, a clean, clear, well-schooled
instrument apparently without sharply individual characteristics, becomes
just such a vehicle for 'personal' expressiveness through the forward,
risk-taking manner of her delivery.
She seizes words and lives them, lives in them. Copland's 12 Emily Dickinson
songs served for a marvellous display of native idioms, tones of voice, all
caught with the shining sincerity that brings this plain-spoken music alive.
A group of Schumann, Wolf and Schubert Lieder achieved a similar bold
simplicity of shape and focus - Gretchen at her spinning wheel, with the
excellent pianist Margo Garrett in pinpoint support, rarely seems so
youthfully tragic. A long stretch of early Debussy songs afforded perhaps
more intermittent delights: Miss Upshaw's French is more a lesson learnt,
less a language freely spoken, than her German.
On the whole, though, this was two hours of cloudless happiness. The day
before, in a Schubert-Janacek chamber concert that ideally embodied this
year's central thematic pairing, the Gaudier Ensemble had offered something
similar. Janacek's late wind sextet Youth and Concertino, nuggety,
hard-edged, joyful, were set in a new and thought-provoking perspective by
the Schubert Octet. The Gaudier, a crack collection of virtuosos from
various orchestras (including the Chamber Orchestra of Europe), avoids
laying on the charm - which is mostly a great virtue but sometimes, in
Schubert particularly, a slight fault.
In the Usher Hall the two Edinburgh concerts of the South West German Radio
Symphony Orchestra under Michael Gielen, its venerable chief conductor, have
proved more of a mixed bag. The orchestra, a sound, solid, no-nonsense
ensemble of exactly the type suggested by their name, was not well suited to
the first programme - music by Rakhmaninov, Schnittke and Suk requiring much
stronger infusions of colour and drama.
But the second, Schoenberg's Piano Concerto (with Alfred Brendel in
sovereign command) and the Mahler Seventh Symphony, found Gielen, a
tough-minded, intellectually searching musician, on much surer ground.
Mahler and Schoenberg: a future Edinburgh thematic coupling, anyone?
SWGRSO concerts sponsored by Royal Bank of Scotland and Dunard Fund
