FT  18 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Bill covers wide range of labour
activity
Internal union affairs: Rules tightened on how union members vote on the use
of political funds, mergers with other unions, and for executive posts.
Greater use of independent scrutineers in union elections. No public funding
of ballots after April 1 1996.
Pay and benefits of union leaders to be notified annually to a Certification
Officer, who will have powers to investigate finances. Union members will be
entitled to written information on finances.
Membership: Individuals will have the right to join the union of their
choice unless membership is limited to an occupation or skill. Unions will
no longer be able to exclude individuals because of 'no poaching'
inter-union agreements, such as the TUC Bridlington rules.
Employers will be able to pay more to individuals to secure changes in
bargaining arrangements, allowing employers to pay extra to those who sign
personal contracts and give up collective bargaining.
Deduction of dues: Employers will have to get written agreement at least
every three years from individuals if union subscriptions are to be deducted
from wages under 'check-off' arrangements. Increases in deductions will have
to be notified at least a month in advance by employers, accompanied by a
reminder that they can withdraw from check-off at any point.
Industrial action: Union industrial action ballots will have to be conducted
fully by post. Where 50 or more are voting, ballot will have to be
independently scrutinised.
Unions will have to give employers at least seven days written notice of
intention to ballot on industrial action, plus a description of which
workers are to be balloted. Employers must get a sample voting paper and
details of the result. Seven days written notice will have to be given by
unions of intended industrial action, dates of action and description of
which workers are likely to be involved.
Any individual deprived of goods or services by unlawful industrial action
will be able to bring legal proceeding to restrain the action. Maternity
leave and rights: Pregnant employees, regardless of length of service or
hours worked, will have the right to 14 weeks maternity leave. All women to
be protected against dismissal on maternity-related grounds.
Changes during passage of the bill include rules affecting the notification
required by a woman of her intention to return to work. Written employment
particulars: After two months in a job an employee must be given a written
statement of main employment particulars (currently 13 weeks after starting
job). Many particulars in collective agreements, including hours and
holidays, will have to be spelled out to individuals. Changes must be
notified within a month.
All employees working more than eight hours a week will be entitled to an
itemised pay statement. In companies with fewer than 20 employees, those
working 8-16 hours will have to complete five years' qualifying service
before entitled.
Victimisation: All employees will be able to go to an industrial tribunal if
dismissed for carrying out health and safety duties, or leaving a work area
if in imminent danger. Employees will have a new right to complain to an
industrial tribunal if dismissed for asserting statutory employment
protection rights.
Transfer and redundancy: Transfer of undertakings regulations will be
extended to include non-commercial undertakings. Any employee refusing to
transfer will be deemed to have left the job voluntarily.
Wages councils: Remaining wages councils, which fix minimum pay, are to be
abolished.
Tribunals: Chairmen will be able to sit without lay members in some
circumstances and hear breach of contract of employment. Identities of
parties in cases involving sexual misconduct are to be protected.
Careers service: Responsibility for careers service moved from local
education authorities to secretary of state.
