FT  29 SEP 93 / Businesses seek education changes
LEADING business people yesterday called for sweeping changes in the way
schools are run, in return for greater investment in education by private
companies.
Mr Michael Ashcroft, chairman of the new Education In Industry group of
business leaders, said changes might include the provision of full education
courses by companies for children over 14, longer school days and the
introduction of a five-term year.
Mr Ashcroft, who chairs the security and vehicle auctions group ADT, added
that lengthening the school day and increasing the number of terms would
help parents working part-time or flexitime, and allow pupils to spend more
time on vocational education.
Companies would also provide marketing, promotional and fundraising
activities. The group will also lobby for industrialists' views on
education.
Mr Ashcroft said school-leavers were not adequately prepared for employment.
'Unless we can systematically improve educational standards, this nation,
its businesses and prosperity are at risk.' He listed measures required by
industrialists, including:
Minimum standards in literacy and numeracy.
New targets that require a second foreign language, computer skills,
technology and vocational training.
Employer-provided approved education courses for pupils aged 14 and over.
Lengthening the school day.
A five-term year.
Compulsory industrial work experience for all trainee teachers.
Mr Ashcroft said the focus of secondary education should move from age 16 to
move in line with practice on the Continent, because this would allow more
concentration on vocational courses at an earlier stage.
The new group has full government backing. Its launch was attended by Mr
John Patten, education secretary, and three education ministers. It
signalled strong support for the government's proposal this week to channel
funds towards schools which specialise in technology. However, the trust
intends to remain non-partisan and will not receive any public funds.
Founder trustees include the the directors of the Institute of Management
and the Institute of Personnel Management, and the heads of Norwich Union,
George Wimpey, Vauxhall Motors, Cable &amp; Wireless, Dixons, Burton Group, and
the British Railways Board.
