FT  14 DEC 93 / UK wins 2.5% VAT for works of art
British auction houses yesterday welcomed a European compromise covering
value added tax on antiques and art works, which should allow London to
maintain its competitive edge against New York in the lucrative world art
market.
European Union finance ministers ended 15 years of intermittent debate by
agreeing a common VAT system for second-hand goods, which covers everything
from Minis to Monets.
Under the complex compromise, works of art imported from outside the
European Union into the UK will be subject to a reduced 2.5 per cent VAT
until June 30, 1999.
Art works re-exported from the EU within two years of entry will be spared
the tax altogether.
Ministers have yet to decide when the directive will take effect.
The UK, centre of the European trade in antiques, currently exempts art
imports from VAT, encouraging non-European collectors to sell through
auction houses such as Christie's and Sotheby's.
Auctioneers and dealers had feared that in the interests of fiscal
harmonisation, EU ministers would force Britain to impose a heavier rate of
VAT on imports.
All other member states will have to impose a rate of at least 5 per cent on
art imports.
Britain's right to levy a lower rate could be extended beyond 1999 if a
special report to ministers by the end of 1998 concludes that increasing VAT
would hamper the competitiveness of the European art market.
Commission officials claimed that art works imported for sale in Geneva or
New York were subject to an average tax of some 3 per cent.
Christie's, which along with Sotheby's, dominates the international art
market, gave a guarded welcome to the proposals.
Sir Anthony Tennant, chairman of Christie's, said: 'We feel that this deal,
tenaciously negotiated by Sir John Cope (UK paymaster general), represents
the best solution possible to secure agreement and that it removes much of
the uncertainty surrounding the market in London. While we remain deeply
concerned about the position after 1999, we are pleased that there is to be
a review of the effect of an import tax before then. The net effect of these
new proposals is minimal in the short term.'
Mr Anthony Browne, a Christie's director, added that while the move was
welcome, Christie's would 'continue to argue vigorously that, if you set too
high a rate, it will damage the European art market'.
Sotheby's also expressed satisfaction. 'The 2.5 per cent until 1999 will
have only a marginal effect. We are pleased that the present uncertainty has
ended'.
Ministers also decided that VAT would be imposed only on the dealer's margin
on the sale of second-hand goods, rather than the full value, and that sales
of goods and art works between individuals would not be subject to VAT.
Certain member states will be exempt from elements of the new system during
a transition period.
Separately, ministers asked the Commission to continue studying the
harmonisation of withholding tax on savings, in spite of opposition from a
number of countries, led by Britain and Luxembourg, to any harmonised system
of savings tax.
