FT  22 JUN 93 / Business and the Law: Setback for EC state aid controls -
European Court
The European Court of Justice has overturned the Commission's 1991
communication on the transparency of financial relations between member
states and public companies in the manufacturing sector.
The court gave its decision in judicial review proceedings brought by France
challenging the communication. The challenge concerned the information which
the Commission claimed to be entitled to request from member states by way
of implementation of the 1980 directive on transparency in financial
relations between member countries and the public sector.
The 1991 communication requires EC states to provide the Commission with an
annual report of financial assistance given by public authorities to
public-sector manufacturing industry with more than Ecu250m turnover in the
previous financial year.
Details to be provided range from the annual report and accounts to every
kind of aid including grants, guarantees, interest-free loans, capital
investments and dividend information.
The purpose is to enable the Commission to assess the compatibility of the
aid with the Rome Treaty and in particular whether investments have been
made on a commercial basis.
The two main questions considered by the ECJ were whether the communication
went beyond the scope of the 1980 directive and, if so, whether the
Commission had identified the legal basis which gave it the power to do so.
The Commission claimed that the communication added no new obligation to
those already imposed on member states by the 1980 directive. Accordingly,
the communication could not be considered to have any new legal effects
distinct from the 1980 directive. It was merely a particular measure
applying the general information rules established by the 1980 directive.
The court ruled, first, that the obligation for EC states to communicate on
a general and systematic basis data required by the Commission was not
inherent in the 1980 directive. The latter required only that member states
keep certain information on their financial relations with particular
companies for five years and communicate it to the Commission on request.
Since the communication adds new obligations to those in the 1980
transparency directive, it is an act intended to have its own legal effects.
Second, the ECJ found, therefore, that the Commission had breached the
requirements of legal certainty, a general principle of Community law, in
failing to indicate the legal basis for the communication.
The annulment by the ECJ of the communication is likely to throw into
disarray the Commission's state aid scrutiny policy but will not necessarily
affect the assessment of particular state aids granted by member states.
C-325/91: France v Commission, ECJ FC, 16 June 1993.
Matra loses state aid battle against Ford/VW
As a sequel to the recent Cook case, the ECJ has reconfirmed the principles
relating to judicial review of Commission state aids decisions which it
clarified in that case. The case concerned aid granted by Portuguese public
authorities amounting to Esc97.44m for a Esc454m investment in a car plant
by Ford and VW at Setubal. The majority of the aid was paid under the
Portuguese regional aid policy approved by the Commission in 1988. Matra
challenged Brussels' decision not to open a full investigation.
The court upheld the Commission's decision on the facts of the particular
case. It found no grounds to interfere with the Commission's assessment of
the risk of overcapacity in the industry or of the geographical
disadvantages which Setubal undoubtedly had because of its distance from the
main car markets.
Applying the substantive principles on which the court says it can review
state aid decisions made by the Commission, it considered that the
Commission had not exceeded its powers of assessment.
C-225/91: Matra v Commission, ECJ FC, 15 June 1993.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
