FT  28 JAN 93 / Hindus triumphant in a quiet village in the north of India:
Co-existence hides a climate of fear
HINDUS and Moslems live cheek-by-jowl in Roshangarh village in northern
India, sharing the rich red earth, the well and the cart-track which leads
past piles of cow dung to the outside world.
Yet generations of co-existence in the village, about 60km north-east of New
Delhi, have not erased the invisible line separating the two communities.
The brightly-painted temple to Lord Shiva stands at one end of the village,
the white-washed mosque at the other.
The villagers have never been so acutely aware of their differences as in
the seven weeks since Hindu militants destroyed the mosque in Ayodhya. The
inter-religious riots which swept through many Indian cities passed
Roshangarh by. As in almost every other Indian village, there was no
violence. But there is tension in the air.
The Hindus are triumphant. 'We are very happy to see the (Ayodhya) mosque
pulled down; 464 years ago it was a Hindu temple and now it will be a temple
again,' says Rajendra Kumar, a 30-year-old farmer.
Mr Dharmendra Singh, a tough-talking 25-year-old, says: 'I want the Moslems
driven out of India. They have many countries. They can go to Pakistan.
Hindus only have India.' Other villagers say that at the very least Moslems
should be deprived of the vote. 'We want Hindu Raj (rule),' says Dharamveer,
the headman.
Almost without exception, the Hindu villagers support the Bharatiya Janata
party, the Hindu militant party whose supporters stormed the Ayodhya mosque.
Even their language is the language of the BJP, a tribute to the party's
formidable propaganda and organisational skills. Eleven villagers serve on
the local area BJP committee.
But the Hindu villagers are reluctant to apply their general condemnation of
Moslems to their Moslem neighbours. Roshangarh is a rich village with
electricity and piped water. The wealthier villagers have two-storey houses
which tower over the surrounding huts. They would lose much if Roshangarh
were ever consumed by violence.
The Hindus say no trouble has ever occurred in the village. Hindus and
Moslems still work together on village councils organising daily matters
such as repairing roads. 'Ayodhya will not change this. We will still talk
in the street. We will greet them at the time of festivals,' says an older
villager. Mr Singh, the young firebrand, disagrees. 'Things will change for
them when the BJP takes charge. They know it.'
The Moslem villagers are nervous and reluctant to talk openly, but their
38-year-old Imam, Mr Abdus Sattar, is not afraid to speak on their behalf.
The Moslem villagers are angry about the destruction of the mosque and
fearful about the possibility of BJP government. 'We believe the BJP is
anti-Moslem,' says Mr Sattar. 'We may lose our rights if they get to power.'
He is also anxious to avoid giving offence. He says there is no
trouble-making in the village, no arguments in the streets. Nothing. Moslems
and Hindus do not talk very much about religion. They never have done.
An old farmer adds: 'There's too much work in the fields for us to argue.'
But Mr Sattar is worried about the future: 'When the general atmosphere in
the country is poisoned, the poison eventually reaches into the villages.'
