FT  26 FEB 93 / A-Z of Personal Finance (13): The secured route may be
insecure - Loans
DO YOU really need a loan? This is probably the first question to ask
yourself before deciding where to turn for one.
Only the desperate will be attracted to small advertisements promising a
sympathetic ear but which can charge exorbitant rates. Which?, the
Consumers' Association magazine, found that one company charged as much as
Pounds 1,000 to arrange a Pounds 5,000 loan, while interest rates on some
loans arranged by brokers were double those at high street banks. If you
want a loan in order to pay off existing borrowings, it is better to go to a
debt counsellor than a loan shark.
But if you are confident that you can repay the loan, there are broadly two
main ways of borrowing. For larger amounts which will be paid back over a
relatively long period, you will probably need a secured loan. Smaller loans
can be arranged by your bank or credit card company. It is worth checking
the cost of various types of loan from a number of institutions before
making a final decision.
Secured loans. The cheapest way to borrow is through a loan secured on your
property. But you should consider carefully whether repayments can be kept
up, because you risk losing your home if you do not. There are three main
options for those with equity in their property:
Further advance. You can borrow more money from your lender against a
specified limit of the equity left in your home. If the money is for home
improvements, you will usually be charged the standard variable rate. The
rate of interest can, however, be higher.
Second mortgage. This is an additional loan, taken out from a second lender
on a home on which there is already a mortgage. If your home had to be sold
to meet your debts, the second lender would be behind the first for payment.
Second lenders are therefore likely to charge a higher rate of interest than
your mortgage rate.
Remortgage. This is more expensive than the other two options, because you
are taking out a new mortgage to replace the old. It therefore involves the
full costs of arranging a mortgage, including valuation and legal fees. In
some cases, tax relief could be lost, so you should check first.
Those borrowing more than 70 per cent of their property's value will incur
heavy mortgage indemnity premiums. By raising the loan-to-value ratio, the
risk of sliding into negative equity is also increased, should house prices
fall further. It is chastening to note that in two-thirds of repossession
cases, a second mortgage was involved. Secured loans are also available from
banks.
Unsecured loans
If you want to borrow smaller sums of money, the main choice is between a
bank loan or borrowing off your credit card.
Overdraft. This is generally an expensive way to borrow, even if it is
authorised. It is a good idea to arrange an overdraft facility when you are
in credit in case you need it when cash-flow problems cause you to be
periodically overdrawn.
Personal loan. A set amount is borrowed at a fixed, though usually
negotiable, rate of interest for an agreed period of time. The period of the
loan is unlikely to be longer than five years. If you are borrowing at a
time of relatively high interest rates, the fixed interest rate may prove
irritating if rates subsequently fall.
Credit cards. These are cheap - and free if your card does not carry an
annual fee - as long as you pay off your bill when it is due. But they are
one of the more expensive ways of longer-term borrowing. If you have a Gold
Card, you may have an overdraft facility on it. The overdraft rate is likely
to be less than that that on a bank loan.
Other options include:
Employers. Some employers may be prepared to give a loan for certain items,
such as a transport season ticket or car, on reasonable terms.
Insurance company. If you have an investment-type insurance policy, for
example, an endowment, which is not already tied to anything else (such as
paying off your mortgage), you may be able to borrow against the value of
the policy from the insurance company.
The loan is a percentage of the surrender value, so unless you have held the
policy for a while, it may not be worth very much. However, this is a
relatively cheap and long-term way of borrowing.
Unauthorised overdrafts and store cards are two of the most expensive ways
to borrow.
As a general rule, it is foolish to borrow in order to invest money. There
is little point in receiving interest on savings only to pay out a greater
rate of interest to finance a loan. Similarly, if you have savings, it is
far better to use these than to borrow, but some cash savings should be left
for an emergency.
