FT  14 MAY 93 / Directors sceptical on cutting red tape
COMPANY directors are highly sceptical about government efforts to reduce
the burden of red tape on businesses. Nearly 70 per cent of directors
believe the campaign will make little or no difference to the level of
regulation, an Institute of Directors' survey shows today.
The campaign against red tape, initiated by Mr John Major, the prime
minister, involves a review of regulations by every government department.
Seven taskforces made up of businesspeople from different sectors are
drawing up priorities for de-regulation.
While more than 80 per cent of directors questioned by the institute said it
was important for the government to reduce bureaucracy, only 30 per cent
believed the exercise would be successful. The institute said the finding
emphasised the need for the government to 'achieve early, concrete results
to convince firms that it means business'.
Top of the directors' list of most troublesome burdens are value added tax,
health and safety regulations, employment-protection laws, and planning
rules. VAT rules cause problems for 27 per cent of the directors, and for 33
per cent of directors in companies employing fewer than 100 people. The
institute is suggesting to the government a number of reforms, including an
extension of the flat-rate VAT scheme available to farmers.
Health and safety has become more of an issue because of the implementation
in the UK of six European Community directives at the beginning of this
year, the institute said.
More than 40 per cent of directors believe government regulation has
restricted the ability of their businesses to expand and employ additional
people. The feeling was particularly strong among smaller businesses - a
worrying finding, given that smaller companies are generally agreed to have
been the main generators of new employment in the 1980s, the institute said.
Most directors spend up to two hours a week personally dealing with
regulation problems, the findings show. For directors of companies with
between 20 and 100 employees, that figure is nearly three-and-a-half hours a
week.
The survey was carried out for the institute by Taylor Nelson in April.
Interviews were by telephone among a structured sample of 304 out of the
institute's 33,500 UK members.
