FT  23 OCT 93 / Smoke signals in the east: A look at western tobacco groups'
bids to broaden their markets
The Marlboro cowboy may have looked bedraggled and saddle-sore in the US
this year but he is still riding high elsewhere in the world.
The cigarette brand's manufacturer, Philip Morris, has fought fiercely in
the past six months to protect its advertising icon. It is anxious to
restore Marlboro's standing in the US. But protecting home sales is not the
only motive. It also fears that any further slippage in its standing in the
US would hit its growing international business.
The emphasis on strengthing an image in new markets is not unique to Philip
Morris. As the US, along with other western markets, have turned away from
cigarette consumption in the face of health lobbies and government
regulation, the multinational producers have had to look elsewhere - such as
the Far East - for sales growth.
This week came evidence that Philip Morris' strategy is paying off. Its
daring decision in April to cut prices in the US by 20 per cent reversed
some of the fall in sales over recent years. Marlboro's market share in the
US has risen from 24 per cent to 25.7 per cent. More spectacularly, results
for the quarter to September showed operating profits outside the US up 15
per cent on the same period a year before.
Although the US, where 500bn cigarettes are consumed a year, and western
Europe, where 750bn are smoked annually, will continue to be important
markets for Philip Morris and other tobacco groups, such as BAT Industries,
R J Reynolds and Rothmans International, it is the international market that
will provide the long-term opportunities.
What has transformed the prospects for the multinationals has been the
opening of new markets in Asia and the Pacific Rim and in eastern Europe.
A decade ago, 4,500bn cigarettes were smoked a year worldwide. But 60 per
cent of the market was closed to the multinationals by trade barriers.
Removal of restrictions in the fast-growing economies of the Far East and
the collapse of communism in eastern Europe, have now given western
multinationals access to all but 5 per cent of a global market that has
grown to 5,330bn cigarettes, in spite of recent worldwide recession.
Japan, Taiwan, Korea and Thailand, for instance, have lifted trade barriers
since the mid-1980s - usually under pressure from a US government that was
discouraging smoking in its own backyard. China, the biggest market in the
world with an annual consumption of 1,705bn cigarettes, still restricts
imports to hard currency outlets, but has said it will open the door wider
in 1995. Philip Morris this year signed a co-operation agreement with the
state tobacco company to produce Marlboro cigarettes.
In Europe, after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, tobacco multinationals
headed the race by western companies to establish operations in the former
communist states, a market of 643bn cigarettes.
Such emerging markets present almost a mirror image of conditions in the US
and western Europe. In the Far East and east Europe, the smoking habit is
spreading and is socially acceptable. Anti-smoking campaigners are less
vociferous. Restrictions on advertising are relatively weak or weakly
enforced.
The contrast between the mature and developing markets can be stark. While a
Los Angeles court recently removed a child from the custody of a mother who
smoked, children sell cigarettes on almost every street corner in Manila.
Whereas in the west, the health hazard is top of people's minds, in Russia's
parlous economy the jobs created by the investments of tobacco companies
weigh more heavily. Moreover cigarettes have the status of a currency which,
unlike the rouble, does not depreciate.
Tobacco multinationals are flourishing in these conditions. World sales of
international brands, such as Marlboro, grew by 7 per cent a year between
1989 and 1992. BAT, which exported 45bn cigarettes in 1989, almost trebled
the number to 129bn last year. US companies shipped 18bn cigarettes to the
Pacific Rim in 1985; last year, the number rose to 87bn.
To cope with the demand from these markets, Philip Morris is completing a
Dollars 400m expansion of its plant in North Carolina, increasing production
capacity by 50 per cent. BAT is investing Pounds 175m in its Southampton
factory in southern England to double annual production to 55bn cigarettes.
The inroads made into Far East markets - where many consumers aspire to what
they perceive to be a western lifestyle - is almost certainly producing the
biggest contributions to profit, although no group gives a regional
breakdown.
Philip Morris has secured 12 per cent of the Japanese market, the world's
fourth largest. BAT's Kent and Lucky Strike brands both rank in the top five
of Japan's best-selling imported cigarettes. The two groups dominate the now
growing imported sector in Taiwan.
Rothmans International this year merged its tobacco interests in Malaysia,
Singapore and Hong Kong to strengthen its operations in the region. Mr Nyren
Scott-Malden, analyst at BZW, says: 'The move enables it to use the cash
built up in the mature markets of Malaysia and Singapore to exploit the
biggest growth markets in the world.'
Outside the Far East, slower economic growth mean returns from investments
will take longer to secure. Sir Patrick Sheehy, BAT's chairman, says
significant profits on the group's east European ventures are not expected
for at least 10 years, 'possibly 25'.
Establishing operations in the former Soviet bloc also requires a deal of
management agility to surmount obstacles presented either by the absence of
any framework of commercial law or a maze of regulations. 'Businessmen,'
says Sir Patrick, 'are marooned in a command economy.'
In Russia, BAT is setting up a joint venture with Yava, Moscow's largest
cigarette factory; Rothmans is investing Pounds 55m in a joint venture in St
Petersburg; and Philip Morris this year bought into its third cigarette
company.
Other ventures are being set up in the the CIS and other east European
countries; in the Czech republic, Philip Morris paid Dollars 400m for a
majority of the Tabak company which controls 80 per cent of the country's
tobacco market. BAT has gained a 50 per cent share of the Hungarian market
through a Pounds 20m joint venture with a local factory.
Equipped with modern machinery, these factories are now improving low-priced
local cigarette brands. The expectation is that over the next few years,
such investments will begin to reap rewards comparable with those in the Far
East.
All this is not to suggest that the multinationals have given up in western
markets.
For instance, the breaking of state cigarette manufacturing monopolies, as
rules for new market entrants have been relaxed, in Italy, France, Spain and
Portugal, have provided further opportunities for international brands.
Marlboro now controls 43 per cent of the Italian market and 35 per cent in
Germany. Sales of BAT's Lucky Strike brand in France have risen by 27 per
cent a year since 1989 to 1.2bn cigarettes.
But demand in the mature markets US and western Europe markets is falling
under constant and growing pressure of health lobbies and increasing
government controls on advertising. The need to keep the Marlboro cowboy
looking proud in China and elsewhere will remain the first priority.
