FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (9): Protection for a final
frontier - Victor Mallet visits the island of Palawan, an environmental
test-case for south-east Asia
THE SIGN at the 'Bottleground' bar on Rizal Avenue, boasts: 'Hot Women Plus
Cold Beer.'
With its brothels and Roman Catholic churches, there is not much at first
glance to distinguish Puerto Princesa, the capital of the island province of
Palawan, from any other town in the Philippines.
A typical family owns an old videotape of the wedding of Britain's Prince
Charles to Lady Diana Spencer, and has eight children. Seven masses are
celebrated each Sunday at the Immaculate Conception cathedral, to
accommodate the growing number of inhabitants.
Religion even penetrates the underground river, Palawan's main tourist
attraction - 'see this stalactite - it is like the Virgin Mary,' declares
the boatman to his sceptical passengers. 'And this one' - he points at
another apparently shapeless rock - 'is like the Holy Family.'
In one very important sense, however, Palawan is different. Elsewhere in the
Philippines almost all the tropical forest has been destroyed, but about
half of this long, thin mountainous island south-west of Manila is still
covered with trees.
Elsewhere, coral reefs have been dynamited into oblivion, but in the waters
around Palawan much of the coral and other forms of marine life have
survived, making the area a paradise for divers and the source of two thirds
of the fish for the national capital, Metro Manila.
Palawan has become a test case, not just for the Philippines but for
south-east Asia as a whole: is it possible to preserve some of the region's
beauty and natural resources for future generations, or must everything be
destroyed to make room for an increasing population and for the traffic jams
which accompany the phenomenon known as 'economic development'?
'Palawan, our last frontier: make it last. Stop illegal fishing,' declares
the roadside billboard in Puerto Princesa. Another billboard shows the
diminishing size of fish caught over the past 20 years, and urges fishermen
to stop using cyanide, which does not discriminate between baby and mature
fish and therefore needlessly decimates fish populations.
The presence of the billboards is both bad news and good news. The bad news
is that the battle to save Palawan's resources for the future is an uphill
struggle; the good news is that a few members of the central and local
governments are starting to take the matter seriously.
The very fact that Palawan is relatively undamaged - and undisturbed by
separatist or communist rebels - makes the island a favoured destination
both for poor migrants from other parts of the Philippines and for foreign
tourists. Migrants follow the logging companies' bulldozers to clear
farmland for rice, cashew nuts or coconuts, and the tourists come to find
the tranquillity now lost in much of the rest of south-east Asia.
Palawan also has oil offshore and nickel deposits in the south, but the
financial benefits - even when they come to the island rather than to the
central government or to big business - are clouded by the inevitable
disadvantages.
The island's population has doubled to about 600,000 in the past decade, and
Puerto Princesa is starting to smell of the diesel smoke and motor-cycle
fumes generated by trucks and tricycle taxis; one of the nickel companies is
being accused of polluting a river with laterite waste; there are fears that
the gold prospectors, who have recently rushed to the north of the island,
will poison fresh water with the mercury they use to separate their gold
from sand; and there are increasing signs that deforestation is causing the
erosion of land, silting of rivers, and fresh-water shortages which have
plagued other islands in the Philippines.
A moratorium on commercial logging in Palawan was imposed last year, and
more recently the authorities banned the transport of live fish which had
been exported from the island to aquariums and to Chinese restaurants.
Enforcement of environmental regulations, however, is hard - 'it's very
difficult,' says Mr Felipe Ortiz, the chief of forest management at the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) in Puerto Princesa.
'There are many people in the city - and it's still a developing city.
There's really a need for lumber.'
Furthermore, big businessmen backed by private armies are still keen to
export logs in defiance of the official ban. Court cases filed against those
who violate timber laws are sometimes mysteriously dismissed, local
officials say.
But the election of a new mayor and a more enlightened local government for
the capital Puerto Princesa in May last year has given a boost to Palawan's
environmental campaigners.
'Before, they (the old officials) made lots of speeches about conservation,
but meanwhile their people were out cutting trees,' says Mr Ortiz.
In 1991, 14 members of Haribon Palawan, the island's main environmental
group, were charged with subversion and harassment, although the charges
were eventually dropped. Now, Haribon workers carry walkie-talkies provided
by the local authorities so the two sides can work as a team.
The resounding defeat of Mr Ramon Mitra, the former speaker of the
Philippine House of Representatives, in last year's presidential election,
is also a bonus for the environmentalists, since he was regarded as the
political patron of Mr Jose Alvarez, a businessman from outside the island
who has taken a leading role in the logging industry in Palawan.
Palawan's new mood of co-operation between the local authorities,
environmentalists and inhabitants was underlined at a recent ceremony in the
district of Tagabinet attended by Haribon representatives and local
officials.
Twenty-two members of the Batak and Tagbanua tribes were awarded
'stewardship certificates', giving them the right (under a national plan to
control upland cultivation) to occupy and farm their land near the St Paul's
national park. Previously they were regarded as illegal settlers. In
exchange they must undertake not to expand their clearing by cutting down
forest trees. Mr Mil Reynoso, the vice-mayor of Puerto Princesa, said too
much deforestation would turn the country into a desert like Iraq - 'it
affects the personality of the people there,' he said. 'They are so hard.'
It is by no means certain that the farmers fully understand their
obligations under the scheme - one drunken smallholder immediately asked
whether it was all right if he chopped down a protected species of tree
because it was good for building houses - but at least a start has been made
in winning the support of the inhabitants of Palawan for efforts to preserve
the island's resources.
Mr Joselito Alisuag, the activist lawyer who heads Haribon Palawan, is
relieved that he finally has a few allies in the city hall. 'We used to
fight everyone,' he says as he fingers his walkie-talkie. 'Now we've got
friends.'
