FT  04 JUN 93 / Rebels with an uneasy cause: A complex legacy of bitterness
and hope after the events of Tiananmen square still divides Chinese
dissidents and their government
Liu Xiaobo, accused by the Chinese authorities of being one of the four
'black hands' behind the bloodstained pro-democracy protests of 1989, is in
a reflective mood. 'The lesson for the Communist party,' he says over dinner
at Beijing's dowdy Friendship Hotel, 'is that it now knows that it can't
rely on shooting people to retain its political authority. On the other
hand, June 4 taught intellectuals like us that radical moves are not the
answer - change must come gradually.'
Four years ago this week, after a government crackdown on student protests
ended in massacre in and around Beijing's vast central Tiananmen square,
both sides appear to be groping in these calmer moments for a way to live
with a complex legacy. Time has hardly lessened the bitterness felt by many
Chinese over those events and, perhaps more importantly, it has not banished
a desire for a historical accounting.
Liu, who was jailed, but not charged, for what were described as
counter-revolutionary activities and defaming the state - he wrote pamphlets
during the disturbances - is not one of those burdened by bitterness.
Rather, he feels an almost overwhelming sadness.
'I could never have imagined they would shoot students,' he muses. 'It meant
that Deng Xiaoping jeopardised his own policies with his own hands, and also
lost the people's trust. The students, however, carried on the confrontation
too long. Both sides made too much of a sacrifice.
'It is time now,' Liu says, espousing a view that will not endear him to
some of his fellow dissidents, 'for the top leaders of the Communist party
and the people to make peace - to end the confrontation and make
improvements. Our slogan issued on June 2 1989 still serves the situation.
'We don't have enemies. We are all responsible for China's poverty and
backwardness.' '
Inevitably, China's accelerated economic liberalisation of the past year or
so has been accompanied by a political loosening, including an easing of
restriction on internal travel, and job mobility. The recent release of
prominent dissidents before their prison terms expired, and time itself,
have encouraged more open discussion among intellectuals of the lessons of
Tiananmen and perhaps surprisingly an appreciation of some of the gains.
None of this debate has appeared in the government-controlled media, in
which the Tiananmen massacre is rarely mentioned and then only in the tight
context of stern official judgment. The Communist party (which wrote the
history of Tiananmen within days of the massacre in a booklet entitled
Report on Checking the Turmoil and Quelling the Counter-Revolution
Rebellion) is not about to allow its version of events to be challenged. It
understands the stakes are high in terms of historical judgment, not only
for the individuals who ordered the crackdown but also for itself.
Liu, a bespectacled, scholarly 38-year-old who holds a doctorate in
philosophy and ethics from Beijing Normal University - one of China's most
prestigious universities - is both a casualty and a beneficiary of the
Tiananmen episode.
The events of 1989 projected him from being a moderately well-known
avant-garde writer on the ills of society to a controversial national
figure. But he has also become a 'non-person' as far as the state is
concerned. He was sacked from his job as a university teacher and, perhaps
more painful for someone who believes he has something to contribute to
China's intellectual discourse, he is barred from publishing his views in a
country where the party ultimately controls of all aspects of the media.
In spite of these restrictions, Liu hopes it will not be long before he is
allowed to publish again. In the meantime he is spending his time reading
and writing, and reflecting on the events of 1989. These are the subject of
his book, The Monologue of a Survivor of the Last Days, published in Taiwan
recently.
As with other intellectuals deeply involved in the June 4 movement, Liu, who
spent 18 months in jail, exhibits contradictory impulses towards Deng
Xiaoping, whom many Chinese believe was ultimately responsible for giving
the order to use force to put down the demonstrations. On one hand, Liu
believes that 'whoever ordered the soldiers to shoot should be punished
according to the law'.
On the other hand, he praises Deng's achievements as more considerable than
those of Mao Zedong himself, and describes the changes wrought in China in
the past few years as unimaginable.
'We must acknowledge that it was Deng Xiaoping who started the whole process
of liberalisation under which China is gradually being merged into the
mainstream of world culture,' he says.
Bao Zunxin, another of the four so-called 'black hands' - the prominent
intellectuals who were accused by the government of masterminding the
protest movement - would probably agree with Liu's assessment. But he
attributes the economic liberalisation in China in the past year or so
firmly and directly to the events of 1989.
Speaking in a small, book-lined study in his Beijing apartment, Bao, who
served more than 40 months in jail for his role in helping to inspire and
organise the protests, says that, while the world seemed to stop in 1989,
actually the shock of those events galvanised the leadership into action,
preparing the ground for the accelerated economic opening of 1992-93.
He believes that Deng's tour of southern China early last year, in which he
urged speedier economic reform, can be traced to Tiananmen. Likewise, he
believes, the Communist party's official embrace of a 'market economy' at
its 14th Congress last year was driven by the events of 1989.
'People did not make a sacrifice in vain. The movement was not a failure; it
was not doomed,' says Bao, who is in the same 'non-person' category as Liu,
sacked from his job as an editor of a highbrow literary magazine and banned
from airing his views publicly in China.
Like other prominent intellectuals, Bao is extremely forthright with his
views except on two issues. Asked how history might judge Deng Xiaoping, he
replies: 'I don't want to talk about that.' Asked whether he believes the
Communist party would be in control in the year 2000, he responds: 'Can you
ask me something else?'
But Bao adds that China will experience a 'big change' politically before
the end of the century. Among the more important legacies of the Tiananmen
episode has been the stimulus given to debate among intellectuals about the
fairly alien concept of human rights in Chinese political tradition.
Cui Wenhua, a philosophy teacher and author who wrote daringly on the
subject in his book Altar of Rights, published in China in 1988, believes
that economic freedoms will ultimately lead to renewed demands for greater
political freedom and an appreciation of individual rights.
A 'non-person' himself - he was suspended from his job as a teacher at
Beijing's Broadcasting Institute after the Tiananmen episode - Cui says a
loosening of the government's grip on people's lives in the economic sphere
was the 'first and most fundamental step' towards greater freedom. 'Sooner
or later the Chinese people will have to realise they have a say in Chinese
politics instead of taking orders from one emperor,' he declares.
These views may prove to be naive - the product of a unique moment in
China's political evolution - but there is no question that debate is
stirring on a whole range of issues. Among the more controversial is the
future and nature of the Communist party, which is likely to find itself
under increasing pressure, assuming that economic liberalisation is
accompanied by strengthening demands for political change.
'If the party has enough wisdom, it will change its Marxist character to be
more of a social democratic party,' observes Liu. 'The only way for the
Communist party to save itself is gradually to embrace reform and
democratisation. The only thing that can save the party is the party
itself.'
