FT  17 FEB 93 / Christopher plays down peace hopes: Mideast visit starts
tomorrow
US SECRETARY of state, Mr Warren Christopher, yesterday sought to damp down
expectations of a breakthrough in the Middle East peace process during his
first visit to the region beginning tomorrow.
He said that he did not expect early agreement on a date for resumption of
peace negotiations which have been suspended since the middle of December.
Instead, he wanted to get 'some sense' of how the talks were viewed by
regional leaders in the hope that a date for the ninth round of talks could
be fixed fairly soon after his return to Washington.
Mr Christopher will travel first to Egypt then to Jordan, Syria, Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait and Israel.
Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organisation repeated
yesterday that it would not resume negotiations with Israel until the fate
of nearly 400 Palestinians expelled to southern Lebanon had been
satisfactorily resolved.
'We cannot participate in the peace talks even if the other Arab states are
willing to,' Mr Yassir Abed-Rabbo, the PLO's information director, told
Reuters.
He said Palestinian leaders in the occupied territories would tell Mr
Christopher that they insisted Israel should immediately take back the
Palestinian activists as demanded by UN resolution 799 before they would
rejoin the peace talks.
Israel agreed a compromise formula with the US last week allowing for 100 of
the Palestinians to return immediately to the occupied territories in order
to head off the threat of UN sanctions and to encourage Arab delegations to
draw a line under the episode. However, it is doubtful whether Syria, Jordan
or Lebanon will resume negotiations without the Palestinians.
President Bill Clinton said in a statement yesterday that his decision to
send Mr Christopher to the region was an indication of the priority the
administration was giving to the Middle East. He warned of the dangers that
this 'historic opportunity could all too easily slip away'.
