FT  20 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar loses in ERM respite
EUROPEAN currency markets were surprisingly quiet yesterday morning after
last week's tensions, casting an unwelcome spotlight on the dollar, writes
Stephanie Flanders.
Although few in the market think that the ERM's troubles are at an end,
yesterday saw many traders unwind short positions adopted in the previous
week, as the immediate danger to existing parities seemed to ease.
Both the French franc and the Danish krone firmed somewhat as a result,
while the dollar's reduced attractiveness as a safe haven currency led the
American unit to fall sharply over the course of the day.
Part of the reason for the more relaxed mood in European markets was the
Bundesbank's two-day currency pact, which was interpreted as a sign that
official German rates will continue their slow but steady fall in the near
future. Many traders, whether or not they agree with this view, are at least
waiting to see this week's German monetary growth figures before staking
much more on possible currency realignments.
The French franc gained steadily during the day, closing in London at
FFr3.407 against the D-Mark, up from Friday's FFr3.418. The recovery in the
Danish krone was even more striking, the currency ending around DKr3.8560
per D-Mark, up from Friday's DKr3.8885 and comfortably above its ERM floor
of DKr3.9016.
In spite of the fall-off in speculative pressure, the Danish central bank is
expected to maintain the policy for defending the currency which it adopted
last week.
Yesterday it increased its 18-day liquidity rate to 20 per cent. The Danish
authorities plan to demand a similar 17-day rate this morning.
The dollar weakened considerably, ending in London nearly two pfennigs lower
against the D-Mark and almost 2 cents down on sterling. At the close of
London trading, the US currency stood at DM1.7055, and Dollars 1.4985
against sterling, compared to the previous DM1.7245 and Dollars 1.4790. In
New York the dollar closed at DM1.7086, with sterling at Dollars 1.4988.
Some traders said that the dollar weakening was due to the markets looking
less charitably at America's tentative economic recovery and continued
balance of payments weakness, as demand for a safe haven currency was
considered less necessary. Many will be waiting for Mr Alan Greenspan, the
chairman of the Federal Reserve, to testify before Congress today and on
Thursday about current US economic prospects.
Sterling gained ground against the D-Mark as well as the dollar. The UK
currency finished at DM2.5550, following Friday's close of DM2.5500.
A number of dealers attributed the rise to lowered expectations of speedy UK
interest rate cuts, although they warned that political uncertainties over
the next few weeks may reverse some of the pound's recent gains.
