FT  10 NOV 93 / Civil servants to discuss ending ban at GCHQ
SIR Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary, is to meet civil service union
leaders today to discuss the possibility of ending the ban on union
membership at GCHQ, the government's listening base at Cheltenham.
The discussions, which come nearly 10 years after the membership ban imposed
by Baroness Thatcher, have been called in an attempt to secure an
arrangement that will save the government from censure by the International
Labour Organisation.
The ILO has threatened to single out Britain as the first industrialised
democracy to breach its convention on freedom of association.
In preliminary talks earlier this year the unions revived a proposal -
rejected by Lady Thatcher in 1984 - of representation at GCHQ in return for
a no disruption agreement.
'We would still want to talk around that,' said Mr Barry Reamsbottom,
general secretary of the Civil and Public Services Association, one of the
five civil service unions involved in the talks.
A no-disruption compromise was worked out at the time of the original ban in
1984 between Sir Robert Armstrong, then cabinet secretary, and Mr Bill
McCall but it was dismissed outright by Lady Thatcher.
She believed that industrial action at GCHQ, particularly during the 1981
pay strike, had undermined national security.
The government is understood to be unwilling to give way to the return of
union membership at this stage but would like some agreement surrounding the
staff federation, which does not have official union status.
Mr Clive Brooke, general secretary of the Inland Revenue Staff Federation,
said there were some 'intractable'' problems to be resolved.
He said ministers did not want to be singled out by the ILO. 'They are
embarrassed that it is on the agenda again and because of the possibility of
a public condemnation.'
The Cabinet Office said yesterday: 'The ILO asked us to talk seriously to
the unions and we are talking seriously.'
A march and rally has been planned in Cheltenham on January 29 to mark the
10th anniversary of the ban.
