FT  02 SEP 93 / Fast expansion 'would cause another recession'
RAPID ECONOMIC expansion will fuel inflation and usher in another recession
after only a few good years, Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of
England, warned yesterday.
In an interview with the Securities and Investment Review Mr George
criticised the UK's economic policy-making establishment for making mistakes
from which it should learn.
Commenting on the boom of the late 1980s he said: 'Very simply, the mistake
was that we let the pound get out of hand and lost control of inflation as a
result. That is something we have to avoid in the future.'
The governor said his personal ambition was for the growth rate of output to
be above the growth rate of inflation for three consecutive years.
'You should not settle for anything less than an effective elimination of
inflation. In reality, this is probably captured by the zero to 2 per cent
medium-term objective which the government has set,' he said.
Meanwhile, the Economist Intelligence Unit says in its lates forecasts that
the recovery will not be strong enough to make a big dent in the budget
deficit and tax increases will be necessary over the next few years.
The unit expects recovery to continue in the second half of this year at the
same pace as in the first, but tighter fiscal policy and slow earnings
growth will stop it from gaining further momentum.
At least as much emphasis willgo on higher indirect taxes as on cutting
public expenditure in the Budget, the report warns.
'Set against this and the expected failure of the recovery to gather further
momentum, the chancellor will probably cut interest rates further to assure
continued recovery.'
The unit expects the economy to expand by 1.4 per cent this year and by 2.2
per cent next year. Growth in 1995, 1996 and 1997 will not rise above 2.3
per cent, it forecasts.
United Kingdom, Country Forecast 3rd quarter 1993. The Economist
Intelligence Unit, 40 Duke Street, London W1A 1DW. Pounds 360 for four
quarters.
