FT  15 JUN 93 / Israel and Palestinians far apart
THE GULF between the Israeli government and Palestinian peace negotiators
appeared as wide as ever yesterday on the eve of the resumption of the
Arab-Israeli peace talks in Washington today.
In the run-up to the tenth round of talks both the Palestinians and the
Israelis have played down expectations of a breakthrough on a joint
statement of principles on interim Palestinian self-rule.
The Palestinian delegation, led by Mr Haidar Abdel-Shafi, is said to be
deeply unhappy about the failure of US officials sponsoring the talks to
provide concrete answers to a series of questions defining the extent of
Palestinian autonomy to be granted over the occupied territories during an
interim period.
The Palestinian delegation has been in Washington since last week pressing
the US State Department to clarify its position on questions central to the
peace talks. Among issues presented by the Palestinians are whether the US
views the territories as 'disputed' or 'occupied', how East Jerusalem would
be governed during the interim and how Washington sees the linkage between
an interim solution and a permanent settlement.
The Palestinians said they failed to receive clear answers from the US
administration and yesterday it was unclear whether Mr Abdel-Shafi would
attend this morning's session or merely send a symbolic delegation.
In Jerusalem Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, said that he expected
no breakthrough in Washington but he said he believed that Israel and some
of the Arab states had passed the point of no return in the negotiations.
'We are not ready for gestures. The period of confidence-building measures
is over,' Mr Rabin reportedly told a parliamentary committee yesterday.
Without any progress on the Palestinian track, negotiations between
Jerusalem and its Arab neighbours Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon are unlikely to
make any headway in Washington.
King Hussein of Jordan, who is due to meet President Bill Clinton on Friday,
last week ruled out the possibility of signing any bilateral agreement until
there is progress in Palestinian-Israeli talks.
Palestinian and Arab delegates are pressing the US to take a more
interventionist role to force concessions on the parties and ensure some
progress is made before the tenth round ends in three weeks.
