FT  25 NOV 93 / Spending of secret services open to scrutiny
Next week's Budget will for the first time include details of the spending
incurred by the UK's intelligence and security services, the government
announced yesterday.
This was disclosed with the publication of the intelligence services bill
containing measures to open the secret services to scrutiny by a committee
of six parliamentarians.
Sir Colin McColl, the head of the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), said in
his first appearance at a press conference that he welcomed greater openness
about the service's work in gathering intelligence overseas. It was
important for his staff and for people who helped them to know that the
government remained committed to the service after the cold war.
Sir Colin said, however, that he would prefer not to take a higher public
profile, or have his photograph published in the same way as Mrs Stella
Rimington, head of the Security Service (MI5) which is responsible for
counter-intelligence work inside the UK.
'Secrecy is our absolute stock in trade,' he said. 'It is important to the
people who work for us and risk their lives that we remain a secret service.
'When the Central Intelligence Agency went open in the 1970s it worried a
lot of their people. I want to send our people a signal that we are not
going to open everything up.'
Sir Colin confirmed that, like all previous heads of MI6, he was known as
'C' after Captain Sir Mansfield Cumming, the first head of the service. He
admitted to continuing the tradition of writing his memos in green ink.
Also making his first public appearance was Sir John Adye, head of the
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the electronic eavesdropping
organisation based at Cheltenham.
Sir John said that the new legislation would provide public assurance of
GCHQ's commitment to work within the law, without risking the secrecy it
needed for success.
Public expenditure plans for the next three years will include estimates of
the aggregate budget for MI5, MI6 and GCHQ. Separate figures will not be
published for each service in case this alerts opponents to shifts in
emphasis.
For the first time, the services' budget will be open to scrutiny by Sir
John Bourn, the head of the National Audit Office.
The new Intelligence and Security Committee will be appointed by the prime
minister from among MPs and peers, following consultation with the leader of
the opposition. It will examine the expenditure, administration and policy
of the services, but not operational matters.
The committee will present an annual report to the prime minister which will
be laid before parliament.
All three services will be subject to similar requirements for obtaining
warrants to enter or interfere with property or intercept communications.
A new commissioner will review warrants and authorisations and report
annually to parliament. A tribunal will be set up to investigate complaints
against MI6 and GCHQ. The Security Service Tribunal already performs a
similar function for MI5.
