FT  22 MAY 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: The cost of a clean break - Divorce
can be financially traumatic
ONCE DIVORCE proceedings start, most women understandably feel they want to
be independent from their former partner as soon as possible. In the highly
charged emotional climate which surrounds most divorces, they may be tempted
to agree a less than perfect financial settlement to speed up the process.
When a couple is relatively well-off, a so-called 'clean break' settlement
may seem the most attractive arrangement. This involves a one-off capital
payment with no maintenance. The links are severed, the recipient - usually
the wife - has a tidy sum over which she or he has total control, and both
parties can rebuild their lives.
That is the theory, but it does not always work in practice. For the wife,
the danger with a clean break settlement is that there is no coming back for
more. If she falls ill she may find there is not enough income to cover long
term nursing care.
A clean break may be better for a younger woman, but it may seem unfair on
elderly wives if their husbands keep the lion's share of the family assets.
And if things go wrong, there is little chance of help from an ex-husband -
as Sarah Hardy discovered.
When she married, her husband encouraged her with his financial backing to
become an underwriter on a number of Lloyd's syndicates which were then
profitable. She divorced in 1989. One of the syndicates is now facing heavy
and as yet unquantifiable losses. Although Sarah resigned from Lloyd's in
1987 she faces possible financial ruin as a result of her share of the
syndicate's losses. She bitterly regrets not arranging a token amount of
maintenance as this would have enabled her to go back to her former husband
for help with her living expenses.
Like many women, once her marriage broke up she wanted to be financially
independent. The lump sum enabled her to buy a flat and still have some
money to invest. She also felt that a one-off capital sum offered her
greater certainty than a future depending on maintenance payments. Had she
had children, their education and needs would have been met by separate
maintenance orders in their favour.
If she had agreed a conventional 'capital plus maintenance' settlement,
rather than a clean break, she could in certain circumstances have gone back
to the court to vary the level of maintenance (it can go down as well as
up). However, maintenance levels can only be varied to cover income needs
and not capital, so she would have been unable to claim against her former
husband to cover her Lloyd's losses.
In Sarah's case, however, such a settlement would have been unlikely as her
husband was exceptionally wealthy. When a couple is reasonably well-off,
solicitors and the courts will usually propose a clean break arrangement.
Indeed, courts are specifically directed to try to do so. The courts decide
how much the wife should get and how that figure should be determined,
setting a precedent for solicitors.
Over the last 15 years, in assessing the appropriate sum the courts'
approach has been very much based on the wife's strict income and capital
needs - what she will need to re-house herself and so on. While looking at
the amount required to compensate her for the loss of maintenance to meet
her income needs, the courts will also look at her life expectancy. The
shorter this is, the lower the sum required. The sum is assessed on the same
basis as an annuity.
This may be better for a wife in her 30s who may well remarry, but for the
elderly wife of a wealthy man the situation is less rosy. Until 15 or 20
years ago, when settlements were more likely to have been based on a share
of the couple's assets, a wife of many years could reasonably expect to
receive a settlement equal to at least one third, sometimes half, of the
couple's assets.
But nowadays, given the courts' increasing tendency to make orders on the
basis of reasonable needs, she could end up with considerably less. Her
husband may be left with a far higher proportion of the assets although his
needs may be equal. Only where an exceptional contribution has been made by
a wife towards a family's wealth will she get more than she ostensibly
needs.
As matrimonial lawyer Siobhan Readhead, a partner with the solicitors
Radcliffes &amp; Co, argues: 'The net result of all this appears to be that
increasingly little value is placed on the contribution made by a wife in
terms of bringing up children, home making, caring for the family and
supporting a financially successful husband. Furthermore, the older and
longer serving the wife, the less she needs to maintain herself until death
and therefore the smaller the proportion of the assets she may be awarded.'
Obviously, settlements depend on individual arrangements and circumstances.
There is no golden rule as to how much money a couple need to have to
justify a clean break; much more depends on whether the wife needs to be
re-housed and the kind of income and lifestyle to which she is used. In a
number of cases, the ultimate decision on the kind of settlement will rest
with the courts.
But a clean break settlement is safer and surer than maintenance payments
and usually better for women with careers. 'If it is possible to get a
decent amount of capital, there may be some justification for a clean
break,' says Fiona Price, managing director of independent financial
advisers Fiona Price and Partners, which specialises in advising women.
Should you find yourself heading towards divorce, what should you do? It is
worth engaging a good specialist matrimonial lawyer who can advise you how
to protect your interests the moment you realise your marriage is in serious
trouble. You will also need a good financial adviser.
During divorce negotiations, one of the first things a professional adviser
will ask you to do is to make a list of your and your husband's income and
assets. 'The biggest problem,' says Price, 'is that many women have no
financial experience and few financial arrangements in their own name. They
have not filled in a tax return so it is very difficult to get the
information they need. It is often down to how clever the solicitor is in
finding out about the husband's assets. It may even involve the wife
rummaging through drawers when the husband isn't there.'
You will also be asked to work out exactly what you spend. Fiona Price finds
that women often underestimate this. Make sure you include the odd coffee
while shopping, the papers, the hairdresser's tip and holidays as well as
your community charge, mortgage and gas bills. It can be dangerous to be too
parsimonious over this period because your husband may be able to argue that
you can afford to live like this all the time.
If you want to remain in the family home, one option as part of a clean
break settlement is to buy out your husband by paying him a lump sum for his
share. If you have to borrow the money or raise an extra mortgage, you will
be able to obtain tax relief on the mortgage. Your husband, too, will be
eligible for tax relief on a mortgage for a new home. If the family home is
to be sold and the housing market is volatile or rising, it may be
worthwhile to agree on a percentage of the sale proceeds rather than a
specific sum of cash.
While negotiations are proceeding you will have to agree on a temporary
financial arrangement until your settlement arrives. In most cases, existing
arrangements for household bills and school fees continue. But it may be
pointless venting your feelings by going on a credit card spending spree as
a thrifty husband may have already cancelled his payment arrangements.
If you are awarded a lump sum and are going to depend on this money for the
rest of your life, you need to invest shrewdly. You want to get the highest
possible income in the most tax efficient way, without exposing yourself to
risks and leaving plenty of flexibility.
Remember that you will be taxed on the income from the settlement, whereas
maintenance is not chargeable to tax. However, if you do not use your
personal allowance, the first Pounds 3,445 would be tax free.
But perhaps the most important advice for all women, however unlikely
divorce might seem, is to consider how you could remain independent if
things do go wrong.
Even if you give up your career and have no independent income, it is
important to know what financial provisions are being made for the future.
It is also a good idea to keep your own savings or inheritance legacy in a
separate account and to ensure that as many of the family assets as possible
are held in joint names. And remember, next time you contemplate leaving,
divorce can seriously damage your standard of living if you are married to a
rich man. The older you are, and the richer he is, the smaller proportion of
his assets you are likely to get.
