FT  16 SEP 93 / Nervous City ponders rogue RPI figure: Emma Tucker reports
that a lack of inflationary pressure means the good times are not quite over
THE CITY of London broke into a nervous sweat yesterday morning when the
retail price inflation figures were released.
Did the alarming jump in the headline rate of inflation from 1.4 per cent to
1.7 per cent mean that the good news on prices was over?
Possibly, but judging by reports from industry, agriculture and retailing
yesterday's was a rogue figure. Inflationary pressure points in the economy
remain hard to detect. Short of an external shock, the only threat to the
government's 1 to 4 per cent target range for underlying inflation in the
near-term appears to come from the government itself - in the form of
administered prices such as rail fares and tax increases.
The message from manufacturing industry is that inflationary pressures are
almost totally absent. Companies are generally operating well below capacity
and productivity increases continue to outstrip wage rises.
There are expectations, however, that some manufacturers may start to look
for higher profits via price rises as demand in the marketplace strengthens.
Prices of many manufactured goods have been depressed in order to maintain
turnover but some manufacturers might test their markets to see if price
rises stick.
The outlook for wages is for only hesitant increases. Although
private-sector pay awards appear to have bottomed out at a level
considerably higher than the current inflation rate, there is not yet much
evidence that skills shortages are putting upwards pressure on salaries.
The Confederation of British Industry says its members have not run up
against skills shortages and in its last quarterly survey, the British
Chambers of Commerce reported that the percentage of firms experiencing
recruitment difficulties remained unchanged at 32 per cent for manufacturers
and 28 per cent for service sector companies.
Pressure from food and commodities is also muted. Very little of a 17.4 per
cent increase in the price of imported food raw materials in the year to
August has been passed on to consumers. Retail food prices over the same
period rose only 3.1 per cent and pent-up inflationary pressures do not
appear to be great, according to industry representatives and analysts.
Some products bought on world markets have seen sharp rises recently. Prices
for nuts and vegetable oils have shot up, largely because of the severe
flooding and drought in parts of the US.
By contrast, the sharp price rises for many EC raw materials which followed
sterling's devaluation last September have been partly reversed in recent
months. This is mainly because sterling has clawed back ground against the
Ecu, and because under CAP reforms, EC intervention and support prices were
cut in July for wheat and butter.
For food retailers increasing competition - due largely to the rapid spread
of cut-price discount stores - means supermarkets will make every effort to
absorb any increase in wholesale prices. So even if seasonal factors that
have kept food prices down start to change, consumers may not find
themselves paying much more.
In non-food retailing too, price competition is increasing and stores are
nailing prices down.
Perhaps the biggest threat to inflation comes from the government itself.
Measures announced in the last Budget will add an extra percentage point to
underlying inflation, currently at 3.1 per cent, when they are introduced
next year.
The Central Statistical Office has calculated that a decision to restrict
tax relief on mortgage interest to 20 per cent from April will add 0.25
percentage points to the all-items index, while VAT on domestic fuel will
add about 0.8 percentage points over two years.
Petrol prices are also set to rise by 3 per cent above the rate of
inflation. This means an extra 6 pence per gallon, which would add 0.1
percentage points to the RPI.
Administered prices, are another potential source of inflation. The
possibility of rail fare increases in the New Year of up to 15 per cent
ahead of British Rail privatisation have been touted.
The only utility where significant price rises are expected is water. The
requirement to meet EC quality standards means that the formula for
controlling price rises agreed by the official regulator allows for
increases to pay for the necessary investment.
Additional reporting by Michael Cassell, Alison Maitland, Lisa Wood and Neil
Buckley.
