FT  20 NOV 93 / Capital Spending (15): Not so obscure objects of desire -
Exclusive Clubs
There are some products which command a loyalty, a reverence which is out of
all proportion to their usefulness. These are the ones that somewhere along
the line have achieved cult status, that are recognised from Kuala Lumpur to
Fifth Avenue, from San Francisco to Tokyo. Each has something to offer which
is above and beyond any rational assessment of their worth.
A CLUBBABLE man regards his tie as a badge of recognition and exclusiveness
but there is one club that remains exclusive even though anyone can join.
This is the fraternity of Hermes tie wearers. The phrase 'it takes one to
know one' might have been invented for the owner of this sumptuous and
ultimately frivolous strip of silk. In spite of the company's huge
repertoire of designs and the plethora of similar ties from lesser
competitors, the Hermes wearer always says he can instantly tell another
from the same stable.
What he really means is that he is able to spot another individual who can
justify spending a minimum of Pounds 59 on a piece of neckwear. But he will
wax lyrical about the wittiness of the designs, the depth of colour and
quality of silk, which sets the Hermes tie above its peers.
Most ties have about four colours; the Hermes tie contains up to eight, and
far more on scarf-print designs which correspondingly cost Pounds 78. Each
shade must be printed on a separate screen. Finishing is done by hand,
stitched with one unbroken thread of special quality silk, to allow maximum
strength and flexibility for the man who likes to pull his knot tight.
Turning and pressing is a skilled job so the tie lies perfectly flat; a
twist fails quality control.
Ask Hermes owners what it is that makes their ties so special and the
surprising answer is the confidence they give. Andrew Wiles, press and
public relations director at Harrods, could choose from 60 other brands in
the store but picks Hermes. 'I bought my first one - a scarf-print - in the
1980s because it was so different from anything else then available. There
had been nothing like it since kipper ties but this was so much more
tasteful.'
