FT  01 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Spotlight on grey market rules - Stock
Exchange halts share deals in demerged parts of ICI
THE STOCK Exchange has asked Salomon Brothers International, the investment
bank, to stop making a 'grey market' in the shares of the demerged parts of
Imperial Chemical Industries.
The exchange said it was reviewing its guidelines on grey market dealing -
dealing in securities on a 'when-issued' basis before official dealings
start.
This could lead to a framework of rules for a Stock Exchange sanctioned grey
market.
At present Stock Exchange rules forbid grey market trading although the
exchange does give permission for such trading to take place on a
case-by-case basis. Grey market dealings were allowed, for instance, in
Racal and SmithKline Beecham.
The division of Salomon which was making the market is not a Stock Exchange
member firm, so was not subject to the rules, but agreed to the request.
The Stock Exchange considered that since not all market participants were
able to trade in the grey market and there was not full information about
the issue which has yet to be priced, trading was not to the benefit of all
investors.
The grey market trading could have affected ICI's ability to price the
Pounds 1.3bn Zeneca rights issue which will coincide with the demerger.
Salomon ceased trading shares in Zeneca and the ex-demerger ICI yesterday at
1 pm, but will re-open trading after the price of Zeneca's rights issue is
announced on May 12.
The final grey market price for Zeneca was 690p and for ICI ex the demerger
590p. All trades done since Salomon opened the market on Tuesday this week
will be honoured.
Shares in Zeneca and the remaining ICI are due to start official trading on
June 1.
Many stock exchanges have an established grey market in shares, and in
London some Eurobonds and gilt-edged stocks are dealt in before issue. The
exchange will talk to people in the market to judge whether a set of
guidelines and a code of practice can be established.
Salomon said it welcomed the Stock Exchange's review 'given the increased
level of investor interest in such trading'.
The High Court ruled yesterday that the Zeneca shares to be issued to ICI
shareholders in the demerger will count as capital in the hands of trustees,
not as income. Had the shares been classed as income it would have caused
problems for trusts where income is regarded as the property of the 'life
tenant' and capital belongs to the 'remaindermen' who benefit after the life
tenant's interest ceases.
