FT  01 NOV 93 / Saturday night dance that ended in terror
IT WAS an all too familiar sight. Tearful women and children laying flowers
at the scene of yet another terrorist atrocity in Ulster.
Last weekend it was the Shankill Road, on Tuesday a cleansing depot in west
Belfast, and late on Saturday night the tightly-knit community of Greysteel
in Co Londonderry was plunged into mourning.
It was business as usual on Saturday night at the Rising Sun bar and
restaurant complex at the northern end of the village. The streets were
bedecked with the red and white bunting of the county's Gaelic football
team, which recently won the All-Ireland championship. That had contributed
to a mood of optimism in Derry in recent months. The county had been
relatively trouble-free in comparison with the rest of the province.
Intensive lobbying from US politicians had brought money and jobs.
Customers were packed into the lounge of the Rising Sun waiting for the band
to start shortly after 10pm when the killers struck. Two gunmen from the
outlawed loyalist paramilitary organisation, the Ulster Freedom Fighters,
fired indiscriminately on the customers. Seconds later, seven people, three
Protestants and four Roman Catholics, were dead and several others seriously
injured.
One of those killed, 54-year-old former soldier John Burns, had no qualms
about socialising with his Catholic former neighbours. Although he left the
village several years ago, he always returned for the Saturday night dance
with his wife. She is fighting for her life in hospital.
As a former member of the Ulster Defence Regiment, he would have been
considered a target by the IRA. But Mr Burns would never have dreamt his
co-religionists would be the men to shoot him dead.
There was no perceptible mood of revenge in the town, home to a nationalism
moderated in part by its past. It was built in the second world war when
many residents worked for the Ministry of Defence at the nearby Eglinton
airfield.
The 2,000-strong community is a source of support for Mr John Hume's Social
Democratic and Labour party. Sinn Fein candidates have lost their deposits
in local elections.
Mr Brian McCaul, a resident for 20 years, said the community would not be
torn asunder by the gunmen: 'People here go to each other's weddings and
funerals. There would not be any anti-British sentiment around here.'
In yesterday's chilling wind, local resident Mrs Merie Irvine brought her
two children to the scene. She said: 'I just feel that it is important to
educate our children so that they know what is going on. I can't see any
point in shielding them from what is happening where they live.'
