FT  18 AUG 93 / Yen eases against dollar
THE YEN fell against the dollar in Tokyo yesterday for the first time in
more than a week after the new seven-party government signalled that it
intended to formulate measures to deal with its advance.
An official said the strength of the yen - which traded within a fraction of
Y100 to the dollar yesterday and is devastating exporters - would be high on
the agenda when key cabinet ministers meet tomorrow to assess prospects for
the country's emergence from economic slowdown.
Before the meeting, called last week, the coalition indicated only that
short-, medium- and long-term measures could all be deployed to check the
rise in the yen. The first of these would need to be implemented by autumn.
The Bank of Japan has been widely expected to cut its official discount rate
next month by half a point to an historic low of 2 per cent. Business is
also calling for an early deregulation of utility rates and a fiscal
stimulus to the domestic economy.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime minister, who will return from holiday for the
meeting, said from a mountain resort north-west of Tokyo that it must be
ensured that calm returns to the currency market.
Mr Hosokawa's comments came as the yen traded in Tokyo at a morning high of
Y100.40, but the rate to the US unit closed at Y101.55, down Y0.30 on the
day as dealers moved to cover short positions.
The government has avoided indicating whether it has in prospect a package
of public works spending and tax cuts of the order of the Y13,200bn (Pounds
88bn) unveiled by the previous Liberal Democratic party administration in
April or the Y10,700bn meted out last August.
At the resort, Karuizawa, Mr Hosokawa yesterday met Mr Keiichi Miyazawa, his
LDP predecessor, to disucss Japan-US trade friction and other issues.
In Washington overnight Mr Lawrence Summers, US treasury undersecretary,
urged Japan to take measures of this nature to help reduce its trade
surplus.
An increase in net payments to the private sector by the government was the
prime reason given by Bank of Japan officials yesterday for a 1.7 per cent
rise in M2 money supply in July.
The year-on-year growth came for the fourth month in a row, and was sharper
than a 1.4 per cent increase in June.
The construction ministry said June public works starts were up 1.5 per cent
from 1992 but for the private sector were down 25.6 per cent.
At tomorrow's meeting ministers may disavow suggestions being made by
officials in mid-year that the economy had touched bottom.
