FT  10 FEB 93 / Japanese employers urged not to cut jobs
THE Japanese government yesterday underlined the seriousness of the economic
downturn by taking the unusual step of formally asking companies not to shed
labour.
The move shows how worried the authorities have become that there could be a
sharp rise in unemployment as economic growth slows.
The labour ministry's call is the latest in a series of government moves to
modify business responses to the downturn.
Earlier this week, banks were formally asked not to restrict lending to
smaller companies, and financial institutions have been asked not to sell
shares to help to prevent further falls on the Tokyo stock market.
The next few months will test whether the bureaucracy still possesses the
authority it used to have over the private sector to enforce such guidance.
Mr Kunihiko Saito, chief of the labour ministry's employment security
bureau, asked a meeting of business leaders to refrain from cancelling plans
to employ new graduates and retire older workers.
Mr Saito told the group: 'Labour adjustment by such means will create great
worries over employment in the whole of society. We want you to do your
utmost to keep workers employed.' He warned that job losses would undermine
society's trust in companies.
The unemployment rate, which was 2.2 per cent for most of last year, rose to
2.4 per cent in December.
A growing number of comp anies have announced recruitment freezes and plans
to lay off older workers to cut costs and boost profitability. Within the
last week alone Eastman Kodak, the film company, Omron, the electronic goods
maker and Minolta, the camera manufacturer have announced plans to trim
about 4,000 jobs over the next few years.
The weakened state of the economy was spelt out by a clutch of official
statistics.
Bank lending in January grew by just 2.0 per cent, the same rate as the
previous two months. The low growth in bank lending means the Japanese money
supply is likely to continue to contract.
Japan's machine tool orders last year fell by 37.8 per cent on the previous
year to Y710bn (Pounds 3,776m) largely because of a slump in private sector
capital investment. Private sector machinery orders, which have been
fluctuating wildly in recent months, fell by 6.2 per cent in December,
according to figures published by the Economic Planning Agency.
EPA officials said they were extremely cautious about the outlook for
machinery orders.
Meanwhile the fall in Tokyo land prices is accelerating, according to a
National Land Agency survey. In the final three months of last year land
prices in central and north-eastern Tokyo fell at 25 per cent a year, after
falling by 20 per cent in the previous quarter.
The land price fall is one factor behind a marked pick-up in sales of
cheaper condominiums in Tokyo and Osaka, which suggests that some parts of
the property market are beginning to recover strongly. The Real Estate
Economy Institute, a private sector research group, said the number of
condominiums put on sale in the Tokyo area last month rose by 24 per cent to
1,969 compared with the same month last year.
About 77 per cent of the condominiums were contracted for sale, a marked
increase on last year. But this was mainly because the average condominium
price had fallen by 25 per cent to Y44m.
