FT  18 MAY 93 / International Company News: Firm Chinese foothold for
Pacific Dunlop / A look at an Australian conglomerate poised to increase its
investment in a boom region
PACIFIC Dunlop, the Australian conglomerate, is about to make a substantial
leap forward in its China business with the registration of a Shanghai-based
holding company to be known as Pacific Dunlop Holdings (China).
This would be only the third instance of a foreign company securing Chinese
approval to set up such a vehicle to oversee business in China which, in
Pacific Dunlop's case, is growing by leaps and bounds.
Mr Howard McDonald, head of Pacific Dunlop corporate affairs, said his
company planned to increase its investment in Asia to about ADollars 1bn
(USDollars 702m) by the end of the century from the present ADollars 500m.
Much of this additional investment will go to China where the company's
current stake is ADollars 120m.
'Our primary objective is to be a participant in China's growth as well as
establishing efficient sourcing for the Australian market for such items as
clothing and footwear,' said Mr McDonald.
China's powerful Ministry of Foreign Trade has approved the setting up of
the Pacific Dunlop holding company. Final approval, which rests with the
local Shanghai municipality, is expected to be a formality.
Pacific Dunlop's investments in China comprise nine factories. These include
two cable factories, a sock factory in Beijing, underwear-manufacturing
ventures in Guangdong province and in Shenzen, adjacent to Hong Kong, and a
shoe factory in Shanghai.
Mr McDonald said that at present rates of growth, China would in the next 10
years be supplying one-quarter of the world's textile requirements.
China-made underwear, for example, accounted for 45 per cent of the
Australian market, and Pacific Dunlop, through its Bonds and Holeproof
brands, had the lion's share.
Pacific Dunlop is also examining ways in which to become more involved in
food processing in China through its Pacific Brands Food Group. Among
options being considered are setting up manufacturing ventures in China and
increasing exports from Australia as Chinese consumer demand grows for such
items as dairy products and French fries.
The company's investment strategy in China dictates that it retain a
controlling 51 per cent interest in joint ventures. But, in fact, average
shareholding of its China-based enterprises ranges between 60 and 65 per
cent.
Pacific Dunlop's main requirement of its China partners is not a financial
contribution so much as 'on ground' support in selecting staff, securing
land for factory construction and, perhaps most important, procuring orders.
In the booming Shenzen economic development zone, Shenzen Olex Cables, a
Pacific Dunlop subsidiary, is a good example of this strategy. Olex's
partners are the China National Posts and Telecommunications Appliances
Corporation and the Shenzen Science and Industry Park Corporation, both of
which have 10 per cent of the local joint venture.
After a year of operation - production began in early 1992 - the factory is
producing near capacity at about 2,500km/day of telecommunications cable,
and is having no trouble disposing of the product in the Chinese market
where demand is almost insatiable. Annual requirements are estimated at
about 10m km of cable which takes traffic in both directions against local
production of 7m km.
But the requirement that Olex China, a ADollars 30m venture, import most of
its copper wire coupled with the continuing sharp depreciation of China's
currency, the yuan, is squeezing profits in a highly competitive market.
South Korea and Taiwan are big suppliers at low prices.
Other challenges facing managers at the Shenzen plant include intermittent
power blackouts - China's overburdened infrastructure has difficulties
coping with the economic boom - and a workforce that needs close supervision
in the absence of effective local Chinese middle-level management at this
early stage.
Olex managers also have to 'fly by the seat of their pants' in scheduling
production because Chinese consumers like to avoid longer-term contracts,
and demand for different types of cable tends to vary almost by the week.
'This is a very difficult way to operate a business,' observed an expatriate
manager.
But in spite of teething problems, Pacific Dunlop clearly regards the cable
business as a lucrative growth sector. Apart from its Shenzen and Tianjin
plants, it is planning a third. Olex China also recently opened a
representative office in Beijing.
Mr McDonald noted that Pacific Dunlop's China trading relationship stretched
back over a quarter of a century; and that both Mr John Gough, its chairman,
and Mr Philip Brass, its managing director, have been personally involved in
the China trade for much of that time. Mr Brass, in fact, is a member of the
mayor of Shanghai's business advisory committee.
