FT  17 NOV 93 / Schools achieve sharp rise in GCSE passes
LEAGUE TABLES of school performance in England, published today by the
Department of Education, show a sharp rise in exam successes, compared with
last year when results were first published.
In 1992, 38.1 per cent of the 15- to 16-year-olds in England gained five
GCSE passes at grades A to C, the equivalent of the old O-level pass. This
year, the figure has risen by 3 percentage points to 41.1 per cent.
Analysis by the FT using government statistics on extra-educational needs
reveals a strong link between inner city deprivation and underperformance.
Using Department of the Environment figures which rank authorities according
to the proportion of their children whose parents are benefit claimants, and
other related statistics, the Isles of Scilly, top authority for GCSE
performance, is also, according to the table, the least deprived in the
country.
The London boroughs of Hackney, Newham, Lambeth, Islington, Tower Hamlets
and Southwark are in the top 10 both for underperformance at GCSE and for
deprivation. Only one of the authorities in the bottom 10 for GCSE results
last year managed to escape it this year.
Outperformance by girls' schools was marked. In mixed schools, 35 per cent
of pupils gained five or more GCSEs at grades A to C. That target was
attained in single-sex schools, a far higher proportion of which are
selective, by 48 per cent of boys and 55 per cent of girls. Independent
schools fared well, with 142 in the top 200 as judged by GCSE performance.
The greatest controversy surrounded truancy figures, published for the first
time, which appeared to show that nationally 12 per cent of pupils played
truant at some point last year.
The figures also appeared to correlate closely with deprivation, with
schools in Manchester and inner London the worst affected. However,
Manchester fiercely disputed the 'spurious' figures.
It claimed that the Education Department statistics were based on Manchester
having 13,333 pupils instead of 24,450. This prompted renewed attacks from
teachers' unions, while Mrs Ann Taylor, Labour's education spokesman, said
the figures should have been released with a government health warning.
Details, Pages 12 and 13
