FT  19 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Government reaffirms need for
stable exchange rate
THE GOVERNMENT said yesterday that the best defence for sterling against
so-called currency speculators was to seek a stable exchange rate through
low inflation and low interest rates.
During discussions in the committee stage of the finance bill Mr Tony
Nelson, the Treasury economics secretary said: 'If you have stability, you
do not invite avalanches of speculation for or against a currency.'
Mr Nelson was responding to calls from the Labour party for the government
to state clearly what action it had taken to defend the pound against
currency speculators since sterling was forced out of the European exchange
rate mechanism in September.
Mr Alastair Darling, Labour frontbench spokesman on City affairs, said it
would be interesting to know what plans the government had to defend the
position of sterling in the future.
He said: 'Clearly at some stage the UK is going to go back into a fixed
exchange rate system prior to a single European currency.'
The government reiterated its opposition to an early re-entry to the ERM.
Mr Nelson said: 'It is not a realistic proposition to expect us to go back
into the ERM under current circumstances.' It would not happen until
'certain fundamental problems' inside and outside the mechanism had been
addressed, he said.
Mr Darling said the Labour party did not support the idea of a tax on
foreign currency transactions to deter speculation since this would penalise
legitimate business.
However, the opposition urged the government to consider what concerted
international action could be taken to prevent a repetition of the upheavals
witnessed among ERM currencies last year.
Mr Alan Beith, the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman, said the government,
while complaining about the faults of the ERM, had proposed no reforms to
its structure.
Mr Beith added that the best way for the government to be able to deter
speculation was to move to a single European currency 'within which there is
no scope for speculation at all'.
Mr Nelson reminded the committee that although the government's economic
policy took into account the level of the pound, it had no specific target
for sterling's exchange rate.
Mr Nelson told MPs yesterday that the forecast cost of running the Treasury
in 1992-93 is Pounds 55.675m, compared with Pounds 44.969m in 1990-91.
