FT  09 AUG 93 / VW steers cautiously through a minefield
A MONTH or more after joining Volkswagen, former General Motors managers
were still working diligently on their old employer's behalf.
Shredding documents is not the sort of work automotive purchasing and
production men are used to, but they got on with the job.
According to Volkswagen, they took pains to ensure that documents which
could 'possibly' belong to GM and could 'possibly' contain sensitive
information were destroyed. Their aim was to 'avoid any danger' that the
information should fall into VW hands - in other words they were working in
the interests of their ex-employer, General Motors.
Eye-witnesses said two of the group, Mr Jorge Alvarez Aguirre and Mr Rosario
Piazza, worked through one night in April, filling a van parked outside a
Wiesbaden house 'metres-high' with bags of confetti.
According to VW, others carried out their shredding in the Gastehaus
Rotehof, a comfortable Wolfsburg hostelry owned by Volkswagen and used
customarily for entertaining distinguished visitors. Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua, newly appointed production director and ex-GM global buying
chief, for example, stayed there while house-hunting.
In one 30-line statement, issued close to midnight on Friday, Volkswagen
effectively put paid to its new employees' persistent claims that none of
them took any documents when they left GM and Adam Opel, the US group's
German subsidiary last March. Since GM papers are now admitted to have been
in the hands of VW employees on VW property, it may make it more difficult
for the German group to sustain claims that no secrets made their way to the
Volkswagen headquarters at Wolfsburg.
Opel said yesterday that the weekend's admissions - notably on the Rotehof
shredding activities - would be of particular significance to public
prosecutors investigating suspicions of industrial espionage against Mr
Lopez and three associates.
The bizarre statement, which emerged after a meeting of the German group's
supervisory board, was otherwise much as expected. The board, which hires,
fires and ensures the decent conduct of executives, restated 'unaltered
confidence' in Mr Lopez and in chairman Mr Ferdinand Piech's claim that the
group would break even this year.
As befits a case in which disappearing acts have so far been everyday
occurrences, there was much missing from the board's declaration. There was,
for instance, no mention of the shredders' names and no explanation of how
or why the papers were taken or sent to Wolfsburg.
But something else was missing. Although the statement reiterated its
support for Mr Lopez, there was no mention of a declaration two weeks ago in
which an elite group of senior supervisory directors said they would stand
by him unless and until he was found guilty.
Volkswagen is hanging on to its miracle-worker, but its grip appears to have
loosened. But as in the past, the group refrained from offering any explicit
support for his colleagues. Indeed, the shredding revelations suggested more
than ever that Mr Lopez's associates have been cut adrift.
