FT  16 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Inland Revenue blocks unit trust
capital gains loophole
THE INLAND Revenue has closed a loophole which in effect allowed life
insurance companies to avoid paying capital gains tax on a portion of their
portfolios by investing in internally managed unit trusts.
The tax change, in the Finance Bill released on Tuesday, will force
insurance companies to deem one seventh of their unit trust holdings to have
been disposed of in any one year. If gains have occurred, capital gains tax
must be paid.
Some of Britain's largest unit trust companies are life insurers which sell
relatively few units to the public but use the trusts as internal investment
vehicles for their own life funds. Unit trusts do not incur capital gains
tax on disposals although unit trust holders must pay the tax on their gains
when their units are sold.
Mr Philip Warland, director-general of the Unit Trust Association, said:
'The implications for ordinary people are not huge. They may at the margin
reduce the after-tax returns of some life funds.'
The insurance industry, which has known of the change for two years,
initially objected but has resigned itself to the additional taxation. The
Inland Revenue has taken the view that the life insurance industry is
under-taxed and has moved to close a variety of loopholes in recent years.
The Revenue has, however, met a central concern of the insurance industry by
exempting from the legislation unit-linked contracts - where individual
policy holders would directly bear the costs of capital gains tax. The
change had been mooted two years ago but had been delayed pending repeal of
Stamp Duty.
The Association of British Insurers had lobbied the Revenue to ensure that
unit-linked policyholders were not subject to the additional tax burden.
The association expressed relief at the wording of the bill but said it
remained concerned that new rules on advance corporation tax on unit trusts
had unfairly penalised life insurers.
Life insurers, unlike other investors in unit trusts, classify dividends as
interest payments and will lose some tax advantages intended to offset a
reduction in the advance corporation tax which can be reclaimed by
tax-exempt investors.
