FT  09 OCT 93 / Gardening: A bird in the box is worth . . .
A GHOSTLY white bird floating across the road in the dark just glimpsed in
the headlights is the only view many people have of a barn owl.
Sadly for many owls it is their last sight of anything as, with their eyes
blinded by headlights, they crash and perish. But road verges are one of the
few hunting grounds left to them, especially in arable areas where hedgerows
have disappeared. There, in rough grass, barn owls can find the voles and
mice they need to survive.
For over half a century, barn owls have been in decline in Britain as their
food habitats and their nesting sites in old buildings have disappeared. For
almost the last 20 of those years it has become increasingly popular to
breed these owls in captivity and to release their progeny into the wild.
Owls have been farmed out to individuals who felt they were doing something
positive for the survival of the species. After all, these rather ugly,
large-beaked, fluffy young, with their far more beautiful, speckled-plumaged
mothers, were living proof of the conservation effort they were making.
But it is now known that this is far from the case. According to the Hawk
and Owl Trust, some 3,000 young barn owls are released each year - when the
total wild population is only 4,500. If all that was needed were more owls,
then you would have expected a population explosion. But this has not
happened, for young birds, bred in captivity and inexpertly released, are
pathetic at adapting to the wild.
The British Trust for Ornithology suggests that only 10 per cent survive and
it doubts that captive-bred barn owls have boosted the wild population at
all. The real problems - food and lodging - were being missed.
The lack of nest sites is simple to deal with - erect an owl box. The big
difficulty is the lack of rough grassland. It is the need to increase this
habitat, and hence the number of mice and voles which live there, which has
been such a problem.
The recent changes in agricultural policy, leading to the establishment of
schemes such as set-aside, together with the extension of Environmentally
Sensitive Areas, could see the restoration of many acres of rodent rich
grassland.
The need for funds to monitor this work, in order to better advise and plan
for the future, is the basis of a new appeal from the Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds.
With more food available, captive-bred barn owls may survive better after
release. On the other hand, with its basic needs attended to, the existing
wild population may grow unaided and captive breeding can cease.
