FT  26 FEB 93 / A-Z of Personal Finance (12): Regulation is helpful but
complex - Knowing where to complain
KNOWING WHO to complain to in the financial services industry is a skill in
itself. The area is riddled with borders which sometimes overlap and
sometimes do not meet at all. Given the plethora of self-regulatory bodies
and ombudsmen, knowing where to begin can seem daunting.
Where to go depends on the nature of your complaint. If you believe you were
given bad financial advice or that you were sold the wrong investment
product, your complaint would be against the person or company that sold you
the product.
But if you are concerned that your investment is being mismanaged, your
complaint would be against the company managing the investment, rather than
the person who sold it to you.
The procedure for complaints is always to approach the individual first, and
then the company. If your complaint is not dealt with satisfactorily, you
should then contact the relevant regulatory body. The final stage is to take
the matter to the ombudsman, if there is one.
Photocopies of supporting documents and the correspondence to date should
also be sent.
Knowing which regulator to contact can be cause for confusion, because some
products fall between various regulatory stools. Home income plans, for
example, can be the responsibility of the Building Society Ombudsman, or
Lautro (the self-regulatory organisation for the life industry), or Fimbra
(the SRO for independent financial advisers).
There is a proposal that Fimbra and Lautro should be merged into a Personal
Investment Authority, which should simplify the process if it actually
happens.
The body with ultimate responsibility for financial services and investments
is the Securities and Investments Board. It will deal with complaints, but
only after they have been through the regulatory authorities.
Some companies may be members of one or more bodies. If you are unsure of
the correct regulatory body, SIB has a central register listing the details
of authorised firms and the conditions under which they can operate. The
number is 071-929-3652.
The self-regulatory bodies and Ombudsmen only have jurisdiction over their
members, so it is important to make sure that you do business with an
accredited individual or company.
Financial Advisers. If your complaint relates to the advice given you by an
independent financial adviser and you have already complained to the
adviser, write to Fimbra at Hertsmere House, Hertsmere Road, London E14 4AB.
Fimbra can withdraw a member's authorisation, and if you find this is the
state to which your IFA has been reduced and that you have grounds for
seeking compensation, you should write to the Investors Compensation Scheme,
Gavrelle House, 2-14 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8RA. SIB has responsibility
for the ICS, and is at the same address.
The procedure is different for agents who are 'tied' - that is, selling the
products of a single insurance company, or who are part of the direct
salesforce of a company.
After approaching the individual and then the company, you should write to
the relevant regulatory body. This is likely to be either Lautro or Imro
(Investment Management Regulatory Organisation). Lautro is at Centre Point,
103 New Oxford Street, London WC1A 1QH; while the address for Imro is
Broadwalk House, 5 Appold Street, London EC2A 2LL.
Banks and building societies. After contacting the branch manager and head
office of the bank or building society, the next step is to write to either
the Banking Ombudsman, Citadel House, 5-11 Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1BR; or
the Building Societies Ombudsman, 35-37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1X 7AW.
The ombudsmen deal with complaints about savings and mortgages.
Insurance-related products sold by a bank's 'adviser' will be handled
elsewhere.
Insurance-related products. You need to find out which is the responsible
regulator for the company, but it is most likely to be Lautro or Imro.
If you are unhappy with the outcome of your correspondence with Imro, the
Investment Referee, at 6 Frederick Place, London EC2R 8BT, can act as a
conciliator between the complainant and the Imro member.
If neither Lautro nor the Investment Referee is able to help, you should try
the Insurance Ombudsman at City Gate One, 135 Park Street, London SE1 9EA.
Pensions. After exhausting the complaints procedure of the company in
question, queries and complaints about occupational pensions should be
addressed to the Occupational Pensions Advisory Service (Opas). Complaints
about private pensions are most likely to be handled by Lautro.
If your case needs to go further, you should contact the Pensions Ombudsman,
who shares the same address with Opas: 11 Belgrave Road, London SW1V 1RB.
Unit and Investment trusts. Unit trusts fall under the self-regulation of
Lautro. The Unit Trust Ombudsman scheme has been dissolved and is now
handled by the Insurance Ombudsman.
The fund management activities of most investment trusts should fall under
the authority of Imro.
Stockbrokers. The Complaints Bureau of the SFA (Securities and Futures
Authority) handles complaints against stockbrokers. The address is Cotton
Centre, Cottons Lane, London SE1 2QB.
The professions are regulated by the Recognised Professional bodies (RPBs).
The main ones are:
Chartered Accountants. There arethree chartered accountancy institutes. The
addresses for complaints are:
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, Gloucester House,
399 Silbury Boulevard, Central Milton Keynes, MK9 2HL; Institute of
Chartered Accountants in Scotland, 27 Queen Street, Edinburgh EH2 1LA; and
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland, 87-89 Pembroke Road, Dublin
4.
Lawyers. Complainants in England should contact the Complaints Office, Law
Society, Portland House, Stag Place, London SW1E 5BL. The corresponding
address for the Law Society of Scotland is 26 Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh
EH3 7YR.
Actuaries. Institute of Actuaries, Staple Inn Hall, High Holborn, London
WC1V 7QJ is responsible for regulation.
Insurance Brokers. Insurance Brokers Registration Council, 15 St Helens
Place, London EC3A 6DS.
