FT  08 JAN 93 / Old reliable deliversa disappointing result: Why with-profit
endowments are paying out less
THE with-profits endowment, the UK's most venerable savings vehicle which is
used to repay most mortgages, has had a bad week.
Actuaries determine the payouts policyholders receive by adding a complex
series of bonuses on to a basic sum assured. These bonuses are reviewed at
the beginning of each year, and the offices which have announced payouts so
far have revealed a sharply downward trend.
Policies taken out 25 years ago - the most common timespan for a mortgage
endowment - are paying out slightly less than similar policies last year,
but returns on shorter-term policies have come down heavily. For a 10-year
policy, Sun Alliance, the composite insurer, is paying out almost 15 per
cent less than it would have done in January last year.
A few months ago, before the markets' post-Black Wednesday rally, this might
not have seemed embarrassing. But the rise in equity and bond markets by the
end of 1992 should have been enough to deliver an 18 per cent return for the
average life fund. Set in this context, cuts in payout are difficult for the
life companies' marketeers to justify.
Investment returns are probably the most important factor behind
with-profits payouts. Unfortunately for the life offices, several other
factors have applied a strong downward pressure.
The root of the problem lies in the arcane with-profits bonus system.
Endowments started as pure life assurance policies, which promised to pay
out a fixed sum assured at the end of a certain fixed term if the
policyholder survived. But over time the policies developed until they were
almost a pure investment vehicle.
Two forms of bonus are added to the sum assured, at the actuary's
discretion, to deliver a final maturity value. Annual or reversionary
bonuses are added each year, and once declared cannot be taken away from the
value of the policy. On maturity, a terminal bonus can also be added.
This terminal bonus now typically makes up as much as 60 per cent of
pay-outs for 25-year policies. This allows greater investment freedom, as
reversionary bonuses need to be backed up by fixed interest securities.
The attraction for investors is that the peaks and troughs of the market can
be 'smoothed'. A bad year need not be reflected in that year's payout, if
actuaries are confident that markets will recover, and past gains locked in.
That smoothing process is, at least temporarily, out of kilter. Payouts
continued to rise after the stock market crash of 1987, as actuaries assumed
that the lower investment returns were only a blip. People whose policies
matured between 1988 and 1991 therefore have reason to be happy, as they
were paid money the policies had not earned.
For 10-year policies, actuaries believe that payouts are exceeding their
policies' share of the fund's assets by 10 per cent or more. This cannot
continue indefinitely, so payouts must continue to fall, barring improved
investment returns. Life companies are expecting lower returns for the rest
of this decade.
Figures for this are controversial, but according to Philip Scott, general
manager (finance) for Norwich Union, his company's payout last year on a
typical 10-year policy exceeded asset share by slightly more than 20 per
cent. This year that figure is closer to 10 per cent, and the aim is to
bring payouts into line with asset share by 1995.
A company's freedom to cushion blows like this is limited by the volume of
business which it has to handle. Several companies did heavy business in
10-year policies during 1983, on the back of schemes linked to mortgage
interest tax relief. Norwich Union expects to pay twice as many maturities
in 1993 than it did in 1992. The 1984 budget removed income tax relief on
life assurance premiums, but the decision did not take effect for some
months. This allowed the companies to make heavy sales as investors rushed
to take advantage of the tax concession while it lasted. That means more
onerous liabilities for 1994.
These heavy commitments lie behind Sun Alliance's steep cut in 10-year
payouts. With maturities of Pounds 175m next year, it could no longer afford
to 'play games' with its bonuses, according to a spokesman, and the company
now says that its payouts are directly in line with asset share.
Life offices also have to contend with the weakening of their financial
position following the heavy distribution costs most of them incurred
acquiring tied agents and direct sales forces in the wake of the Financial
Services Act of 1986. These costs came out of reserves, and free asset
ratios, measuring the percentage excess of assets over liabilities, tumbled,
further limiting their room for manoeuvre.
Insurance companies can strengthen their position by announcing lower
reversionary bonuses - and all the companies to have announced so far this
year have done this. Some, such as Guardian Royal Exchange, have abandoned
the conventional with-profits policy altogether, and offer a 'unitised
with-profits' policy to new investors. In these policies, investors buy
units, and bonuses are added to these units. Strength is less important
because the life company does not need to put aside reserves to meet the sum
assured at the beginning of the policy.
High terminal bonuses have also boxed companies in. These offered greater
flexibility but with such a large proportion of the payout undecided until a
policy matured, final values have become more volatile. This is unattractive
for investors. Guardian Royal Exchange yesterday emphasised this by
announcing that it was not paying any terminal bonus at all on its 10-year
policies - the first time it failed to do so since 1968.
Does this mean the end for the with-profits policy? Certainly, the
reassuring belief that the policies would increase in value indefinitely has
taken a knock. Even so, annualised yields remain comfortably in excess of
inflation - for example, Commercial Union's policies yield 13.2 per cent
over 10 years, and 13.3 per cent for 25 years.
But the fault-lines which these bonus announcements have revealed need to be
addressed. The traditionally discreet UK life industry may need to be more
informative to its investors. Few are likely to understand why payouts have
gone down after the market went up.
Lex, Page 15
