FT  10 JUN 93 / Nigerians promised the world: Paul Adams looks at the
elections that will end military rule
IF NIGERIANS believed half the campaign promises for the polls on Saturday
they would be looking forward to a golden era of prosperity when the elected
civilian president takes office on August 27 and ends a decade of military
rule.
Mr Moshood Abiola, the candidate of the Social Democratic party, will
'banish poverty from the nation'. Mr Bashir Tofa, his rival from the
National Republican Convention (NRC), will 'make Nigeria work again'.
Both parties are the creation of President Ibrahim Babangida, and neither
has a coherent set of policies which differ clearly from the failed attempt
at economic restructuring by the outgoing military regime.
After becoming president in a military coup in August 1985, Gen Babangida
promised to hand over power when he had established civilian politicians fit
to run the country. His legacy looks like being a civilian regime which
reflects his own choice far more than the will of the people.
Hope is the message which both the Tofa and the Abiola party machines are
trying to convey, and mismanagement is their culprit for the decline in
standards of living. Both candidates are wealthy businessmen who have risen
through the system of patronage which many Nigerians blame for the country's
economic decline.
The American-style advertising and the big-spending rallies of this election
campaign have swept through most of the country since mid-April, but left
the issues which matter almost untouched.
The debate on possible changes to the federation of Nigeria's diverse 30
states has been suppressed by a military decree last month and the president
has ignored appeals to reform the system of government.
Mr Abiola has a bigger list of promises, while Mr Tofa's campaign is closer
to the popular mood of discontent with the state of Nigeria.
Mr Abiola's economic plan alternates between promises to improve fiscal
management and spending on a grand scale, including free education and a
scheme to build 30m housing units. He rejects the structural adjustment
programme of the Babangida regime as a failure and says the SDP has its own
policies which will not be dictated by outsiders.
He has also abandoned his talk of reparations from the western powers for
African slavery to wipe out the Dollars 27bn (Pounds 17.8bn) external debt.
Both he and Mr Tofa intend to negotiate debt relief from the international
donors but their hastily assembled economic plans do not meet the terms
recently set out by the joint IMF/World Bank mission to Nigeria.
Mr Tofa is more cautious on the structural adjustment programme, blaming its
failure on implementation rather than the policies.
The NRC's economic programme is a mixture of state planning and free market
reforms. Mr Tofa gives top priority to the exchange rate of the naira which,
he says, 'cannot be controlled by the government simply fixing it'. His
remedy is to bring down the budget deficit through fiscal discipline to
around 3 per cent of gross domestic product by 1996, which would be
acceptable to the IMF. The deficit has averaged nearly 8 per cent for the
last seven years.
But Mr Tofa would also instruct the Central Bank of Nigeria to devise
'short-term methods to shore up the naira that are consistent with having a
free market'.
It is also unclear how he would reduce the budget deficit. 'My government
will concentrate its resources on infrastructural developments,' Mr Tofa
promises. He also plans to increase spending on health and education and
would maintain the oil subsidy, which costs almost as much as the budget
deficit of 1992 and whose removal is a condition of official debt relief.
In the twilight of the Babangida regime power failures in most urban areas
have been more frequent and prolonged, fuel shortages have paralysed public
transport and trebled the cost of food - although strikes by oil workers
have now been called off - and failed water supplies increase the spread of
disease.
Although there is no surge of support for the candidates, Nigerians do not
want to rock the boat when at last the end of military rule is in sight.
The hard choices ducked by the military government have been left for the
new civilian regime and the qualifications of both candidates for the task
are unconvincing.
