FT  09 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Westerners to sign Kazakh oil
deal
IN AN oil exploration deal that could be worth several billion dollars,
seven western companies including British Gas, British Petroleum and Royal
Dutch Shell are to sign a preliminary agreement today to explore the Caspian
Sea offshore from Kazakhstan, according to foreign officials in the former
Soviet republic.
The preliminary agreement calls for seismic surveys of the Caspian Shelf
over the coming three years. Geologists say the portion of the shelf off the
Kazakh coast probably contains substantially more oil than the central Asian
republic's 25bn barrel Tengiz field. The US company Chevron in April signed
a 40 year Dollars 20bn agreement with the Kazakh government to develop
Tengiz.
The Caspian Shelf agreement is to be signed in Alma-Ata, the Kazakh capital,
according to the western officials.
Oil geologists are cautious as no no reliable survey of the shelf has yet
been completed, but preliminary reserve estimates varying from a possible
40bn barrels to 60bn barrels have provoked intense interest in the region.
At the low end of the estimate, 40bn barrels, the Kazakh portion of the
shelf still would contain two thirds of Kuwait's proven reserves, though far
more difficult to exploit, geologists say.
Proceeds, however, could significantly exceed an expected windfall at
Tengiz. One key problem in making a final agreement on the Kazakh
exploration is establishing sea boundaries between the five Caspian states.
A final agreement could nevertheless come as early as the autumn.
The companies combining with Kazakhstan's ministry of oil are, in addition
to BP, BG and Royal Dutch/Shell, Mobil Oil, and French companies Agip and
Total. The Norwegian company Statoil is also participating, forming a
partnership with BP.
The seven companies will finance the surveys and pay the Kazakh government
an unspecified fee. In return they will gain the right of first refusal to
exploit whatever oil is discovered.
An environmental survey is included in the agreement, as much of the Caspian
Shelf is a nature reserve. No matter what is found, no oil is expected from
the shelf before the turn of the century.
