FT  27 JUL 93 / TSB sells car hire arm to Midland
TSB GROUP yesterday continued its disposal of businesses outside its retail
banking core by agreeing to sell Swan National Leasing, its vehicle contract
hire business, to the leasing arm of Midland Bank.
Forward Trust Group, the Midland subsidiary, will pay Pounds 182.5m for SNL.
The sum includes Pounds 57.9m for the assets and Pounds 124.6m to repay debt
finance provided to the leasing business by TSB. The deal follows a setback
last week in TSB's disposal programme - it disclosed it had failed to agree
a selling price to place its estate agencies in a joint venture with
National &amp; Provincial Building Society.
The move leaves TSB with the Eurodollar car rental business of SNL, which it
is thought to be considering selling through a management buy-out. It has
also been trying to dispose of its Hill Samuel investment banking arm.
Mr John Burns, TSB's finance director, said SNL's pre-tax profit of Pounds
7.3m last year meant the Pounds 57.9m purchase price represented a post-tax
multiple of 13.1. He said this was in line with the multiples common in the
vehicle leasing business.
TSB would make an exceptional gain on the sale of Pounds 30.8m this year, as
well as releasing Pounds 57.9m in capital. It would have to deduct a
'relatively small' amount from the profit figure as an adjustment to
goodwill written off in reserves. Mr Graham Picken, Forward Trust's chief
executive, said that adding SNL's 26,000 vehicles and 300 staff to the
existing 14,000 vehicles would put the business in third place in the
vehicle leasing market.
He estimated that the earnings multiple had fallen to about 9 times in
current trading conditions because the SNL business was expected to make a
profit of about Pounds 10m this year. He also said it had re-financed the
SNL debt on better terms. He said Forward Trust was paying Pounds 30.8m in
addition to SNL's net asset value of Pounds 27.1m. About Pounds 18m of this
would be written off as goodwill paid in addition to the 'fair value' of
SNL.
TSB has signalled that it intends to dispose of a variety of non-core
businesses in order to return to its retail banking roots from which it
diversified unprofitably after its flotation in 1987.
Lex, Page 18
