FT  10 SEP 93 / Survey of Dutch Banking and Investment (7): New urgency over
reforms - Amsterdam Stock Exchange
UNLIKE its competitor on the other side of the English Channel, the
Amsterdam Stock Exchange has always avoided the 'Big Bang' approach to
change, preferring instead to pursue a rolling programme of reforms to
bolster its position in Europe.
But its plans for fundamental and far-reaching reform in early 1994 betray a
new sense of urgency, prompted by London's increasingly tight grip on block
trading in Dutch shares and government bonds.
To counter the attractions of London's Stock Exchange Automated Quotation
System (SEAQ), the Amsterdam bourse will be offering a rival screen-based
system called ASSET (Amsterdam Stock Exchange Trading System) where banks
and brokers can advertise their prices. This will be supplemented by an
on-screen trading system called AIDA.
For the first time, foreign banks and brokers based outside the Netherlands
will be offered direct access to the Amsterdam market through the new screen
system, in a bid to persuade them to stop trading Dutch shares and
government bonds in London.
Equally important, the Amsterdam bourse wants competition from foreigners to
force domestic players to adopt a more aggressive stance in the market. The
screens will be used only in the wholesale segment market, which is to be
created through another dramatic reform ' the splitting of trading into
distinct retail and professional sectors.
Together, the advent of limited screen-based trading and the division of the
market between private and institutional investors will mean the demise of
the Amsterdam 'hoekman,' or stock jobber, a traditional feature of the Dutch
capital's stock exchange. It was the hoekmen's task to bring together supply
and demand, and most transactions had to be channeled through them.
The hoekman will disappear and be replaced by a market 'specialist,' similar
to those in New York, who will operate on the retail side of the market.
Rather than having two competing hoekman companies specialising in each
Dutch stock, the new specialist will have exclusive rights to deal in
individual companies' shares.
'The specialist will now have to compete against the market, instead of
against his 'hoekman' competitor,' Baron Boudewijn van Ittersum, the
bourse's chairman, said in an interview.
The change will have radical consequences for the exchange's 23 'hoekman'
firms and their combined workforce of around 200. Less than 10 firms will be
eligible to become specialists, and they will all have to invest heavily in
new equipment. And, to survive in a new world of lower commission rates,
they will clearly have to boost their share volume.
Amsterdam's multiple moves to split the market, to allow in foreign-based
brokers and to do away with the old-style hoekman are a response to
surprising figures on trading in Dutch securities uncovered last year by
McKinsey &amp; Company, the consultants.
Although Amsterdam's low, 32 per cent share of trading in Dutch bonds had
been cause for concern for years, the McKinsey figures showed that share
trading had also undergone a profound shift to London.
The seepage to SEAQ was most pronounced in block trades worth more than Fl
1m each, with only 33 per cent of these deals done in Amsterdam in 1991
compared with 68 per cent in 1988. Overall, the Dutch exchange accounts for
60 per cent of dealings in Dutch securities, down from 80 per cent three
years earlier.
Mr van Ittersum said the 'shocking' figures had helped concentrate the
collective mind of the Amsterdam financial community, producing a consensus
for change.
The McKinsey report also found that investors were increasingly turning to
foreign banks and brokers when investing in Dutch shares, helping to
accelerate the trend towards SEAQ trading. It urged Dutch banks and brokers
to boost their competitiveness as well as their trading volume, and to be
prepared to offer more liquidity in the market. But Mr van Ittersum noted
that a change of mentality was needed in addition to the change in trading
methods - 'no matter how well-organised you are, you will lose out in the
end if the Amsterdam-based intermediaries are not competitive enough to win
back the business that has gone abroad,' he says.
Besides Amsterdam's comprehensive revamping of its trading system, the
bourse also faces the challenge later this year of incorporating its
lower-tier 'parallel market' into the main share market. The parallel
market, launched in 1982 as a breeding ground for smaller companies seeking
to graduate to the main bourse, has stagnated after a series of
well-publicised company failures dented its image.
Before the parallel market can be abolished, however, the bourse must
resolve the question of what admission conditions will govern the transfer
of stocks to the mainstream market.
Another issue coming to a head later this year is the desirability of
greater co-operation between the stock exchange and the Amsterdam-based
European Options Exchange.
The two exchanges have asked Coopers &amp; Lybrand to report this autumn on
potential areas for partnerships. In the first instance, the two markets are
interested in exploring cost-savings that could be generated by operating
joint back-room administration and legal services. However, a more
thorough-going link-up is also possible.
'There is no question of an automatic merger, but far-reaching co-operation
can also not be ruled out,' says Mr van Ittersum.
In the longer term, the stock exchange also wants to increase the number of
Dutch companies coming to the market. Next year's privatisation of the Dutch
PTT will be the biggest-ever flotation in the Amsterdam bourse's history
(see report below), but unlike France or Germany, where heavy privatisation
programmes should swell turnover in the years ahead, there are few
privatisation targets in the Netherlands, meaning that the bourse's ranks
can only be bolstered by newcomers from the private sector.
Mr van Ittersum says there are at least 200 medium-sized Dutch companies
'ripe' for flotation - 'we have a magnificent top league of bourse-listed
companies, but there's gap at the lower end,' he adds.
