FT  10 JUN 93 / Andreotti may face murder link charge
ROME magistrates yesterday announced that they wanted to press charges
against Mr Giulio Andreotti, seven times prime minister of Italy, for
allegedly organising the murder of a journalist in 1979.
It is the first time a former European leader has been faced with such
allegations. The announcement is a further devastating blow to the
reputation of the veteran Christian Democrat politician. Last month
parliament agreed to waive Mr Andreotti's immunity as a life senator to face
charges of consorting with the Mafia.
Mr Andreotti reacted strongly to yesterday's announcement. 'I don't wish to
avoid facing justice like any other citizen, but I must raise my voice in
moral indignation at this attempt to lynch me. I hope it can be unmasked as
soon as possible,' he said.
The latest move follows a long interrogation of Mr Andreotti on May 25 in
connection with the killing of Mr Mino Pecorelli. He was a journalist who
published OP, a small magazine that peddled, in cryptic language, inside
information about politics, the security services and the Mafia.
Mr Pecorelli was a member of the secret masonic lodge P2. His death is
widely believed to involve some of the murkiest aspects of recent Italian
history linking politicians, the Mafia and the security services.
The murder was seen as an attempt to silence an inconvenient voice. He is
reported to have had sensitive information about the kidnap and murder of Mr
Aldo Moro, the Christian Democrat prime minister, by the leftwing terrorist
group, the Red Brigades. Ten years of investigations ending in 1992 failed
to find those responsible for Mr Pecorelli's death.
But last April Palermo magistrates are understood to have questioned Mr
Tommaso Buscetta, the Mafia 'supergrass' living in the US, about his
allegations that Mr Andreotti was linked to the Pecorelli killing. Mr
Buscetta claimed the murder itself was carried out by Cosa Nostra, the
umbrella organisation of the Sicilian Mafia.
He also alleged that Mr Andreotti was behind the murder in 1982 of General
Carlo Alberto dalla Chiesa, the Palermo police chief, who was reported to
have been killed because he too knew secrets about the Moro kidnap.
Rome magistrates yesterday indicated they were asking parliament to waive Mr
Andreotti's immunity not solely on the basis of Mr Buscetta's information.
Italian MPs to curb 'suspect' secret service, Page 3
