FT  12 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Candover plans to raise new funds
CANDOVER Investments, an investment trust specialising in management
buy-outs, yesterday announced plans to raise a new fund valued at between
Pounds 200m and Pounds 300m.
It will invest between Pounds 30m and Pounds 40m of its own money towards
this total alongside funds raised from outside investors.
If Candover succeeds in reaching even its minimum target, this would be the
largest fund raising by an independent venture capital company for more than
three years.
In March the company said it did not need to think seriously about new
fund-raising but it has since been using the money in its existing funds and
wants to be well-placed to invest in any large deals which come along, said
Mr Roger Brooke, chairman.
Candover still has Pounds 75m left to invest from its two existing funds, a
Pounds 319m fund raised in 1989, and a Pounds 37m smaller companies fund
raised in 1991. But other UK venture capital funds have had great
difficulties raising money over the past 18 months and Candover is keen to
ensure it has enough funds available.
The company has not set a formal target figure of funds to be raised but it
set itself a target of Pounds 200m with its 1989 fund and finally achieved a
total of Pounds 319m, including Pounds 20m of its own money.
'We are talking about the same order of magnitude,' said Mr Brooke. Candover
started talking to UK institutions two to three weeks ago and expects to
begin approaching US investors in the next couple of months. 'The board and
I feel we should be a bit more aggressive in investing. We have Pounds 25m
of cash from realisations,' said Mr Brooke.
Candover has had quite a good reaction from UK investors, including people
who invested in its last fund, said Mr Brooke. But many UK venture capital
funds had failed to provide the returns expected by investors and had been
unable to dispose of their investments so institutions were still waiting
for their money back. In the US, in contrast, institutions are increasing
their allocation to venture capital.
Candover expects to back two or three more deals this year to exhaust its
present funds. Four of the companies in which it has already invested are
planning a stock market listing while two are considering selling out to
other companies.
