FT  10 SEP 93 / Arts: Enjoy an opera or ballet for only Pounds 10 - The new
ROH season's programme
THE Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, is, of course, home base for The Royal
Ballet, and many participants in the FT-Royal Opera House offer of a ticket
to Covent Garden for just Pounds 10 will be motivated by the chance to see
one of the world's leading dance companies in action.
The Royal Ballet is emerging from a fallow period into an exciting era. It
is building up its company in readiness for the move to the modernised Opera
House promised for later in the decade, but already the stars are emerging,
the names the balletomanes love to follow: Viviana Durante, Sylvie Guillem,
Darcey Bussell, Fiona Chadwick, and now Leanne Benjamin, as leading
ballerinas, and, among the men, Jose Manuel Carreno, Jonathan Cope, Zoltan
Solymosi, Irek Mukhamedov, and Bruce Sansom.
The only new full length production of the season, The Sleeping Beauty, will
be premiered during The Royal Ballet's tour of the United States, and
overseas commitments mean that there will be much less ballet than opera at
the The Royal Opera House this season, perhaps just one hundred performances
as against over 150 of opera. But the programme planned is popular and with
broad appeal.
It starts on October 23rd with a mixed programme of four contemporary
ballets, two of which are world premieres, one is new to Covent Garden, and
the fourth is the eagerly awaited re-working of Kenneth MacMillan's 1984
ballet, Different Drummer. In a way the programme is a tribute to MacMillan,
The Royal Ballet's resident choreographer, who died last year. The new works
are by two of his prodigies, nineteen year old Matthew Hart, his first
ballet for the Company, and William Tuckett, both of whom came through the
Royal Ballet Choreographic Group. The UK premiere is Herman Schmerman, by
the Frankfurt based choreographer William Forsythe, which has Versace
contributing to the costume designs, and a promised appearance by principal
guest artist Sylvie Guillem. These highly individual works will find The
Royal Ballet on points but refreshingly modern in approach.
Then comes one of The Royal Ballet's most enduring favourites, Kenneth
MacMillan's version of Romeo and Juliet, danced to Prokofiev's inspired
music, and regarded as MacMillan's masterwork. Although The Royal Ballet
cannot guarantee appearances by dancers far in advance (they are so accident
prone) Leanne Benjamin is expected to make her debut as Juliet in some
performances, and Darcey Bussell is also expected to dance the role.
The Royal Ballet is celebrating Christmas in style this year with a rush of
performances of Tales of Beatrix Potter, which was staged a year ago to
intense popular acclaim, even if some of the critics were more reticent in
their praise. This re-incarnation for Beatrix Potter's ever popular animals
is brought to the stage by The Royal Ballet's director Anthony Dowell and
danced to Frederick Ashton's original choreography. Some matinee
performances will be mounted especially for younger children. In the same
programme is Ballet Imperial, music by Tchaikovsky, choreography by
Balanchine, and in terms of excitement and design all you expect from a
classical ballet.
This festive double bill runs in tandem with another Christmas favourite,
Nutcracker, as much a part of the season as The Messiah and the pantomime.
Tchaikvoksy's music, Julia Trevelyan Oman's designs, Peter Wright's
production, with its impressive special effects: this is the perfect
introduction to the ballet.
In contrast Mayerling, choreographed by Kenneth MacMillan to the music of
Liszt, is a much more dramatic, indeed tragic, ballet. It tells, with social
realism, the story of the fatal romance between Crown Prince Rudolph, heir
to the Imperial throne of Austria, and the 17 year old Mary Vestera, (danced
some nights by the promising young Gillian Revie), which ends in death for
them both at Mayerling. The Royal Ballet intends to use this production to
show off the progress of some of its younger dancers alongside the
principals.
There follows a particularly strong Triple Bill. The Dream was Frederick
Ashton's working of Mendelssohn's incidental music to A Midsummer Nights
Dream, and among the dancers taking the roles of King and Queen of the
Fairies will be Bruce Sansom and Viviana Durante. In the same evening you
can see another work by Ashton. A Month in the Country is based on Turgenev
and has suitably atmospheric music by Chopin. The Triple Bill ends with
David Bintley's most recent work for Covent Garden, Tombeaux, which is
designed by Jasper Conran.
Don Quixote was first unveiled last year, with the choreography re-worked by
Mikhail Baryshnikov on Petipa's original, and the staging handled by Anthony
Dowell. It is a very stylish looking ballet and the public loved it much
more than the critics. Darcey Bussell is expected to make her debut as
Kitri.
The Royal Ballet dances one more programme before it disappears to New York
for its 1994 summer tour. It is a Triple Bill, which will feature a new work
by Ashley Page; Glen Tetley's La Ronde, with music by Korngold; and
Balanchine's Agon, danced to the music of Stravinsky. It brings to an end a
Royal Ballet season, designed to confirm the recent improvements and to
establish a new generation of dancers in the public's affection. It should
thrill the Pounds 10 punters.
But participants to the offer also get the chance to see another dance
company at the Royal Opera House: the Birmingham Royal Ballet. This is the
former Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet which has moved to Birmingham, changed
its name, and enjoyed a tremendnous new lease of life. It has settled in so
quickly that it is already winning accolades and awards for its
performances. In March it brings the latest work by David Bintley,
MacMillan's most likely successor as leading British choreographer, to
London. Sylvia, based on a Greek legend, has been a favourite subject in the
dance world for over a century. Delibes provided the music for a famous
French 19th century version, which was choreographed by Frederick Ashton for
Covent Garden in the 1950s. Bintley uses much of Delibe's romantic music in
his fresh and modern interpretation, which still finds Eros triumphant at
the happy ending. The ballet is premiered in Birmingham next month and
promises to be the highlight of the season.
Birmingham Royal Ballet is also presenting a Triple Bill which will be of
great interest to London ballet fans since it gives them their first chance
to see the company in Balanchine's popular Serenade, danced to Tchaikovsky's
Serenade for Strings. Also in the programme will be two other works with
American links, Agnes de Mille's dramatic Fall River Legend, and the rousing
Elite Syncopations, danced to the Ragtime tunes of Scott Joplin.
The general director of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden,is Jeremy
Isaacs. His philosophy is simple. 'The thing that makes the whole job
worthwhile for me is to come out of the stage door and bump into people in
Floral Street with happy faces, who've enjoyed what they've seen and heard,
and are reeling around with the happiness of it.' This is the kind of
programme which should enable Mr Isaacs to enjoy many such encounters.
