FT  18 JAN 93 / Menu with bewildering array of choices: Jurek Martin asks
whether Clinton is able to make the tough decisions
The former senior Reagan administration official was ready to be charitable.
'Of course Clinton's got the brains. You only had to look at the way he
handled his economic summit in Little Rock to see that. No president I can
think of could have pulled that off, and in sentences that made sense. But
the real question - which we still don't know the answer to - is, can he
choose?'
All presidents who enter office, as Bill Clinton does on Wednesday, with
incomplete political resumes do so under a cloud of uncertainty. John
Kennedy's maturity was doubted, as was Jimmy Carter's experience and Ronald
Reagan's awareness of the real world. Old professionals, like LBJ, Gerald
Ford and George Bush, occasioned fewer initial qualms.
Yet American democracy, more than any other, has an extraordinary capacity
to revive, even sometimes to reinvent, itself. There is no preferred
training ground for the White House, no political apprenticeship at the end
of which a man (still only a man) is deemed qualified for the presidency. Of
the last 11, from FDR to Clinton, four had been state governors, five
prominent in Congress, one came from the military and one, the departing
George Bush, was mostly a career public servant. Five moved up from the
vice-presidency, three in emergency and one, Richard Nixon, after an
eight-year wait in the wilderness.
Sometimes it seems that the US is a country without a sense of political
continuation. The list of notionally qualified men who never became
president is very long. The authority of the two main political parties has
been in decline for 25 years, to the point where last year the ultimate
anti-politician, Ross Perot, won nearly one vote in five.
The circumstances of the 1930s Depression may explain the radical
differences between Hoover and Roosevelt. But there was nothing comparable
in the wind of the times to suggest that Reagan would actually carry out a
policy agenda so very different not only from that of Carter, the Democrat,
but also from the middle-of-the-road tenets of his own Republican party.
Yet this capacity to inject new blood and ideas into the body politic has
also been America's strength, unnerving though it may occasionally seem to
an outside world that must live with the elephant that is now the only
superpower. Inside the country, it is nothing less than extraordinary to
observe the extent to which the advent of Clinton is seen not as a high-risk
gamble but as a window of opportunity to fix those parts of the national
machine which have simply stopped working as they should. This same sense
even extends to the prospect of renewed US leadership in tackling everything
from Bosnia to Baghdad. It is not a bad initial mandate for a man elected
with the second-lowest share of the vote this century.
Great expectations indeed are held out for Clinton, still just 46 years old,
shaped by the turbulent 1960s, the first president born after the second
world war and the first in modern times ever publicly to have opposed a war
in which the US was actively engaged, with a wife as impressively well
educated as himself, addicted to policymaking and golf, sometimes short of
temper, worldly-wise but not well versed in the way the world works - in sum
the self-proclaimed 'different kind of Democrat'. The question, as the old
Reagan hand put it and as George Bush tried to say on the campaign trail, is
whether or not he can take the tough decisions.
Some objective circumstances will make his beginning a little easier. First,
he inherits an economy somewhat on the mend. Only the wilder optimists
believe a new boom is round the corner. Consensus forecasts of about 3 per
cent real growth in the year to come will not be sufficient much to reduce
either unemployment (over 7 per cent) or the budget deficit (projected by
the Bush administration at Dollars 300bn and rising). But if the deficit
limits his freedom of action, at least he ought not to be hammered by a
series of depressing monthly statistics in the immediate future.
Second, there is a will on the part of the Democrats who control Congress to
work with him not against him, while the Republican party, especially in the
House, is falling captive to those very conservative ideologues whose
adversarial policies contributed to Bush's defeat. The Democrats seem to
have heard former Vice-president Walter Mondale's warning that, if the party
does to Clinton what it did to President Carter, it would spend the next 28
years in opposition.
In fact, its liberal wing is much weaker now, and Ted Kennedy, its leader, a
man only with a past. Editorials in The New York Times, criticising Clinton
for sending his daughter to a private school and for picking a Washington
lobbyist, Ron Brown, as commerce secretary, do not carry the same potent
menace.
Third, he has picked a cabinet widely approved for its apparent competence
and its variety, except that three-quarters are, along with the Clintons
themselves, lawyers by training. Commendation has, naturally, not been
universal. Among the more vivid dissenters is the New Republic magazine,
which falls into the muscular neo-liberal camp and which derisively
describes Warren Christopher, the secretary of state-designate, as a
'pragmatist mainstream realist liberal conservative moderate centrist' with
the views of 'a sphinx'.
Several special-interest groups, including the American Jewish lobby and
assorted trade and economic factions, have complained at their
under-representation. Others have questioned Clinton's relentless search for
women and members of minorities for senior positions. But the general
impression is that the cabinet will not be short of ideas.
Finally, there is a palpable sense that Clinton is the man of the hour,
someone who has set up his government so he can control it. He will not be
disconnected, as Reagan was in his second term, nor selective in his
interests, Bush's great failing, nor inclined to moralise, Carter's fatal
tendency.
Washington can be a catty town, only too willing, as it is already doing, to
keep a scorecard of campaign promises broken. But it also desperately wants
a new social and political Camelot, even with a fondness for fast food. The
New York Times gently wondered on its front page recently whether Clinton
can live up to his billing as the new national 'idol'. One of his closest
advisers has taken privately to calling him 'the sun king'. Public
fascination with Hillary Clinton, who may well be the most distinctive first
lady since Eleanor Roosevelt, is on an equivalent scale.
But, by definition, honeymoons do not last for ever. If the premise of the
Clinton administration is to change things, so many issues demand attention,
from healthcare to Bosnia, that a question of priorities instantly emerges.
Clinton intends to attack domestic issues first. That has been the thrust of
the transition period, in the appointment of economic and social policy
officials before anybody else, in the Little Rock economic summit, in his
recent meetings with car industry leaders and with his budget team, and last
week's with healthcare experts. He has engaged in some private foreign
policy cramming, talking on the phone to foreign leaders, but even the likes
of Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, or John Major, Kiichi Miyazawa and
Yitzhak Rabin, prime ministers of the UK, Japan and Israel, have had to
accept undetermined places in the post-inauguration queue.
The domestic agenda promises to be heavy, embracing job creation and
budget-cutting and reforms in healthcare, welfare and education. It will be
heavy not only because of the complexities of the issues themselves and the
budgetary constraints on them but because, the honeymoon notwithstanding,
there is no great consensus over the right policy proposals.
The continued focus on a new petrol tax provides a classic illustration.
Whatever the economic and environmental arguments in favour, the coalition
of interests arrayed against - the oil and trucking industries, the public
transport lobby, the rural constituencies, - remains powerful enough to
bring about a legislative battle should the subject ever reach Congress.
Clinton will have to weigh very carefully the risks of being bogged down in
such a quagmire on an issue that he ducked during the election against the
possible knock-on effects on more prized, but equally contentious, reforms
such as the introduction of universal healthcare. If cutting spending
assumes its expected importance in the first term, he is going to need all
the help he can get.
Just because the Democrats run Congress it cannot be assumed they will roll
over and play dead at every presidential proposal transmitted from the other
end of Pennsylvania Avenue. Clinton has the minor advantage that a quarter
of the 103rd House of Representatives are new members, and many are imbued
with attitudes close to his own. But that does not obviate the need to
stroke Congress and to set clear legislative priorities, as Reagan did in
1981 but as Carter did not four years before. History suggests - and Bush,
who lost control of the domestic agenda early on, would concur - that the
first year is critical.
But history also attests to the pull on any president of foreign policy  -
and in this the challenge to Mr Clinton is radically different from that
confronting his immediate predecessors. The US is now the only global
superpower, yet, even without the evil empire, the world is no safer a
place. As Bush said in a farewell address, the US cannot afford now to be
'passive and aloof'.
Clinton has been careful in the transition never to disagree with Bush on
foreign policy. Indeed, freed of election constraints and the ever-cautious
advice of James Baker, Bush's last 10 weeks have seen it pursued in what
many suspect to be a Clintonian manner - particularly in the intervention in
Somalia and the harder line on Bosnia. Bush has also tied up some
outstanding business, such as nuclear arms control with Russia.
There seem to be two clear schools of thought abroad in the new
administration: the emphasis on diplomatic negotiation, embodied in the
appointment of Christopher, viewed not only by the disapproving New Republic
as the star graduate of the Cyrus Vance school of foreign policy; and the
more robust, even interventionist approach associated with Les Aspin at the
Pentagon, Jim Woolsey at the CIA and, on Bosnia, with Anthony Lake, the new
national security adviser in the White House.
Uneasily perched in the middle, at least until his term expires in
September, is General Colin Powell, the esteemed chairman of the joint
chiefs of staff. He has already expressed reservations about excessive
cutting of the defence budget, reorganisation of the duties of the four
military services and too reflexive a deployment of US forces overseas.
There are powerful members of Congress, such as Senator Sam Nunn, head of
the armed services committee, who share some of his opinions. Bipartisan
political mileage may exist now for the use of force, but if three years
hence US soldiers are still getting shot at in distant corners of the world,
as they were in Vietnam, then the Republicans, and possibly Ross Perot, will
have an election issue.
Nobody disputes that Clinton will lead an administration active in foreign
policy, partly because of his inclinations and partly because events will
demand it. But there is no clear sign yet of where, or how, he will want to
get involved first. Relations with western Europe, however, could be
seriously tricky, not only over the Balkans but over such issues as steel
imports and Gatt in general. The Middle East peace process will demand early
attention if it is to be kept on track. Russia cannot be ignored, nor, for
different reasons, can Japan and China. Above all there are the issues of
peacekeeping and peacemaking, not only in the current hotspots (Bosnia,
Somalia, Iraq, Cambodia) but in a fistful of ethnic wars waiting to erupt.
At home and abroad, therefore, the Clinton plate is full. The big difference
from his favourite fast food restaurant is that, at McDonald's, the choices
are limited - and affordable.
