FT  05 FEB 93 / Chinese steelmaker to cut 80,000 jobs
WUHAN Iron &amp; Steel, the fourth largest steelmaker in China, is to cut its
workforce by two-thirds in an effort to achieve western standards of
efficiency, Xinhua news agency reported yesterday.
However, none of the 80,000 workers affected will find themselves out of a
job. Wuhan's decision appeared to conform with the stated aim of the
country's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, of breaking the 'iron rice bowl',
which guarantees workers' basic necessities from cradle to grave. Last year,
the plant, China's main producer of tinplate for can making, produced just
under 5m tonnes of crude steel with a workforce of 120,000. By contrast,
British Steel employed about 40,000 to produce 12.1m tonnes.
In cutting the number of workers and transferring them to ancillary
companies, Wuhan is treading a path already well worn in the west. British
Steel had to reduce its workforce radically in the 1980s. Italy's Ilva,
which has just hired a Japanese managing director, is following the same
route.
In Japan, where employees are used to having a job for life, steelmakers
have had to diversify to maintain employment as well as profits growth.
However, these companies have been faced by stagnant or declining markets
for their output. China is one of the very few places where steel demand is
booming.
Imports are up steeply and, according to Mr Hafidzah Hassan, an analyst at
Asian Capital Partners in Singapore, the supply-demand gap will rise to 12
per cent this year.
Wuhan has not had the same high levels of investment as some of its large
rivals in China. The country's steel showpiece, Baoshan, in Shanghai, made
6.5m tonnes of crude steel in 1992, up from 4.7m the previous year.
Shougang, in Beijing, saw production rise to 5.7m from 4.9m. Wuhan's
production rose by just 380,000 tonnes. But, as a producer of sheet steels,
Wuhan remains a key player in the development of the Chinese steel industry.
Last year, it announced plans to invest in a tinplate facility in the Pearl
River delta near Hong Kong, adding to the huge growth of investments in
China's coastal regions.
China produced 80m tonnes of crude steel in 1992, 9m tonnes more than in the
previous year and the biggest increase in the world. China wants to produce
100m tonnes by 2000, according to estimates from the ministry of
metallurgical industry. Production could rise to 110-120m by 2010 - which
would almost certainly make China the world's biggest producer.
Other Chinese steelworks are also planning investments to meet this growth.
Baoshan, which is set this year to become the holding company for all the
steelmaking facilities in Shanghai, is looking for investment at home and
overseas for a greenfield steel plant in Guangdong province. The plant is
set to produce eventually 10m tonnes a year. Baoshan also wants to build a
3m-tonne plant in Zhejiang province, using the latest thin strip casting
technology which looks set to slash globally the costs of sheet steel
manufacture.
Shougang intends to build a 10m-tonnes-a-year steel plant in Shandong
province. In an effort to meet the raw material requirements for this
expansion, Shougang bought a Peruvian iron ore mine last year and, last
month, started dismantling a disused melt shop in California for shipment to
Shandong.
As steelmaking in China is hugely profitable, Wuhan's move to cut costs is
not necessitated by immediate fears of losing money. Rather, it is aimed to
create a leaner, more flexible organisation to help pay for investments and
prepare for the inevitable downside in this cyclical industry.
Bob Jones is deputy editor of Metal Bulletin
