FT  23 OCT 93 / US and Japan post no progress in trade talks
THE US and Japan concluded two weeks of trade negotiations yesterday,
reporting little progress in bridging their principal differences.
While officials from both sides described the talks as useful and
constructive, Japanese officials noted that some of the proposals made by
the US to open Japan's market to foreign goods involved actions that were
not within the authority of the Japanese government.
Mr Sozaburo Okamatsu, vice-minister for international affairs at the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry, emphasised that setting
numerical targets for imports to Japan would run counter to the Japanese
government's attempts to deregulate the country's markets.
The US appeared to be adopting a less combative approach in trying to open
Japan's markets.
Instead, Ms Charlene Barshefsky, deputy US trade representative, took the
moral high ground by pointing out that the US was only trying to persuade
Japan that it had a responsibility to move in step with other countries of
its stature, in terms of foreign direct investment, import penetration and
market transparency 'in order to promote global growth and to revitalise its
domestic economy.'
Ms Barshefsky underlined that the US was not demanding anything of Japan but
was trying to argue that 'as the world's second largest economy, and perhaps
the world's most pre-eminent economy, Japan should move in line much more'
in those respects, with other industrialised countries. To that end, the US
had presented publicly available data on the foreign penetration of the
public procurement markets for telecommunications and insurance in G7
countries.
According to that data, foreign direct investment in Japan was only 0.7 per
cent compared with 38.5 per cent for the EC and 28.6 per cent for the US. In
the public procurement market for telecommunications equipment and services,
foreign penetration was only 5 per cent in Japan, compared with a 25 per
cent average in the other G7 countries.
Mr Peter Sutherland, Gatt director general, repeated his call on Japan to
accept tariffication of its rice market and said that if the Uruguay Round
failed, Japan, the EC and the US would carry the primary responsibility.
