FT  12 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: School tests set to plague
government
MR JOHN Patten's Commons announcement yesterday of sweeping changes in
national curriculum tests slows down the timetable for implementing them,
but does nothing about the politically more heated topic of the tests for
1993.
National curriculum tests are being introduced in phases, and are now in
their third year in primary schools. Some tests, including those in Welsh
for 11-year-olds, were not planned to start until 1998, according to the
original timetable adopted by the Schools Examinations and Assessment
Council.
The tests had not been interrupted by industrial action until this year,
when they were first made compulsory in secondary schools. Tests for some
seven-year-olds involving continuous assessment will already be almost
complete.
Mr Patten had already launched a subject-by-subject review under Sir Ron
Dearing, the chairman of the the Schools Curriculum and Assessment
Authority, a new body which will govern both the content of the curriculum,
and the testing arrangements. Sir Ron's review is due to report in July, and
his recommendations could be implemented in time for next year.
Rather than wait for Sir Ron, however, Mr Patten has announced changes that
will result in some tests, such as those for 14-year-olds in technology,
taking place this year, but then being withdrawn in 1994. The same applies
to the assessments of seven-year-olds in history, and geography.
Tests for 11-year-olds, to have been made compulsory next year following a
pilot in 2 per cent of schools this year, are now to continue on a pilot
basis for another year.
His decision that tests for seven-year-olds would be restricted to the
'basics', and that the tests as a whole should be 'streamlined' are both
directly in line with recommendations made to Sir Ron last week in a
document jointly submitted by all six teachers' unions, and a group of
representatives of independent schools.
Teachers also welcomed the restriction of the core curriculum at the age of
14 to only three subjects, and his decision to look at using external
examiners for 11- and 14-year-olds. Both moves might help to reduce
workloads.
However, the basic principles of the national curriculum remain untouched.
Children are still expected to be assessed at four key stages - at seven,
11, 14 and 16, and at each key stage they will be separated into 10 levels,
using assessments.
