FT  02 DEC 93 / Russian 'peacekeepers' raise imperialism fears: Doubts are
growing over Moscow's 'army abroad'
As the Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe mulls over the new
Russian military doctrine which provides for the stationing of Russian
troops in the 'near abroad', Colonel Ivan Maleevitch, in the remote republic
of Tajikistan, is laying plans.
As spokesman for the newly-created 25,000-strong Russian and Central Asian
'peacekeeping' force, he is already plotting to paint his vehicles blue.
'We need to do this to show that we are proper peacekeepers,' says Col
Maleevitch, who is charged with explaining Russia's military presence in
Tajikistan, the scene of a bloody 18-month civil war between the government
and Islamic rebels.
His task will be delicate. With the Russian army now actively engaged in the
Caucuses, Moldova and Tajikistan, fears that Russia could be engaged in a
new military imperialism under the 'peacekeeping' guise have been one of the
key issues dogging the CSCE meeting.
In Georgia, Russian troops are guarding the railways in defence of the
Georgian government, and in exchange have received permission to run five
military bases, including three Black Sea ports. This has prompted Mr Tengiz
Chachava, the 'ambassador' in Moscow of Georgian rebel leader Mr Zviad
Gamsakhurdia, to claim that 'it should be clear to all countries now that
what is at stake in Georgia is the resumption of Russian rule'.
In Azerbaijan 200 Russian military advisers are covertly supporting the
Azerbaijani government in exchange for a share in Azerbaijan oil fields for
Russia's state oil group Lukoil, according to Azeri officials.
But it is the 700-mile Tajik-Afghan border which could prove critical in
defining Russia's policies in the 'near abroad', not least because the area
is already an embryo for any future CIS-wide peace-keeping force.
To try to allay western fears, Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister,
recently suggested that the operations be given a United Nations or CSCE
mandate, insisting that 'Russia's withdrawal from its peacekeeping role
would threaten the former Soviet Union with a Yugoslav scenario'.
The proposal has already provoked outrage from some Baltic and central
European countries as well as some UN officials, who point out that the UN
stipulates that 'peacekeepers' cannot be taken from adjacent countries.
Nevertheless the proposals have received a more tolerant hearing in Britain,
France and Germany, where there is a grudging acceptance that Russia has
legitimate security concerns on its borders - and that a Russian-held peace
might be better than no peace since the UN is in no position to provide
peacekeepers.
However, as western diplomats admit, the problem is that Russia's
longer-term policy in these areas remains unclear, with the Russian army and
Russian foreign ministry apt to speak with different tongues.
Mr Kozyrev, for his part, insists that Russian troops are needed in
Tajikistan, for example to protect the 200,000 Russians in Tajikistan and
prevent the rebels based in Afghanistan from spreading 'Islamic extremism'
into its southern flank.
In Dushanbe General Boris Pyankov, acting commander of the peacekeeping
force, denies that Russia has any 'imperialistic' aim, pointing out that all
the Russian forces, including the locally based 201 division, are now under
a joint command structure.
This structure, drawn up between Russia, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrghyzstan
and Uzbekistan in August, envisages a six-month peace-keeping term,
renewable at the Tajik government's request.
But this multilateral control is largely a diplomatic figleaf - most of the
heavy weapons remain in the hands of the Russians. With the Russian troops
now in effect propping up the Tajik government, Mr Abdumalik Abduladjanov,
the Tajik prime minister, admits that the troops are likely to be in the
country 'for a long time'.
So far western observers in Dushanbe have retained a discreet silence on the
issue. 'I don't think the United Nations will come out openly with official
support. But I think they will give a tacit nod,' explains one diplomat.
Even if the west accepts Russia's role on the border, it is likely to insist
on strong international scrutiny, which may involve a demand that the troops
maintain a dialogue with both sides. There has been little evidence of this
recently in Tajikistan or Georgia, and in Moldova the Russian forces have
openly sided with the local Russians.
With the mission in Tajikistan likely to be unwinnable, questions also
remain about Russia's patience. After 25 Russians were massacred by the
opposition on the border in summer, Russian leaders know public opinion in
Russia could become less tolerant. . On the ground Russia's presence has
already made the opposition virulently anti-Russian.
'Russia will pay for this in the future - we blame the Russian government
for this,' says Davlat Usmon, opposition leader from his stronghold in the
Pamirs. And in Afghanistan itself, opposition forces are already reported to
be offering Dollars 350,000 for the head of a Russian commander.
