FT  10 MAY 93 / International Company News: Drew Scientific valued at Pounds
25m
DREW Scientific Group, which makes machines that allow doctors to monitor
the management of diabetes, is joining the rush for a market quotation.
It is set to join the stock market later this month through a placing of
some 30 per cent of its shares, putting a value on the whole of this
Chiswick-based group of about Pounds 25m.
Formed by Mr Keith Drew, a former submarine lieutenant in the Royal Navy,
the group has evolved in the last five years from work screening blood for
sickle-cell anaemia carried out with the Institute of Child Health, an
affiliate of Great Ormond Street Hospital.
The placing is expected to be priced at about 110p, to raise Pounds 7m, of
which Pounds 4m will be used for development of the group which has so far
grown from internally generated resources and a small overdraft.
Mr Drew and his family, which currently holds just over 50 per cent of the
shares, will raise Pounds 1.3m through share sales and will be left with
just under 30 per cent of the group.
In the year to March the group made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 151,000 on
sales of Pounds 1.7m. It is currently producing 40 machines a month -
retailing at up to Pounds 15,000 - and the packs of consumables required for
each test, and could make profits of up to Pounds 2m, giving earnings per
share of 5.8p assuming a low tax charge.
The new issue precedes flotation of a similar diagnostic instrument company,
Anagen, due for mid-June although that is still developing its product and
has made no sales.
Drew Scientific's main product, the Glycomat, is an automated analytical
instrument capable of monitoring large numbers of blood samples. It is now
making instruments for a larger market that needs tests for the level of
glycated haemoglobin in blood.
So far Drew has sold only 275 machines. But it claims 'considerable
potential for rapid growth' after it received Food and Drug Administration
approval to sell in the US and launched its main Glycomat product there in
December.
Competition for the system comes from traditional electrophoresis methods,
which are much cheaper but also more time consuming. Other competition is
High Performance Liquid Chromatography, which unlike the Drew system
requires high pressures. The main producers of this are a Californian
company, Bio Rad, and Daiichi of Japan.
Drew has given worldwide distribution rights to Ciba-Corning, a subsidiary
of Ciba Geigy, and also European rights to IL of Milan.
Mr Drew says the group wanted a sounder base for development given the
intentions to market a new, smaller instrument to a wider market later in
the year.
It also needed to move from manufacturing 'cottage industry' style in
Chiswick to a full manufacturing base in Cumbria. 'We have done alright but
we have fresh markets to go for particularly in the US and in Japan,' Mr
Drew said.
