FT  09 MAR 93 / Marc Rich steps down and cuts holding
MR MARC RICH, the interational commodity trader, is retiring from the big
trading company, Marc Rich &amp; Co, he founded in 1973 and has headed ever
since.
The usually secretive company said in a statement that Mr Rich would also be
reducing his shareholding from more than 50 per cent to 15 per cent within
five years.
Mr Willy Strothotte, a 48-year-old German who left the Zug-based company
last year after what Mr Rich called a 'philosophical difference in
management', is to become chief executive. According to the statement, Mr
Rich was 'very pleased' that Mr Strothotte was returning.
It said Mr Rich's share stake would be reduced to 40 per cent, hopefully
within 90 days. 'The management and a number of employees of the company
will acquire the ownership which is being transferred.'
Mr Rich, a Belgian by birth, founded it in New York in 1973 after leaving
the US commodity trading group, Philipp Brothers (Phibro) in 1973 over a
dispute about his annual bonus.
He soon built it up to a multi-billion dollar business. He said last year it
had turnover of Dollars 30bn in 1991, and net worth of more than Dollars
1bn, placing it second only to the US Cargill group among international
traders. It employs about 1,300 people throughout the world and has some 200
shareholders.
In 1984, in the face of tax evasion, fraud and racketeering charges in the
US, he moved to the Swiss city of Zug where the group had its headquarters.
He still faces criminal charges in the US. In the same year, the Swiss
Federal Banking Commission investigated a loan to the Rich group, and
concluded that the loan, secured on a Rich ship, was designed to prevent the
US authorities from confiscating the ship when it entered US waters.
Evidence of unrest at the group emerged last summer when three senior
executives, including Mr Strothotte, left. Mr Rich scoffed then at
suggestions of retirement. 'I guess I am a business machine, yet I have been
doing this for 40 years. When my original partners retired two years ago the
thought went through my mind: 'Should I retire as well?' But it did not take
me long to decide I love the business and this is what I want to continue to
do.'
