FT  21 APR 93 / Drug groups will work together to find Aids cure
FIFTEEN OF the world's largest drugs companies have pledged to work together
in an effort to find a cure for Aids in an unprecedented collaboration.
The effort, which took more than a year to negotiate, involves nearly every
large pharmaceuticals company searching for a treatment against HIV, the
virus that causes Aids, in the US and Europe. The companies' annual sales
total Dollars 55bn (Pounds 36.4bn).
The group includes Wellcome, makers of AZT or Retrovir, the leading drug for
HIV-positive individuals and Aids patients. Earlier this month an important
Anglo-French study claimed that the drug failed to delay the onset of Aids
in asymptomatic HIV-positive patients.
The surprise announcement yesterday said the companies would swap
information, provide their drugs for competitors' clinical trials and
exchange development techniques in an effort to speed up the flow of drugs
to treat HIV-infection.
The groups will only swap information on drugs that are in development being
tested for safety and efficacy. Data about drugs in research, before being
tested on humans, will not be exchanged. No group has a commercial interest
in the collaboration and each group will continue its own clinical trials.
The world pharmaceuticals industry is spending about Dollars 2bn (Pounds
1.3bn) a year to find a treatment for Aids.
'This is an extremely important collaboration,' said Dr Charles Leighton,
senior vice-president for administrative planning at Merck, the US group
that took a leading role in setting up the collaboration.
'The most optimistic route to an Aids therapy in the near term is through a
combination of drugs because the virus is likely to become resistant to
single agents.
'Many of the companies in this collaboration have single agents, but do not
know which combinations to use them in. The hope is that through
collaboration we will achieve more effective treatments more quickly for
this terrible disease,' he said.
He warned that failure rates for drugs in development remained high, but
argued the collaboration was a step in the right direction.
Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo, Europe's largest drugs group,
said: 'I don't see any cut-throat competition in drug development in the
Aids area. No one is going to make much money from Aids but we need to show
that the pharmaceutical industry can produce the goods when it needs to.'
Dr Leighton said it would not have been appropriate to set up collaboration
before, because the drugs did not exist and it was not known how the virus
built up resistance to drugs used on their own. He stressed the initiative
had come from both US and European companies.
The US companies include Merck &amp; Co, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly,
Pfizer, Du Pont Merck and Syntex, as well as Miles and Burroughs Wellcome,
Bayer and Wellcome's respective US subsidiaries. European companies include
Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham of the UK, Roche of Switzerland, Hoechst and
Boehringer Ingelheim of Germany, Astra of Sweden and Sigma-Tau of Italy.
