FT  20 MAY 93 / Clarke firm on police reforms
MR KENNETH CLARKE, the home secretary, yesterday sought to reassure police
officers that he shared their concerns while yielding nothing over his plans
for radical change in the service.
Speaking at the Police Federation conference in Blackpool, he emphasised
that it was the structure of the service that needed reform and 'not the
policemen and policewomen who work within it'.
But Mr Alan Eastwood, federation chairman, warned of deep anxieties and
sinking morale.' I have never known a time when the service, at every level,
has been so demoralised,' he said.
Mr Clarke has started restructuring police authorities to turn them into
smaller, more businesslike bodies and wants to streamline disciplinary
procedures making it easier to dismiss under-performing officers.
In addition, the results of the Sheehy inquiry into police structure and
reward due next month are likely to lead to the abolition of some senior
ranks and the introduction of performance-related pay.
Facing brief outbursts of jeers and heckles, Mr Clarke dismissed the view
that his proposals would increase central control of the service. He said:
'I intend to abolish many of the controls now applied by the Home Office and
let police managers get on with doing their jobs.' Chief constables would be
encouraged to delegate responsibility from their headquarters.
But Mr Eastwood said some people saw 'something positively dangerous' in the
home secretary's plans to reduce local authority representatives, replacing
them with government nominees and a Home Office-appointed chairman.
The new arrangements could be used 'in a dictatorial fashion', he said, and
there was a danger that chief constables who challenged government policies
might find themselves 'brought into line'. Mr Eastwood said police
authorities risked being 'reduced to a walk-on part' and Mr Clarke's
proposals resembled a Home Office takeover or a forced merger where all the
voting shares were held by the home secretary.
'I really do beg you not to press on regardless, impervious of local
opinion, dismissive of professional advice, lumping all criticism of your
grand design as the inevitable voice of special pleading. If ever there was
a time for a minister to listen it is now,' Mr Eastwood said.
Ministers are increasingly determined to take a tough stand on crime and Mr
Clarke said that in addition to amendments to the Criminal Justice Act
announced last week he would legislate soon to give the police powers of
immediate arrest when bail was breached and to bring squatting clearly
within the criminal law.
He also announced an independent examination of the amount of paperwork
imposed on the police by the criminal justice process.
