FT  27 MAY 93 / Britain makes global impact
WHEN the government last carried out a thorough review of science policy 21
years ago, no-one knew how to transfer a gene from one organism to another
and Clive Sinclair's first electronic calculators were beginning to replace
slide-rules.
Now genetic engineering is the basis of the multi-billion-dollar
biotechnology industry and today's laptop computers outperform a 1972
supercomputer. UK science has played an impressive role in the technical
revolutions of the past two decades - a part far outweighing the country's 5
per cent share of global research spending.
That contribution is most evident in fields such as biomedical and chemical
research. Pharmaceuticals are an outstanding example; one third of the most
successful drugs were discovered in the UK.
But even in areas such as electronics, where the country's industrial
performance has been weaker, researchers continue to contribute. For
example, a breakthrough at Southampton University in 1987 enables light
pulses to travel thousands of miles along fibre-optics without the need for
expensive amplifiers.
One way of comparing the impact of researchers in different countries is
'citation analysis', which shows the frequency with which work is cited by
researchers in publications worldwide.
On this basis, UK science has a disproportionate impact, though there was a
decline from the 1981-85 period, when British researchers earned 23 per cent
more citations than the world average, to 1987-91, when they were 16 per
cent above average.
There is no doubt that UK research creates a vast amount of wealth and
knowledge for the world. The question after the white paper is whether the
'technology foresight' process can harness it more effectively for the UK.
The proposals in the white paper target research funding as the core of the
nation's problems in science. How that will cause British companies to
invest in scientific advance is yet to be demonstrated.
The speed of change over the 21 years is shown by the following advances:
BIOTECHNOLOGY
1972: Genetic engineering not yet invented. Biotechnology consists of
traditional fermentation to produce antibiotics, vaccines - and beer.
1993: Biotec is one of the world's great growth industries.
MEMORY CHIPS
1972: Integrated circuits with a few hundred components on one silicon chip
are beginning to replace circuit boards.
1993: Standard 16 Mbit memory chips contain 30m components and store as much
information as 1,000 printed pages.
SPACE
1972: Enthusiasm for space flights is running high after the successful US
Apollo programme. Men on Mars predicted within 20 years.
1993. Astronauts restricted to low orbit, 300 miles above earth. Emphasis is
on utilitarian space technology: satellites for communication and earth
observation.
ROBOTICS
1972: First crude industrial robots are causing excitement.
1993: Hundreds of thousands of robots are working routinely in factories
worldwide. The novelty now is the medical robot helping to carry out human
surgery.
