FT  21 JAN 93 / International Capital Markets: Liffe launches medium-term
German contract
THE launch of Liffe's medium-term German government bond (Bobl) future today
represents the latest round in a fight with Germany's Deutsche Terminborse
for dominance of German interest-rate products.
Last week, the DTB announced plans to link with France's Matif, increasing
the penetration of its D-Mark products.
This is the first time Liffe has launched a new product in direct
competition with a well-established contract on another exchange.
Liffe's Bobl contract will compete with a similar contract on the DTB,
launched in October 1991, which is currently trading an average daily volume
of 13,000 contracts. Last week, the DTB introduced options on the Bobl
future.
The two exchanges already compete head-to-head over bund futures. So far,
Liffe has managed to hold on to its lead with about 70 per cent of the
market.
Liffe also offers a short-term interest rate contract, known as the Euromark
future, which is now almost as actively traded as the bund future, with
volume of over 50,000 contracts a day.
The introduction of a medium-term bond future will encourage spread-trading.
'The German bond yield curve is expected to steepen, so there is a likely to
be a lot of spread-trading between five and 10 years,' said Mr Steve Ballard
of BZW Futures, one of the designated brokers for the new contract.
By taking a long position in the five-year contract and a short position in
the 10-year contract, investors can express the view that the yield spread
between five and 10-year bonds is set to widen.
Some dealers said the availability of short, medium and long-term
instruments, allowing trading across the yield curve, would help win
business back to Liffe.
The DTB does not yet have a short-term contract although it is currently
considering introducing a D-Mark interest rate future.
According to dealers, international business routed through the DTB in order
to trade the Bobl future could return to Liffe.
'A lot of business has been done through brokers by firms which could deal
directly on Liffe,' one trader claimed.
However, while Liffe dominates bund future trading, cash market trading in
shorter-term German debt is more concentrated in the domestic market, which
could give the DTB a natural advantage, in addition to its head start in the
contract.
