FT  23 APR 93 / World Trade News: Clinton's 'bulldog' makes adroit debut
TELECOMMUNICATIONS was the only 'loser' in the settlement this week of the
US-EC dispute over government procurement.
Mr Randall Tobias, vice-chairman of AT&amp;T, America's biggest telephone
operator, said he was disappointed by the pact, but added he was
'encouraged' that the US and EC could reach any agreement at all.
In Washington the business community is heaving a collective sigh of relief.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the untutored 'bulldog' whom President Bill Clinton had
appointed to 'open markets', made his debut with a successful nego-tiation.
Previous trade representatives had come into the job with little knowledge
of their brief. Mr Kantor is an experienced negotiator but it was by no
means certain the skills employed in the give and take of private-sector
talks - or in politics - could be swiftly transplanted to the trade arena.
Mr Kantor and Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, spent most of their
time together alone in the US trade representative's office. In public they
seemed to be increasingly comfortable with each other.
A senior US trade official said they had developed mutual respect and
growing trust.
This bodes well for settlement of the Uruguay Round this year.
Most trade experts agree that the deal the two men cut required creativity
and flexibility. Because they have been silent about how they got where they
did, it is not known whose skills made the difference.
To Ms Kim Elliott, a research assistant at the Institute of International
Economics, the procurement deal looks 'pretty good' but the dispute was more
about symbols and precedents than substance.
'Every directive out of the EC 1992 exercise which involved reciprocity
provisions, we've challenged on principle,' she said. Referring specifically
to the EC utilities directive which came into effect at the beginning of the
year, she added: 'The US decided it just couldn't let this one go by.'
It was also the first big market opening by the EC in any dispute with the
US in years.
Ms Elliott, who conducted a study of the results of section 301, an
aggressive US market-opening provision, found that the law had produced
liberalisation in two-thirds of the cases filed.
But its lowest success rate was with the EC.
