FT  18 MAY 93 / Government knew of arms sales to Iraq via Jordan, inquiry
told
THE government agreed an important defence package with Jordan in 1985
although it suspected Jordan was being used to divert military equipment to
Iraq, according to evidence gathered by the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, inquiry counsel, said yesterday: 'Papers we have
seen show that by 1985 there was government knowledge that Jordan was being
used as a diversionary route for military equipment to Iraq.'
Under government guidelines at the time, during the Iran-Iraq war, no
equipment which might prolong the conflict should have been exported to
either combatant.
The revelation at the start of the second week of public hearings in the
Scott inquiry raises potentially embarrassing questions about a deal that
involved government ministers, and a secretive government-owned company.
Government documents held by the inquiry team show that in September 1985,
the government signed a memorandum of understanding between the UK and
Jordan. This was later to result in a Pounds 270m defence package which was
arranged by International Military Services (IMS), a defence company wholly
owned at the time by the Ministry of Defence.
In response to questions in parliament, both Mr John Major and Mrs Thatcher,
when prime minister, have in the past refused to comment on IMS on grounds
of commercial confidentiality.
Miss Baxendale referred to previously restricted MoD documents which show
that IMS was criticised by two defence officials in July 1985 for allegedly
attempting to evade the guidelines. The criticism referred to a contract for
armoured recovery vehicle spare parts to Iraq which were instead used to
supply tanks.
The inquiry also heard evidence yesterday from Sir Adam Butler, minister for
defence procurement between September 1984 and September 1985.
Questioned about government knowledge of Jordanian diversion of military
equipment and of the internal criticism of IMS, Sir Adam said he had no
personal knowledge of either, although he accepted that his post made him
responsible for IMS's conduct as a company.
The inquiry, headed by Lord Justice Scott, was set up in November in
response to public controversy surrounding the collapse of the
Matrix-Churchill case in which three former directors of the machine tools
company had been accused of illegally trying to export arms-making equipment
to Iraq. The inquiry is investigating whether official guidelines were
breached with the knowledge or complicity of the government.
The inquiry next Monday will take evidence from Sir Hal Miller, a former
leading Conservative backbencher who in April 1990 revealed that he had
warned the government about Iraq's supergun two years before parts for it
were seized by UK customs officers.
