FT  29 NOV 93 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1993 (28): Crackdown
against copying - Software piracy / Illegal copying, software viruses, games
and pornography are among the risks when office automation goes live
One problem with giving staff personal computers (PCs) with word processing
and spreadsheet programs is that they can run other software, too. The
results can range from lost files wiped out by computer viruses, to fines
and imprisonment for company directors for illegal copying of software
products.
The issues surrounding the running of other software are related not so much
to the wasting of company time on games and pornography as to the risks of
viruses and illegally copied business software products being loaded into
office computers.
The Business Software Alliance, representing the world's biggest PC software
companies, says as much as half of its members' products are copied. UK
users are among the more responsible: the copying rate here is between 30
and 40 per cent.
Lotus Development, supplier of the 1-2-3 spreadsheet package, last year
appointed a director of copyright protection after estimating that half its
users worldwide were using pirated copies. Wordperfect and Microsoft
recently found pre-release versions of their products on on-line bulletin
board systems available to anyone who could communicate through a PC.
The UK's Federation Against Software Theft (Fast) says its 1,100
investigations last year found that most copying - almost 60 per cent - is
done by people who are unaware of the copyright law. A fifth is done by
computing managers seeking to cut costs. Only 12 per cent is by people or
companies which sell software.
'So many people simply don't realise it's illegal to copy the word
processing or database program that's passed across the desk,' says Mr Bob
Hay, chief executive of Fast and a former chief superintendent in London's
Metropolitan Police. 'Because it doesn't feel like a crime, they don't think
of it as one.'
Fast was formed in 1984 and has more than 450 member companies, including
leading computer companies and users.
Fast has also recently surveyed 600 company directors, who face up to two
years in prison and unlimited fines if their organisation is caught copying
software. About 45 per cent of directors believe copying goes on in their
organisations.
This survey shows that the main reason for copying is that it is so easy:
this was mentioned by 65 per cent. Cost was mentioned by 58 per cent.
Those questioned now take the whole issue seriously. More than 80 per cent
believe observance of the law should be tackled by top management, although
half feel it is the users who should be responsible for their own software
piracy.
More than 70 per cent would take action against employees found copying
software and a fifth of these make it a dismissal offence.
One fear connected with software piracy is that of the introduction of
viruses. Any disc brought from outside, whether it holds pirated software or
a legally bought product or is a give-away by a computer magazine, can
contain a program which at best periodically displays a rude message and at
worst deletes information. One estimate says there are more than 1,200
viruses in existence, although a dozen or so are the most prevalent.
As with software piracy, the introduction of viruses is generally down to
ignorance and an absence of safeguards. Surveys show that well over 80 per
cent are introduced by people loading a floppy disc.
Slack management is highlighted by Fast as a reason for software copying: a
third of directors questioned mentioned a lack of adequate software
management policies as a reason. Companies reported on in this issue of
Software At Work certainly believe firm policies pay off.
Mr Tony Fisher, audit and security manager at PC auditing company Safe
Guard, pinpoints the management issue as the main cause of the introduction
of both viruses and illegally copied software.
'Companies are spending thousands of pounds a year on office hardware and
software but it's being badly managed,' he says. 'The decentralisation trend
means more managers are getting their own budgets and spending authority and
often buy PC products on their credit cards. There's no central control over
these purchases and their use.'
Safe Guard, a joint venture by Barclays Computer Operations and systems
house Deverill Computers and Communications, uses the Incontrol Audit
package from Greenscreen to run its auditing service.
An auditor loads the Incontrol disc into each computer and the program scans
the system to record information about the software that is loaded and about
the equipment configuration. Incontrol later produces reports about all the
machines and software. It is then up to management to decide whether to
delete rogue software or buy extra licences.
'We find all sorts of things,' says Mr Fisher. 'We find viruses by the
bucketful. We always check for viruses before we load the Incontrol disc, as
we don't went to get it infected.
'One leading bank with tight control told us it has one or two in every 100
PCs infected every year. In offices where there are few or no controls we
find up to 10 per cent of machines infected.
'We find lots of pornography, sometimes animated. We find it on senior
managers' PCs and across whole departments. In a department it's probably
like a porno magazine: one person brings it in and it does the rounds. We
find machines full of rubbish: ancient files which no one needs. On one
machine recently we found 12 earlier versions of the DOS operating system.
'We also come across machines which are running vital work, but can't be
accessed. They might be managing all the files on an office network but
no-one has the password and the staff who set up the system have gone.'
One way of preventing staff from bringing in discs is to make it impossible
for them to load the discs until they have been checked.
Clerical Medical Investment Group does this by using the Disknet package
from Reflex Magnetics. The package is loaded on every PC and will only read
discs which have a special code, calculated from the disc contents. The code
is inserted by a known clean PC running one or more virus checking packages
and typically referred to as a sheepdip or gateway.
If the disc contents are changed by a user at his or her own PC, for example
by editing a document, the Disknet program on that PC calculates a new code.
A user can therefore move a disc between PCs which run Disknet, and are
therefore free of viruses, without having to put it through a virus scanner
every time.
This means that scanners only have to be installed and updated on specific
gateway machines, not on every office PC.
'We had a couple of very minor incidents and saw the likelihood increasing,'
says Mr Mark Oram, a computer security analyst at Clerical Medical. 'We
assumed that if we got a virus the source would probably be software brought
from home or from magazines, so we wanted to prevent staff bringing it in.
'We didn't want to rely on people going to a sheepdip PC to run a virus
check: it's very easy to forget. But this package forces them to do so.'
Enforcement and education are seen as the complementary ways of stamping out
viruses and software piracy.
Bob Hay at Fast comments: 'As long as software copying exists, we have a
role in education and enforcement - we must continue to work to increase
commitment from management.
'The battle is far from won.'
