FT  23 AUG 93 / Clinton joins lobbyists with pitch for Saudi air business
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's personal intervention with King Fahd of Saudi
Arabia on behalf of US aircraft manufacturers could signal a new style of
high pressure export promotion by the US government, according to
administration officials in Washington.
The results of Mr Clinton's telephone call to King Fahd, urging him to buy
Boeing and McDonnell Douglas jets for the fleet modernisation planned by
Saudia, the national airline, are not yet clear.
Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the home state of Boeing, proclaimed
victory last week, but industry experts believe each of the three large
passenger aircraft makers - Boeing, McDonnell and Airbus Industrie of Europe
 -is likely to receive at least a share of the Saudia order.
White House officials said Mr Clinton had encouraged King Fahd to buy
American, but had lobbied for the US aerospace industry in general, rather
than for any particular manufacturer.
'The president has said he would do all he could to promote US aircraft and
aircraft manufacturers,' said Ms Dee Dee Myers, the White House press
secretary.
Ms Murray said: 'What it really shows is that finally government and
business understand that they have a partnership in the worldwide economy.'
President Clinton has repeatedly stressed his desire to make economics a
more central component of US foreign policy and is eager to create more jobs
in export industries.
The proposed modernisation of Saudia's 107-aircraft fleet is expected to
include the purchase of about 60 aircraft, for delivery up to the year 2000.
Some industry officials believe Saudia may not announce the results of its
tender until October. Worth between Dollars 6bn and Dollars 8bn (Pounds 4bn
and Pounds 5.3bn), the order is by far the largest currently being contested
in the civilian aerospace market.
French officials last month said they were confident that Mr Alain Juppe,
France's foreign minister, had succeeded in persuading Saudia to order 44
aircraft from Airbus, but aerospace industry analysts said Saudi irritation
at the early announcement could have cost the European consortium some of
the order.
Boeing and McDonnell officials are worried that Ms Murray's comments could
have the same effect. It is a maxim in the industry always to allow the
customer to announce the order.
US efforts to win the lion's share of the Saudia order, however, appear to
have been sustained and well co-ordinated.
Mr Clinton's telephone sales pitch followed a trip to Saudi Arabia in May by
Mr Ron Brown, the commerce secretary, and has been backed up by the US
Export Import Bank's decision to help Boeing's bid with a preliminary
financing commitment of Dollars 6.2bn in direct loans and guarantees.
US presidents are, however, no strangers to intensive lobbying. Former
president George Bush visited Japan with US car and car part manufacturers,
although this raised hackles in Tokyo - which 10 years earlier had reacted
snootily to Mrs Margaret Thatcher's efforts to persuade Japanese carmakers
to locate in the UK. The Asahi Shimbun newspaper said the then prime
minister had 'become an official in an employment agency'.
