FT  02 JUN 93 / Survey of Shanghai (4): Nanking Road's familiar names - The
multinationals are investing in strength
WALK down Nanking Road, Shanghai's main shopping street, stroll on the Bund
along the Huangpu river, or cross the river to the Pudong development zone
and evidence of foreign investment abounds.
On Nanking Road, Benetton, Stefanel and the Sincere department store chain
from Hong Kong have established new shops and emporiums. Du Pont and
Pilkington have settled in Pudong, and a Kentucky Fried Chicken sign has
been attached to the stately facade of the old Dong Feng hotel on the Bund.
After a hesitant start, foreign investors are pouring money into Shanghai.
And local officials, foreign businessmen and western commercial attaches say
investment is likely to continue to surge.
Mr Xia Zhongguang, senior economist with the Shanghai Municipal Foreign
Investment Commission, described 1992 as a 'very special year' in which
approval was given for 2,012 projects with proposed investment of Dollars
3.5bn, equal to the previous entire 10 years.
Since 1978 the Shanghai FIC has approved more than 4,000 projects with total
investment of Dollars 8.5bn, of which about 40 per cent of committed funds
have actually been invested.
Hong Kong investors have been the most active, followed by the US, Japan and
Taiwan. But with the establishment of formal relations between China and
South Korea last year, South Korean business may soon figure prominently in
Shanghai's future.
The first three months of the year saw approval for 750 new projects with
projected investment of Dollars 1.8bn.
Relaxation of controls on foreign investment in real estate has helped fuel
the investment surge. About half of new investment is in real estate,
including office buildings and residential quarters. The rest is fairly
evenly divided between light and heavy industry.
Foreign banks and insurances companies are also boosting their presence in
the Shanghai, including several ground-breaking ventures. Banque National de
Paris and Commercial Bank of China signed in 1992 a Dollars 60m agreement to
establish China's first joint venture bank. Shanghai also approved China's
first foreign insurance company - American International Group - a wholly
owned joint venture. AIG had operated in China since early this century,
until the communist takeover.
A feature of rapidly increasing foreign investment is heightened Japanese
involvement, after a slow beginning. Hitachi, Sharp, Matsushita and Toshiba
are just a few of the big-name Japanese companies becoming more deeply
engaged in Shanghai's economy. Japanese investment of about Dollars 200m is
proposed in plants producing air conditioners, compressors, components for
TV tubes and batteries.
Ford is also moving in with plans initially to produce automotive
components, but with a view eventually to becoming involved in building a
range of vehicles. Among foreign car makers Volkswagen is already well
established, producing Santana sedans.
Mr Xia made it clear that Shanghai's main aim was to attract high technology
industries, and preferential tax policies, including three-year tax
holidays, were aimed at this sector. So far, 120 projects in the hi-tech
area had been given the go-ahead, including Volkswagen and Pilkington which
is involved in a successful float glass joint venture.
Shanghai's other priority is to attract foreign investment in infrastructure
projects such as power stations, highways and telecommunications. As a
clever inducement, the authorities are offering valuable real estate as
compensation.
