FT  28 APR 93 / IoD attacks handling of economy: Confidence rises sharply
but business leaders demand government rethinks strategy
BRITISH business leaders yesterday warned that long-term recovery would be
threatened without fundamental changes in government policy.
The gloomy prophecy came as the Confederation of British Industry announced
the sharpest rise in business optimism since 1983 in the first four months
of this year, with exports driving a significant improvement in
manufacturing output and order books.
The generally upbeat survey follows the release of other encouraging
economic indicators this week.
But delegates to the Institute of Directors' annual convention in London
heard business leaders warn that Britain could slip back into a boom-bust
cycle without a fundamental rethink of economic strategy.
Mr Peter Morgan, the IoD's director general, said the business climate was
improving but Britain risked re-entering the 'dreary pattern of post-war
economic decline' unless business and government worked together to build
lasting prosperity.
Accusing government of being 'in the hands of economists', Mr Morgan said
any recovery on the way was 'more or less over the dead bodies of Bank of
England and Treasury officials'. He called for an independent central bank
to oversee a policy of 'sound money' and the right financial framework for
stable economic growth.
Sir Alistair Grant, chairman of Argyll Group, the food retailer which owns
Safeway, Presto and Lo-Cost, attacked the government for being 'in the grip
of events' and for lack of vision. The state of the economy today was 'very
largely the consequence of Tory government policy'.
He added: 'Surely we are asking for no more than the appropriate level of
competence in government when we require from John Major that he should
create a vision of 21st century Britain, that he should assemble and
organise a government team that is competent to do its job.'
The CBI's latest quarterly industrial trends survey reported that while the
manufacturing sector was emerging from recession, the strength of recovery
was threatened by economic slowdowns in other European countries and
disappointingly weak investment intentions.
Sir David Lees, chairman of the CBI's economic affairs committee,
acknowledged that the findings of the latest quarterly industrial trends
survey were positive but said industry was waiting to see its trends
confirmed: 'We can't yet be fully confident that the economy is on a firmly
upward path,' he said.
The survey showed that a three-year decline in total new orders came to an
end in the first four months of this year. Manufacturers, who have depleted
stocks to their lowest level for almost three years, are now expected to
increase output at the quickest pace since 1989.
Exports rose in the past four months, suggesting that the effect of
industry's competitive edge is outweighing the difficult economic conditions
of the UK's main European trading partners.
The bad news was that both investment and employment in manufacturing are
expected to continue falling, albeit at a slower rate than for most of last
year. Sir David said he thought business was being 'quite properly cautious'
and waiting to be confident of the recovery.
IoD conference and the CBI industrial trends survey, Page 9;
Dynamism thrust upon it, Page 19;
Lex, Page 20;
Currencies, Page 35;
London stocks, Page 44
