FT  24 APR 93 / Yeltsin pledges dominant role for presidency over state
bodies
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday promised Russians a constitution in which
presidential power would dominate every other state institution if he won
their support in tomorrow's referendum on the country's future.
Speaking on television in his native Ekaterinburg, Mr Yeltsin claimed the
four-question referendum was a pivotal test for Russia. 'Will reforms in
Russia continue, will we finally achieve results that every family and every
region can feel? Or . . . will Russia turn backwards, without realising that
the turning point was so close at hand?' he asked.
A poll published by Izvestia yesterday showed that Mr Yeltsin enjoys the
support of 57 per cent of those who would vote on the first question - do
you trust the president? However, voters are similarly divided over the
second question, on support for Mr Yeltsin's economic programme.
The other questions ask if voters want early elections for the presidency
and for parliament.
Mr Yeltsin hinted that he would push the new constitution through rapidly
against all opposition. Mr Sergei Filatov, the president's chief of staff,
said last night that if he won the referendum, Mr Yeltsin would 'appeal to
the people . . . to adopt a constitution and hold new elections. These
documents are being prepared'. He gave no details but Mr Sergei Shakhrai,
the president's main legal adviser, said these included a new electoral law.
The proposal, full of guarantees of human rights, would allow people the
right to own and dispose of property. This right was mooted in the days of
former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev. But property ownership remains in
a twilight world between legality and illegality.
The president would have the right to nominate the prime minister, the heads
of the armed forces, the head of the constitutional court and other top
judges, the central bank chairman and anyone else in a position of power in
Russia. Parliament would have the right to approve or veto his choice, but
he could override its objections by dissolving it and calling fresh
elections.
This parliament, a holdover from Soviet days, divided into Supreme Soviet
and Congress of People's Deputies, would be replaced by a bicameral assembly
with rights confined to debating legislation (introduced by the president)
and supervision.
In an introduction to excerpts from the draft constitution printed in
Izvestia, Mr Yeltsin said that 'a vote on confidence in the president is not
about an abstract bright future, but about concrete legal guarantees of
civil rights and human values'.
His initiative came as General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister, rejected
the charge of corruption brought against him on Thursday night by the
procurator-general as 'a political act . . . aimed at discrediting
government structures'. Gen Grachev is the most senior of ministers and
presidential aides against whom corruption has been alleged. The allegations
emanate mainly from Gen Alexander Rutskoi, the vice-president.
Shortfall in G7 aid; Vote-rigging denied; Referendum fails to inspire St
Petersburg Page 2
