FT  21 OCT 93 / India records sharp increase in exports
INDIA'S exports rose 24.3 per cent to Dollars 8.7bn in the five months to
August, raising hopes the country's wide-ranging economic liberalisation is
starting to produce results.
The sharp rise in the first five months of the 1993-94 financial year
contrasts with a sluggish 3.6 per cent rise in 1992-93, according to the
government's monthly economic report published yesterday.
The strong export performance is helping to push India's foreign exchange
reserves to record levels: at the end of September they stood at Dollars
7.6bn compared with just over Dollars 1bn in mid-1991 when the government of
Mr P V Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, launched its restructuring
programme amid a balance of payments crisis.
The reserves are so high that India, which was bailed out in 1991 with loans
from the International Monetary Fund, has for the moment delayed entering
into a new medium-term IMF borrowing programme.
Weak imports are contributing to the reserve position. Imports in the first
five months of 1993-94 fell 3.7 per cent to Dollars 8.9bn, leaving a trade
deficit of just Dollars 255m, against Dollars 2.3bn for the same period last
year.
The decline in imports reflects continuing weak demand in heavy industry,
hit by a fall in sales to state-owned enterprises, which are suffering
because subsidies are being cut under the reform programme. Meanwhile, with
industrialists uncertain about the long-term effects of liberalisation,
private sector demand is showing little sign of recovering. Industrial
production in the first three months of the financial year rose 0.2 per
cent.
Economists puzzled by the apparent failure of export growth to generate more
overall industrial growth believe the reason may be that the industrial
production statistics exaggerate the importance of large companies in heavy
industry; much of the export growth has come from small companies in
industries such as garment-making, jewellery and engineering components.
Indian forces fired tear gas and swung truncheons yesterday to disperse
Moslem demonstrators supporting insurgents besieged inside Kashmir's holiest
Islamic shrine, AP reports from Srinagar.
