FT  30 SEP 93 / International Company News: Global overcapacity adds to woes
 -Hopes rest on tie-ups and new models
YESTERDAY'S downgrade by Mazda reflects the severity of the business
environment facing Japan's third-largest carmaker.
Mazda's 60 per cent export ratio makes the company vulnerable to this year's
rapid appreciation of the yen and the sharp downturn in Europe, notably in
Germany where Mazda is the top-selling Japanese car.
In Europe, plans for manufacture have been shelved in spite of mounting
pressure for a reduction in Japanese imports. Earlier this year, Mazda was
forced to abandon a tie-up with large shareholder Ford that would have given
it a manufacturing base in the European Community.
Mazda is losing ground in its domestic market where, in the first six months
of this year, it posted the largest decline in output among Japan's 11
vehicle manufacturers. Output fell 18.6 per cent, compared with an industry
average of 7.2 per cent.
The company blames the decline in part on a reduction of pick-up truck
manufacture, due to its decision to buy pick-ups from Ford starting this
summer. But officials admit that a lack of new models has not helped.
The forecast pre-tax loss of Y32bn (Dollars 301.9m) for the year ending next
March will be Mazda's first loss in 23 years. Some analysts say that Mazda
over-extended itself in the domestic market by launching five dealership
channels and a strategy to increase market share to 10 per cent.
The company is addressing these problems with a programme to pursue quality
rather than quantity in production, through cost-cutting and plans to
strengthen its domestic sales force.
Mr Yoshihiro Wada, president, sees the company's woes as part of an
industry-wide trend: 'There is overcapacity in the world auto industry new
car demand is not going to increase much in developed countries which are
mature markets.'
Each carmaker must deal with this overcapacity by adjusting production to
levels more appropriate to slow growth. But Mr Wada is loath to reverse
completely Mazda's recent expansion programme.
It does not help that Mazda has a brand-new factory in Japan which is not
running at capacity.
'Mazda is too big to become a niche player,' Mr Wada says. 'It needs a range
of models as core mass-market products, and other specialist cars in
addition.'
Mr Wada is looking to tie-ups with other carmakers as a way to keep a full
product range and still survive in markets where he fears future growth
could be less than 1 per cent.
'We need to make a range of products because dealers want a number of models
to offer their customers, even though they may not be in large volumes,' he
explains.
Mazda is buying diesel engines from Isuzu and negotiating with Nissan to
cross-supply each other with commercial vehicles. The same strategy could be
applied on a global level, where the needs of regional markets differ
significantly, says Mr Wada.
He is optimistic that such co-operation 'in which each company maintains its
own identity' provides a way around the overcapacity afflicting the world
car industry.
But he is impatient with US demands that Japan make more efforts to open its
car market to imports and that Japanese carmakers buy more US auto parts.
His message is that US carmakers need to make a greater effort to develop
cars that Japanese consumers want.
Given Mazda's dismal performance in its domestic market, it is a criticism
Mr Wada himself may face if the Japanese car market remains weak. Mazda is
counting on a number of new model launches expected in the coming months to
revitalise sales.
