FT  19 NOV 93 / Survey of UK Leasing and Asset Finance (6): Initiative
proves a damp squib - A look at the impact on the public sector
THERE was jubilation in much of the UK leasing industry following the launch
in last November's autumn statement of the government's private finance
initiative.
The initiative, announced by Mr Norman Lamont, then chancellor, included a
series of measures designed to encourage the private sector to finance
public expenditure. These included new rules to encourage greater use of
leasing by civil service departments, government agencies, nationalised
industries and the health service.
Jubilation has been shortlived, however, with little so far to show in the
way of new leasing business apart from one large and rather unusual deal
involving railway rolling stock. While many in the industry still hope to
see big opportunities open up in the public sector, progress so far has been
painfully slow.
Until last year, Treasury accounting rules provided an almost insuperable
obstacle to leasing in central government. Apart from property and some
specialised leases, the capital value of the asset had to be deducted from
the expenditure total of the department or agency in the first year of the
lease. Thus, even operating leases offered no significant benefits in
smoothing expenditure across the life of the asset.
This contrasted with local government where most councils now finance much
of their non-buildings capital expenditure through leasing, according to Mr
Andy Thompson, secretary of the Finance and Leasing Association. Local
authority leasing of vehicles and other movable equipment accounted for the
bulk of the Pounds 844m of public sector business recorded by the
association last year.
The autumn statement offered new hope for leasing in the civil service,
health service and nationalised industries. The chancellor opened up the
possibility of greater opportunities for the public sector to use leases
where they offered the best value for money.
As in the rest of private finance initiative, the key was the transfer of
risk. Where the 'great majority of the risk' stays with the lessor, only the
leasing payments would count against public expenditure allocations.
This ruled out finance leases, as was made clear in a subsequent Treasury
note on leasing, issued in May. With access to finance at gilt rates, it
will usually be cheaper for central government to finance purchases of
capital equipment directly.
However, the potential for converting capital projects into current spending
through operating leases could now be explored for public bodies such as the
health service and British Rail.
The initial stumbling block has proved to be the requirement for a
substantial transfer of risk, according to Mr Thompson. 'The government is
looking for something extra in the form of residual values or the
maintenance of the leased assets,' he says.
On assets worth less than Pounds 1m, the only requirement imposed by the
Treasury is that the lease should count as an operating lease under the
relevant accounting standard SSAP 21.
And with assets worth more than Pounds 1m but less than Pounds 10m, the
Treasury has devised a simple rule of thumb for determining whether the
great majority of the risk has been transferred to the lessor. The
requirement will have been satisfied if the present value of the lease
payments amounts to less than 70 per cent of the value of the assets.
But if this test cannot be satisfied, the Treasury will require convincing
that risk has been substantially transferred through a detailed risk
analysis. Such an analysis will always be required for assets worth more
than Pounds 10m.
In practice, these onerous requirements have largely limited new leasing
business to smaller projects below Pounds 1m. Detailed project opportunities
have been slow to come in, according to the Finance and Leasing Association.
Interest in finding ways of satisfying Treasury criteria has also been
dampened by the additional requirement to open public procurement contracts
to competitive bidding. In this notoriously secretive business, leasing
companies have been reluctant to come forward with innovative forms of
leasing which will then be exposed to competitors through tendering.
The main exception in this lack of progress has been in railway equipment.
In the autumn statement, the chancellor gave British Rail the go-ahead to
lease Pounds 150m of rolling stock in the run-up to privatisation. The two
main UK manufacturers, ABB and GEC Alsthom, were invited to compete for the
money to ensure maximum value for money.
The battle to win the contract raged for much of this year, spurred on by
rivalry between the two BR divisions which stood to benefit from the new
order. Last month, ministers announced that ABB had won the competition,
with a contract that includes responsibility for financing, building and
maintaining the trains - in addition to accepting the risk involved in the
residual value of the rolling stock at the end of the deal.
This residual risk could have been a considerable one, given that once BR is
privatised, passenger franchises are expected to be awarded for five to
seven years, much less than the expected life of railway rolling stock.
However, the actual risk may have already been diminished by the creation of
three new leasing companies to take over BR's existing rolling stock and
lease it back to the franchisees. The franchise director will be able to
direct franchisees to use particular types of rolling stock, so that it will
be possible to write off investment in new equipment over a reasonable
period.
The chance of ABB, or any other lessor, being left with new rolling stock at
the end of a franchise period has thus been considerably reduced.
These changes to the rail privatisation structure will make rolling stock
leasing much more attractive, according to Mr Ian Henley of NatWest Markets.
'There is an enormous appetite in the market for big ticket opportunities,'
he says. 'Bankers who have had their fingers burnt on aircraft leasing are
now doing rail business across Europe and are looking to finding similar
opportunities in the UK.'
