FT  06 MAY 93 / Jordanian businessmen count their losses
JORDANIAN businessmen and currency dealers counted their losses yesterday
after Iraq withdrew from circulation old, premium-priced banknotes in an
attempt to shore up the Iraqi dinar at home, Reuter reports from Amman.
The ID25 notes have been hoarded in Jordan and the Gulf by speculators
waiting for the fall of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein or the lifting of
United Nations trade sanctions to boost the sharply devalued currency.
'I have been wiped out overnight with all my small savings,' said Mr Zein
Ayyad, 40, who had put most of his JD8,000 (Dollars 11,700) savings into the
now-withdrawn Iraqi currency. 'I do not believe there is a house in Jordan
that has not been hurt by this move.'
Baghdad closed its border with Jordan at midnight and gave Iraqis a week to
exchange the ID25 notes, known as the 'Swiss version' or 'originals', for
those printed in Iraq since it invaded Kuwait in 1990.
Jordanians had no place to turn for compensation. 'Outside speculators in
possession of 'Swiss dinars' have been caught with their pants down. . . the
move clearly was to stop them gaining,' said Mr Mifleh Aqel, a senior
Jordanian banker.
'It will boost the purchasing power of the dinar held inside Iraq by
reducing the money supply and prevent the holders of outside notes from
using them to increase inflation on goods.'
Traders said the local branch of Iraq's state-owned Rafidein Bank refused to
take the 'Swiss' notes from them and transfer them to their accounts in
Iraqi banks. Calls from anguished dealers poured into Jordan's central bank
asking if Amman had any plans to intervene to help them change the Iraqi
money.
'Originals' have also been amassed by traders who delivered goods to Iraq.
'We have official papers proving we took it out in return for goods we gave
them,' said Mr Ibrahim Salem, a food merchant, showing Iraqi certificates.
Baghdad's move angered many Jordanians who backed Iraq during the Gulf war.
'All this support for Iraq has come to nothing,' said Mr Ali Odeh, a
disgruntled investor.
