FT  22 APR 93 / Virgin Radio banks on seductive powers of Mrs Robinson
VIRGIN Radio, the UK's first national commercial rock station, was playing
the 1960s hit Mrs Robinson yesterday. It was, however, a version by the
Lemonheads, not the original by Simon and Garfunkel.
The difference perhaps helps to define the new station's place in the
market. Virgin, which is launched officially on April 30, aims to broadcast
the best adult album rock music of the past 25 years, aimed at the 20 to
45-year-old market.
'We are too old for the charts and too young for the gold stations,' says Mr
David Campbell, chief executive of the station. Virgin Radio is 75 per cent
owned by Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group with the remainder held by Apax,
a venture-capital group.
Although there are still eight days to the launch, the sound of Virgin Radio
1215 AM can already be heard all over the country.
Mr Campbell decided to use the transmitters he had available from the
beginning of this month. The station can do anything at the moment apart
from take money for advertising before the official launch.
From Monday Virgin Radio will be broadcasting 24 hours a day and even
transmitting examples of the advertisements that will run from April 30  -
without charge.
Virgin bid Pounds 1.8m for the licence in a joint venture with former
breakfast broadcaster TV-am which has since sold its stake. The total
investment will be about Pounds 12m. The station will be run with a total
staff of 42, including 15 presenters.
Virgin Radio has guaranteed advertisers an audience of 3.3m - although this
may be on the conservative side.
In its first few months on air Classic FM quickly reached more than 4m
listeners a week.
Mr Campbell says the station is already ahead of its projections. It is
believed that more than Pounds 2m in advertising will have been booked by
the time of the launch.
Ten 'founding advertisers' include three using UK commercial radio for the
first time - Perrier, Hewlett Packard and a new product from Ambre Solaire.
A fourth, Carling Black Label, is returning to commercial radio for the
first time in six years.
Mr Campbell believes that Virgin, together with Classic FM and Atlantic 242,
which broadcasts over much of the UK from the Irish Republic, will together
boost commercial radio so that it starts earning more than its traditional 2
per cent of total advertising revenue.
Mr Ray Kelly, chief executive of Carat (UK), the media space buyer, believes
national commercial radio will broaden the advertising base of radio as a
whole. Being on AM rather than FM is, however, the downside for Virgin, he
says.
'On FM Virgin would have been a real success. On AM it remains to be seen.'
