FT  22 OCT 93 / Cable venture launched for south Wales
A JOINT venture company set up by South Wales Electricity and International
CableTel of the US plans to invest about Pounds 200m in building a cable TV
and telephone network covering most of urban south Wales.
The venture, one of the largest cable investments in the UK announced this
year, will cover Cardiff, Newport and West Glamorgan, embracing more than
300,000 homes and 26,000 businesses.
It marks a significant diversification for South Wales Electricity (Swalec),
one of the 12 privatised electricity distribution companies in England and
Wales. Swalec forecasts that 10 per cent of its earnings could come from the
joint venture by the year 2000.
The launch follows Swalec's decision earlier this week to buy the cable
franchise for West Glamorgan and CableTel's success earlier this month in
raising more than Dollars 400m (Pounds 265m) in debt and equity in New York
to finance new UK cable ventures.
Mr Wynford Evans, Swalec's chairman, said the deal offered 'significant
business and domestic potential'. The new fibre optic network would give
'enormous opportunities for expansion'.
The joint venture will involve an initial investment of Pounds 75m by the
two companies - Pounds 30m from Swalec, Pounds 45m from CableTel. Once the
company reaches positive cashflow, it plans to raise another Pounds 125m to
complete its network.
In addition to equity, Swalec will use its billing and customer service
systems for the new venture. CableTel will contribute expertise in cable
operation. Swalec expects that within ten years half of the residents in its
south Wales area will be taking cable TV and more than a third cable
telephone.
So far only one other regional electricity distributor has entered the
telecommunications market - Yorkshire Electricity, which is constructing a
regional fibre-optic network covering Yorkshire and Humberside. However, the
National Grid, owned jointly by the 12 distributors, is erecting an optical
fibre network on its pylons.
Other privatised utilities are also entering the market. In August Yorkshire
Water took a stake in a joint venture to build a cable network for
Yorkshire. The other partners are Singapore Telecom and Generale des Eaux,
the French diversified services group.
In the two years since the ending of the UK telecoms duopoly between BT and
Mercury, cable operators have recruited nearly 250,000 subscribers to their
telephone networks.
