FT  22 OCT 93 / Troops overthrow Burundi president
PARATROOPERS of the minority Tutsi tribe yesterday overthrew President
Melchior Ndadaye of Burundi, ending a short-lived experiment in democracy
which had given the majority Hutu tribe a rare taste of political freedom.
There was confusion last night over whether the president was dead or alive.
State radio in neighbouring Rwanda reported that Mr Ndadaye and three senior
government officials may have been executed. But according to Radio Burundi
he was taken prisoner and held at an army barracks. Rwanda state radio said
the army had imposed a state of emergency and a dusk-to-dawn curfew.
Diplomats in Nairobi said they feared a bloodbath in the central African
state, scarred by tribal massacres since independence from Belgium in 1962.
Mr Ndadaye, a Hutu, took office in July after winning Burundi's first
multi-party elections. His victory appeared to mark the end of 31 years of
Tutsi domination, although he was careful to include members of the minority
tribe in his government. The army remained under Tutsi control.
Speaking from a hideout, Mr Jean-Marie Ngedahayo, the deposed government's
spokesman, told Radio Rwanda the president had been lured into a trap by the
coup plotters. Paratroops from the 2nd Parachute Battalion surrounded the
presidential palace at midnight, he said. There was a brief exchange of
gunfire, but soldiers loyal to the government were quickly overwhelmed.
The paratroops fanned out across the capital in search of congressmen and
government ministers.
'All the other leaders of the new Burundi have gone into hiding. Our
telephones have been cut. We are using makeshift gadgets and do not know how
long we will stay in contact with the outside world and friends,' Mr
Ngedahayo said. City centres were deserted. A few demonstrations in favour
of Mr Ndadaye outside the town centre had been suppressed by soldiers, he
said.
The European Community strongly condemned the coup and pledged support for
Mr Ndadaye. In Nairobi, Mr Joseph Banguranbona, Burundian ambassador, called
on the international community to intervene militarily and restore
democracy. 'This is a coup against democracy. There will be bloodshed if the
military consolidate power. The west can't allow this.'
The Tutsi, feudal overlords before colonial days, took control of government
and army after independence, though they made up less than 15 per cent of
Burundi's 5.6m people. The Hutu were victims of periodic massacres. In 1972,
about 100,000 people, mainly Hutu, were killed. In August 1988 Hutu farmers
staged an uprising in which 5,000 people died.
Mr Ndadaye survived the anti-Hutu slaughters in 1972 by fleeing to Rwanda.
He returned in 1983 when ex-President Jean Baptiste Bagaza, said to be one
of the coup leaders, was still in power.
