FT  09 JUL 93 / Seven hanged for terrorism in Egypt: Attacks on tourists and
trying to overthrow government
SEVEN Islamic militants were hanged in Egypt yesterday on charges of
attacking foreign tourists and seeking to overthrow the government - the
greatest number of executions for political crimes in the country's recent
history. Five were hanged in 1982 for assassinating President Anwar Sadat.
The seven were convicted by a military court in April of six separate bomb
and firearm attacks on tourist buses and Nile cruisers late last year, in
one of which a young Englishwoman was killed.
The men were among 49 tried in the case, including six in absentia, who had
proclaimed loyalty to the Gamaa al-Islamiyya extremist group which has
claimed responsibility for attacks on tourism and security forces over the
past year.
A total of 22 individuals have been sentenced to death in trials arising
from politically-motivated violence since December last year. President
Hosni Mubarak has made a point of publicly ratifying each one to signal his
government's resolve to crush the threat from Islamic extremists.
Five more men face the scaffold later this month after being convicted in
May for their part in four bombings and an attempt on the life of Mr Safwat
Sherif, the information minister, who escaped a shooting near his Cairo home
with light injuries last April. Two men were hanged in June - the first
executions for political crimes in Egypt since 1982 - and the remainder of
the 22 sentences were given in absentia.
The government's determination to mete out the severest penalties possible
on Islamic militants comes despite rising opposition from western and
domestic human rights groups both to the use of the death penalty and to the
conduct of trials by military courts.
President Mubarak shifted authority over such cases to military courts in
February to ensure the speediest possible process.
Yesterday's executions come a day after publication of Amnesty
International's annual report, in which it repeats opposition to use of the
death penalty and reiterates allegations of torture, detention without trial
and unfair practices in the military courts.
Just after yesterday's hangings took place in a Cairo prison, in sequence
between 7am and 10am, the Arab Organisation of Human Rights condemned in a
press conference the use of military courts, which were 'outside the normal
legal framework', said Mr Mohammed Fayek, its secretary general.
However, no such opposition is at all likely to deter President Mubarak from
ratifying further death sentences which may result from trials due before
these courts in the next few weeks.
In the biggest of these, a total of 700 alleged members of the Jihad
extremist Islamic group are being tried in two concurrent cases, facing
charges which include the attempted assassination of public figures and
incitement to rebellion.
Moreover, the government has still either to apprehend or to bring charges
against those responsible for an apparently random series of nail-bombings
in Cairo since mid-May which have killed 16 Egyptians.
