FT  10 AUG 93 / Kenya's quest for credibility meets a sceptical eye: Western
donors are unconvinced by attempts to end corruption
MR Micah Cheserem, Kenya's new central bank governor, sought recently to
reassure an International Monetary Fund team in Nairobi of the Government's
zeal in trying to stamp out financial corruption. His assurances met with
scepticism.
Kenya has some way to go to win credibility with its donors, even after the
past turbulent weeks in which two local banks were closed and the Central
Bank's two most senior employees sacked.
Mr Musalia Mudavadi, the finance minister, ordered the closure last month of
the Exchange Bank and the Pan African Bank - known as 'political banks' for
their ties to influential politicians - after external audits, carried out
at the insistence of the IMF, revealed serious financial malpractice.
Exchange Bank is alleged to have defrauded the Central Bank of millions of
dollars by claiming export rebates on fictitious shipments of gold and
diamond jewellery.
In addition, the Central Bank is owed Dollars 156m by the two closed banks
and a third institution under investigation, Delphis Bank, according to an
internal Central Bank memo leaked to the local press. The three local banks
acquired high-yielding treasury bills with unsecured cash advances from the
Central Bank. There is no evidence that the money has been repaid.
'Bank overdrafts to financial institutions are leading to massive inflation,
the need to devalue the currency, instability in the macro-economic scene,'
Mr Edward Jaycox, the World Bank's vice-president for Africa, said recently.
'This deters investment, it also raises questions about the management of
the economy which are more longstanding.'
Such squandering of public money is embarrassing to a government that is
trying to win back foreign aid suspended in November 1991. Kenya is now more
than Dollars 550m (Pounds 369m) in arrears to institutions and creditor
governments on its debt service obligations.
President Daniel arap Moi is under pressure from the World Bank, which has
told the president privately that Kenya has one last chance to clean up its
economic management. The country's largest donor will pull out of the
country if it fails to do so, it said.
While there is some confidence among western bankers in Mr Mudavadi's
determination to root out corruption, many Kenyans believe that the powerful
men behind the President have a different agenda. They believe Exchange Bank
and Pan African Bank were sacrificed because they had already exhausted
their usefulness. Few believe the 'intensive investigations' promised by the
finance minister will result in arrests, prosecutions or convictions.
'Why was (former Central Bank governor Eric) Kotut given another public
sinecure?' asks Mr Peter Waturere, managing editor of the weekly Economic
Review. 'His forced resignation was a cosmetic measure. I don't think it
reflects well on the government's commitment to cleaning up corruption.'
Another banker says: 'What we are seeing now is a lot of transparency with
no accountability.'
Not a day goes by without newspapers or opposition members of parliament
denouncing new scams or documenting evidence of graft within at the heart of
government.
'Western agencies and donors,' the Daily Nation said in an editorial, 'will
not be disposed to rush in and restart full aid support when (a banking)
scandal of these proportions remains not just unresolved but fundamentally
unaddressed.' Some donors worry that the two top positions at the Central
Bank are now being held by men with no experience in banking or central bank
management.
Others however, say they are encouraged that at least some reform has taken
place in the past four months. Special waivers in the Banking Act, which
allowed the 'political banks' to function with impunity, have been scrapped.
Import licences have been abolished. Exporters are now allowed to keep
foreign earnings in retention accounts, which has in turn reduced the
practice of under-invoicing.
But many problems remain. The country's annual audit of its public accounts,
published last month, is a sorry catalogue of the government's inefficiency
and mismanagement. As well as the Exchange Bank scandal, it documents the
use of National Social Security Funds to buy houses from a private developer
at inflated prices; irregularities in the Health Ministry's public tendering
for drugs; and millions of dollars and sterling paid by the Office of the
Vice-President to overseas companies for the procurement of equipment that
was never received.
Mr Jaycox's appeal to Kenya last month appeared final: 'We want Kenya to run
its economy,' he said. 'We don't want to have to come out to Kenya every few
months and look over everybody's shoulder to check the books.'
