FT  23 JUN 93 / International Company News: GM to shift capacity back to US
GENERAL MOTORS begins crucial talks today on a new three-year labour
contract with the United Auto Workers' union - but in a much improved
atmosphere, helped by a GM announcement that it is moving some car
production from Mexico to the US.
Detroit's other two big motor manufacturers - Ford and Chrysler - also face
contract negotiations this summer, but GM's are potentially the most
difficult because it faces more serious financial problems in North America
than its rivals, while its labour relations have been traditionally worse
than theirs.
However, Mr Jack Smith, chief executive of GM since last autumn, has been
trying hard to ameliorate the distrust between the company and the UAW -
including taking the unusual step of leading the GM team when talks open
today.
In a significant move on Monday, he also announced GM was to shift
production of 70,000 to 100,000 units annually of its Chevrolet Cavalier
sub-compact car from a plant in Ramos Arizpe, Mexico, to Lansing, Michigan,
next year.
The move will create between 800 and 1,000 jobs in Lansing, which will be
filled, at least in part, by laid-off GM workers. In return, GM has won from
the UAW an agreement at the Lansing plant which should ensure much greater
labour flexibility and productivity.
The agreement, hailed by both the union and management as a example of
sensible co-operation, should also give a boost to proponents of the North
American Free Trade Agreement, bringing together the US, Mexico and Canada.
NAFTA is facing a tough battle in the US Congress for ratification, with
opponents arguing it would involve a large loss of American jobs to Mexico's
cheaper labour market. However, GM's move is likely to be used to
demonstrate that job movement will not be all one-way.
The Cavaliers being moved to Lansing are earmarked for the US and Canadian
markets. GM says the shift should not mean any job losses in Mexico, with
Cavalier production expanding to meet growing local demands and GM
considering building a new small car at Ramos Arizpe for the Mexican market.
GM does not manufacture a small car in Mexico, where this section of the
market is dominated by Volkswagen and Nissan.
Mr Stephen Yokich, the chief UAW negotiator at GM, said he believed this was
the first time a US motor manufacturer had moved production out of Mexico to
the US.
Praising Mr Smith, he said that 'since he took over as CEO we have had more
talk and more working together than we have had in the history of GM and the
UAW.'
Still, the contract talks will be heavy weather. The Big Three will be
seeking greater labour flexibility and lower health and pension liabilities,
while the union will be trying to maintain benefits and prevent job losses.
After initial negotiations, the union traditionally selects one of the Big
Three as its prime target and then tries to impose the settlement reached
with this company on the other two. Many analysts believe GM is the
likeliest target for this so-called 'pattern bargaining'.
