FT  04 OCT 93 / The Russian Crisis: Steps to Moscow upheaval
THESE are the key events leading up to yesterday's upheaval:
September 21 - Yeltsin suspends the conservative-dominated parliament and
announces fresh elections for December 11-12 in bid to clear way for his
free-market reforms. Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, chief opposition
leader, immediately denounces move as a coup and says he is taking over
power.
September 22 - Parliament votes to strip Yeltsin of presidential powers.
Constitutional court rules Yeltsin has violated the constitution and can be
impeached. Yeltsin says he will not use force to resolve crisis.
September 23 - Yeltsin announces early presidential elections for June 12,
1994, and indicates he will stand for a third term. The Congress of People's
Deputies, Russia's supreme legislature, convenes in parliament building.
September 24 - Yeltsin orders defence and interior ministries to disarm
parliament guards. Congress of People's Deputies votes to call simultaneous
parliamentary and presidential elections by March 1994.
September 25 - Yeltsin says parliament's resistance to his decree is fading
and is 'at its last gasp'. Parliament's electricity cut off.
September 26 - Yeltsin attends Red Square concert. About 15,000 of his
supporters rally in central Moscow, while parliament supporters stage
demonstration near White House.
September 27 - Yeltsin rules out simultaneous elections.
September 28 - Interior Ministry announces it is sealing off parliament with
barricades and razor wire. Police order parliament defenders to surrender
weapons in 24 hours. Khasbulatov says they will fight if attacked.
September 29 - The 24-hour deadline for surrender of arms passes without
incident. Government sets fresh deadline of October 4.
September 30 - Armoured vehicles close in on parliament. Yeltsin accepts
church mediation, offers to lift blockade if weapons surrendered.
October 1 - Yeltsin representatives meet rebel deputies in monastery to find
peaceful end to standoff. They sign pact to lift blockade partly but
parliament leaders later reject it.
October 2 - Rutskoi calls for uprising against Yeltsin.
