FT  04 MAY 93 / IMF to oversee currency trends
THE International Monetary Fund is to step up its supervision of the
economies of industrial nations in an attempt to head off currency crises
such as that which rocked the European Monetary System last September.
The plan, endorsed by the IMF's policy making Interim Committee at the end
of last week, could mean greater IMF intervention to influence the economic
policies of countries such as Japan which are running large balance of
payments surpluses with the rest of the world. Until now the IMF's main
preoccupation has been with countries with debt problems or in balance of
payments difficulties.
In his speech to the Interim Committee, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US treasury
secretary, hinted that surplus countries could find themselves under
pressure to change policy. 'Policies that are sound under normal
circumstances may have a destabilising effect on markets in particular
conditions,' he said. 'The Fund must have the means to identify and call
attention to such risks.'
The Interim Committee gave the IMF a mandate to strengthen its surveillance
over the exchange rate and macro-economic policies of its members. As part
of this task it has also been asked to focus on regional developments.
Mr Theo Waigel, German finance minister, told the Interim Committee that it
would be the IMF's job to make sure that the existence of 'regional blocs'
did not undermine the world's open, multilateral economic system. According
to one official, this aspect of surveillance could result in the IMF being
asked to pass judgment on incipient tensions in the EMS.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, Spanish finance minister and Interim Committee chairman,
said it was the first time since the end of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange
rate system in the early 1970s that the IMF had been asked to try to reduce
exchange rate volatility.
He said that the fact that all the IMF's members - from industrialised to
developing and former communist countries - were asking the Fund to play a
more active role in monitoring and curbing exchange rate instability should
not be underestimated.
Although final details have to be fleshed out, it will be the IMF's task to
study exchange rate developments more close-ly and assess whether they are
consistent with member countries' macro-economic policies and economic
fundamentals.
One precondition of success, mentioned by Mr Bentsen, will be the
development of comparable data on member states' policies 'so we know what
we are looking at'.
According to Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF's managing director, IMF staffers
will try to identify at the earliest possible opportunity whether tensions
are developing in economies that could trigger currency disturbances. The
IMF would then suggest measures that countries should take to try to avoid a
repetition of crises such as last autumn's upheaval in the European exchange
rate mechanism.
However, Mr Solchaga sounded a note of caution about the IMF's capacity to
achieve currency stability. Surveillance was a necessary but not sufficient
requirement for stable exchange rates, he said.
In an apparent reference to France, he pointed out that some countries with
'outstanding' economic credentials had been buffeted by currency speculation
in last year's crisis.
The monetary talks in Washington wound up on Saturday with a discussion in
the joint IMF-World Bank development committee of how best to encourage
private capital flows to developing nations.
The committee decided that host countries bore the main responsibility for
creating an environment attractive to foreign investors. But industrialised
countries should remove unnecessary institutional and regulatory barriers to
the supply of investment funds.
From Sinatra to Sinatra-plus, Page 16; Economics Notebook, Page 19
