FT  21 AUG 93 / Man in the News: A meter man at heart - Cedric Brown
It is not hard to imagine Mr Cedric Brown, chief executive of British Gas,
turning up to read the meter. Mr Brown has never lost the bluff, genial
manner he developed running one of British Gas's regional offices, where he
was pitched into the middle of the company's battle to please its customers.
Mr Brown's matter-of-fact style has won him praise at the helm of Europe's
14th-largest company, by market capitalisation. Employees are warming to his
increasing openness. He will need all the communication skills he can muster
in coming months when British Gas faces crucial negotiations with the
government over its structure.
The company must soon begin discussions over this week's recommendations by
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission that it sell off its trading
activities and relinquish its monopoly over household supply. The
commission's report leaves a question-mark hanging over the company, which
Mr Brown is keen to remove.
The doubts are largely of Mr Brown's own making. It was at his insistence a
year ago - the day before he took over as chief executive  - that British
Gas submitted itself to an investigation of its entire business by the
commission. His move was unprecedented in UK corporate history and the
biggest gamble of his career. It could have led to the break-up of the
company without compensation for shareholders.
This week Mr Brown said his gamble had paid off. He disagrees with the
commission's conclusion that British Gas must be split up to encourage
competition, but admits that its suggestions at least mean customers will
pay for the changes, rather than shareholders. 'We have by no means got
everything we wanted out of this inquiry. I don't think anyone has, but that
probably means the MMC got it just about right.'
What pleases Mr Brown most about the commission's report is that it lays out
a framework for the industry over the next 10 years. 'This time last year,
we had no idea of the regulatory demands that would come up in six months.'
Uncertainty over regulatory changes in the run-up to the inquiry was partly
a result of the acrimonious relationship between British Gas and its
regulator, Ofgas, headed by the acerbic Sir James McKinnon. Contacts between
the two had deteriorated to such an extent that they could barely work
together.
One of Sir James's chief complaints about the company has been that it often
thinks and acts like a nationalised monopoly in spite of seven years in the
private sector. Sir James conjured up the picture of a company fighting
tooth and nail to preserve the status quo, determined to hang on to its
monopoly, rather than embrace competition.
British Gas hoped to address those concerns, albeit rather belatedly, last
year with the promotion of the 58-year-old Mr Brown.
Mr Brown likes to think of himself as one of British Gas's risk-takers. The
Yorkshireman caught the attention of the board of directors when he
completed the Pounds 1.5bn Morecambe Bay development in the North Sea 13
years ago - British Gas's first venture into such a large offshore gas
development.
Now he says he wants to take 'a can-opener' to the utility he has inherited
and release some of the latent potential buried within. 'I'm aware British
Gas has been accused of being bureaucratic, arrogant, slow-moving, reluctant
to change. I think those comments do have a ring of truth to them and I want
to change that.'
This is partly why Mr Brown is relaxed about giving up the company's
monopoly. In a free market, where consumers have a choice of supplier, the
role of the regulator would be diminished since no single company would
dominate supply. This would give Mr Brown a free hand to develop British Gas
without constant interference.
But having spent his 30-year career almost exclusively at British Gas, Mr
Brown is a recent convert to the free market. He says he saw the light about
halfway through the commission's inquiry at a hearing of British Gas's
evidence by the monopolies panel.
'The MMC had raised a whole series of questions about the monopoly and we
were stressing our concerns about what would happen if the market were
opened up. It suddenly hit me that what we were saying sounded defensive,'
Mr Brown says. He adds that he then made clear to the panel that he did not
want to defend the monopoly for its own sake.
But he stresses that there are important issues such as safety and prices to
be addressed before the market can be opened up.
Cynics could infer from Mr Brown's change of heart that he realised he was
swimming against the tide of a determinedly pro-choice government. 'British
Gas was slow to recognise the changes required in its attitude to
competition,' says one industry observer.
Mr Brown's conversion to the free market has not come lightly. 'It would be
dishonest to say this has been easy,' Mr Brown confesses. 'I take great
pride in British Gas's achievements in creating the market for gas in the UK
over the past 25 years.'
But at least this way, by agreeing to give up the monopoly, Mr Brown can
wrest some benefits for shareholders and safeguards for his customers in a
market free-for-all - even if the government does not implement all the
commission's recommendations.
He wants to concentrate on turning British Gas into an entrepreneurial
organisation. some Over the next couple of years he intends, first, to
develop a strategy for the company and then to begin a programme of cultural
change. In this, he will be assisted by a new chairman, after Mr Robert
Evans retires next year.
Some observers remain sceptical about Mr Brown's long-term strategic vision.
He is best known for his skills as a facilitator, rather than as a thinker.
But he is creating a climate at British Gas in which young talent can
flourish - unlike the atmosphere he grew up with. Shaking off that stifling
atmosphere, Mr Brown is reinventing himself as a free marketeer with a
can-opener.
