FT  30 APR 93 / International Company News: RJR warns on impact of cigarette
price war in US
RJR NABISCO, the US tobacco and food group, warned yesterday that profits
this year from its domestic cigarette business - which accounts for more
than half of group operating profits - would be hit by the looming cigarette
price-war in the US.
Additional marketing and promotional investments would have a negative
effect on full-year 1993 results, 'although it is still too early to
determine the degree of impact', the group said.
The price war began when Philip Morris, RJR's US rival, said it would cut
the price of its flagship Marlboro brand by Dollars 4 a carton, or 40 cents
a packet. Earlier this week, RJR revealed plans to match this cut on its
Winston brand - its leading full-priced brand, and the one that competes
most closely with Marlboro - with some other promotional activity applied to
its Camel brand.
RJR's cuts would apply in June, and be reviewed at the end of that month.
The company has already amended a 'targeted stock scheme' - designed to
create two separate classes of stock pegged to the tobacco and food
divisions respectively - because of the uncertainty hanging over its tobacco
division's profitability.
The warning came as RJR announced first-quarter profits of Dollars 163m
after tax, compared with a loss of Dollars 15m in the same period of 1992.
Most of the advance was due to lower interest costs, however, and operating
income increased only marginally from Dollars 664m to Dollars 683m.
The domestic tobacco division saw slightly lower profits at Dollars 500m
(Dollars 512m), while international operations advanced from Dollars 139m To
Dollars 159m. The fall in domestic tobacco profits reflected higher unit
volume - up 9 per cent - but more sales coming from less profitable
'discount' brands.
On the food side, RJR saw operating profits increase from Dollars 189m to
Dollars 203m, on sales up from Dollars 1.54bn to Dollars 1.63bn. Group sales
in the first quarter were Dollars 3.74bn, compared with Dollars 3.64bn in
the same period of 1992.
Mr Michael Miles, chairman of Philip Morris, told the group's annual meeting
yesterday that if the 40 cents a packet price cut was not enough to regain
the ground that full-priced brands have lost to discount cigarettes, 'we are
prepared to go beyond that if we have to protect our brand franchise'.
However, he was upbeat about long-term prospects, and indicated that a
dividend increase might be forthcoming in August.
