FT  27 SEP 93 / Estonia seeks to reform banking sector
ESTONIA is seeking to strengthen its reputation as the best performing
former Soviet republic by reforming the banking system.
A commercial bank law, being drafted for presentation before parliament in
November, sets out higher capital requirements for new banks and stricter
regulation of the Baltic state's infant financial sector.
Initial capital requirements for a bank will go up to EKr25m (Dollars 1.9m)
by next July, after rising from EKr6m to EKr15m earlier this year. The
government hopes eventually to match the European norm of Ecu5m.
Meanwhile reserve requirements on deposits, deemed too high at 10 per cent,
will be decreased to free the banks' hands, according to Mr Andres Sutt,
deputy head of banking supervision at the Bank of Estonia. The maximum
exposure to one borrower is not being reduced from the current high level of
50 per cent of total capital.
The steps follow an initial restructuring begun after a banking crisis last
winter led to failures at three of the largest banks, which accounted for a
third of the money supply.
The national bank's regulatory arm reviewed licences and set higher
operating standards. Of the 42 commercial banks at the start of the year,
one has gone bankrupt, 10 have merged and eight were not given new licences.
To further strengthen the sector, the Bank of Estonia has decided not to
give new commercial licences this year.
The government wanted to close half the banks in order to centralise scarce
capital and temper the weak banks' penchant for risky lending, particularly
in Russia. The banks are now being asked to redirect themselves to financing
infrastructure work, recapitalisation at newly privatised state enterprises
and to consumer operations.
Tallinn Bank, one of the largest with EKr190m in total assets, plans to open
the country's first automated teller machine next month and computerise
capital transfers soon afterwards.
The banks are gaining confidence. Lending rates are between 20 to 30 per
cent a year, down from 100 per cent when Estonia began monetary reform by
introducing its currency, the kroon, in June 1992.
Estonia may have stemmed its economic decline. Local experts point to a
flourishing private sector, which now makes up 40 per cent of the economy,
and an export boom.
Exports rose by some 50 per cent the first half of the year, mostly driven
by trade with western countries, particularly Finland. The IMF expects
exports with countries other than former Soviet Union states to hit Dollars
500m (Pounds 333m) this year, up from Dollars 50m in 1991 to Dollars 247m in
1992.
'Nobody could be more pleased. Estonia really has changed in one year,' says
Mr Mart Laar, prime minister. He adds that he wants Estonia to be the first
former Soviet republic to permit foreign ownership of land.
Industrial output the first half of the year was 65.3 per cent of the 1992
level and real wages are not rising. But Estonia remains the darling of
international lending institutions for its monetary and fiscal discipline:
inflation was 0.7 per cent in August, the currency is stable and the budget
is projected to remain in broad balance next year.
