FT  22 OCT 93 / Arts: Delightful Precipice - Jazz
'We know our Freddie Keppard backwards, but we are not part of the
retro-movement yet' said Django Bates breathlessly, two thirds of the way
through the crazy funfair that is the Delightful Precipice. The shipping
forecast tape which played to the filling auditorium had already warned of
the gales to come and when the 18 pieces which make up the jazz orchestra
filed in, the atmosphere in the QEH was like that of the end of term
concert.
Yes, jazz is fun again] For Bates, one of many Loose Tube luminaries in the
1980s, it always has been and with the new band (which features other Tube
people), and a new record deal, he keeps the eccentric faith.
The combination of conventional orchestration in reeds and brass with
piccolos, kazoos and what looked like Northumbrian pipes behind Bates's own
ricocheting and sometimes random keyboard technique creates a heaving,
seemingly steam driven mass of sound.
The writing, mostly Bates's own and sometimes drawn from the Loose Tubes'
book, describes a peculiarly British scene of obsession and off-kilter
observation. Fans of Ivor Cutler, Viv Stanshall, the seaside and the sixth
form should find a welcome in numbers such as 'Armchair March', 'Queen of
Puddings' and 'The Loneliness of Being Right'.
Earnest followers of the stern young men who make up what Bates describes as
the retro-movement should give Delightful Precipice a wide berth, however.
Featured soloists such as Iain Bellamy (saxes), Julian Arguelles (baritone
sax) and Eddie Parker (flutes) know the rules but choose to bend them, egged
on by Bates's mad professor direction which involved him whirling from his
stool, peck horn in hand to gurn horribly at the brass section.
Less swinging than the Tubes, perhaps, the Precipice is similarly bursting
with ideas which are juxtaposed at crazy angles to keep the listener off
balance. And although some of his musical gags may cause the odd wince, as
an antidote to the unsmiling keepers of the tradition, Bates is becoming an
indispensable part of the jazz scenery.
Sponsored by Contemporary Music Network, Arts Council. Tour continues to
Swansea Talisin Arts Centre (Oct 21); Bath University Hall (Oct 22);
Plymouth Guildhall (Oct 23); Birmingham Adrian Boult Hall (Oct 24);
Manchester Royal Northern College of Music (Oct 27); Leeds Irish Centre (Oct
28); Coventry Warwick ARts Centre (Oct 29); Cheltenham Town Hall (Oct 30)
