FT  16 JUL 93 / Two of a Kind: Glaring gap between idea and reality -
Central bankers who are sceptical about deeper European Union
Mr Pierre Jaans, director-general of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, is a
quizzical-looking intellectual who handles the Grand Duchy's monetary
affairs from a fourth-floor office near the main railway station.
Prosperous Luxembourg - currently the sole EC member with a good enough
economic performance to meet the Maastricht criteria for economic and
monetary union - is normally regarded as a true believer in Euro-federalism.
Mr Jaans, however, is a heretic. Asked whether the EC should deepen its
co-operation towards greater pooling of political and economic power, or
widen it to include new members, Mr Jaans replies crisply: 'Deepening is
over. Nobody wants it.'
Of crucial importance, he says, is how the Community treats the former east
bloc countries seeking membership. 'I cannot really imagine a consensus
coming about in favour of staying with 12 members, making the Community
first a kind of federal state of these 12, and then letting the others come
in later on their knees.'
Whatever the EC's future course, Luxembourg's past record has been
impressively integrationist. It has its own monetary union with Belgium
under an agreement dating back to 1922.
Although Mr Jaans has been for 16 years Luxembourg's representative on the
EC committee of central bank governors, his institute is not, properly
defined, a central bank. Its powers of monetary creation are limited to
responsibility for issuing Luxembourg franc coins and banknotes. Interest
rates are set by the National Bank of Belgium, which, Mr Jaans says
succinctly, 'tells rather than consults' him about its decisions.
Mr Jaans himself is a model Euro-citizen. Born in Luxembourg 57 years ago,
he studied economics in Berlin, Paris and Munich, and worked for 10 years
(between 1962 and 1972) in the research department of the German Bundesbank.
Mr Jaans's wife is German, and he says he appreciates the 'very tolerant and
generous' nature of German society. Although he highlights Luxembourg's
history of 'economic or military occupation' by its large German neighbour,
he is not concerned by the thought that Europe will fall under domination of
reunited Germany.
What worries Mr Jaans is the Maastricht treaty. He is all too aware of the
gap between the desirability of great-er European co-operation and its
feasibility, criticising the treaty for being unclear about how Emu can be
ach-ieved. If Luxembourg had held a referendum on Maastricht, he probably
would not have voted for it.
His chief complaint is that politicians will have too much leeway in
deciding how the treaty will be interpreted and implemented. 'It sets up
structures which can be shelved or mobilised at the choice of a handful of
people.'
As far as Luxembourg is concerned, this will damage what he regards as a
highly beneficial feature of his country's democracy: 'the really admirable
proximity of individual citizens to the political process'.
His long-held responsibility for Luxembourg banking supervision - he was
banking commissioner before taking over at the Monetary Institute - gives Mr
Jaans a wry perspective on past Emu plans. The most celebrated was drawn up
by Mr Pierre Werner, the former Luxembourg prime minister, who in 1970
formulated a timetable (quickly shelved) for European monetary union by
1980.
Mr Jaans recalls that Luxembourg's growth as a financial centre during the
1970s was spurred by German measures to keep out inflows of speculative
funds into the D-Mark, which drove the money to the Grand Duchy instead.
Hence his conclusion: 'If Pierre Werner's plan had come about, we would have
had no financial centre in Luxembourg.'
As befits a man who once worked at the Bundesbank, Mr Jaans shares the
German central bank's view that the timetable set down for Emu in Maastricht
is 'very ambitious . . . The time horizon for monetary union in 1997 is not
really realistic. It's difficult to say whether this will be the case for
1999.'
However, unlike the Bundesbank - which pleads that a low inflation rate is a
condition for faster growth - Mr Jaans thinks that commitment to stable
money can have a contractionary effect on the economy. 'If you opt for a
hard currency model, the price you pay is somewhat lower growth. If you
really have stability of the currency as your first priority, this brings
with it limitations.'
This controversial thesis is an important reason for Mr Jaans's belief that
a monetary union involving all 12 EC members will never be feasible. 'I feel
this group (the 12) is not homogeneous enough politically. They are
countries with such different priorities.'
Mr Jaans says the aim of setting up Emu on a D-Mark-orientated hard currency
basis 'may suit countries such as Germany, the Benelux countries, Denmark
and perhaps France, with high prosperity and reasonably well-spread
financial wealth'. Less well-off countries would rather give priority to
growth, he says, and will not want to join in.
Could not the more prosperous countries proceed to monetary union on their
own? 'Technically and economically', Mr Jaans says, this would present no
obstacles, but he believes there is little political will for such a step.
Moving to a single currency with a single central bank for a limited group
of EC countries would be like 'building a political cathedral. It may be
nice as a political monument, but you are not gaining significant additional
benefits.' Mr Jaans clearly thinks Europe's single currency will take quite
a while to arrive.
This is the second in an occasional series on EC personalities
