FT  15 JUN 93 / Technology: Reinventing the media - Computers, telecoms and
publishing are converging
Every morning, in common with millions of other people around the world,
researcher Walter Bender reads his daily newspaper over breakfast. But the
publication, nicknamed Bender's Bugle, is far from the usual daily read.
It really is his very own newspaper, delivered to his personal computer and
reflecting his tastes and interests. The tailor-made publication is
assembled overnight from the near-limitless choice of words available in
electronic form from the news agency databases of Associated Press, Reuters
and Dow Jones.
Bender is interested in cycling, so the computers pick out cycling articles
and put them on his front page alongside news of world events. Bender is a
researcher at the Media Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and one of a group which has launched a far-reaching programme of
research on news in the future.
Underlying 14 projects - ranging from computers that can 'understand' and
select the news, to the use of news as a tool for learning - are two
propositions: that the era of mass media is giving way to the era of
personal choice; and that all media, whether television, radio or print, are
being driven together by digital technology and turned into the equivalent
of bits of computer information.
All media organisations, according to Nicholas Negroponte, director of the
Media Laboratory, are now in 'the bit radiation business'. Work is already
under way on the practicalities of delivering personalised newspapers in the
form most people would like them - words printed with ink on paper and laid
out in a form resembling a conventional newspaper.
The Media Laboratory is trying to develop reusable paper so that newspapers
can be printed in the home in large format. 'You want 15 magical pieces of
natural paper and when you've finished today's paper you stick it back in
the machine and it erases today's paper and prints tomorrow's.
'There's going to be a huge uproar over the next four or five years about
dead trees. And printing in the home is not necessarily going to be more
expensive than current delivery systems,' he claims.
He first proposed founding the Media Laboratory in 1978 in the belief that
the worlds of computing, publishing and broadcasting would converge. By the
time Dollars 50m (Pounds 32m) had been raised to start the venture in 1985,
many of the things he had predicted were already beginning to happen, in
particular the widespread use of personal computers. Making PCs easier to
use and improving both the design and clarity of the words that appear on
computer screens has also been one of the underlying themes of the Media
Laboratory's work.
Funded 80 per cent by industry and 20 per cent by the US government, the
Media Laboratory has 75 sponsoring companies, including the largest names
from the world of media, computers and telecommunications. They include
Knight-Ridder and Reuters, Apple and IBM, BT and Deutsche Bundespost.
Many of the dozens of ideas under investigation at the laboratory's elegant
headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts involve the admittedly futuristic.
One long-term project involves holographic video. Already, researchers using
large-scale computing power can project and manipulate the holographic image
of a car. Within five years or so the technology could be used in medicine
to display images of the human body.
Other work is more immediate. Media Laboratory researchers contributed some
of the sophisticated code which controls the movement of the dinosaurs in
the compact disc game being released with Jurassic Park, the new Steven
Spielberg film.
Researchers were dismissed as 'nuts' when they proposed putting computing
power into childrens' bricks. Now this is the basic of a successful
programmable toy.
The laboratory's researchers also claim a contribution to the development of
PS/2, IBM's top-of-the-range PC. 'I can open a PS/2 and point to circuits
that came out of the Media Laboratory,' says Negroponte.
Even though not all the ideas generated by the Media Laboratory will find
their way into products, many heavyweight industrial backers are happy to
pay their share of the Dollars 12m-a-year running costs, just in case. As
sponsors, they have access to the venture's work.
There are few serious media organisations which are not watching closely the
convergence of computers, telecommunications and broadcasting in a new
digital world and trying to work out the implications for their businesses.
According to Negroponte, every computer company at the higher end of the
market is now involved in multi-media, while television manufacturers are
also putting more computing power into their products.
But in the broadcasting equipment market, he believes the computer companies
will emerge victorious over traditional manufacturers. 'In five years' time,
you will go to broadcast studios and see logos that say IBM and Digital
Equipment; you won't see Ampex or Grass Valley. They don't bring anything to
the market any more. You are not doing video any more, you are doing general
signal processing,' says Negroponte.
He predicts that hundreds of new television channels and the ability to
squirt film down telephone lines will create a video-on-demand business
worth Dollars 20bn a year in the US alone. Forecasting is not, however, the
way Negroponte describes what the Media Laboratory does. 'The best way to
predict the future is to invent it. We are not forecasting. We build working
prototypes. The 300 people here are inventors.'
This includes the Media Laboratory researcher who, Negroponte says, has just
discovered how to put 5,000 hours of piano music on a single compact disc.
Negroponte has told the researcher he will probably have to live the rest of
his life with Fatwa-threatened author Salman Rushdie if the music industry
finds out.
