FT  03 JUN 93 / Opposition fury over beatings
LEADERS of Serbia's democratic opposition yesterday denounced the government
of President Slobodan Milosevic, calling the arrest and beating of more than
20 opposition politicians and journalists 'a brutal crime'. Mr Nicola
Milosevic, head of the Serbian Liberal Party told a news conference: 'This
was an unprecedently violent action instigated by Slobodan Milosevic and his
police. It is a totalitarian regime that arrests the leader of the biggest
oposition party.'
The democratic politicians demanded the immediate release of those arrested
and the resignation of the interior minister. However, their call for a mass
demonstration outside the federal parliament yesterday went unheeded.
The violence with which police broke up Tuesday night's protest against the
removal of Mr Dobrica Cosic, the federal president, apparently succeeded in
intimidating opposition supporters.
Serbia's democratic opposition has become increasingly marginal as radical
nationalist leaders, backed by paramilitary groups, have gained ground.
'There is a new ascendancy of the ex-Communists. We are heading for worse
troubles,' said Mr Borislav Mihailovic, a leading member of Depos, a
coalition of democratic groups.
On Tuesday night police fired rubber bullets and tear-gas at several
thousand people gathered outside parliament, the largest demonstration in
Belgrade for more than two years. One police officer died from gunshot
wounds and more than 30 people were injured in street battles that continued
into the early hours.
Mr Vuk Draskovic, head of the Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO), the largest
opposition party, was in serious condition with a fractured jaw and other
injuries after he was beaten by police who burst into the party offices
early yesterday morning, an SPO spokesman said. 'He was beaten in the lift
as he was taken away by police and again in the courtyard of police
headquarters. He has had to undergo surgery.'
Mr Draskovic, a charismatic figure who led violent demonstrations against
the Milosevic government in 1991, was arrested with senior party officials
and local journalists. Bosnian Serb troops were reported to be closing in on
the Moslem enclave of Gorazde yesterday, as an upsurge of fighting
threatened to disrupt aid operations across the former Yugoslav republic,
Reuter reports from Sarajevo.
UN officials, confirming Bosnian government reports of the Serb assault on
Gorazde, said Nato aircraft had spotted fires close to the enclave thought
to have been caused by shelling.
The UN yesterday halted relief flights to Sarajevo after snipers wounded
four French soldiers and a US relief aircraft was hit by a bullet.
