FT  14 SEP 93 / BT pushes on with plan for videos via phone lines
BRITISH TELECOM is pushing ahead with proposals to launch a national
video-on-demand service via telephone lines. The venture might cost several
billion pounds.
Video-on-demand is a system by which consumers can order films from a
database and have them relayed to their TV set, while the telephone can
still be used for talking.
A network to deliver programmes or other services is already on the drawing
board and exploratory talks have been held with several Hollywood studios
and other owners or brokers of entertainment rights.
The aim would be to launch a service competing with video shops, cable and
satellite television as early as next year.
A decision on whether to go ahead is expected next month. Several senior
executives are believed to be enthusiastic about taking BT into the new
business.
The system can deliver anything from films and television programmes to
catalogues or holiday information on demand from either a large national or
a number of regional databases.
The film or programme is shown in 'real time' via the telephone lines, but
the signal has to be digitally compressed. Decoders would therefore be
needed in the home for the service.
If BT goes ahead, there will inevitably be questions as to whether the
company has the legal right to run such a service.
US telephone companies such as Nynex and Southwestern Bell, which are
investing millions of pounds in developing cable franchises in the UK, are
expected to challenge BT in the courts through the Cable Television
Association.
Mr Jon Davey, director of cable and satellite at the Independent Television
Commission, said yesterday that BT could almost certainly get a programme
licence for its service. It was less clear whether the telephone company
would need a local-delivery licence under the 1990 Broadcasting Act to
retail programme services. Mr Davey said: 'If a (local-delivery) licence is
needed, it effectively stops BT.' Such licences are not given in areas
already franchised for cable television. Under the Duopoly Review of March
1991, BT is not allowed to move into cable television for at least 10 years.
The attraction of such a venture, if the regulatory hurdles can be overcome,
is that BT would be able to offer a service to a high proportion of the 23m
homes in the UK. On average, telephones are in use less than 1 per cent of
the time.
BT accepts that there would be some picture degradation the further a
subscriber was away from the local telephone exchange. Critics say parts of
the BT network are too old to carry watchable pictures.
At least at the outset, BT would probably solely operate the network for a
fee for other commercial interests.
Pounds 40m regional telecoms network planned, Page 10
