FT  30 JUN 93 / Greek deal to buy Romanian fleet in doubt
THE fate of a Dollars 335m (Pounds 223m) deal which would cede control of
Petromin, Romania's main shipping company, to a little-known Greek company
was in the balance yesterday after Romanian officials disagreed as to
whether the contract should be renegotiated.
The government reaffirmed its commitment to the deal under which Forum
Maritime, owned by Mr Stelios Katounis, would acquire 51 per cent of
Petromin in spite of a barrage of criticism from parliament, local business
and the press.
Under the existing contract, hailed as one of eastern Europe's largest
post-communist investments, Forum Maritime has until today to come up with a
downpayment of Dollars 100m in addition to the Dollars 25m it paid last
week. According to the contract, Forum has until 1997 to pay the remaining
Dollars 210m.
But the chamber of commerce in Constanta, where Petromin is based, said it
had begun legal proceedings to have the deal annulled in spite of the
government's position. It said that, under Romanian commercial law, at least
30 per cent of Forum's investment should have been paid when the joint
venture was signed.
Initially, the sale's opponents attacked the government primarily for
underselling Petromin to what the local press described as a relatively
obscure and small company.
Petromin owns 106 vessels totalling some 4.6m tonnes deadweight, around 75
per cent of Romania's merchant fleet. Its vessels are mainly used to
transport oil and raw materials, giving it a strategic significance.
Piraeus-based Forum Martime owns 12 bulk carriers, registered in Panama. It
is active in eastern Europe, shipping around 2m tonnes of grain to the
Commonwealth of Independent States annually, according to company officials.
The opponents' cause was strengthened by revelations on Monday that the
Romanian Development Agency (RDA), the country's investment watchdog, had
also opposed the deal as negotiated by Petromin and Forum.
According to a letter addressed to Mr Nicolae Vacaroiu, the prime minister,
the RDA recommended that the contract be delayed until Petromin received
legal advice; Forum's payment period and investment plans had been
clarified; and Petromin had been independently evaluated.
Government sources in Bucharest said yesterday that Mr Ion Iliescu, the
former prime minister, and Mr Vacaroiu had been so anxious to pull off a
deal and to put Romania's foreign investments drive on the map that they had
overlooked the RDA's warnings.
So far, Romania has lagged behind central Europe's other former communist
countries in attracting western capital. Only Dollars 672m in direct foreign
investment had been committed by the end of May.
The controversy over the deal is a further blow to an already weak governing
coalition, led by the left-wing Democratic National Salvation Front.
Nationalist and ex-communist parties, upon which the minority government
relies, are threatening to withdraw their support if the prime minister
fails to explain his role in the affair.
