FT  08 FEB 93 / International Company News: Endesa will issue bonds to
finance acquisitions
ENDESA, Chile's biggest electricity company, hopes to place more than
Dollars 50m of long-term bonds on the international markets this year to
finance acquisitions in Argentina and Peru, according to the company's
financial managers.
Endesa sees the privatisation of utilities in neighbouring countries as an
opportunity to become Latin America's first multinational company in the
energy sector.
The process began last year, when Endesa acquired a controlling stake in
Argentina's Central Costanera, a power generator, and a minority
shareholding in Edesur, an electricity distribution company. The Dollars
100m investment was financed in part with an Dollars 85m syndicated credit
led by Credit Suisse First Boston.
Mr Rodrigo Danus, chief of Endesa's financial division, says the company is
preparing to bid for Hidronor, a group of five power plants in southern
Argentina which will be privatised in the first half of 1993. Company
executives have also travelled to Peru to study the planned state sell-offs
of Electro Lima and Electro Peru.
Endesa, which generates over half of Chile's electricity, posted profits of
Dollars 260m last year, a 30.2 per cent increase over 1991. The results were
'the best in the company's history,' according to Mr Jose Yuraszeck,
chairman.
It recently became the first private sector corporation in Latin America to
win an 'investment grade' rating from Standard &amp; Poor's, the US ratings
agency.
At home, Endesa has begun work on a Dollars 450m hydroelectric dam in Chile,
partly financed by the World Bank's International Finance Corporation.
Environmental groups oppose the dam's construction on the grounds that it
will destroy wildlife and affect Indian communities in the reaches of the
Bio Bio, Chile's longest river.
In Argentina, Mr Yuraszeck said Endesa had increased electricity production
at Central Costanera nine-fold since it took over the plant last May.
