FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Government Statements): Bids for Channel tunnel
link to be sought - Infrastructure
This section contains details of the government's planned tax changes which
were given in separate announcements from the Inland Revenue, Customs and
Excise and other government departments after the chancellor had made his
publication of the Budget details in the Finance Bill.
BIDS would be invited from the private sector so that the Channel Tunnel
Rail Link project could be taken forward as a joint venture as soon as
possible.
The timing will be discussed with the private sector participants, but the
government hopes that the new line will be completed around the end of the
decade. The government will make its own contribution to the project in
recognition of the benefits that will accrue to domestic travellers from the
new link.
Full responsibility for the project will be transferred to the private
sector.
A joint venture between British Rail and BAA to build Heathrow Express, a
fast rail link between Heathrow and Paddington, was also announced.
The Treasury said the secretary of state for Scotland would announce in the
next few days the appointment of advisers on involving the private sector in
a package of transport measures around the Firth of Forth, including a new
crossing to be financed and built by the private sector; and also in the
Central Scotland Fastlink, which will connect the north-east of Scotland to
the A74 and M6 artery to the south.
Improvements to the tax relief which is currently available for expenditure
incurred by enterprises before they begin trading, were also announced.
These are intended to remove possible obstacles to the undertaking of large
projects with a long lead time.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary and the minister responsible for
developing the private finance initiative, said projects would be going
ahead which would otherwise have had to wait or not be undertaken at all.
This would allow the private sector to contribute its skill and experience.
The treasury is publishing guidance which it has provided to departments on
the appraisal of the government's contributions to joint ventures.
It expands on the interim guidance on private finance published in December.
The government has decided that the Crossrail project should be re-examined
with the aim of ensuring the greatest possible involvement of the private
sector and maximising value for money.
