FT  24 APR 93 / Bard's muse of fate: Gerald Cadogan invokes the spirit of
Shakespeare
DID William Shakespeare's muse home in on Southwark, south London,
yesterday, for his 429th birthday? If so it might have been a bemused muse.
Shakespeare would have looked at where his wooden O, the Globe, stood (now
Park street) and west across Southwark Bridge Road to Marlowe's Rose. Then
he would wonder why his countrymen who profess to be so proud of him, and
benefit from the tourists he brings the scepter'd isle, leave these two
theatre sites sad and forlorn, when his descendants had the luck to come
upon them a few years back
It is a puzzle. It took an American, Sam Wanamaker, to build a replica of
the Globe slightly to the north-west of both sites. The Globe itself looks
like a bombed site, and the Rose lurks beneath the Rose Court office block
strewn with banners advertising space to let. The archaeology at both sites
is unfinished - at the Globe it has hardly reached the end of the first act.
Yet these are the remains that can tell precisely where the players made
their exits and entrances and where the gravedigger dug in Hamlet, and so
how the plays were played. The only way to learn is by digging them fully.
The Globe was built in 1599, and the lease names Shakespeare as one of the
tenants. It was one of 11 or 12 amphitheatre playhouses built in London
between 1567 and 1614 which gave acting companies permanent homes for the
first time - and are the transition to the indoor theatres we know today. In
1613 a cannonade for the King's entry in Henry VIII caused a fire and the
Globe burnt down. Rebuilt in 1614, it it was finally pulled down in 1644.
Tenements went up on the site, as the archaeologists report* in the account
of the 1989-91 trial dig. They were demolished when Southwark Bridge was
built in 1814-19 and Anchor Terrace (listed Grade II) in 1821. Most of the
Globe lies beneath Southwark Bridge Road and Anchor Terrace.
East of the terrace the diggers found the outer gallery wall and what seems
to be a stair turret, and signs of two phases of building - but it is
unclear which Globe was built first.
With such a small patch excavated, diggers can tell us little more except
that the audience ate hazelnuts and that in Hollar's famous 1630s 'Long
View' drawing, from Southwark Cathedral tower, the building with a stair
turret marked 'beere bayting' is really the Globe, and that marked 'the
Globe' is really the Hope, another theatre. The stage and backbuildings
still await the diggers' trowels, and the site sits idle while Hanson, which
funded the trial digs generously, decides what to do.
Now is the time for Peter Brooke, the heritage secretary, to act. Jack-up
Anchor Terrace on piles and dig beneath. Then look under Southwark Bridge
Road. Then arrange to display what is left of the place where the world's
greatest playwright put on his plays. This is our National Heritage - as
nothing else is in the country.
And if you are sceptical, Mr Brooke - though you should not be, as a
longstanding member of the Friends of Friendless Churches and so of the
Ancient Monuments Society - think of our France, always ready to spend money
on its capital city.
Do not forget the Rose. The Rose Theatre Trust has the offer of a grant from
the South Thames TEC to open the site for plays and readings. That will
bring the Rose back to public attention. But it still needs some Pounds
70,000 to prepare plans to conserve the remains permanently, complete the
archaeology and display the theatre, and then much more money to carry out
those plans.
If the Cabinet has doubts, tell them of the economic benefits. Southwark is
bound to boom. It is crammed with history. Here is an opportunity to make a
comprehensive scheme, by world-wide architectural competition, to display it
all as an historic area by the river - and even find a use for Bankside
power station next to the Wanamaker Globe.
If nothing is done, we are left with the diggers' reports - a messengers'
speech of tantalising brevity and a drama without end. Is that the way to
treat this blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England?
*Simon Blatherwick and Andrew Gurr, with John Orrell, Shakespeare's factory:
the Globe, Antiquity 66 (1992) 315-33.
