FT  07 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Teachers' bodies scorn curriculum
review
ALL SIX teachers' unions have agreed on an alternative structure for the
national curriculum review which has been ordered by Mr John Patten, the
education secretary.
In an unprecedented show of unity by the teaching profession their nine-page
document has been endorsed by five representative bodies for independent
schools, including the Headmasters' Conference and the Girls' Schools
Association.
The move thwarts Mr Patten's attempt to appeal to 'moderate' teachers by
announcing a review of the national curriculum, as associations which refuse
to take industrial action have made clear their opposition to national
curriculum testing.
It comes at the end of a week when Mr Patten has been hit by the
resignations of two of the architects of the national curriculum, Lord
Skidelsky and Dr John Marenbon, from the School Examinations and Assessment
Council.
The teachers' plan would cut the proportion of the curriculum which is
prescribed by law, cut the amount of time devoted to testing and limit the
powers of future secretaries of state by providing a formal structure for
reviews at regular intervals.
Sir Ron Dearing, the chairman-designate of the new Schools Curriculum and
Assessment Authority, who is conducting the review, quickly welcomed the
teachers' proposals. He has already written to all six unions seeking
immediate meetings and hopes to meet them again at a later date. He also
thanked them for their prompt response but refused to comment on their more
detailed proposals.
The document attacks the tests, which two unions are boycotting. It says:
'The amount of time teachers are required to devote to assessment at the
expense of learning is far too great.'
Mr Brian Maybee, chairman of the Independent Schools Association
Incorporated, which endorsed the document, said the national curriculum in
primary schools was 'almost designed to limit the proper education of the
young child'.
He said Mr Patten's design for education had become 'too prescriptive, too
overloaded with assessment and simplistic testing'.
The National Union of Teachers, which is balloting its members on a boycott,
welcomed Sir Ron's prompt response and said: 'Hopefully he will listen to
the concerns of the profession and take them to heart. The needs of
individual children cannot be properly met by diktat from the centre.'
Mr Patten did not comment, saying that the teachers' unions would be
expected to provide Sir Ron with evi-dence.
Ms Ann Taylor, Labour's education spokesman, said that the tests should be
abandoned for this year, and that the membership of Sir Ron's School
Curriculum and Assessment Authority should be subject to ratification by the
Commons education committee.
She said: 'The sheer scale of opposition to Mr Patten and his brand of
testing is now so great that even he must by now have realised that
something has gone badly wrong.'
In a separate development, which further damages the chances of the tests
taking place, the National Association of Head Teachers advised its members
to permit their parents to withdraw children from the assessments.
