FT  05 JUL 93 / Tokyo attempts to smooth path to G7 summit
THE Japanese government has offered to use a variety of indicators to
measure its efforts to reduce the current account surplus, in an attempt to
prevent trade frictions with the US souring this week's Tokyo summit of
heads of state from the Group of Seven industrialised nations.
Japan would set the criteria to be used, which would flow from the
government's normal economic forecasts. Tokyo insists the indicators would
not amount to targets to reduce the surplus or increase imports, nor should
the indicators be binding commitments which could invite sanctions from the
US if they were not met. The US has been pressing Japan for two months to
agree a new framework for trade talks which would include numerical targets
in opening up the Japanese market and cutting the current account surplus,
which could reach Dollars 150bn (Pounds 100bn) this year. The US wants these
targets to be set and reviewed jointly, while Tokyo argues this would
infringe its right to run its domestic economic policies.
Talks over the framework broke up a week ago without a date for the next
round of discussions.
The Japanese proposals, which were hurriedly put together in the past few
days, reflect the concerns of senior Japanese diplomats that Japan and the
US should not be seen to be seriously at odds over trade during the summit.
The main economic issues on the G7 agenda are world growth and unemployment;
trade, focusing on the stalled Uruguay Round of liberalisation talks; and
help for Russia. President Bill Clinton and Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the Japanese
prime minister, are due to agree the trade talks framework at a bilateral
meeting this week.
The Japanese strongly oppose the US plan for numerical targets which, they
argue, would require the government to guarantee a share of the domestic
market for foreign producers. Part of the opposition may reflect the
political turmoil in the country in the run up to the general election on
July 18. The government's weakness has emboldened bureaucrats at the
powerful Ministry of International Trade and Industry to harden their
opposition to the use of numerical measures.
However, officials in the Foreign Ministry are concerned that the country
should not be seen to be rudderless over the most controversial issues in
its relations with the US.
The Japanese offer will at least allow Mr Clinton and Mr Miyazawa to rebut
claims the talks have broken down.
The plan will not in itself satisfy US demands enough to provide the basis
for a deal, although it is a step towards the US position. In Washington, Mr
Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, said he wanted to 'lower
expectations' of a bilateral trade agreement between the US and Japan. The
proposals were 'worth discussing on our part. . . Whether we can draw close
enough together is an open question,' he said in a television interview
yesterday.
