FT  16 MAR 93 / Italy's Corruption Scandal: Billions paid in public sector
contract bribes
FROM confessions of businessmen, politicians and civil servants it has
become clear that virtually all transactions from the mid-1980s onwards in
the public sector were subject to bribes and commissions. This was also true
of a considerable slice of private construction activity, as well as supply
contracts.
How much was creamed off in bribes and illicit commissions each year? How
much did this cost the economy?
Total public spending in 1992 was L135,000bn (Pounds 59bn)-L70,000bn (Pounds
30bn) on the purchase of goods and services and L65,000bn (Pounds 28bn) in
investments.
According to confessions to the investigating magistrates, supply contracts
routinely carried a commission of between 5 and 10 per cent.
Public works contracts, which totalled L30,000bn, carried a 3 per cent
commission. But this rose to 4 per cent in the case of private treaty deals
with Anas, the roads authority (which accounted for 10 per cent of public
works contracts).
Building permits and property development permissions carried a commission
of 6-8 per cent of the value of the project. The construction industry had a
turnover of L156,000bn in 1992.
On a crude median of 5 per cent for both supply and investment projects, and
total public spending of L135,000bn in 1992 - then L6,750bn (Pounds 3bn) was
paid out last year in bribes. If this is reduced because some expenditure
reflects projects on which commissions have already been paid, then the
figure could be cut to a minimum of L5,000bn (Pounds 2.2bn).
But this figure only includes public sector spending. Public works contracts
represent a mere 20 per cent of the construction industry's annual turnover
of L156,000bn.
When building permits and permissions for property developments are factored
in, it would not be unreasonable to put a figure of around L6,000bn (Pounds
2.6bn) per year being creamed off.
How much of this went into private pockets and how much to the political
parties is hard to tell.
According to those who have confessed to the magistrates, at least 30-40 per
cent of total bribes paid went directly to personal enrichment - much more
in the case of the private construction sector and the granting of building
permits.
It is also difficult to distinguish between benefits in kind which have been
connected to party work - free travel, gifts, apartments, telephones,
etc-and direct self-enrichment.
The cost to the economy has to be measured partly by:
the extent to which contract values are increased to absorb the
bribes/commissions;
the increased cost of contracts due to the absence of competition. Ministry
officials say public works contracts could well have been inflated by 15 per
cent or more.
There is also the hidden cost of high public spending, reflected in the
public sector deficit equivalent to almost 11 per cent of gross domestic
product and the expense of both borrowing and servicing Italy's huge
national debt, equivalent to about 107 per cent of GDP.
This latter element is extremely important: if at the beginning of the 1980s
corruption had a silver lining, in that it encouraged greater private
consumption expenditure and even investment into the economy, by the end of
the 1980s the accumulated impact was simply to fuel ever-higher public
spending, thus substantially raising the national debt.
