FT  08 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Job for Mr Hunt
THE BRITISH government may not have finished with the trade unions yet. As
the increasingly depressed and depleted band of brothers and sisters confers
this week at the annual Trades Union Congress, Mr David Hunt, employment
secretary, is saying that options for further curbs on union activities are
still being reviewed.
However, if the government continues to pursue the unions, it will find
itself engaged in an activity yielding diminishing returns. The quest to
strengthen individual employment rights and, at the same time, cut the red
tape that business deplores, could be conducted more profitably elsewhere.
Mr Hunt should look first at the creaking industrial tribunal system which -
as reported in the Financial Times yesterday - is currently failing
employers and employees alike. What was once supposed to be a quick route to
justice has become bogged down in legalism and excessive delays.
The recession and an increasing awareness by workers of their rights have
led to a sharp increase in the number of cases registered: in 1990-91, there
were about 43,000 applications to tribunals; for 1992-93, the figure stood
at just under 72,000. Half of these cases have to wait six months to be
dealt with - and in London delays of a year are not uncommon.
As the jurisdiction of tribunals continues to widen with each new piece of
employment legislation, and rulings from Brussels and Luxembourg further
complicate matters, the system is beginning to buckle. It is time for a
fundamental review by the government of options for reform.
Three proposals, in particular, should be given serious consideration.
First, the current arrangements which require representatives of both
employers and employees to sit alongside a legally qualified tribunal
chairman in almost all cases should re-examined. Speedier and cheaper would
be to appoint one specialised and highly qualified individual who could
adopt a more inquisitorial approach.
Second, as the Engineering Employers' Federation has suggested, the tangle
of case law built up over the last 30 years could be replaced by a set of
modern codes of employment practice. Tribunals would refer to the codes,
freeing both employers and applicants from the need to employ lawyers in
almost all cases.
Finally, where both sides agree, arbitration, perhaps under the auspices of
the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, could be made available
for individual employment grievances - a move which would help to relieve
the pressure on the tribunals.
