FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (The Chancellor's Speech): Strategy seeks to
bolster recovery in the coming year - M0 range set at 0-4% and M4 at 3-9%,
PSBR for 1993/94 at Pounds 50bn, Freeze on personal tax allowances, Most
alcohol duties to rise by 5%
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor of the exchequer, rose to deliver his
Budget speech at 3.31pm, and completed it at 5.22pm, a duration of 1 hour
and 51 minutes. He said:
'Mr Deputy Speaker, in my Budget last year I announced a far-reaching reform
that was supported, I believe, on all sides of the House. From November this
year, public expenditure and taxation will be brought together in one annual
Budget statement.
The advantages of the new system are clear.
Ensuring that tax and spending decisions are taken at the same time will
allow better control over government borrowing.
Indeed that is the main purpose of the change. And with tax, spending and
borrowing decisions presented in a single statement the relationship between
them will be much easier to understand.
But for now our existing, and to me rather antiquated, procedures remain in
place. And I shall, therefore, concentrate today largely on the tax side of
the accounts. My Budget should nonetheless be considered alongside the
Autumn Statement I delivered just four months ago.
In that statement I set a firm limit on public sector wage increases. This
was essential and we shall stick to it. And I established tight overall
spending ceilings for the next three years. But I also gave priority to
programmes that would help to promote growth and the long-term performance
of the economy. In this way, the Autumn Statement played a key role in
putting Britain on course for recovery.
My Budget today is designed to ensure that this recovery will be sustained.
Above all, this Budget has two objectives: first, to support the recovery in
the year ahead; and second, to set out a clear medium-term strategy for
bringing the borrowing requirement back towards balance.
The Financial Statement and Budget Report, together with a number of press
releases filling out the details of my proposals, will be available from the
Vote Office as soon as I have sat down.
Mr Deputy Speaker, it is impossible to review the short-term prospects for
the British economy without first considering what is happening in the world
outside. Many people talk as if Britain's economic problems were unique, as
if we can somehow insulate ourselves from the economic tides that sweep
across the world. The truth, of course, is quite different. As an open
economy which exports a third of its output, developments abroad have a
profound impact on Britain.
The one ray of light on the world scene has been the recovery in North
America and particularly in the United States. The US economy grew by over 2
per cent last year, with growth in the final quarter revised up to an annual
rate of 4 3/4 per cent.
But the success of the United States stands in marked contrast to
developments elsewhere.
Industrial production has been falling in many of the world's largest
economies - over the last year it has fallen 2 per cent in Italy; by 2 1/2
per cent in France; by 6 1/2 per cent in Germany; and by 7 per cent in
Japan. By contrast, in Britain industrial production has actually risen.
And the recent indicators of GDP confirm this gloomy world picture. Even
Japan has now been visited by the prospect of recession, with GDP declining
by  3/4 per cent in the second half of 1992. France and Italy have also had
to cope with falling output.
And Germany, still struggling with the costs of re-unification, has now
suffered three successive quarters of declining GDP.
It was against this background that the prime minister and I secured
agreement at the Edinburgh Council last December to a European Growth
Initiative.
This was closely modelled on my own Autumn Statement, and was designed to
deal with the most serious problem facing the European Community - the
seemingly inexorable rise in unemployment across the continent.
Last year unemployment in the Community rose by 1 1/4 m and it is projected
to rise further this year to some 11 per cent of the work force. France,
like Britain, has 3m unemployed; in Ireland and Spain more than 1-in-6 are
out of work. Even in western Germany, unemployment is rising once again.
To a large extent this pattern reflects the impact of recession.
But particularly in the European Community, the recent rise in unemployment
comes on top of a relentless upward trend. In the Community as a whole
unemployment rose in every single year from 1973 to 1985; and though it fell
back in the boom of the late 1980s, it has stayed at well over twice the
level of 20 years ago.
Unemployment in Europe is much higher than in many other parts of the world;
and it cannot be reduced simply by stimulating demand. A deep-seated problem
needs more fundamental solutions. It requires more flexible markets, not
just for labour but also for goods and services. And it requires support
given by governments to be directed less at propping up declining
industries; and more at helping the unemployed to rejoin the workforce.
Above all, Mr Deputy Speaker, if we are to secure a lasting reduction in
unemployment over the years ahead, we must continue to resist the imposition
of job-destroying measures emanating from Brussels.
The high cost economies of the European Community cannot insulate themselves
from the world outside - from the more flexible economies of the Pacific Rim
and North America.
Nothing would do more damage to job prospects, not just in Britain, but
across Europe, than the imposition of further tax or regulatory burdens on
employers. That is why this government will never sign the social chapter.
UK ECONOMY
Mr Deputy Speaker, while activity has been falling in many parts of the
world, GDP in Britain rose slightly in the second half of last year.
And with interest rates down by 4 percentage points in just 6 months,
Britain enters the year ahead in a more favourable position than most of our
major competitors. That is confirmed by the European Commission, which
expects Britain to be the fastest growing of all the major European
economies both this year and next.
The substantial interest rate cuts I have made provide a solid foundation
for recovery this year. And they come alongside the measures in my Autumn
Statement to revive business confidence. We are already beginning to see
their effects.
Lower interest rates have contributed to a pick up in the growth of narrow
money, while retail sales have been on a steady upward trend for almost a
year.
The abolition of car tax has prompted a surge in activity in the motor
trade, right at the heart of British manufacturing. New car registrations
were nearly 16 per cent higher in the latest three months than a year
earlier.
By the end of this month the additional money I provided in the Autumn
Statement will have taken about 20,000 properties off the housing market.
Although house prices remain weak, building society commitments and advances
are stronger and both housebuilders and estate agents are now reporting
increased activity.
The extra support I announced for British exporters will reinforce the
competitiveness of our companies trading overseas, while exports in the last
three months of 1992 were already at record levels.
And the temporary increase I announced in capital allowances will provide a
continuing boost to business investment over the next six months. According
to the CBI, manufacturers are more optimistic now than at any time for
almost five years.
The recovery we have seen in confidence rests, above all, on one crucial
foundation - the dramatic progress we have made in reducing inflation.
There has been much debate about Britain's experience with the ERM. Today I
wish to make just two observations.
First, it was absolutely vital to get inflation in this country down. The
two years we spent in the ERM were tough. But the war against inflation was
one we had to fight and one we had to win.
Second, once sterling left the ERM, and with inflation sharply down, we were
right to take the opportunity that gave us to relax policy and get interest
rates down.
Inflation is now at its lowest level for over 25 years. The rapid fall in
the headline rate is, of course, partly the result of the reduction in
mortgage rates. But even more significant is the fall in underlying
inflation - down in the last year from 5 1/2 per cent to 3 1/4 per cent.
Except for a few months in 1986, after the collapse in the oil price,
underlying inflation has not been this low since February 1968.
Mr Deputy Speaker, in my Mansion House speech I announced the establishment
of the Panel of Independent Forecasters. My intention in doing so was to
demonstrate more clearly that the judgments the government has to make are
not based on one single forecast.
I have now received the Panel's first report and I am most grateful for
their contribution. The Panel recognise that the substantial relaxation of
monetary policy has greatly improved the prospects for recovery in 1993.
Their forecasts for growth this year vary between  1/4 and 2 per cent, with
an average of just over 1 per cent.
SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS
The Treasury forecast is very similar. Broadly in line with the average of
the Panel's forecasts, we expect GDP to grow by 1 1/4 per cent this year,
with the recovery gathering pace through the year. Growth in the year to the
second half of 1993 might reach 1 3/4 per cent, rising to 3 per cent in the
first half of 1994.
But, as the Panel stress, uncertainties remain. It is possible that growth
this year may exceed the 1 1/4 per cent forecast that I have made.
But there are significant downside risks too. It is very difficult to be
sure when consumers will feel that their finances are sound enough to
support a stronger growth of spending. And there are, as I have said,
considerable doubts about the prospects for our major export markets.
This will inevitably affect the prospects for the current account. The
deficit in 1992 was about Pounds 12bn. And as the economy recovers and the
unfavourable short-term effects of the fall in the exchange rate feed
through, I expect the deficit to widen this year to Pounds 17.5bn. But the
measures I shall be putting in place today should help to strengthen our
trade position over the years ahead; and I expect the deficit in the
meantime to be readily financeable.
THE MEDIUM-TERM
Mr Deputy Speaker, the key to an improved trade performance lies in the
competitiveness of our products. And the signs are encouraging. Earnings are
now growing more slowly than at any time for 25 years. Labour productivity
has been rising rapidly; and while unit wage costs in manufacturing - have
been rising in Japan and Germany, here they showed no increase at all during
1992. British business now has a great opportunity to expand into overseas
markets and to replace imports at home. But costs must be kept under firm
control.
The government's task is to provide a clear and practicable framework for
policy - to ensure that business has the freedom and the support it needs to
get on with the job. Our strategy for sustained growth rests on three key
principles: first, that growth comes from the private sector, not from
Whitehall; second, that a continuing commitment to low inflation is vital if
competitiveness is to be maintained; and third, that the only way to
increase the country's long-term growth rate is by improving the supply
performance of the economy.
SUPPLY SIDE POLICY
Mr Deputy Speaker, supply side improvements are seldom the stuff of
headlines. But the policies this government has pursued have begun to
improve the way that markets work. We have transferred to private ownership
some two-thirds of the state sector we inherited; and our labour market
reforms have given back to management the power to manage, so that last year
the number of days lost to strikes was the lowest for a century.
But we still have a long agenda of unfinished business.
In my Autumn Statement I set out proposals to increase the role of the
private sector in modernising Britain's infrastructure. And I also announced
additional resources to underpin the education reforms we have set in train.
The wealth of a nation depends largely upon the skills of its people; and
nothing could be more important for the long-term performance of the British
economy than the steady improvement in education and skills that this
government is committed to bring about.
INFLATION AND MONETARY POLICY
But if long-term improvements in economic performance are determined largely
by the supply side, we have seen all too often in the past 20 years how
short-term prospects can be blown off course by inflation. I am absolutely
determined that this should not happen again.
The government's objective is to keep the underlying rate of retail price
inflation within the range of 1-4 per cent and to bring it down to the lower
half of that range by the end of this parliament. I expect underlying
inflation to be 3 3/4 per cent at the end of this year, close to the top of
its target range. But inflation should fall further over the medium-term.
Monetary policy is set to meet that objective.
The detailed framework for monetary policy was set out in my letter to the
Treasury and Civil Service select committee last Autumn. And since then I
have introduced two further developments to demonstrate our determination to
conduct monetary policy in a way that will deliver our inflation target. We
now publish a Monthly Monetary Report which shows the information that
guides our decisions. And I have also asked the Bank of England to provide
regular reports on our progress towards meeting our inflation objective.
Interest rate decisions are based on a continuing assessment of monetary
conditions, measured principally by the growth of narrow and broad money,
and movements in the exchange rate and asset prices. And alongside the
target for inflation, I am setting monitoring ranges for both the narrow and
broad measures of the money supply; for the period of this Parliament the
ranges are 0-4 per cent for M0 and 3-9 per cent for M4.
In judging the prospects for inflation, I have to weigh the evidence from
all the indicators, taken together. If any one is out of line, it is
particularly important to assess its significance against the performance of
the others.
Following the recent substantial reduction in interest rates M0 growth may
be above its monitoring range in the period ahead. But on the basis of the
indicators taken together I believe that interest rates at their current
level are consistent with the achievement of the government's inflation
objectives. And at the lowest level in the European Community, they are also
fully consistent with the prospects for recovery this year.
I turn now to funding, a subject of peculiar fascination for many City
commentators and of particular interest to a number of my Rt Hon and Hon
friends.
The government's full fund policy ensures that its borrowing does not add to
inflationary pressures. I am clear that this policy remains appropriate.
But from time to time it has been right to reconsider its detailed
application. I have therefore decided that transactions by banks and
building societies in gilts will, from now on, be included in the funding
definition. In periods when banks and building societies reduce their
holdings of gilts extra sales to other sectors will be needed. But in
current conditions the change I am making will help to ease the pressures on
liquidity and avoid complicating money market arrangements. If it also leads
to some strengthening in the growth of M4 that would be no bad thing.
In the year ahead sales of gilts will as usual form the bedrock of the
funding programme. But National Savings will again make an important
contribution.
FISCAL POLICY
Mr Deputy Speaker, in controlling inflation, monetary policy must of course
be supported by a sustainable fiscal policy.
I expect a PSBR in the current financial year of Pounds 35bn, slightly lower
than projected at the time of my Autumn Statement. But because unemployment
tends to increase for a while even after growth has resumed and because some
taxes, particularly corporation tax, are collected a year in arrears, I
expect borrowing next year to rise further. The PSBR for 1993-94 has
therefore been set at Pounds 50bn, some 8 per cent of GDP.
Unless action is taken, large deficits will continue over the medium-term.
The PSBR could still be around 6 per cent of GDP in 1996-97, the last year
of this parliament. I do not believe that borrowing on that scale is
acceptable and I shall be announcing measures today to reduce it
progressively over the years ahead.
In the early 1980s we took steps to bring the public finances back under
control. We turned a PSBR of over 5 per cent of GDP into a surplus of 3 per
cent. And we nearly halved the ratio of public sector debt to GDP. We did
not shrink from making the necessary changes then and I will not shrink from
making them today.
The rise in the PSBR since 1989-90 is largely due to the recession. And
because of the reduction in the national debt in the 1980s, I have been able
to allow the so-called 'automatic stabilisers' - the increases in public
spending and the reduction in tax receipts that directly reflect the
weakness of the economy - to operate fully. It was right to do this to
maintain the level of demand during the recession. But just as a business
cannot go on year after year ignoring a fall in cashflow caused by a
downturn in the economy; so too the government cannot keep on running up
debt in the hope that recovery will solve our problems.
Even if the higher debt we now face was largely caused by the recession, the
extra borrowing still has to be financed. And as debt mounts up, so too do
the debt interest payments. In this way what might have started off as a
cyclical deficit will soon become a structural deficit unless action is
taken to bring borrowing down.
All round the world we see countries striving to reduce their fiscal
deficits or suffering from their failure to do so sooner. President
Clinton's programme shows that the need for fiscal discipline is now widely
understood. And the deficit which the Italians are now having to deal with
is a salutary warning to those who think that a problem postponed is a
problem solved.
Those who argue that there is no need for action should confront the
consequences of such a course, the consequences not just for the public
finances but also for the level of interest rates.
For all these reasons I believe that the greatest threat to sustained
recovery in Britain would come not from a lack of demand, but from excessive
government borrowing over the medium-term. We have to address that problem
now.
Action to bring the fiscal deficit down clearly has to start with the amount
the government spends. The new control arrangements I put in place last year
were an important first step; and we now have firm ceilings for expenditure
over the next three years that will keep the growth of spending below that
of the economy as a whole.
But proper control of public expenditure cannot be achieved simply by
setting targets. It requires a continuous examination of each and every
department and of all the functions of government. What was once a desirable
role for the public sector may no longer be appropriate today. And that is
why the fundamental reviews of public spending programmes are so important.
These reviews will inevitably take time; so I have also had to look to the
revenue side of the account.
In doing so I have had to balance two key objectives. First, the essential
task of helping recovery. Second, the need to tackle the deficit so that the
recovery will be sustained.
I believe, Mr Deputy Speaker, that my proposals strike that balance. In the
year ahead, 1993-94, their effect will be broadly neutral, thus allowing the
recovery to take hold. And I will be announcing later some measures to
improve that prospect by helping business and the unemployed.
But for subsequent years, as the economy strengthens, my proposals are
designed to build in a wedge of steadily rising revenue.
Overall they will raise revenue by Pounds 6.5bn in 1994-95 and by Pounds
10.5bn in 1995-96, equivalent to 1 1/2 per cent of GDP.
In setting out the government's plans for raising revenue, good intentions
are not enough. I intend that as far as possible these proposals should be
legislated for in this year's Finance Bill.
Taken together with the tight public expenditure plans I announced in the
Autumn Statement, they should ensure that the PSBR returns towards balance
over the medium-term. But if further action proves necessary I shall not
hesitate to take it.
TAXATION OBJECTIVES
Mr Deputy Speaker, the proposals I shall be announcing today are part of a
continuing programme of tax reform. A programme which has sharpened work
incentives and improved the efficiency of the economy.
In deciding where to look for additional revenue, I have been guided by a
number of principles.
First, that where possible money should be raised in a way that will not
damage the working of the economy.
Second, that in general this means reducing the value of allowances and
broadening the tax base rather than increasing marginal tax rates.
And third, that taxation should support social, health and environmental
objectives.
I will deal with my revenue raising proposals in two parts. I will start
with my proposals for the year ahead, 1993-94; and then describe the
measures I propose for the two years thereafter.
For the year immediately ahead, as I have said, my proposals are broadly
neutral. My objective has been to strengthen the recovery by giving help to
business. But in order to pay for this, I have had to raise revenue from
other sectors of the economy.
ALLOWANCES
First, income tax. With inflation now down to levels not seen for a
generation, I propose for the year ahead to freeze the personal allowances,
the married couple's and related allowances, the basic rate limit and the
income limit for age-related allowances.
Unleaded petrol increases by 12p per gallon VAT to be introduced on domestic
fuel and power Warning: Head depths do not match The threshold for
inheritance tax, the capital gains tax exempt amount and the earnings limit
for tax relief on pension contributions will also remain unchanged. This
will save some Pounds 670m this year.
EXCISE DUTIES SECOND, EXCISE DUTIES.
The removal of customs controls at the Channel has been welcomed by many
thousands of travellers who are now seeing the benefits of the single market
at first hand. And, it has also brought many benefits to British business,
including some 10m fewer forms this year.
But there is natural concern too about the impact an increase in
cross-border shopping might have on British businesses, particularly in the
south-east.
In considering what changes to make to excise duties I have had to balance
this against the need to raise revenue. I have therefore decided to raise
the duties on most alcoholic drinks by only 5 per cent this year. From 6.00
pm today, the total tax on a pint of beer will rise by about one and a half
pence and that on a bottle of wine by about five and a half pence.
I have also received many representations this year about the taxation of
spirits, and in particular, the taxation on whisky. This is one of Britain's
most successful exporting industries. I promised in my Budget speech last
year to resist proposals from Brussels to introduce tax rules which would
hit whisky sales in European markets. But having succeeded there, it is
important that our own tax regime does not further disadvantage this
industry. I have therefore decided to make no change in the duty on spirits
this year. I am sure this will be welcomed on all sides of the House and
especially in Scotland.
Next, tobacco. Last July, my Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for Health
published a white paper containing our commitment to maintain the real value
of the taxation on tobacco products. But again I have also had to take into
account the impact of the single market. I propose therefore to increase the
overall burden of duty by some 6 1/2 per cent, 4 per cent above the rate of
inflation. This will add 10 pence to a typical pack of 20 cigarettes - and,
I regret to say, some 4 1/2 pence to a pack of 5 small cigars.
But I also propose to make this increase in a different way from usual. As
the House will recall, cigarettes are subject to two different excise
duties: a 'specific' duty, which is a flat rate charge per cigarette, and an
'ad valorem' duty, on their price. Given that the health objective is to tax
the harm cigarettes do, it is better to tax the cigarettes themselves rather
than their price. I therefore propose to increase the specific duty on
cigarettes by 10 per cent, while cutting the ad valorem duty from 21 per
cent to 20 per cent. This will mean a proportionately bigger tax increase
for cheap cigarettes many of which are imported.
I also propose this year to increase the duty on most gaming machines by 20
per cent.
Taken together, these changes will raise Pounds 290m in 1993-94 and Pounds
365m in 1994-95.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I turn now to motoring taxes, where I propose to combine
raising revenue with tax reform.
When I abolished car tax in my Autumn Statement, I said that I would recoup
the cost from other motoring taxes.
I therefore propose to raise all fuel duties by 10 per cent from 6.00 pm
today putting 12 pence on a gallon of unleaded petrol and 15 pence on a
gallon of four-star. From midnight tonight, vehicle excise duty for cars -
the tax disc - will also rise, by Pounds 15 to Pounds 125.
Taken together with the abolition of car tax these measures will raise a net
Pounds 400m in 1993-94.
The overall impact will be to shift the tax burden from car buyers to car
users; and to help both the environment and the industry. Together with the
increases I have announced on alcohol and tobacco duties, it will add  1/4
percentage point to the RPI in April, compared with indexation.
FUEL SCALES
Alongside the increase in fuel duties, I propose to increase by 20 per cent
the scale charges for free fuel supplied to company car drivers for private
use. I also propose to abolish the 50 per cent discount currently available
to drivers doing more than 18,000 business miles in a year.
Employees can, of course, avoid this tax altogether by paying for the full
cost of all fuel provided for private journeys themselves. The environmental
impact of my proposals on fuel duties will be strengthened by reducing the
number of motorists who use fuel at no direct cost to themselves. This
measure will raise Pounds 65m in the year ahead and Pounds 70m in 1994-95.
COMPANY CARS AND VANS
I turn next to the tax treatment of company cars.
From its introduction in 1976 until 1988, the income tax charge on company
cars significantly underestimated their true value. Since then charges have
been steadily raised to more appropriate levels. I propose this year to
complete that process by bringing the car scales up to a level which fully
reflects the true value of the benefit of a company car. This requires an
increase in the car scales of 8 per cent, bringing additional revenue of
Pounds 100m in 1993-94.
But, as I said last year, the structure of the current regime remains
unsatisfactory. In most cases the value put on the benefit, and the tax that
is payable, are determined not by the price of the car, but by the size of
its engine. This might have mattered less when scale charges were very low,
but it now gives rise to serious distortions.
Following consultation with the industry, I propose from 1994-95 to replace
the current car scales with a simple system based on the price of the car.
The annual benefit of a company car will be valued for income tax purposes
at a fixed percentage of the manufacturer's list price. To make the reform
revenue neutral, I propose to set that percentage at 35 per cent. Company
car users will then pay income tax at their marginal rate on that amount.
However, I do not believe that it would be right to apply the full rigour of
the charge to those who use the company car largely for business purposes. I
therefore propose that there should be a discount of one-third for those
company car users who drive more than 2,500 miles a year on business, and a
discount of two-thirds for those who do more than 18,000 business miles.
In future, the tax on company cars will rise or fall automatically with the
price of those cars. It follows that there will no longer be any need to set
the tax charge each year in the Budget.
My reform will reduce tax distortions in the car market and enable
manufacturers and fleet managers to plan production and purchasing in a more
rational and stable system. For these reasons, I believe it will be
welcomed.
I also propose to replace the existing complex arrangements for taxing
employees' private use of company vans with a simple scale charge, covering
both the van and any fuel provided, set at the modest level of Pounds 500.
This will raise Pounds 10m in the year ahead and Pounds 35m in 1994-95.
ANTI-AVOIDANCE
In addition I intend to close a number of loopholes which have been
exploited to avoid tax.
First, from midnight last night I propose to exclude from the Business
Expansion Scheme all schemes which involve the provision of loans to BES
investors. The BES was set up to encourage investment in small business -
not to provide highly subsidised loans for top rate taxpayers.
Second, I intend to end the practice whereby group companies buy up other
companies with capital losses simply in order to set those losses against
their own capital gains.
Third, I intend to restrict the situations in which changes in company
ownership can create scope to avoid advance corporation tax.
Finally, I propose to tighten the rules for foreign companies under UK
control.
Full details of these and other measures are provided in a series of Inland
Revenue press notices being issued today.
Taken together, they should raise some Pounds 70m in 1993-94, rising to over
Pounds 480m in the following year.
TAURUS
Before leaving my proposals for 1993-94, I wish to make clear the position
on stamp duties on securities and property other than land and buildings.
Following the decision by the Stock Exchange last week to abandon Taurus,
stamp duty will remain in place at least for 1993-94, raising Pounds 1bn
during the coming year. I will review the position further in the light of
the conclusions of the Securities Settlement Task Force set up by the Bank
of England.
The measures I have proposed so far will raise Pounds 2.4bn in 1993-94, not
including stamp duty. Of this, Pounds 750m is required to finance the
abolition of car tax. I will be using a large part of the rest to reduce
taxes on business.
REVENUE MEASURES 1994-95 AND BEYOND
But before I turn to business taxes, I intend to set out my tax proposals
for 1994-95 and the years thereafter. As I have already explained, these tax
proposals will build up over the years, creating a wedge of increasing
revenue, which, as far as possible, will be legislated for in the coming
financial year.
NATIONAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTIONS
In my Autumn Statement I took some tough decisions on current spending to
maintain capital programmes. But, to protect the poorest and most vulnerable
members of society, we also decided to uprate social security benefits in
full. That decision was warmly welcomed on all sides of the House.
But had no further action been taken the effect of that decision, combined
with the rise in unemployment, would have been to push the National
Insurance Fund into deficit. To prevent this, I introduced a new Treasury
Grant and legislation to implement this has been now taken through the
House.
This makes sense at a time when ensuring economic recovery is our priority.
But it is clearly not a fair, or reasonable basis for financing the National
Insurance Fund over the medium-term. A Treasury Grant is paid for by the
general body of taxpayers, including millions of pensioners who have already
made a full contribution to the Fund throughout their working lives.
Accordingly, my Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for Social Security and
I propose to place the finances of the National Insurance Fund on a firmer
footing.
I do not propose to increase National Insurance Contributions in the coming
year. However, from April 1994, my Rt Hon friend and I propose to increase
the Class 1 main rate of employee National Insurance Contributions by 1 per
cent to 10 per cent and the Class 4 rate for the self-employed by 1 per cent
to 7.3 per cent. The arrangements for employees earning below the lower
Earnings Limit and the self-employed with profits below the lower Profits
Limit will be unchanged by these measures. The necessary legislation will be
brought before the House in the coming year.
Taken together, these increases will raise about Pounds 1.8bn in 1994-95 and
Pounds 2.2bn in a full year.
But, Mr Deputy Speaker, that will still leave a deficit in the National
Insurance Fund of Pounds 2.8bn in 1994-95 and a similar sum the following
year. National Insurance Contributions are, of course, paid not just by
employees and the self-employed, but also by employers. And when a deficit
of this size emerges in the Fund it is natural to look to all contributors
to make up the balance. The remaining deficit is roughly equivalent to an
increase in the employer National Insurance Contribution rate of 1.2 per
cent from 10.4 per cent to 11.6 per cent. But having reflected carefully, I
do not believe that it would be appropriate to increase the burden on
employers. I therefore propose to retain a smaller Treasury grant to make up
the continuing shortfall in the Fund.
NORTH SEA FISCAL REGIME
Mr Deputy Speaker, one of the main objectives of this Government's tax
reforms has been to eliminate tax rules which distort investment decisions.
This was the driving force, for example, behind the far-reaching reform of
the corporation tax system in 1984.
Today I wish to carry this principle through into another important sector
of the economy - the North Sea, and in particular Petroleum Revenue Tax, or
PRT.
When PRT was introduced in 1975, the North Sea oil sector looked very
different - oil prices were very high and the typical oil field was
relatively large. The purpose of the new tax was to ensure that the
Exchequer got its fair share of the large profits that were there to be made
in the North Sea, while companies were left with a reasonable return on
their investments.
But as the North Sea has developed, the PRT regime has come to look
increasingly anachronistic. As profits in many existing fields attract a
marginal tax rate of over 83 per cent, there is little incentive for
companies to keep costs under control or for additional investment in
existing fields. Moreover, as a result of the uniquely generous allowances
that are available, the Exchequer is no longer getting a fair return. In
1991-92, the PRT regime actually cost the Exchequer Pounds 200m.
As many in the oil industry recognise, this is neither reasonable nor
sustainable. The North Sea tax regime has to be placed on a clear long-term
footing. So today I intend to set out a major reform which will raise
revenue in the medium-term and give the oil industry a stable framework to
plan ahead.
I propose from 1 July this year to reduce the PRT rate on existing fields
from 75 per cent to 50 per cent. And for new fields I propose with effect
from today to abolish PRT entirely.
It follows that for new fields I also intend to scrap all the allowances
that go with the existing PRT system; including, for example, relief for
exploration and appraisal expenditure that can be set against PRT on
existing fields. But contracts entered into before today for exploration and
appraisal will continue to get relief against PRT on existing fields for the
next two years. Allowances that can be claimed within existing fields will
remain essentially unchanged.
This reform will greatly simplify the tax regime for new fields, disapplying
at a stroke some 300 pages of complex legislation. And it means that the
only tax on new oil fields in the North Sea will be corporation tax - at 33
per cent, the lowest rate of business tax in the industrialised world.
Britain will have a competitive tax regime which strikes a reasonable
balance between the interests of the industry and those of the nation as a
whole.
For, Mr Deputy Speaker, the paradox of this reform is that despite the
abolition of PRT for new fields, and the reduced rate for existing fields,
after 1993-94 it will actually raise revenue for the Exchequer. I expect the
yield in 1994-95 to be some Pounds 300m and in the following year some
Pounds 400m.
RELOCATION EXPENSES
I turn now to another area where reform is long overdue - the tax treatment
of job-related relocation expenses.
When a company asks its employees to move house, it may offer help with
relocation expenses. Usually, that involves paying for the cost of the
removals, but sometimes, if the move is to a more expensive area, the
employer will also pay allowances towards the employee's higher living
costs.
For the past 40 years we have allowed employees to receive most of this help
tax free, provided the employee has sold his existing home, a condition
which has attracted some criticism. This means that someone whose employer
gives them as much as Pounds 25,000 might pay no tax on it at all. On the
other hand, people who decide to move to find work and pay their own costs
get no help from the tax system whatsoever.
I see a case for some measure of relief where employers help meet employees'
removal expenses. However, it is difficult to find a convincing rationale
for a system of tax relief whose effect is to give the biggest subsidy to
those moving to the highest cost areas. And with these reliefs expected to
cost the Exchequer no less than Pounds 800m this year, I believe the time
has come for reform.
I am therefore asking the Inland Revenue to withdraw the present
extra-statutory concession which helps people moving to a more expensive
area. And I propose to restrict relief on removal expenses to payments of up
to Pounds 8,000 for people whose employers require them to relocate after 6
April this year. Under the new system, the existing home need no longer be
sold to qualify for relief.
Although these changes come into effect immediately, they will not start to
raise revenue until the year after - about Pounds 200m in both 1994-95 and
1995-96.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I turn now to mortgage interest relief. The rapid
expansion of home ownership is one of this government's most enduring
achievements; and I have no plans to change the existing ceiling for
mortgage interest relief of Pounds 30,000.
But in the last few Budgets, we have taken steps to improve the focus of
mortgage interest relief and to contain its costs, most recently in my 1991
Budget, by restricting the relief to the basic rate.
Even so, mortgage interest relief is expected to cost the Exchequer Pounds
4.3bn next year alone. I propose therefore, to reduce the rate at which
relief is given from 25 to 20 per cent. But I propose to defer the
implementation of this change until April 1994. In all, this change will
yield Pounds 900m in 1994-95 and Pounds 960m in the following year.
At current mortgage rates, no borrower will be more than Pounds 10 a month
worse off from the reduced rate of relief; and for many with mortgages below
Pounds 30,000 the increase in payments will be even smaller. Moreover, it is
the level of interest rates, not the amount of tax relief, that is the most
important determinant of the cost of a mortgage. Because interest rates have
fallen so far since October 1990, payments on the average mortgage have been
cut by over Pounds 150 a month. So the cost of the change I am proposing is
equal to just a fraction of the benefit mortgage payers have already
received from lower mortgage rates.
I know that there are some elderly people with life annuity home income
plans, which allow them to draw down some of the savings they have invested
in their houses. Such schemes will continue to attract relief at 25 per
cent.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I am fully aware that, despite some encouraging signs of
increasing activity, the housing market remains fragile. That is why the
changes I have described will not come into effect until next year. And that
is also why I have one further proposal which will affect people buying
houses. Whereas my proposals on mortgage interest relief do not apply until
April 1994, this measure comes into effect immediately. I propose to double
the stamp duty threshold to Pounds 60,000 for documents executed from today
and not stamped before 23 March when the required Budget Resolution has been
considered by this House.
This means that the cost of buying homes priced at between Pounds 30,000 and
Pounds 60,000 will be reduced, by up to Pounds 600. From today, the number
of transactions in the housing market liable to stamp duty will be halved.
This will be of particular benefit to first-time buyers, who tend to buy
less expensive homes.
With mortgage interest rates at their lowest level for decades, this
reduction in stamp duty should provide a further stimulus to the housing
market. The change will cost Pounds 220m in 1993-94 and about Pounds 270m in
the following year.
MARRIED COUPLE'S ALLOWANCE
Mr Deputy Speaker, last year I announced a significant change in the
treatment of the Married Couple's Allowance, giving couples greater
flexibility in allocating it between them. Today, I have a further important
change to propose.
At present the Married Couple's Allowance reduces a taxpayer's liability at
his or her marginal rate. A taxpayer on the 20 per cent lower rate benefits
by Pounds 344 but a higher rate taxpayer gets Pounds 688 - twice as much.
There is no good reason why an allowance intended to recognise the
responsibilities of marriage should give least to those on low incomes and
most to those right at the top of the income scale.
From 6 April 1994 I therefore propose to restrict relief for the Married
Couple's Allowance to the lower rate of 20 per cent. It will then be worth
the same amount to taxpayers at all levels of income. The allowances which
are linked to the Married Couple's Allowance for those aged under 65 will be
similarly restricted.
Because of the higher level of allowance to which they are entitled, this
change will bear harder on elderly married couples.
So also from 1994-95, I propose to increase by Pounds 200 the Married
Couple's Allowance for those aged 65 and over. This will ensure that
pensioners paying tax at the basic rate are affected in the same way as any
other basic rate taxpayer by the change. And elderly married couples in the
lower rate band will actually gain slightly.
As I have said, these changes will not come into effect until 1994-95. They
will then raise about Pounds 900m in 1994-95 and Pounds 1.2bn in 1995-96.
GREEN MEASURES
Mr Deputy Speaker, in recent years, there has been much debate on the
subject of global warming and the role tax measures can play in combating
it. This has led the European Commission to propose a Community-wide carbon
tax. There may indeed be a case for further co-ordinated international
action on global warming. But I remain unpersuaded of the need for a new
European Community tax. Tax policy should continue to be decided here in
this House - not in Brussels.
Individual countries should, of course, take their own measures to give
people the right signals to encourage the efficient use of energy. Today, I
shall propose measures designed to do just that and to raise revenue at the
same time.
Last June, my Rt Hon friend the prime minister signed the UN Convention on
Climate Change at Rio. This was a milestone in international efforts to halt
global warming.
When Britain and other countries have ratified the Convention, the
government will be committed to bring forward measures aimed at returning
greenhouse gas emissions from this country to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
My Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for the Environment published last
December a consultation paper which set out the various options.
The largest contribution to the growth in UK carbon dioxide emissions in the
coming years is expected to come from the transport sector. I therefore
propose to make clear today the government's long term intention on road
fuel duty. We intend to raise road fuel duties on average by at least 3 per
cent a year in real terms in future Budgets, in addition to the increase I
have already announced for this year.
In deciding the level of duty to be levied in any particular Budget we will,
of course, take full account of conditions at the time, including, if
charges for motorways and urban roads are introduced, the overall level of
taxes and charges which road users are paying. But my announcement today
will help manufacturers and consumers to plan ahead. It should provide a
strong incentive for motorists to buy more fuel-efficient vehicles. And it
will raise at least a further Pounds 520m in 1994-95 and Pounds 950m in
1995-96.
But, Mr Deputy Speaker, in order to meet the commitment we entered into at
Rio, action will be required not just in the transport sector, but across
the whole economy. And in deciding how best to meet our carbon emissions
target we will need to ensure that the right incentives are in place
throughout the economy - encouraging people to consume less and conserve
more. Above all, it is crucial to avoid taking measures that will have a
disproportionate impact on the competitiveness of British industry.
Against this background, Mr Deputy Speaker, I have one further measure to
propose that will not only encourage greater energy efficiency in every
household in the country; but will also raise a considerable amount of
revenue for the Exchequer over the years ahead.
Fuel and energy supplies to industry pay VAT in Britain. Those to the home
do not. In this respect, we are unique in the European Community.
I therefore propose, over the next two years, to end the zero rate of VAT on
domestic fuel and power. Again, this change will not come into effect
immediately, but in 1994. VAT will be charged at 8 per cent from 1 April
1994 and at 17 1/2 per cent from 1 April 1995.
Mr Deputy Speaker, this measure will raise some Pounds 950m in1994-95,
Pounds 2.3bn in 1995-96 and around Pounds 3bn a year thereafter. For the
first time the rate of VAT on domestic fuel and power will be the same as
that charged on goods like loft insulation material, which improve energy
efficiency. This will bring an end to the current anomaly which makes a
nonsense of any attempt to use the tax system to improve the environment. My
intention is to legislate for this proposal this year.
Mr Deputy Speaker, social security benefits will, of course, rise
automatically to reflect the price effect of this change. But I recognise
that this will cause particular problems for those on low incomes. My Rt Hon
friend, the Secretary of State for Social Security, will take this into
account when the income related benefits are uprated next year.
Together with measures which have already been announced, these tax
proposals should take Britain two-thirds of the way to meeting the Rio
target. And they will do so in a way that does the least possible damage to
the competitiveness of British industry. I am confident that the remaining
gap can be filled through sensible energy saving measures, as and when the
Convention is ratified by our major industrial competitors.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the measures I have announced so far will raise
substantial revenue in 1994-95 and beyond. I turn now to my measures for
business.
DEREGULATION
As the House is aware, the government has embarked on a major drive to
reduce the burden of regulation on industry. I will therefore start with
three significant measures of deregulation, which should be of particular
benefit to the self-employed and to small businesses generally.
Self-assessment of income tax has operated successfully in many countries,
including the United States. But none of my predecessors has found a way of
introducing it here.
For most people that has not been a problem - the PAYE system already deals
very simply with the tax affairs of some 16 million employees. But for the
8m taxpayers who have to fill in a tax return each year, the current
arrangements are very far from simple.
Following a detailed consultation exercise, I now propose to offer these
people, including 4m self-employed, the option of self-assessment.
Legislation will be brought forward in next year's Finance Bill to implement
the proposal from the earliest practicable date, which is 1996-97.
For those who choose to take it up, self-assessment should provide a
significant reduction in bureaucracy and paperwork;
and it will also bring out more clearly the link between public expenditure
and the burden this places on the individual taxpayer. A more transparent
tax system can only lead to more informed choices and debate; and I believe
that self- assessment for a third of all taxpayers will contribute to that.
But for self-assessment to work, the tax system has to be simple enough for
taxpayers themselves to be able to fill in their own tax returns. My second
reform will achieve a significant simplification, particularly for the
self-employed.
One of the least attractive features of our present tax system is that it is
simply too complicated for them to work out how much tax they owe: people
setting up in business on their own are more or less forced to employ an
accountant.
Since 1926, the self-employed, working under the so-called 'preceding year'
basis of assessment, have generally paid a tax bill based on profits they
made up to two years previously.
People with several different sources of income may be assessed on a number
of different bases, with separate tax bills and payment dates for each. It
would be difficult to invent a more complicated system for taxing the
self-employed even if one set out with that very objective.
Under my new proposals, people will have just one tax bill each year,
covering all their income. And the self-employed will pay tax on the profits
they make in the current year, not the preceding year. This should be a
major simplification; and I am sure it will be warmly welcomed.
Taken together these two measures amount to the most fundamental reform of
income tax administration since the introduction of Pay-As-You-Earn in 1944.
My third announcement will be of particular interest to smaller businesses.
At present, all incorporated businesses must have their accounts audited.
While it is clearly important that accounts should be reliable and indeed,
that the Inland Revenue and other users should have the assurance they need
that the accounts have been drawn up properly, the current statutory audit
requirement imposes a disproportionate cost on smaller businesses. My Rt Hon
friend the President of the Board of Trade will therefore shortly be issuing
a consultative document setting out options for reducing this burden, at
least for the very smallest incorporated businesses. This would deliver
significant savings and would represent a major step in cutting out red
tape.
BUSINESS TAXES
Mr Deputy Speaker, reducing the government's borrowing requirement will
benefit business by ensuring that the recovery is sustained.
But as I said in my Mansion House speech last October, the government is
determined to keep all our policies under continuous review, to ensure that
British business has the backing it needs to compete in world markets. And
this is particularly true of our tax policies.
Britain already has the lowest rate of tax on business profits in the
industrialised world and we have a personal tax system which makes it
attractive for entrepreneurs and managers to live and work in Britain. We
intend to see that continue.
Britain has had an outstanding record over recent years in attracting
investment from overseas. Indeed we have attracted no less than a third of
all foreign investment into the EC over the last few years.
But we cannot be complacent. With the advent of the single market, the
competition in Europe to secure inward investment has become ever more
intense. So my Budget sets out to ensure that our business tax regime
retains its clear competitive edge.
SURPLUS ACT AND THE TAXATION OF DIVIDENDS
In talking to business organisations over the last few months, one issue has
come up again and again - the problem of surplus Advance Corporation Tax, or
ACT. Many believe that this feature of our tax system both penalises
successful British-owned international companies and distorts investment
decisions.
This issue has of course been with us for many years, and it has so far
defied solution. Nonetheless, I made a commitment in my Budget last year to
return to it; and I am pleased to be able to report to the House that I have
now found a way forward.
I hope that the House will bear with me, as I am afraid that my proposals
are complex. But they do attack the problem of surplus ACT, they are central
to the strategy of this Budget, and they raise a significant amount of
revenue.
At present, ACT is paid on dividends at 25 per cent. This funds a tax credit
which covers the basic rate income tax bill of the shareholder. But as its
name implies, it is also an advance payment of the company's corporation tax
bill.
In normal circumstances, the system works very well. But sometimes it does
bring problems, particularly for companies which earn a large proportion of
their profits overseas. These companies often end up paying an ACT bill on
their dividends that is greater than their entire UK corporation tax
liability. The so-called 'surplus ACT' that results cannot be claimed back -
in effect, it becomes an extra tax on profits.
And this can have damaging economic effects. For example, it gives some
companies a strong incentive to move important activities, including
research and development, abroad, leading to the loss of skills and jobs in
the UK. It cannot be right to distort the commercial decisions of British
companies in this way or to give them an incentive to move elsewhere in
Europe.
So today I am putting forward some proposals that will go a long way towards
alleviating the problem.
First, I shall establish a special tax regime from 1994-95 to help
foreign-owned international companies which are considering setting up their
headquarters in the UK. This will make it more attractive for international
companies to base their operations in Britain. And it will further promote
London's position as Europe's leading financial centre.
Second, I am today issuing a consultation document proposing a scheme under
which British companies may choose to class any dividend paid out of
overseas profits as a 'Foreign Income Dividend'. Unlike normal UK dividends,
this will not carry any tax credit and although ACT would initially be
payable in the usual way, the company will be entitled to a refund if it
gives rise to surplus ACT. Once fully operational, this scheme could reduce
the build-up of surplus ACT by some Pounds 250m a year.
Finally, Mr Deputy Speaker, I have one further proposal which will help not
just companies with surplus ACT, but all dividend paying companies; and it
will do so in a way that will also raise considerable revenue. I propose
simply to reduce the rate of ACT in two stages, from 25 per cent to 22 1/2
per cent in 1993-94 and then to 20 per cent in 1994-95.
Reduction of 7 1/2 % in ECGD premiums Loan guarantee scheme premium to small
businesses falls Warning: Head depths do not match This will give companies
which pay dividends a cash flow benefit of about Pounds 2bn over the next
two years. And it will reduce the build-up of surplus ACT by about Pounds
300m a year.
I also propose to reduce from 25 per cent to 20 per cent in 1993-94 the tax
credit that shareholders get when they receive a dividend.
Those familiar with these issues - a select few, I fear - will know that tax
credits affect two main groups of shareholders. Those with no tax liability,
particularly pension funds, can claim a cash payment from the Inland Revenue
for the tax credit. And higher rate taxpayers have to make up the difference
between the 40 per cent top rate of tax and the 25 per cent tax credit they
receive.
So the reduction in the tax credit I am proposing will have two important
effects.
First, the payments that lower rate payers, non-taxpayers and particularly
pension funds, get from the Inland Revenue will be reduced by 5 percentage
points, saving the Exchequer no less than Pounds 1bn a year.
Second, higher rate taxpayers will have to pay an extra 5 per cent of tax on
the dividends they receive, in order to discharge their liability to tax at
the top rate of 40 per cent. This in turn will yield an extra Pounds 200m a
year.
Finally, in order to ensure that most ordinary shareholders are not affected
by this change, I also propose to reduce the rate of tax on dividends from
the current basic rate of 25 per cent to the lower rate of 20 per cent. The
effect of this, combined with the change to tax credits, is to leave most
basic rate taxpayers neither better off nor worse off than they are now.
So, Mr Deputy Speaker, these proposals achieve three objectives at the same
time. They will give companies a Pounds 2bn cashflow boost over the next two
years. They will significantly reduce the problem of surplus ACT for the
future. And they will raise Pounds 900m in extra revenue for the Exchequer
from 1995-96 onwards.
There is, however, one group for whom I believe it would be desirable to
ease the immediate effect of these changes. I therefore propose for
charities to phase in the effect of the reduction in the tax credit over a
four year period. I also have some further measures for charities, to which
I shall turn later.
EXPORT CREDIT
The House will be relieved to hear that my next measure is a little less
opaque. But it is equally important for the long term success of British
manufacturing.
In the Autumn Statement, I announced a substantial increase in export
credits to help British businesses win major contracts abroad. But the fact
remains that export credit insurance has proved expensive for the taxpayer.
For that reason the government has negotiated hard over the years to secure
a reduction in the subsidies offered by other countries. Some progress has
been made, and we shall continue in that effort. But in the meantime,
British firms are sometimes at a competitive disadvantage in seeking
business overseas.
My Rt Hon friend the President of the Board of Trade and I have therefore
looked again at the whole range of ECGD services and have decided to make
some important changes.
First, premiums. Last year, premiums were cut on average by about 20 per
cent. But there is scope to do more. We have therefore decided to make a
further reduction of 7 1/2 per cent in the average level of ECGD premiums.
This means that, while premiums for individual export markets will always
differ, the average level of premiums paid by British exporters next year
will be down to around the average paid by their G7 competitors.
Second, export credit cover. In the Autumn Statement, I increased the cover
available to exporters by Pounds 200m this year, and by a further Pounds 500
million for 1993-94. Over the next three years, my Rt Hon friend and I
propose that additional cover of Pounds 1.3bn should be made available for
those exporting into some of the fastest growing and most important markets
around the world. Taken together with my Autumn Statement announcement, this
means that the annual cover for these markets will have increased by more
than 75 per cent in just 4 years.
As a result British firms will now be able to go out into export markets,
with greater confidence that they can compete on a more equal basis with
their overseas competitors. I am sure that they will seize the opportunities
that are now available to them.
INSURANCE
Over the years, one of Britain's most successful exporting industries has
been insurance. But for some years now, the industry has argued that the tax
reliefs available to some of their European counterparts put them at a
competitive disadvantage.
In fact, that is not the whole story - in other respects, our own tax system
is very favourable. Nevertheless, having reviewed the position again, I
believe that there may indeed be a case for allowing tax relief on certain
types of equalisation reserves covering occasional, exceptional losses.
But if such reserves are to be allowable for tax, they would also have to be
within the regulatory framework for the industry.
This would be a major departure for both the tax and regulatory systems. A
consultation document will be issued later this spring to consider the
options.
LLOYD'S
I also propose to introduce a significant reform of the tax regime for
Lloyd's.
I propose to tax the gains on the disposal of assets which form the premiums
funds of Lloyd's Names in the same way as those of corporate insurers.
And I intend to replace the current reserve arrangements with a better
targeted reserve, which should enhance Lloyd's ability to deal with the
particularly volatile type of risk which makes up most of their business.
My proposals will greatly simplify the taxation of Lloyd's. Lloyd's has had
a difficult time recently; but it remains vital if London is to retain its
pre-eminent position in the world insurance market. Taken together the
reforms I am proposing will be revenue neutral.
SMALL BUSINESS
The measures I have announced so far will be of help particularly to larger
businesses. But small firms play a crucial role in our economy. Small
businesses do not follow the economy - they lead it. That has been
demonstrated time and time again. In this Budget, I shall set out some
further proposals which will help small businesses to lead the recovery once
again.
Following heavy losses in recent years, the banks are bound to be more
cautious in their lending in future. Moreover, the fall in property prices
has reduced the security for their loans.
As the recovery progresses small firms may therefore find that their
prospects for expansion are increasingly threatened by a shortage of bank
finance. My first proposal is directed at that problem.
The government's Loan Guarantee Scheme helps entrepreneurs with viable
projects, but who do not have the track record or loan security to attract
sufficient finance on their own. It enables them to borrow with a government
guarantee, usually for 70 per cent of the value of the loan, in return for
paying a premium of 2 1/2 per cent on the guaranteed part of the loan.
In Germany and the US, a large proportion of lending to small businesses is
done at fixed rates of interest. By contrast, in Britain, most borrowing is
linked to the level of base rates. I believe that many small businesses
would benefit from making more use of fixed rate finance which would give
them more stability and would enable them to plan ahead.
I propose therefore to make a substantial reduction in the Loan Guarantee
Scheme premium for guarantees on fixed rate lending. This will fall to  1/2
per cent and will, I hope, encourage more fixed rate lending. I also intend
to reduce the premium on variable rate loans to 1 1/2 per cent. The premiums
will henceforth apply to the whole loan, not just the guaranteed portion.
This change should take effect in the next month or so.
I also propose that the limit on the size of loan allowed to such businesses
should be raised from Pounds 100,000 to Pounds 250,000 and the proportion of
the loan guaranteed increased from 70 per cent to 85 per cent. My Rt Hon
friend the President of the Board of Trade and I will be taking this forward
urgently with the banks.
CGT REFORM
My second measure relates specifically to entrepreneurs who have built up
successful businesses and now wish to sell them in order to start up a new
one.
The current Capital Gains Tax regime provides generous annual exemptions to
those who make regular capital gains from trading in shares. But it is much
less generous to the entrepreneur. Typically, he sells shares in his own
company only once, and so has only one year's annual exemption to set
against gains built up by hard work over many years. So for every Pounds 100
taken out of the old company at the margin he has only Pounds 80 to invest
in a new one.
It is hardly surprising that entrepreneurs complain that they are locked in
by the CGT regime, and prevented from investing their talents elsewhere.
For this reason I propose in future to defer the payment of CGT for any
entrepreneur whose gains from the sale of his own company are reinvested in
another qualifying unquoted trading company, or companies. I know this will
be widely welcomed by the venture capital industry.
I also propose to relax the conditions for CGT retirement relief, by
reducing the qualifying shareholding from 25 per cent to 5 per cent; and to
extend this relief to cover full-time employees, as well as directors. These
changes will cost Pounds 50 million in a full year.
VAT THRESHOLD
I turn now to the VAT regime, which for many small businesses takes up a
great deal of time and can be a particular source of worry. The best way to
help is to keep them out of the VAT system altogether. I am therefore
raising the VAT threshold to the maximum extent possible. The new threshold
will be Pounds 37,600.
Over the last couple of years I have also announced measures to allow
traders to reclaim VAT on debts which remain unpaid after 12 months; and to
encourage firms to take advantage of the Cash Accounting Scheme under which
traders only have to pay VAT to Customs when they themselves have been paid
by their customers.
I now intend to take this further.
I propose to increase the ceiling on turnover below which firms may join the
Cash Accounting Scheme by Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 350,000. This will allow
an extra 15,000 businesses to benefit, on top of the 400,000 that qualify
already.
I also intend to help businesses which are too big to take advantage of the
Scheme. At present, VAT can be reclaimed on any invoice which remains unpaid
after twelve months. I propose to halve that qualifying period to six
months.
These measures will give considerable help to companies, improving traders'
cashflow by some Pounds 150 million in the year ahead.
VAT PENALTIES
In addition, I have a further series of reforms to propose to the current
system of VAT penalties.
First, I intend to focus the rules better so that only larger errors and the
most persistent offenders will incur the 'Misdeclaration Penalty'. This will
reduce the number of penalties imposed by over 40 per cent.
Second, I propose to place a 3 year limit on the number of years' interest
that can be charged when tax has been underpaid.
Third, I have decided to reform the VAT Default Surcharge so that traders
will be notified sooner of default and surcharged at a lower rate and only
on larger defaults. This will make the Surcharge system more effective,
while removing some 125,000 small traders from the Default Surcharge
altogether. I know this will be welcomed by many small businesses.
KEITH REPORT
I have one final reform of the VAT penalty system. Following Lord Keith's
1983 review, the Government concluded that it would be wrong to give Customs
discretion over the level of VAT penalties. After considerable debate, this
conclusion was eventually accepted by the House. But the controversy has
continued ever since and, over time, more and more people have come to
believe that it is wrong to have a penalty regime which is almost entirely
automatic.
I have considered this matter afresh, and concluded that the time has come
to make a change. I propose therefore that Customs should be given some
discretion to mitigate the penalties for some misdeclarations, to enable
them to take account of the individual circumstances of the trader. If
necessary, of course, the trader will still be able to appeal to a VAT
Tribunal, which will also have greater scope for discretion.
These reforms will put the VAT compliance system onto a secure long term
basis. They will be of most benefit to small businesses, for whom the burden
of compliance is heaviest; and I am sure that they will be widely welcomed
on both sides of the House.
BLOODSTOCK
Mr Deputy Speaker, I have already announced my intention to extend Value
Added Tax to domestic fuel and power from 1 April next year. I now have one
further announcement to make on VAT.
As the House knows, it has long been this government's intention to switch
the burden of taxation from direct taxes on income to indirect taxes on
consumer spending.
It is perhaps less well-known that Britain has one of the lowest effective
rates of VAT in the European Community.
Against this background and in a Budget designed to place the public
finances on a sound footing, I have inevitably had to look very carefully at
the whole structure of our current VAT regime and particularly at whether
all of our existing zero rates should be maintained. Some of these
zero-rated goods, for example food and water, are clearly amongst the most
basic necessities of life. Others, for example sewerage and newspapers,
perhaps fall into a different category.
Having reflected carefully, Mr Deputy Speaker, I have decided nonetheless
not to extend the VAT base beyond fuel and power.
I do however have one further announcement on VAT, which will I hope offer
some consolation to those HMs who would rather be at Cheltenham today,
watching the Champion Hurdle.
For some time the bloodstock industry has been concerned about competition
from other EC countries which levy a lower rate of VAT on horses. The single
market has exacerbated this problem and created a major incentive to move
bloodstock business abroad, threatening 30,000 jobs.
There have been intensive discussions between the Jockey Club and Customs
and I am pleased to announce that a way forward has been found.
As a result of proposed changes in the Jockey Club's rules owners who wish
to do so will now be able to organise their racing activities in a more
commercial way. This in turn will enable them to meet the normal business
test for VAT registration and to claim credit for VAT on purchases, subject
to the usual rules.
I know that registration on this basis meets the industry's concerns over
this problem. No Government has done more for racing than this one  - and
quite rightly so, for it is not only an important industry, but a vital part
of our national life. This measure will be welcomed by the industry and by
their many supporters in this House.
UBR
Mr Deputy Speaker, I have one final announcement, which will be of direct
help to many businesses.
My last Budget helped many thousands of firms by altering the business rates
transitional arrangements to accelerate the gains of those who gained most
from the change in the system, while freezing real rates bills which would
otherwise have risen substantially.
The freeze applied for one year only. So many businesses now face a
substantial increase in their rates bills in the year ahead - of up to 20
per cent over and above inflation on large properties and up to 15 per cent
on small properties.
It would, I believe, be wrong to impose such increases in present
circumstances. I therefore propose for a further year to freeze in real
terms the rates bills of those losing from the new system.
As a result of this and last year's measures, no business will face a real
increase in its rates bill in the year ahead, and many will benefit from
reductions. In cash terms, that means that no bill will rise by more than
3.6 per cent, the increase in the RPI in the year to last September.
Subject to parliament's approval, the Government will again pay extra sums
into the business rates pool to ensure that the income of local authorities
is not reduced. My Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for the Environment
will shortly introduce a Bill to implement these proposals. Full details
will be published today in a press notice.
The new measure will reduce the total business rates bill in England and
Wales next year by 2.6 per cent. Bills in Scotland and Northern Ireland will
likewise be reduced by 2.6 per cent in aggregate. My Rt Hon friends the
Scottish and Northern Ireland Secretaries will be announcing the details.
These measures will again bring significant and early benefit to many
thousands of businesses throughout the United Kingdom. About 800,000
business properties will benefit. The revenue cost is estimated to be some
Pounds 370m in 1993-94 and some Pounds 260m in 1994-95.
Mr Deputy Speaker, taken together, the measures I have announced will reduce
the burden on business by about Pounds 1bn in the year ahead. I am sure that
the whole House will agree that this is the best possible use for the sums I
have been able to raise this year.
NATIONAL LOTTERY AND CHARITIES
The House is aware of the government's plans to introduce a National Lottery
from next year. This will provide a substantial increase in resources for a
number of good causes: charities, sport, the arts, the national heritage and
the millenium fund. I have no doubt that the lottery will be both popular
and successful.
The government has always made it clear that the National Lottery will be
taxed. In deciding the tax rate, I have taken into account the level of tax
on other forms of gambling and the extent to which spending is likely to be
diverted from other taxed activities. Much of course will depend on how the
lottery develops and I shall keep the position under review.
But for the first year of its operation I propose that National Lottery
tickets should be taxed at a rate of 12 per cent. Existing society and local
authority lotteries will be exempt. Winnings will incur no tax whatsoever. I
believe that these proposals will ensure that the National Lottery gets off
to a good start.
Since 1979, the Government has done an enormous amount to help charities.
Indeed, their special position in society is recognised in the substantial
tax reliefs approaching Pounds 1 billion which they already receive. And
they will also benefit from the new Lottery. I now have two further changes
to propose.
First, I intend to raise the annual limit for income tax relief under the
payroll giving scheme from Pounds 600 to Pounds 900 with effect from 6
April.
Second, I propose that the minimum gift attracting tax relief for single
donations under the Gift Aid Scheme should be reduced from Pounds 400 to
Pounds 250 from today.
These measures build on the principle that tax reliefs for charity should
focus on what individuals give, rather than what charities themselves spend.
Taken together, they will boost tax relief on donations to charities by some
Pounds 30m in a full year.
EMPLOYMENT MEASURES
In the Autumn Statement, the government announced a number of measures to
help the unemployed. And in my Budget, I have set out my further proposals
to help business and sustain recovery - the best way to promote employment.
But we know from experience that unemployment may continue to rise for a
while even after growth has resumed. That is a matter of great concern to
the whole country, and it is a concern which I fully share. My Rt Hon friend
the Secretary of State for Employment and I have therefore decided to take
further special measures to help an extra 100,000 unemployed people.
First, we have decided to provide more help for those who wish to set up
their own businesses under the Business Start-Up Scheme. This offers advice
and financial assistance, and has been one of the most successful employment
schemes. We propose to offer an additional 10,000 places in 1993-94. That
will give a direct boost to small business creation and self-employment in
years ahead.
Second, my Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for Employment proposes to
introduce a new initiative to allow the long-term unemployed to learn the
practical skills they need to find work. Resources will be made available to
allow 30,000 long-term unemployed people to take up full-time vocational
courses.
Third, it is widely agreed that in every community there are plenty of jobs
needing to be done, and plenty of people who want to do them. My Rt Hon
friendthe prime minister has recently indicated the importance of offering
more unemployed people the opportunity to undertake some form of training or
activity. We are therefore launching a new Community Action programme to
allow 60,000 of the long-term unemployed to do part-time work in their local
communities, organised by voluntary groups. Those involved will be paid an
allowance based on their previous benefit rates plus a small premium. The
scheme will start as soon as possible.
Mr Deputy Speaker, those who have been unemployed for a long time tend to
lose touch with the job market, and find it increasingly difficult to find
an employer who wants to take them on.
We propose to test in pilot schemes the feasibility and effectiveness of a
new approach where rather than pay benefits to the long-term unemployed to
do nothing, payments will instead be made, for a limited period, to an
employer who recruits them.
Employers taking on people who have been out of work for at least 2 years
will receive a one-year subsidy based on the benefit payments which would
otherwise have been paid. That subsidy will taper off as the period of
employment progresses. Pilot schemes using different approaches will be
launched this summer in four parts of the country. If they can be made to
work, this could lead to permanent jobs for the long-term unemployed as the
economy recovers.
Finally, the establishment of Training and Enterprise Councils throughout
the country has successfully brought local business people into the design
and running of training and enterprise programmes for the unemployed. I now
propose to offer the TECs a new Pounds 25m fund. My Rt Hon friend the
Secretary of State for Employment will invite TECs to submit competing
applications to develop the most imaginative schemes to help the long-term
unemployed and stimulate job creation. The degree of local business
involvement will be an important criterion against which each application
will be judged.
These measures will cost Pounds 230m and will give special help to those who
need it most, including disabled people. The disabled will be given priority
in the vocational education initiative and in Community Action, helping us
to build on our achievements in helping the disabled back to work. In the
first nine months of 1992-93 the Employment Service found jobs for 31,000
unemployed disabled people, 25 per cent more than in the same period of
1991-92. I am sure the House will welcome this.
PRIVATE FINANCE
Mr Deputy Speaker, in my Autumn Statement I announced significant changes to
the rules for the private financing of major infrastructure projects. This
initiative has met with an enthusiastic response; and today I have a number
of specific developments to announce.
First, Hon Members will recall that legislation has already passed through
both Houses, permitting the construction of a new fast rail link that will
cut the journey time between Heathrow Airport and Paddington. I can now
announce that BAA plc and British Rail have agreed to proceed with this
project, the Heathrow Express. This is a major new joint venture, involving
private sector investment of nearly Pounds 300m.
As well as providing a substantial boost to the construction industry, this
project will significantly enhance the transport infrastructure of the
nation's capital.
Second, Crossrail, a public sector project first proposed in 1989 to reduce
congestion in central London. Mr Deputy Speaker, the government remains
committed to securing for London the benefits that Crossrail will bring. But
we now believe it would be preferable to take this project forward as a
joint venture with the private sector. The present proposals for Crossrail
will therefore be re-examined. Our aims will be to maximise the
participation and financial involvement of the private sector and to secure
the best possible value for money for the taxpayer.
One of the most ambitious civil engineering projects ever conceived has been
made possible by private finance: I refer of course to the Channel Tunnel.
This will provide a fast link between Britain and Paris, cutting journey
times dramatically.
But those times could be cut still further by reducing the time taken for
journeys within Britain itself.
For that to happen a new rail link will be required - from London down to
the Channel Tunnel itself. This will be a massive undertaking - one of the
largest infrastructure projects in this country since the war. But after
careful consideration, the government has decided to make a firm commitment
to the project. So I can announce today that the Channel Tunnel Rail Link
will go ahead.
My Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for Transport will be inviting the
private sector to come forward with bids so that the project can be taken
forward as a joint venture as soon as possible. We will discuss timing with
the private sector.
We hope to be able to introduce a bill as soon as the legislative timetable
permits, and to see the new line fully completed around the end of the
decade. The government will make its own financial contribution, recognising
the benefits that will accrue to domestic travellers from the new link.
Full responsibility for the project, its management and completion will be
transferred to the private sector.
Subject to the results of detailed work by British Rail over the next few
months, the London terminus of the new link will be located at St Pancras.
This will provide a new lease of life for this magnificent Victorian
building, which will become the gateway to London for international
passengers. My Rt Hon friend the Secretary of State for Transport will make
a statement on the details of the route shortly.
Over the years ahead, my private finance initiative will play an ever
increasing role in the modernisation of Britain's infrastructure. The
projects I have announced today represent a considerable step forward. They
will not only improve the country's transport network; they will also create
jobs. I am sure they will be warmly welcomed on all sides of the House.
INCOME TAX
Mr Deputy Speaker, I turn finally to income tax.
My priority in this Budget has been to set out a clear strategy for reducing
public sector borrowing over the medium term.
I am therefore unable this year to reduce the basic rate of income tax. I
also propose to leave the higher rate of tax unchanged at 40 per cent.
But in my Budget last year I opened up an alternative route for moving over
time to our ultimate objective - a 20p basic rate of income tax for
everyone. The new lower rate band I announced last year at a stroke took 4m
taxpayers on low incomes down to the 20 per cent rate, cutting their
marginal rate of tax by a fifth.
In this Budget I have taken my reform a step further. The government's 20
pence pledge not only involves a reduction in marginal tax rates for 19
million basic rate taxpayers.
But, also, when the basic rate is eventually brought down to 20 pence, tax
reliefs for basic rate taxpayers will, of course, be worth 20 pence in the
pound too. In this Budget, I am bringing forward that change by restricting
three specific tax reliefs to 20 per cent. Not just for basic rate
taxpayers, but for all taxpayers.
First, I have reduced the tax credit on dividends to 20 per cent, to cut the
rate of Advance Corporation Tax which companies pay on dividends.
Second, I will be reducing the rate of relief on mortgage interest payments
to 20 per cent, to cut the subsidy on borrowing and to pay for a reduction
in the tax on housing transactions.
Third, I will be restricting the tax relief for married couples to 20 per
cent, to make it worth the same for all taxpayers.
All these measures are sensible reforms in their own right.
And when revenue has to be raised it is far better to do this by broadening
the tax base than by increasing tax rates.
But, in addition, the restrictions I have introduced will also allow me to
make further progress in getting income tax rates down.
I therefore propose to increase the width of the new 20p band in 1993-94 by
Pounds 500 to Pounds 2,500. That will help all taxpayers currently paying
tax at 25 per cent. And it means that in the coming year nearly 5m taxpayers
will face a marginal rate of income tax of only 20 per cent. Already, for
about a fifth of all taxpayers, I will have delivered on our promise of a
20p rate in the first Budget of the Parliament. And I will have done so by a
sensible and fair reform of the tax system.
But I can also go further. The measures I have announced today will also
allow me to make a further extension of the 20p rate in 1994-95. From April
next year I propose that the 20p band should cover the first Pounds 3,000 of
taxable income, Pounds 500 more than in the year ahead. And we shall
continue to widen the 20p band in the years to come - year by year we will
make further progress towards our objective. A 20p basic rate of tax for
everyone.
CONCLUSION
Mr Deputy Speaker, in the first Budget of the parliament, I have set out the
government's economic strategy.
I have cut the tax burden on business; and given help for small businesses,
exports and the unemployed.
I have demonstrated clearly how we will bring Government borrowing down in
the years ahead.
That is the only way to sustain growth and build a strong and sound economy
in the 1990s.
This is a Budget for sustained recovery and a Budget for jobs - not just for
this year, and next year - but right through the decade. I commend it to the
House.'
