FT  13 APR 93 / Spending at the European Bank: Reconstructing and developing
a new working environment
'WE KNEW we didn't like it. It didn't give us the right feeling. It was too
complicated.' Pierre Pissaloux, EBRD's director in charge of planning and
budget, was speaking of the marble which used to grace the bank's main
lobby.
This was Travertine marble, similar to that installed in other neighbouring
buildings in the Broadgate complex, but it was removed and replaced with
some hewn slabs of very high-quality statuary marble specially imported from
Forte di Marmi in Tuscany. It cost Pounds 750,000.
The new marble is set out in a sequence or gradation that would not look out
of a place in a museum of Modern sculpture. The creamy white pieces,
reflected by a mirrored ceiling, range from rough rock to polished marble.
The marble is only one of several distinctive features of a building that
was developed by Mr Stuart Lipton, of Rosehaugh Stanhope, and fitted out by
Bovis Construction according to a brief given by the bank's president to an
Anglo-French design team. Other features include:
An entrance hall designed less to keep out predators than to impress
visitors. The internal security barrier looks like a prop from the film Star
Wars. It is a horizontal wooden slab with a mock marble painted finish.
Activated by remote control, it slides to one side before slotting back into
place. Nearby video screens project the national flags of the EBRD's member
countries
The construction of a large auditorium on the first floor of the building to
house 300 people. This will cost about Pounds 1m but has yet to be completed
because the complex engineering involves removal of two massive structural
columns to make room for the seating.
The main staff dining room (there are nine dining rooms) called the
'Mozart'. Apart from posters and paintings of the great composer it is
fitted with wall-to-wall multi-coloured carpets and sycamore-lined walls.
Its laminated tables and linen-covered chairs were specially designed for
the architects, the Anglo-French group Berthet, Pochy, Sidell &amp; Gibson. Mr
Jean Louis Berthet, said: 'Our brief was to make people working in the bank
happy. We didn't want a cafeteria that was uncomfortable and noisy.' Hence a
very modern and chic restaurant designed for people either with many hours
to spend in the bank or with time on their hands.
Works of art in the building are, in the words of bank officials, aimed at
reflecting Europe in its 'full cultural and intellectual diversity'. Some of
the more prestigious items, such as a set of Piranese engravings, were
donated by the Italian government. In addition, the bank has commissioned
artists, mainly from eastern Europe, to display their works on site. The
boldest example is a giant fresco by a group of French and Russian painters
which depicts Europe's great thinkers beneath a giant globe. Mr Pissaloux
says the bank has spent about Pounds 250,000 in purchasing works of art.
Among items expected to come in the next few weeks is a large segment of the
Berlin Wall donated by the German authorities. The plan, according to Mr
Pissaloux, is to place the segment outside the bank's headquarters facing a
large sculpture of a fat lady.
