FT  29 NOV 93 / Emerging Markets: News round-up
INDIA
Confidence is riding high after the Bombay stock exchange rose by 5 per cent
last Friday, hitting a new 14-month high. Foreign buyers are thought to have
become active buyers in recent weeks, says Maryam Mansoury of Lehman
Brothers, with some switching of funds out of south-east Asia evident.
A more stable political environment has also led to an improvement in
sentiment, with the Congress party forecast to do better than expected in
the current round of local elections.
ISRAEL
The public offering of a 10 per cent stake in Bank Leumi has been delayed.
The offer was due to have started today but has now been postponed until
January. This follows the failure of the offering in Bank Hapoalim, the
country's largest bank, last week.
THAILAND
Phatra Thanakit, one of the country's leading stockbrokers, has been fined
Bt40m (Dollars 1.6m) for breaking stock exchange rules. The fine is believed
to be the largest ever imposed by the authorities.
The broker automatically channelled a stock order from a sub-broker onto the
market instead of re-keying the order onto its own computers.
TAIWAN
Reforms have been announced which aim to ease restraints on foreign
investment in the country's financial markets. Restrictions on remittances
of capital gains and principal out of Taiwan by foreign investors will be
removed.
The government is also resuming its stalled privatisation programme by
offering a 15 per cent stake, worth TDollars 972m (Dollars 36m), in Chung
Kuo Insurance.
CHINA
China plans to free state-owned companies from government control, making
them into legal entities with clear lines of responsibility over strategy
for profit and the use of company assets.
SOUTH KOREA
The Economic Planning Board is drawing up plans for the privatisation of at
least 40 of the 134 companies in which the state owns a stake in response to
demands by President Kim Young-sam for reform of the state sector.
GREECE
Trading in the Aegek civil engineering group begins on the Athens bourse
today. Aegek's three main shareholders own 80 per cent of the share capital
after the company's initial public offering earlier this month which raised
about 150 times the Dr1.59bn (Dollars 6.5m) sought, with 532,500 new shares
entering the market.
ARGENTINA
A price of 5.30 pesos per share has been set for the government's sale of
its remaining 30 per cent stake in the Central Puerto electricity utility.
RUSSIA
Plans are in preparation to sell a big stake in the Lada car plant, and 50
per cent of the shares could be sold before the end of this year, with
foreigners being permitted to take a stake.
The sale of AvtoVAZ is likely to be a combination of a voucher auction and
an investment tender, offering some shares in exchange for privatisation
vouchers held by Russian citizens.
TURKEY
Investors are preparing for a small bang when the stock exchange begins a
switch to computerised trading on Friday. The exchange is to introduce
automated price matching on 50 less active shares as a trial.
