FT  25 MAR 93 / International Bonds: Continental buyers warm to UK insurer's
Pounds 120m convertible
LEGAL and General, the UK life and general insurance group, was one of
several borrowers to tap the Eurosterling sector of the international bond
market yesterday, and its Pounds 120m convertible Eurobond issue due 2008
was well received by the market.
Tax changes to the treatment of share dividends announced in last week's UK
Budget were expected at the time to add to the attraction of convertible
bonds, particularly to UK pension funds, which are adversely affected by the
changes. However, although there was said to be some switching by UK
investors out of Legal and General's equity and into the bonds, most of the
paper was eventually sold to continental European buyers.
Demand for convertible paper, especially from continental Europe, enabled
the issuer to achieve a 6 3/4 per cent semi-annual coupon, at the lower end
of the indicated range, and a conversion premium of 17.85 per cent, at the
higher end of the indicated range. The subordinated issue, callable after
five years, represents 4 per cent of Legal and General's share capital.
An official at the lead manager, CSFB, said that about 80 per cent of the
issue had been placed on the continent, with Swiss investors showing the
strongest interest. The bonds, which were priced at par at issue, were
trading at 100 1/4 bid in the afternoon. Other syndicate managers involved
in the deal reported some demand from UK pension funds.
Mr Anthony Hobson, the finance director of Legal and General, said that the
issue was a fixed tranche and that it would not be increased. The proceeds
would become part of the group's general resources and would serve to extend
the maturity profile of its debt. He added that the group did not have any
plans to tap the international bond market again this year.
The Bank of Dutch Municipalities, the public-sector Dutch financing agency,
launched Pounds 150m worth of seven-year Eurobonds priced to yield 30 basis
points over the 9 per cent UK government bond due 2000. An official at the
lead manager, BZW, said that this marked the first Eurosterling issue by a
Dutch state-owned entity.
He added that the bonds were re-offered below par, at 98.567, in order to
ensure liquidity in the bonds in the event of a further fall in interest
rates. The proceeds of the issue were said to have been swapped into
fixed-rate guilders. When the bonds were freed to trade, the spread was
virtually unchanged.
The Eurosterling sector also saw a Pounds 104.5m two-tranche issue of senior
mortgage-backed floating rate notes from Leo 1, a vehicle set up to
securitise mortgages originated by UCB Group, a subsidiary of Compagnie
Bancaire of France. An official at the lead manager, J P Morgan, said this
added to an original issue of Pounds 158m in May 1992.
He added that the original issue had been priced at a slight discount to par
but that the price of those notes had risen since then due to the lack of
paper. Both tranches of yesterday's issue were priced at a slight premium to
par, and were bid at their launch level in the afternoon.
J P Morgan was also active in the Canadian dollar sector where it arranged a
CDollars 300m 10-year Eurobond issue for the European Investment Bank. The
bonds were priced to yield 30 basis points over the 7 1/4 per cent Canadian
government bond due 2003. The bonds were not freed to trade by the close of
business.
Meanwhile, investor demand for the warrants linked to Roche Holdings's
Dollars 1bn seven-year warrant Eurobond issue, launched on Monday, enabled
the borrower to raise an additional Dollars 200m through the issue of a
further 5m warrants.
An official at the lead manager, Swiss Bank Corporation, said the new
tranche doubled the number of warrants in issue. The warrants, which are
exercisable into Roche Genussscheine (non-voting profit-sharing
certificates), were quoted at SFr67.80 bid yesterday, up from SFr65.30 bid
at the launch.
Colombia's mines and energy minister, Mr Guido Nule Amin, said yesterday
that the state oil company, Ecopetrol, planned to issue Eurobonds for the
first time to finance its operations, Reuter reports from Bogota.
He did not disclose the size or the timing of the issue. Colombia is the
only big Latin American economy not to have yet tapped the Eurobond market,
but it is planning a sovereign issue in April.
