FT  21 JUN 93 / Key pits face closure threat: British Coal executives expect
to shut mines on 'core list' within year
BRITISH COAL executives expect within a year to have to close some of the 19
mines previously considered its core pits, fuelling the controversy about
the industry's future and adding to the government's political travails.
The 19 pits were given a future even last October, when 60 per cent of the
industry was earmarked for shutdown. Any closures would be in addition to
those among 12 collieries reprieved by the government in March after a
public outcry over the October plans.
The threat to some of the core pits came as Mr Arthur Scargill, president of
the National Union of Mineworkers, urged the Trades Union Congress to call a
special 24-hour strike by all workers in protest at pit closures and other
job losses.
And Dr George Carey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, warned that Britain could
not afford to waste miners' skills. Speaking at a Sheffield Cathedral
service marking the end of Coal Week, he appealed to the government to help
communities hit by pit closures.
'There is a sense of injustice and bitter anger in the affected mining
communities, and a wider disquiet among thinking people across party lines
as they watch the gates slamming on so much investment,' he said.
Last week British Coal re-awakened public debate over the future of the
industry when it set in motion procedures that may lead to the closure of
three of the 12 reprieved pits and indicated that others were at risk.
The threat of closures among the core pits stems from an even larger decline
in the likely mark-up for coal in the next few years than was envisaged in
October. That results from tighter environmental controls and the improved
efficiency of nuclear power plants.
In addition, British Coal executives say that some of the 19 are in danger
because of the improved performance of the best of the 12 reprieved pits.
'It would be difficult to justify closing any of the 12 if they were
outperforming what we had previously considered to be the core pits,' one
executive said yesterday.
British Coal would not speculate on the future of the 31 remaining
collieries, but executives spoke in private of the doubts surrounding the
19.
Ellington, in the north-east of England, is among the most vulnerable. A
report for the government this year by John T. Boyd, a US consultancy, said
it was one of the least efficient of the 19. Since then, the mine has fallen
short of production targets.
Troubles are greater still for three of the 12 pits that British Coal said
last week were encountering geological obstacles. Miners at Rufford in
Nottinghamshire agreed by a small majority on Friday to closure by the end
of the year.
British Coal said yesterday it was seeking the 'best solution' at Markham,
Derbyshire, after miners there decided on Saturday against taking a vote on
closure. Pitmen at Silverdale, in Staffordshire, are expected to meet this
week to decide which approach to adopt.
However, few British Coal executives expect Markham or Silverdale to be open
by the end of the year. Faced with a declining market, miners will be
tempted by enhanced redundancy terms on offer until December 31, executives
say.
For the rest of the industry, the crunch date is April 1 next year. From
then, electricity generators will buy only 30m tonnes of coal a year under
existing contracts, against 40m at present.
Scargill addresses rally, picture Page 6
