FT  08 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Ex-Star TV chief may bid for ITV company
Mr Julian Mounter, former chief executive of Star TV, the Asian satellite
venture, is involved in a consortium looking seriously at acquiring an ITV
company.
It is believed that Mr Mounter, a former Thames Television executive who
went on to make a success of running Television New Zealand, is providing
the television expertise for a weighty consortium.
The members of the consortium have not yet become public, but it is believed
that they include a substantial UK company which would like to enter the
television market and a company from the European Union.
All the signs are that for the right deal the consortium has already lined
up the finances to buy any of the free-standing ITV companies.
Mr Mounter, who is at the moment in Hong Kong, declined to comment yesterday
other than to emphasise that the UK television market was just one of the
prospects he was looking at.
It is thought unlikely that the consortium plans an early intervention in
either of the two takeover deals already under way - Carlton Communication's
agreed bid for Central Independent Television or Granada's contested bid for
London Weekend Television.
The available targets to such an outside consortium, probably after January
1 when the barriers to takeovers of ITV companies become lower, would
include Yorkshire-Tyne Tees, Anglia Television and HTV.
An international outside investor might take the view that the present
government proposals to allow one ITV company to hold two franchises,
however large (apart from London), are only the first stage in the
liberalisation of commercial television. The rules will be debated in the
House of Commons today and in the House of Lords next Monday.
Under such an argument it would make sense to acquire an ITV company quite
soon, even a middle ranking one, and hope that further expansion is possible
at a later date.
The consortium being advised by Mr Mounter, who left Star soon after Mr
Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation bought a controlling interest, is also
looking at the possibility of bidding for a Channel 5 licence.
