FT  30 JAN 93 / Major backs 'merchant venturers'
MR JOHN MAJOR has found a fresh theme this week: the importance of
exporting.
Returning to London yesterday after a six-day trip to India and the Middle
East, the prime minister was looking a little pleased with himself.
Accompanied by a team of businessmen, he had spoken repeatedly of the need
to boost overseas sales and had been rewarded with a defence sales agreement
with Saudi Arabia worth between Pounds 4bn and Pounds 5bn and several
smaller deals in India and Oman.
Mr Major told industrialists that Britain's economic prosperity hung on
their future export successes. The government and industry, he said, must
ensure Britain takes advantage of sterling's devaluation - and not, as so
often in the past, blow its chance of building economic growth on export
sales. 'We need merchant venturers, not merchants of gloom,' he said last
night in Glasgow.
The businessmen travelling with Mr Major were impressed. He spent much of
his time discussing their individual clashes with Indian regulations and won
praise for his efforts to open doors in government.
The emphasis on exports marks a shift in Whitehall. In the past both the
Treasury and Mr Major have emphasised the need for a revival in consumer
confidence. In Delhi, however, Mr Major said: 'Export growth will lead our
recovery.'
At first it appeared a throwaway comment. But it seemed by the end of the
week that Mr Major was moving towards believing recovery has to be built on
investment and export growth.
The genesis of the remark was the Downing Street Policy Unit's new year
summit on domestic issues. By the year 2000, Mr Major argues, Britain will
have to broaden its manufacturing base and increase competitiveness in
middle and leading-edge technologies. 'Soft' markets such as India are
becoming manufacturers in their own right.
Mr Major says there has to be a 'new language' between industry and the
government and an end to prejudice against manufacturing and engineering.
The change is more about mood than prescription. Mr Major will take a
delegation to Japan later this year; he will listen to the Confederation of
British Industry more; he will mount another Whitehall offensive against
unnecessary regulation and he has promised a further review of
state-supported export credit insurance, even though the Treasury's
provision was increased in the Autumn Statement.
Back in Westminster, however, Mr Major could find the debates on coal,
Maastricht and the costs of 3m unemployed pushing the detailed concerns of
exporters from his immediate priorities.
Industry will be looking for much more than public relations-driven export
promotion. The CBI wants more favourable Export Credit Guarantee Department
premiums. It says UK companies should not, for instance, be paying more than
French counterparts.
Conservative MPs will want the right economic levers pulled to end recession
as early as possible. Tax rises would be politically difficult. Overseas
sales may be important but it was, after all, to boost consumer and investor
confidence that interest rates were cut this week.
And it would be churlish of a prime minister to complain that growth, when
it resumes, was the wrong sort of recovery.
