FT  01 APR 93 / Change to acquisition accounting planned
THE SCOPE for companies to create provisions in their balance sheets against
businesses they have acquired will be severely curtailed under radical new
proposals issued by the Accounting Standards Board yesterday.
The board recommends that provisions for future losses and reorganisation
costs after an acquisition will no longer be allowed to be treated as
liabilities in the acquired business on the balance sheet of the purchaser's
accounts.
The purchaser will instead be required to pass these costs through the
profit and loss account as they are incurred, showing them as exceptional
items if they are large enough.
The proposals could be converted into a draft standard by the end of this
year and be mandatory some time next year. Comments are invited by June 14.
The proposals are likely to provoke considerable opposition because they
will greatly reduce the flexibility in financial reporting currently
available to conglomerates and other companies which make acquisitions.
Mr David Tweedie, chairman of the board, said: 'Acquisition accounting is
the biggest scam in British financial reporting. We expect a lot of flak for
these ideas.'
Traditionally companies have been able to purchase a business and write down
large amounts in their balance sheets. They are then able to release the
provisions over a number of years to boost profits artificially.
This has long been outlawed in the US, but was sanctioned by SSAP 22, the
existing accounting standard on goodwill which was revised as recently as
1989.
In representations to the board companies have claimed that the proposals
would reduce their scope to be prudent by making provisions in advance.
Mr Tweedie said: 'It might look prudent in the balance sheet but it creates
a mulch over the accounts and it becomes unclear where profits are coming
from.'
To prevent companies evading the new regulations the board proposes
'anti-avoidance' measures which would generally forbid provisions made by a
business within six months of it being purchased from being shown in the
balance sheet of the acquirer.
In general, the board says, the fair values of assets and liabilities
acquired should be based on those which existed at the time of acquisition
and not anticipate any changes in the activities of either the purchaser or
the purchased company. The discussion document draws heavily on the board's
statement of principles, which says that liabilities must be strictly
obligations of a company to pay out in the future. Many acquisition
provisions would be excluded under this definition.
Fair values in acquisition accounting. Accountancy Books, PO Box 620,
Central Milton Keynes MK9 2JX. Pounds 6.
Hedged bets, Page 12
