FT  22 OCT 93 / Harman to retain shadow Treasury job despite vote
MR JOHN SMITH decided last night to retain Ms Harriet Harman as shadow chief
Treasury secretary despite her failure in Wednesday night's annual shadow
cabinet election.
The Labour leader made only limited changes to his team, although Mr John
Prescott was rewarded for his performance at last month's Labour conference
with promotion to shadow employment secretary - one of the three core
economic jobs.
Labour officials characterised the decision to keep Ms Harman on as a signal
of Mr Smith's determination not to be pushed around by the parliamentary
party. The decision means the shadow chief secretary's job will be held by
someone outside the shadow cabinet for the first time in seven years.
But Mr Smith's caution was greeted with dismay by some shadow cabinet
members who had expected a wider-ranging shake-up.
The changes will take effect after next month's Queen's speech, leaving Mr
Prescott, as the present transport spokesman, free to spearhead Labour's
opposition to the railways bill when it returns to the Commons.
Mr Smith made no changes in the four senior portfolios, with Mr Jack
Cunningham reconfirmed as shadow foreign secretary, in spite of retaining
his shadow cabinet place by a margin of just three votes.
Mr Robin Cook, who topped the poll, will remain as shadow trade and industry
secretary. Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair, the party's foremost
modernisers who both dropped down the rankings, stay as shadow chancellor
and shadow home secretary respectively.
Mr George Robertson, elected to the shadow cabinet for the first time, was
moved straight into a prominent position as shadow Scottish secretary. The
experienced Ms Joan Lestor, the other newcomer, was given a newly created
portfolio with responsibility for children and the family.
Mr Prescott swapped jobs with Mr Frank Dobson, another leading figure from
the party's centre-left, with whom he tied for second place in Wednesday
night's ballot. But Mr Dobson will retain responsibility for London in
moving from employment to transport. Ms Marjorie Mowlam was moved from the
public services portfolio to national heritage in place of Ms Ann Clwyd, who
lost her shadow cabinet seat. Mr Tom Clarke was moved from Scotland to
overseas development, replacing Mr Michael Meacher who will take over the
public services beat.
Officials said there would be no procedural changes for next year's
election. In spite of a rule change introduced this year which was designed
to increase female representation on the shadow cabinet, the number of women
elected fell from four to three.
Steady as she goes in Smith's reshuffle, Page 10
