FT  02 JAN 93 / Czechs and Slovaks vow to keep split amiable: Prime
ministers of both states shy away from predicting the exact course of future
dealings
MR Vladimir Meciar, the first prime minister of newly independent Slovakia,
appealed yesterday to Slovaks of all ethnic origins to rally behind the new
country and build a legal, democratic and decentralised state.
In a televised address to the nation from the capital, Bratislava, he called
on 'all Slovaks, and Hungarian, Czech, Polish, Ukrainian, Ruthenian and
Romany (gypsy) minorities, all the citizens of the Slovak Republic,' to work
together.
In Prague, now the capital of the independent Czech Republic, Mr Vaclav
Klaus, the prime minister, pledged to maintain close ties with Slovakia,
formerly the junior partner in the 74-year-old federal Czechoslovak state,
which was formally dissolved at midnight on December 31.
Mr Klaus said in a speech to political and religious leaders in Prague
castle that there would be 'no Chinese wall' along the common frontier. He
underlined that Slovakia's economic prosperity and the maintenance of
political pluralism was also a political concern for the Czech Republic.
Mr Meciar acknowledged, in a speech which implicitly recognised the fears
and reservations that many Slovaks harbour about the ending of the link with
the more prosperous Czech Republic, that difficulties lay ahead for the
smaller of the two new states. He assured Slovaks that links with the Czech
Republic would continue to be close and that Slovakia 'needed neither
customs officers nor border crossings and other restrictions'.
Both leaders underlined the difficulty of predicting the exact course of
their future relationship. Mr Meciar pledged to honour all obligations
assumed during the six months the two states moved apart and to co-operate
at the highest possible level.
He and other leading Slovaks attended independence celebrations in
Bratislava's central square, which began with the hoisting of the new flag
and the singing of the national anthem. Thousands of people turned out to
usher in both the new year and the new state.
Under a placard saying: 'Kiss me, I'm Slovak,' one of the throng caught the
mood of the night. She said it was a special moment for all Slovaks, as
people queued to smother her with kisses. Then, to the strains of The Blue
Danube, the singing and dancing continued into the night.
In his speech the Slovak leader stressed the importance of relations with
Austria, and underlined Slovakia's 'permanent and sincere interest in good
relations' with Hungary. In a reference to the economic difficulties facing
Slovakia, whose heavy and arms-related industries were built largely to
serve the former Soviet and Comecon markets, he warned there was 'a lot to
learn'.
Mr Meciar, a former communist, said it was necessary to 'draw a thick line
between the present and the past'. While the 'velvet revolution' of November
1989 had rejected a system that was bad, 'we cannot reject the work of those
who worked honestly under this bad system' - an indication that he will not
permit a clean break with communist-style methods favoured by the
free-market orientated Czech government.
