FT  11 JUN 93 / Survey of South Africa (4): In search of skills and
technology - Resumption of foreign investment is crucial to sustained
recovery
AFTER a decade of political turmoil, sanctions and disinvestment, few
multinationals have been perched on the end of their chairs waiting for
Nelson Mandela to give the green light to invest in South Africa. But with
investment at its lowest level for more than 30 years (15.9 per cent of
GDP), and with capital pouring out of the country at the rate of 2.8 per
cent of GDP between 1985 and 1992 the resumption of foreign investment is
crucial to sustained recovery.
Little is likely to materialise in the near term, though in both business
and government there are high hopes of resumed access to IMF and the World
Bank funding once agreement is reached at the constitutional negotiations.
Welcome though this will be, what South Africa desperately needs is
substantial direct investment inflows, bringing with them skills, technology
and market access.
The Washington-based Investor Responsibility Research Centre (IRRC)
estimates that between 1984 and 1991, 214 US firms or about two thirds of
those with investments in South Africa disinvested. As a result, the stock
of US direct investment fell to Dollars 700m at the end of the 1980s from
Dollars 2.6bn at the start. Another 190 non-US firms have left during the
same period, the majority British-owned. Many foreign firms retained
non-equity links with South Africa, which could limit the number of
returnees.
There have been some moves since the sanctions thaw began three years ago
with Mr Mandela's release. The IRRC says 16 US companies have quietly opened
offices or established subsidiaries in the past two years, including four of
the 168 US corporations that disinvested between 1985 and 1990. Six of the
new entrants were in the software and computer businesses.
There are now 119 US corporations with direct investments or employees in
South Africa, with many more likely to set up shop once second-tier
sanctions, operated by more than 60 city, county and state organisations
penalising US firms doing business in South Africa, are lifted.
Britain is by far the biggest player with the UK-South Africa Trade
Association estimating British investment, direct and portfolio, at more
than Dollars 16bn. The London School of Economics Centre for the Study of
the South African Economy and International Finance, has identified 51 new
investments in the country since late 1989. While stressing that its
database is incomplete the centre estimates the inflow of new direct
investment over the past three years at around Dollars 1.5bn or 1.5 per cent
of GNP.
The LSE Centre found that the bulk of the resumed foreign investment has
focused on a narrow range of activities - those that are highly vertically
integrated, knowledge and communications intensive and quality dependent.
More than 85 per cent of the investments identified since 1989 were in five
sectors - beverages, hotels and leisure, electronics, chemicals and oils and
engineering. According to the IRRC, a feature of renewed US investment is
the switch from equity to non-equity links, with the number of US companies
with non-equity links increasing from 184 to 299. South African Reserve Bank
figures show a similar trend. The Bank's census of foreign transactions for
1989, just released, makes a distinction between direct and non-direct
investments, noting that the share of the latter has risen from 46 per cent
of the total in 1973 to more than 76 per cent in 1989.
Since South Africa fell off the foreign investment agenda of most global
firms in the mid-1980s, the rules of the game have changed. Today's global
business is unenthusiastic about natural resource investments in mining and
less likely than 20 years ago to be attracted by plentiful labour, even when
it is low-cost. The key attractions today are markets and skills and because
South Africa is a long way from the Triad markets of North America, the EC
and the Far East and has little to offer on the skills front, new foreign
investors - as distinct from those already there - may well be thin on the
ground.
The more so if the new government insists on codes of conduct, social
programmes, affirmative action, and expatriate and local value-added quotas.
The fact is that global competition for inward investment is intense and
there are already enough disincentives to investment in South Africa without
throwing up new obstacles that do not apply elsewhere in the third world.
Pessimism can be overdone. A peaceful, stable South Africa must become the
logical headquarters for African operations and the platform for developing
exports and markets in the sub-Saharan region.
