FT  09 NOV 93 / International Company News: Merck wins go-ahead for Dollars
6bn takeover of Medco
US anti-trust authorities yesterday cleared the proposed Dollars 6bn
takeover by Merck, the US's largest drugs group, of Medco Containment
Services, the country's biggest drugs distributor. The go-ahead could open
the door to a further reshaping of the country's pharmaceuticals industry.
The Federal Trade Commission had asked Merck in September for information
about the proposed acquisition, suggesting it might seek to challenge the
deal. Yesterday, though, Merck said it had received FTC clearance even
before it had supplied all of the requested evidence.
The acquisition is now likely to be completed on November 18, when Medco
shareholders vote on the proposal. News of the FTC clearance lifted Medco's
share price by Dollars 1 3/8 to Dollars 38 3/8 , while Merck's shares fell
back on fears that the takeover would dilute the company's earnings and not
yield the hoped-for benefits.
The deal signals Merck's belief that pressure to hold down drug prices will
force manufacturers instead to fight for market share. By acquiring Medco,
Merck, which claims a near-8 per cent share of the US market, would control
the distribution channel through which drugs are supplied to 33m people in
the US.
Before obtaining FTC approval, Dr Roy Vagelos, chairman and chief executive,
said: 'We're not just trying to remodel Merck, we're trying to remodel the
entire industry. The rest of the sector normally follows what we do.'
Dr Vagelos said access to Medco's database, which carries details of the
drugs taken by people covered by the company, as well as the outcome of
courses of treatment, would enable Merck to target its drugs more precisely.
Access to greater information would also make it easier for Merck to price
'capitation' services, under which it meets all of a person's drug needs for
the year for a flat fee agreed in advance, he added.
The FTC's clearance is likely to intensify the debate among other drugs
companies about the merits of vertical integration in the industry. Merck's
surprise move, announced in July, has given it a clear lead over rival
manufacturers, most of whom have set up urgent studies into whether they
should follow suit.
However, other industry executives question whether Merck is overpaying for
Medco, and whether access to Medco's database will give Merck the advantages
it claims.
Health insurance companies and health management organisations already have
databases with more information on the outcomes of drug treatments than that
maintained by Medco, said Mr Raul Cesan, president of Schering Laboratories
in the US, part of Schering-Plough.
