FT  09 JUL 93 / Technology: Grabbing the elusive protein - Virtual reality
is set to spark a revolution in drug design
A tiny office crammed with electronic equipment in York University's
chemistry department seems a far cry from the brave new world of virtual
reality, promoted as the future craze in computer games technology.
But Rod Hubbard and his team at York are on the way to demonstrating that
virtual reality - VR - could bring strong commercial benefits, not least in
the increasingly complex world of new drug design.
In a research project unique in Europe, the York team, working with Glaxo,
is devising ways of looking at the structure of proteins through the
visionary world of the VR headset.
With the space-age headset in place, a ribbon-like representation of the
protein floats across the field of vision. A turn of the head and the ribbon
protein floats away; the touch of a button and it floats forward, engulfing
the VR user. By touching another button the VR traveller can grasp the
ribbon and turn it in every direction. New atoms can be added, others
changed.
Proteins are especially suited to visualisation because they are such large
molecules, explains Hubbard. 'You're dealing with hundreds of thousands of
different objects that have to be manipulated.'
To build new proteins, researchers need to visualise them in three
dimensions and understand the way in which particular atoms are presented on
their surface. If scientists understand how the protein's structure relates
to its function, then the function can be changed by altering that
structure.
Peter Murray-Rust, head of the protein structure group at Glaxo, believes
the VR system could help Glaxo to understand and manipulate protein
molecules.
'We want to grab hold of it. We want to be able to twist it around and ask
questions about it.' But he quells any excessive enthusiasm for the project
by placing any benefits of the York research squarely in the medium- or
long-term.
Murray-Rust believes the explosion in information about proteins means that
visualisation will be essential in the future to enable chemists to do their
job - 'paper and two-D images' will not be enough. 'We're in the middle of a
revolution. A lot of drug discovery in the next decade will be
information-driven as well as laboratory-driven. We will be flooded with
information which will change the way pharmacologists work.'
In the late 1970s researchers recognised the need to visualise proteins.
They needed to represent large numbers of atoms, move them around in real
time and link the images with a computer database so that the molecules
could be interrogated.
The computer industry's response in the 1980s was to produce 'stereo'
computers. In today's stereo systems two pictures alternate rapidly on the
screen up to 60 times a second. By donning a pair of special spectacles -
sophisticated versions of the three-dimensional spectacles given away with
many a schoolboy comic - the brain is fooled into seeing depth in the
molecule structure.
The technology was an important step towards the use of VR in molecular
modelling. Another was advances in computer workstations, which brought
immense computing power to the scientist's fingertips. But they did not
solve the basic problem of how scientists react with the molecules - tapping
into a keyboard or using a mouse was not intuitive to the scientist.
As the initial year of the project at York University comes to a close, the
research team has a prototype system up and running. Murray-Rust emphasises
that it is a prototype and has limitations, but he is confident it will be
the forerunner of equipment Glaxo will need to use in the future for new
drug development.
One particular limitation, says Murray-Rust, is the low resolution of the
two liquid-crystal television screens which sit inside the VR helmet and
display the images. He believes the quality needs to be improved by a factor
of four before the hardware could bring real benefits, but it could be
several years before such systems are available at the right price.
Today, two types of system are available which do provide higher-quality
images, but both are far more costly than the Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 40,000
system that the York chemists are using. The first is a military technology
which uses fibre-optic cables to bring 1m pixels, or picture elements, to
each screen. The second uses heavier four-inch square cathode ray tubes
which give superior picture quality but are so heavy that they have to be
suspended from a boom and are impractical for many applications.
Researchers also need to think carefully about the software and the way
proteins are represented, believes Murray-Rust.
'No matter how good the displays, we need to think quite carefully about how
we interact with the molecules.'
At York, post-doctoral researcher Mike Hartshorn has spent much of the past
year developing the visual representation of the protein structures. The
next stage, which should last for a further three years, is 'to build real
pieces of software to do real science,' as Hubbard puts it.
In common with Murray-Rust, Hubbard is dismissive about much of the hype
that has surrounded virtual reality. 'One problem is that people think
virtual reality is about walking around. But you get very tired, very
quickly,' he points out. 'We're trying to develop applications sitting
down.' Hubbard believes the widespread use of VR in molecular modelling will
not happen until the price of the hardware drops.
Jones believes that could happen quite quickly. As the technology is refined
the very latest equipment will be introduced at the same price as the
previous models, but the outdated equipment will drop swiftly in price, he
says. 'The level of performance we have today will be available at lower and
lower costs.'
Hubbard is also sceptical about the range of commercial applications for
which VR will be used, largely because so few applications required stereo
systems in the 1980s. 'I cannot understand all this hype. Where are all
these applications that need virtual reality that didn't need stereo in the
1980s?'
Howard Rippiner, marketing communications manager of Silicon Graphics, which
specialises in three-D and VR graphics systems, believes the demand will be
much greater for VR because it fulfils a wider range of uses. 'Chemistry is
probably the only major user of stereo devices because in molecular
modelling it is essential to see which atom is in front of another,
something which is not essential in other applications.'
Jones points to the many commercial applications for which Division has sold
VR systems - designing kitchens and even assessing lighting requirements.
But the time taken to develop the software for the systems - Jones estimates
it takes one man-year of time to get the best out of a VR system - is
unlikely to find many friends in the commercial world.
That could be overcome once off-the-shelf software is available.
'Applications for the end-user will come over the next year or two,' Jones
estimates.
As for chemists, they are at an advantage, points out Hubbard.
'We're not as constrained as other applications in representing the real
world,' he says. 'In many ways we're not working in virtual reality at all,
because we don't know what molecules look like. There is no reality we have
to recreate.'
