FT  17 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Hard times ahead for Ecuador's
shrimp farmers
FOLLOWING RECORD exports last year, there are signs that Ecuador's shrimp
industry may be heading for a slump. Rising costs, low productivity and a
lack of investment capital are raising doubts about whether the country, the
world's fourth largest shrimp-cultivator, will be able to maintain its
market share.
Double-digit growth figures in 1991 and 1992 took total production of whole
shrimps to 125,000 tonnes, worth USDollars 526m. But export prices for
Ecuador's high quality white shrimps dropped consistently from Dollars 4.20
in 1986 to Dollars 3.10 in 1992.
Notwithstanding its strong growth, Ecuador's shrimp industry compares
unfavourably with its Asian competitors. Productivity is less than half
Thailand's 2,500 kg a hectare, for example.
'Had there not been an increase in the cultivation area, exports may have
dropped between 10 and 15 per cent,' says Mr Luis Villacis, president of the
National Federation of Shrimp Exporters: 'Our productivity has been
seriously affected by pollutants and diseases.'
Besides lacking the aggressive government support of its competitors,
Ecuador's shrimp farmers are facing a series of problems.
The price of diesel fuel, used to operate the pumps that continuously change
the water in the cultivating pools, has risen by 70 per cent since the
government began cutting energy subsidies last September.
High shipping costs out of Ecuador will continue to constrain profit margins
in the future. For a container of shrimps heading to Europe, an Ecuadorian
exporter pays a tariff of Dollars 7,500, while in a Chilean port that tariff
equals Dollars 3,500.
An increase in piracy in the Gulf of Guayaquil has resulted in the loss of
nearly Dollars 1m worth of shrimps being shipped to the packaging sites.
Military action has been ineffective and shrimp farmers have resorted to
hiring private security forces.
Industry analysts say that productivity could be boosted significantly if
diseases were controlled, nutrition improved and breeding pool sizes
optimised. But state funds for research have been cut back considerably and
with interest rates high and investment capital in short suply the private
sector seems unlikely to be able address these problems for some time.
One advantage that Ecuador has in the world market is that it is at present
the sole supplier of the vannamei, a white shrimp which is favoured by
consumers in the US, which takes more than 70 per cent of Ecuador's exports.
