FT  18 OCT 93 / Strange brews herald a real ale renaissance: The changing
tastes of beer drinkers
BRITAIN is fast rediscovering a taste for real ale. Around the country
traditional brews with such thirst-satisfying names as Hop Back Summer
Lightning, Malton Old Bob, Oakhill Black Magic, and Felinfoel Double Dragon,
roll off the tongue in increasing numbers.
The Good Beer Guide, published today by the Campaign For Real Ale, says
there are more than 1,000 real ales on the market.
While the big brewers forecast more brewery closures, and some regionals
have quit the industry to become pub retailers, the revival of
cask-conditioned beers has encouraged a surge in micro-brewers.
More than 50 new brewers have come into the industry in the past couple of
years - an increase of more than 30 per cent in the numbers of independent
real ale suppliers.
Commercial brewing is returning to towns where the occupation had long been
abandoned. Beer is being made in Tring, Hertfordshire, and Lichfield,
Staffordshire, for the first time for 60 years. Casks of beer are rolling
out of the most unlikely places: former cowsheds in Devon, an old foundry in
Lancashire and a disused sawmill in Hereford.
The new brewers include several landlords who started producing beers for
sale in their own bars. Many supply 50 to 100 pubs in their localities.
The real ale renaissance is being driven by changing consumer tastes.
'British drinkers are undoubtedly undergoing a conversion,' says Mr Jeff
Evans, editor of the Good Beer Guide. 'Whereas fizzy, processed keg beers
and lagers have dominated the pub market for the last 20 years, drinkers are
now trading up to beers full of flavour and character. Keg beer is fading
fast and lager is past its peak.'
Camra's campaign to preserve the regional variety of traditional ales has
been helped by the freeing of thousands of pubs from their ties with
national brewers. Pub landlords could thus shop around for their beers.
As drinkers began to turn to real ales, the big brewers reinforced the trend
with increased spending on advertising their own brands of cask-conditioned
beers.
The result is that production of distinctive styles of beer, from the malty
brews of the Midlands to the fruity ales of East Anglia, is flourishing.
Good Beer Guide 1994, CAMRA, 34 Alma Road, St Albans, Herts AL1 3BW. Pounds
8.99.
