FT  19 MAR 93 / Arts: Moved by the Greek miracle - Patricia Morison admires
the exhibition currently in New York
Forty years ago, ER Dodds began his wonderful book, The Greeks and the
Irrational with an encounter in front of the Elgin marbles. A young man
accosted him and said, 'I know it's an awful thing to confess, but this
Greek stuff doesn't move me one bit . . . It's all so terribly rational, if
you know what I mean.'
These days, people are quite unembarrassed about admitting that Dead White
Marbles leave them cold. On the one hand, mass tourism allows millions of
people to experience Greek art in its homeland. A frenzy of excitement
greeted the 1972 discovery of the Riace bronzes, fished from the sea off
Italy. On the other hand, without a beach close at hand, many people find
Greek art less appetising.
The Greeks have lost their supremacy. Seemingly timeless masterpieces such
as the Apollo Belvedere and Venus de Milo are now widely known to be copies
made some four centuries later than the lost originals. Tutenkamen's magic
appeals far more widely than the sculpture which enraptured Winckelmann and
his followers.
Into this complicated picture, there comes an extraordinary exhibition. The
Greek Miracle. Classical Sculpture from the Dawn of Democracy. The Fifth
Century BC, has brought together some 40 sculptures, none of them Roman
copies. First seen in Washington, the show has now moved to New York, to the
naturally lit spaces of the Metropolitan Museum's Robert Lehmann Wing.
The Greeks have lent 22 objects, of which 20 have never been seen outside
Greece. Among them are works shown in every textbook on the origins of
western art. Here you will find the 'Kritios Boy', the tombstone of the
daughter of Hegeso, 'Hercules carrying the Heavens' from the Temple of Zeus
at Olympia. Young Athenian nobles gallop on a severely eroded fragment of
the Parthenon frieze. From the Temple of Victory on the Acropolis there
survives the exquisitely graceful relief of the winged goddess of victory
loosening her sandal.
Other museums have contributed pieces such as the beautiful Chatsworth
Apollo from the British Museum. A life-size marble statue of Theseus,
crouching in combat against an Amazonian, was dug up only 60 years ago in
Rome, where it was probably taken as loot by Emperor Augustus. He is
frequently not on view in the Capitoline Museum; this show represents a
chance not only to contemplate him, but to escape the baking misery of
queues for Greek museums in the tourist season.
In New York, the show has been enriched by more objects from the Met and
lent by private owners. One such is a magnificent water-jar presented to the
goddess Hera in gratitude for victory in the games. Greek theatre and Greek
cultural expansion are evoked by a silver stag's head drinking-cup, one of
the famous rhytons from the Black Sea region. The figures around its rim
have been explained as a scene from the play Philoktetes.
Memorable above all is the Met's particular coup de theatre. The first
exhibit is a pink, life-size statue of a youth, a kouros of around 600 BC,
from the Met's collection. Its rigid frontality, the scrolling lines of its
stylised muscles, are the work of an artist still trained in the Egyptian
way of representing the human form. One foot is extended, but there is no
illusion of movement.
Behind there stands another kouros, one of a dozen found at the Temple of
Apollo on Mount Pton. It was made only 80 years later and yet a great change
has taken place. He is softer and suppler, the muscles seeming to swell
beneath the skin. His face, however, is still Oriental, flat-cheeked and
framed in stiff loops of curls.
Next in this revelatory line-up comes the 'Kritios Boy' of about 480BC,
found on the Acropolis. If he does indeed represent the divine Theseus, then
it is not hard to imagine Athenians worshipping such an uncannily beautiful
image. The show tries to remind us that Greek sculptures were once brightly
painted and inlaid, with gleaming weapons, jewellery, and locks of bronze
hair. The 'Kritios Boy' would have had 'real' eyes, like the little bronze
head which shares the inset eyes, eyelashes, and lips of the famous
Charioteer of Delphi.
The 'Kritios Boy' really does appear about to walk. His spine is curved and
one beautiful buttock droops in the contrapposto pose which Greek art
bequeathed to artists of the Renaissance. Here, then, is the Greek miracle,
that in one century of experimentation, craftsmen had learned to fashion
images of such dazzling naturalism.
But, perhaps unwisely, the phrase 'Greek Miracle' does not stand alone in
the show's title. It is hitched to the 2,500th anniversary of the birth of
democracy in Athens, ushered in by the reforms of Cleisthenes in 508BC.
President Mitsotakis writes, 'Although we take (democracy) for granted in
our time . . . only in ancient Athens and in the United States has democracy
lasted as long as two centuries on a continuing basis.' He overlooks, as
many people do, the oligarchic interludes. However, the point is that this
show marks a warm point in US-Greek relations.
There may never have been such an ambitious cultural exchange. At the
National Gallery in Athens, the Greeks are able to feast their eyes on From
El Greco to Cezanne. The 72 masterpieces from the Met and the National
Gallery in Washington include paintings by Veronese, Caravaggio, Vermeer,
Goya, Rubens, Rembrandt, Van Dyck, Manet, Gauguin and Degas.
The problem with talk about democracy is that it sends up a flurry of
familiar questions. What exactly had the art of Greece's Golden Age to do
with democracy? Would such a massive production of cast bronzes and polished
marbles have been possible without slave labour? Athenian democracy excluded
not just slaves but women, too. Moreover, Pericles could never have boasted
about the glory of Athenian art without imperial wealth raked in by a
ruthless foreign policy.
An article in The New York Review of Books took a scornful view of what it
called the historical naivete underlying this show. As far as the
unimpressive catalogue is concerned, this is justified. The introduction by
Nicolas Gage (author of tear-jerking best-seller Eleni), is positively
comic. Victorian sentiment meets New Age-ism in gush about Attica's austere
landscape where 'men reached a level of excellence that has remained an
inspiration for mankind, the mind and spirit in equilibrium as never before
or since.'
But these objects are presented first and foremost as an aesthetic
experience, an alluring vision of a Golden Age which produced art of the
utmost refinement, strength and grace. We respond to images which seem to
speak of a people who valued friendship, family and horses. Sons greet their
fathers in the afterlife with a gentlemanly handclasp. The gravestone of a
little girl kissing her pet turtle-dove speaks as winningly now as two
centuries ago when it was unearthed and taken for an English nobleman's
collection. Ktesilaos and Theano gaze at each other with unfathomable
gestures, although the temptation is to read it as an image of devoted
married love.
Meanwhile, scholars continue to wrangle over what exactly was the nature of
Greek pederasty. Is it an accident that there is not a single erect image
either on view or in the catalogue, nor even a reference to the Greeks'
uniquely tolerant attitude towards homosexuality? Perhaps this has something
to do with the seal of official approval. What we now enjoy in the cool
daylight of New York, is an unforgettable presentation of those eminently
rational, miraculously talented Greeks.
The Greek Miracle continues until May 23. From El Greco to Cezanne, at the
National Gallery in Athens until April 11. Sponsor of both exhibitions is
Philip Morris Companies Inc
