FT  03 MAR 93 / World Trade News: US 'in no hurry' over China talks
CHINA and the US made some progress this week in talks on terms for China's
entry to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, but accord remains a
'long way off,' according to the chief US negotiator.
Mr Douglas Newkirk, assistant US trade representative for Gatt, said after
two days of talks that China had stepped back from previous understandings
on entry terms for the world's fair trade regime.
Among these sticking points is China's apparent unwillingness to accept a
safeguards system to prevent such developments as sudden surges in exports
that might swamp the domestic markets of Gatt signatories. China is also
lukewarm about committing itself to a full market economy as an eventual
goal.
Mr Newkirk said that before formal negotiations were suspended in 1989 -
talks were frozen in protest at the army crackdown on pro-democracy
activists - China had agreed to both the safeguards and market economy
provisions. Discussions this week also focused on US demands that China
commit itself to a single national trade regime, full transparency in the
publication of its trading regulations and the gradual elimination of
non-tariff barriers.
Western officials say that China has made significant progress in
liberalising trade policies, but much more needs to be done to improve
market access for foreign business. They see the Gatt negotiations as a
useful device to push the Chinese to go further.
Mr Newkirk said the US was 'not in any hurry' to conclude an agreement.
'We're prepared to go as fast or as slow as they're prepared to go,' he
declared. The US made it clear that that unconditional Most Favoured Nation
status for China was non-negotiable. The US government is obliged by
Congress to review China's human rights record each year before granting
MFN.
The US official's predictions of slow progress towards Gatt accession for
China are likely to disappoint and frustrate Chinese officials who had been
predicting an early agreement.
