FT  14 APR 93 / Management: A question of misjudgment - Public relations
setback for Wellcome
Wellcome should by now be accustomed to public relations crises about its
controversial HIV-treatment AZT. But this month the drugs group was badly
caught on the hop when the UK Medical Research Council called a press
conference about AZT's effectiveness. What happened thereafter is an example
of how even apparently well-prepared companies can mishandle the media and
the stock market.
'The whole business was a great pity from beginning to end,' admits John
Robb, chief executive.
Preliminary details of a Franco-British trial suggesting AZT did not
slow-down the onset of Aids were presented by the MRC on Thursday, April 1.
The conclusion of the trial, if correct, had serious consequences for sales
of the group's second best-selling product. Since the MRC press conference,
Wellcome's shares have fallen 8 per cent.
Wellcome admits it was not ready for the MRC to publish the results. 'We
knew something was going to happen that week in terms of findings, but I
expected a position to be agreed between the MRC and Wellcome,' says Robb.
'And I didn't expect a press release to be sent out without our agreement.'
Robb, together with two US executive directors and Martin Sherwood, head of
public relations, were in the US presenting the company's recent results to
staff and institutions.
'I took the view that our representatives were part of the trial monitoring
committee and that it would be wrong to back out of a visit to US employees
and shareholders,' explains Robb.
Meanwhile, in London, two executive directors were on holiday, leaving the
research and development director, Trevor Jones, virtually alone to cope
with the media. He was supported by John Precious, the recently appointed
finance director, and two press officers. Robb admits the headquarters was
understaffed. Wellcome's external relations machinery was overwhelmed, in
spite of extensive contingency planning and media training.
During the rush for information, the public relations department not only
lacked data to counter the MRC's briefing, but actually gave out inaccurate
information exaggerating the trial's potential damage to AZT's sales.
Press officers said 38 per cent of patients using AZT in the US were
asymptomatic. They concluded that in a disaster scenario the company could
therefore lose 38 per cent of its worldwide AZT sales, worth Pounds 131m for
the first six months to February this year. In fact, the worldwide
percentage of AZT patients who are asymptomatic is between 10 per cent and
15 per cent.
'An internal investigation has been set up to investigate how the 38 per
cent figure was given out, and how expressions such as 'disaster scenario'
were used,' says Robb. The next morning, AZT's apparently disappointing
performance was front-page news. The shares fell 51p to 692p.
'I was dismayed - but not by the share price,' says Robb. 'We are
responsible to the doctors who prescribe the products, our employees and the
patients. For them, the news was devastating.'
Robb and his team returned from New York the following Saturday. They were
convinced the MRC's conclusions were too strongly stated, given
contradictory results from other studies and the preliminary nature of the
trial's data. They thought the results, once properly analysed, would show
the drug was effective.
On Monday last week, Wellcome counter-attacked, calling a combined
conference for Wednesday for the press and analysts, and a later meeting for
Aids activists. The presentations were not a success. The company misjudged
its audience. A technical presentation left attendees, analysts and
journalists, confused. Afterwards, MRC scientists attacked Wellcome's
position, claiming the company had manipulated the data. The group's shares
fell a further 23p. 'We've learned a lot in the last few years, but we still
have some way to go,' says Robb.
