FT  29 JUN 93 / Menem awaits Clinton rewards
US President Bill Clinton will meet Argentina's President Carlos Menem today
in an encounter that the Argentine government hopes will underline its
growing importance in Washington's policy toward Latin America.
Since Mr Menem abandoned Argentina's century-old anti-Americanism when he
came to power four years ago, his new alliance with Washington has brought
important advantages.
US support in international financial organisations accelerated Argentine
economic reforms. This in turn has encouraged US inward investment: the US
is the second largest foreign investor in Argentina's Dollars 9bn (Pounds
6bn) privatisation programme.
The government's successful adoption of market policies, its willingness to
abandon strategic weapons projects and submit to international nuclear and
missile technology safeguards are genuinely appreciated in Washington.
The US is anxious to encourage Argentina as an example of good behaviour for
other developing countries. The Clinton administration has regularly
mentioned Argentina - along with Chile and Venezuela - as being prime
candidates for accession to the North American Free Trade Agreement which
may be ratified this year between the US, Canada and Mexico.
Argentina's Foreign Ministry is euphoric over the warmth of relations with
Washington. One official said: 'Mexico has entered the North American orbit
and therefore has lost value as a Latin interlocutor. The US needs a valid
interlocutor and it has made its choice. Argentina is democratic, the
economy is booming and (we) have enormous influence in the hemisphere.'
Some observers in Buenos Aires think this may be going too far. Mr Carlos
Escude, a former government adviser, warned: 'The US has taken the substance
of Menem's policies seriously. Many of his policies cannot be easily
reversed. But we must keep clear that Argentina is not an important country
for the US. Not only are we distant, but we have a competing economy and
have less to offer than Mexico, Brazil or Venezuela.'
Washington has already disabused Buenos Aires of any illusions that it can
expect big trade privileges. Last week, the US announced countervailing
duties on Argentine steel exports and said it was increasing its exports of
subsidised grains - a market in which Argentina competes with the US.
Trade will figure high on the agenda and inevitably, dialogue will be
one-sided. The US will demand passage of patent and intellectual property
legislation and removal of non-tariff trade barriers.
Argentina will ask the US to stop exporting subsidised grains. Agricultural
exports account for 70 per cent of Argentina's export revenues. It will also
ask for better access to US markets for manufactured and agricultural
products like leather.
The Argentine president will also repeat demands that Washington keep its
promises to sell two squadrons of second-hand A4 Skyhawk fighter bombers.
