FT  18 SEP 93 / Markets: Recognising the spirit of adventure - Serious Money
HE WHO ventures has definitely been winning over the last year. If any
sector epitomises the helter-skelter pace of the bull market, it must be
venture capital investment trusts, which back developing, and mainly
unquoted, companies.
For a long time during recession, the sector seemed to produce nothing but
disastrous news from the likes of Drayton Consolidated, Ensign and Gresham
House, as their portfolios were devastated by corporate bankruptcies. But
over the year to September 1, the average venture capital trust produced a
share price total return of 66.35 per cent (mid-market to mid-market with
net income reinvested; source Micropal.)
A significant transformation in investors' attitudes seems to have occurred
over the past six months. When we wrote about Electra, the largest trust in
the sector, in February, in our series on investment trusts, its shares
stood at a discount of 34 per cent. Now, according to S G Warburg
Securities, the discount has dropped to 15 per cent. The shares, then 214p,
are now 276p.
Electra's results in June were moderately encouraging - a 14.7 per cent rise
in net assets and a 4.5 per cent increase in dividend. Michael Stoddart,
chairman, said in his statement: 'I believe that the worst is over. The
majority of companies in our portfolio look to be set for better times and
we should start to see a gradual increase in the underlying values.
'All in all, while maintaining a cautious approach to the US and UK
economies, I do believe that the outlook for your company is more
encouraging than it has been for some time.'
But the market is evidently taking an even more optimistic view. As John
Symanowski, of SG Warburg Securities, says: 'The asset values of venture
capital trusts tend to lag the rest of the stock market.' First the economy
starts to recover; then the companies owned by the trusts have to complete
their financial years; then those companies have to report improved results
two or three months later; finally trusts, when they revalue their assets,
can translate the improved results into increased asset values.
In short, after a long time during recession, when the markets appeared to
believe that companies were being insufficiently cautious about the value of
their unquoted holdings, investors evidently believe there is scope for
asset values to increase.
There is plenty of room for recovery; Electra's asset value is still below
its level at the end of September 1989.
Robbie Robertson, of NatWest Securities, argues that, after all the problems
experienced in the sector, many trusts adopted a stringent approach to the
valuation of their unquoted holdings. 'There were far more write-downs of
assets than write-ups in the years 1990-92' he says. 'Trusts have cut away
the deadwood in their portfolios.'
Venture capital trusts have also been helped by the revival of smaller
company shares which has occurred during 1993, with the FT Small Cap Index
far outstripping the performance of the Footsie.
Many venture capital trusts own quoted small company shares - usually long
term holdings which they have successfully seen though from development to
flotation. The increase in the prices of these shares flows straight through
into the asset values of the trusts.
Furthermore, the small company revival has led institutions to review their
venture capital weightings, according to Robbie Robertson, and decide there
was a risk involved in being left behind. A venture capital trust represents
a quick way of getting exposure to the sector.
Another important factor, according to Robertson, is the incidence of stock
market listings. 'It's easy for trusts to put money into companies,' he
says, 'they have got to be able to get it out as well.' When companies
float, that results in an immediate uplift to asset values, as the 'discount
for illiquidity' disappears.
All these factors make Robertson believe the revival in the venture capital
sector has been justified. But Warburg's Symanowski takes a different view.
'I think the rally has been overdone. There is not enough sign of a UK
recovery to justify the revival.'
'I wonder how much we will see of the living dead factor' adds Symanowski.
'Some companies have been teetering on the brink and trusts have not written
them off. But as valuations rise across the rest of their portfolios, they
will use the chance for write-offs.'
For those who side with Robertson, rather than Symanowski, the top
performing venture capital trusts over the past year, according to Micropal,
have been SUMIT (up 189 per cent), Murray Enterprise (171.3), Govett
American Endeavour (107.7), Foreign &amp; Colonial Enterprise (105.1) and
Electra (87.8). Over five years, the top five are: Manakin (which is
gradually winding itself down and distributing its assets), Candover (up
202.8 per cent), Pantheon (185.1) Foreign &amp; Colonial Enterprise (146.8) and
Group Development (77.5).
