FT  30 SEP 93 / The Labour Party Conference: MSF's last-minute switch
secures rule change
THE narrow victory on the vital rule change was clinched by a last-minute
switch by the MSF technical union.
The MSF vote, which went by 19 votes to 17 in favour of abstention, meant
that 4.5 per cent of the conference vote was not cast with the opponents of
Mr John Smith's one-member-one-vote reform.
That made all the difference as the card vote on rule change E - which
provides for a one-member-one-vote framework to be set up in constituencies
 -was passed by 47.5 per cent of the votes to 44.3 per cent.
Although the TGWU general union motion strongly opposing reform was also
narrowly passed - by 48.6 per cent to 48.4 per - the Labour leadership could
also take some comfort from the fact that a motion more favourable to
one-member-one-vote was passed with a slightly wider margin.
That motion, moved by the RMT transport union and the Nupe public services
union, was passed by 48.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent.
Another motion opposing one-member-one-vote, moved by the GMB general union,
was lost by 44.01 per cent to 53.1 per cent, largely because the MSF
supported the TGWU motion but voted against the GMB.
Although details of how unions and constituencies voted were not immediately
available it seems that on the crucial rule change a large number of
constituencies that had planned to vote against it decided to abstain after
the appeal from Mr John Prescott, transport spokesman.
Slightly over half of the constituencies appeared to vote in favour of rule
change E - representing about 17 per cent of the total vote - with slightly
less than half of the union vote representing about 30 per cent of the total
vote.
At the end of the series of votes, delegates had approved five rule changes
 -identified by the letters A to E - which will allow Mr Smith to implement
his democratisation plan.
Taken together, the rule changes mean that:
Parliamentary candidates will be selected by individual members voting by
single transferable vote in their constituencies, instead of jointly by
individuals and affiliated trade union branches. Union members who pay the
political levy will be able to vote if they pay a further fee of Pounds 3 to
join the party. Trade union branches retain the right to nominate
candidates.
The leader and deputy leader will be elected by an electoral college giving
a third of the votes to each of three groups - trade unions, members of the
Westminster and European parliaments, and individual members. Trade unions
had 40 per cent of the votes in the last election, with the balance split
equally between parliamentarians and constituency parties.
The union block vote in conference debates will be weakened by forcing
unions to split their votes between individual delegates. But unions will be
able to control delegates by mandating them in advance. The unions' 70 per
cent share of conference votes will be reduced to 50 per cent, but only if
party membership increases from 260,000 to 300,000.
The rule changes also allow a number of less controversial innovations,
including a cut in membership fees from Pounds 18 to Pounds 15, and
compulsory all-female candidate shortlists in 50 per cent of Labour held
seats that fall vacant. A resolution seeking greater black representation on
candidate shortlists was was defeated.
