FT  23 JUL 93 / Christian Democrats seek path to salvation
THE fate of Italy's discredited Christian Democrat party will be decided at
a four-day special assembly starting today.
Devastated by the nationwide corruption scandals, divided by internal
squabbles and flabby from 45 years enjoying the spoils of state, the party
faces further fragmentation unless it can incorporate the best of its
Catholic traditions in a new reformist party.
The party may, however, be beyond recovering its electoral appeal and
traditional role in the centre of the Italian political spectrum.
With the encroachment of the populist Lombard League in the north and the
continued strength of the former communist party of the Democratic Left
(PDS) in central Italy, the Christian Democrats will have to fight hard to
remain a national party. The party also has to find a raison d'etre to
replace its traditional cold war role as an anti-communist alliance. On the
economic front, the party swings between free market aims and nostalgia for
a strong state presence, summed up by the slogan at the assembly: 'No to
state capitalism but no to capitalism without the state.'
Invitations to the assembly have been carefully vetted. All parliamentarians
who have received notice from magistrates for alleged corruption and other
serious crimes have been excluded. This has effectively disqualified the old
party barons. Mr Giulio Andreotti, active in the formation of the party in
1942, and the Christian Democrat politician who has held office the most,
has not been invited.
Mr Mario Segni, leader of the referendum movement who three months ago left
the party after 16 years, has been invited but declined to attend.
In all there will be 45 deputies, 15 senators and 10 European MPs, plus
special guests. The main confrontation is expected to be between Mr Mino
Martinazzoli, the party leader since October 1992, and Ms Rosi Bindi, the
deputy from the Veneto. Mr Martinazzoli sees the party as a leaner
organisation aiming for the centre ground, redefining its role with the
church but remaining strongly Catholic and Liberal/Social Democratic in
political inspiration.
Ms Bindi claims the party has failed to clean itself up quickly enough and
remains too influenced by the old guard. Aware of the success of the League
in her home territory, she sees a new 'popular party inspired by Christian
ideals whose priority is beating the League'. But in areas such as Naples or
Rome, where the League does not count, such a strategy is too narrowly
focused.
She has already formed in the Veneto a Popular party (a party of this name
was dissolved by Mussolini in 1926 but provided the inspiration for the
Christian Democrats) and is ready to go her own way. If she does, the
Christian Democrats will either splinter or become more regionally rooted.
