FT  06 JAN 93 / Oil spill threatens disaster: Stricken tanker in danger of
breaking up - Salvage tugs on scene
FEROCIOUS SEAS were last night threatening to break up the stricken oil
tanker which was yesterday driven ashore in the Shetland Islands, raising
fears of an environmental disaster.
According to Coast Guard officials, the Liberian-registered Braer, carrying
84,000 tonnes of light Norwegian crude, was holed at the bow and stern, and
Coast Guard officials were already talking of a 'catastrophe'.
Two salvage tugs had reached the tanker by midnight and a third was on its
way, although weather conditions prevented attempts to deal with the
pollution hazard, endangering one of Britain's most environmentally
sensitive shorelines.
Earlier, the Braer's superstructure had been visible from cliffs above
Garths Ness as waves battered its hull. Water in nearby Quenland Bay was
brown with oil. The fume-laden air smelt like paraffin and police ordered
people away because of the risk of explosion.
Shetland Island officials, assisted by marine pollution specialists from the
Department of Transport, were devising a plan to contain the spill. But they
said it was impossible to do anything in the mountainous seas and storm
force winds.
'The technology that's available is not going to do any good at all in
current weather conditions,' said Mr George Sutherland, the director of
maritime operations for Shetland Islands council.
The disaster, he said, was 'the worst scenario that we ever expected in
terms of ship size and weather conditions'.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, said he wanted to be certain that
everything possible was being done to avert an environmental disaster.
Lord Caithness, shipping minister, said the engine failure could have
happened to any ship. Had it been at another point, the ship would have
missed the island. 'It is like hitting a needle in a haystack,' he said.
Giving an initial estimate of the cost of cleaning up the spill, Lloyd's
insurance officials said: 'We don't expect the damage to go much above
Pounds 80m.'
The fact that the crude oil is light in density should make it more likely
to disperse than heavier crudes.
Shetland Islands council has been acutely aware of the dangers of an oil
tanker disaster since the Sullom Voe oil and gas terminal was built at the
north end of the main island in the 1970s. It prepared plans to use booms to
contain oil spills and dispersants dropped from aircraft.
Mr Ken Lowe, the Coast Guard district controller, said: 'There is nothing we
can do tonight but we are setting up a joint response centre which will
decide what to do when the weather improves.'
There was no immediate prospect of the force 10 storm moderating or changing
direction away from the south-west.
The Braer had been making its way through the 22-mile wide channel between
Sumburgh Head and Fair Isle on a voyage from Mongstad in Norway to Quebec.
Yesterday, at about 5am, the vessel reported its engines had failed,
apparently because water from very heavy seas entered the fuel supply.
When it became clear that the tanker was likely to run ashore, the 34-strong
crew of Filipinos and Greeks was taken off by helicopter at about 9am.
An attempt was made to get a line on board the Braer from two tugs before it
hit the shore. A helicopter landed two crew members and Mr Jim Dickson, oil
pollution control officer with Shetland Islands council, on the ship.
But efforts were to no avail. Shortly afterwards, at about 11.20am, the ship
crashed on to the rocky sea bottom and the rescue party was evacuated.
The 18-year-old tanker has a single hull without the extra casing required
on new vessels since July last year.
Mr Lowe said the wind and wave direction was retaining much of the oil
leaking from the ship in the immediate bay where it had grounded. He held
out the hope that the wind direction would shift to north-west which might
drive the pollution away from Shetland.
Page 5
Wildlife at risk
Tougher regulation urged for tankers
Storms thwart clean-up
