FT  17 APR 93 / Spring rite keeps Swiss woman in her place at home / A look
at obstacles to women having a role in national life
ON MONDAY afternoon, a strange annual spring tribal rite will be played out
on the streets of Zurich.
According to a 650-year-old tradition, the (male) pillars of the city's
business establishment will dress up in medieval garb and, having had slap
up lunches in the halls of their various guilds (zunfts), will parade down
the streets of the old city on foot or on horseback. The procession ends in
a city park where a symbolic figure of winter, known as Boogg and capable of
being pronounced only by Swiss, is put to the torch.
The strangest part of this ritual is the audience. Lining the streets will
be mainly the men's wives, mistresses, secretaries and other female friends
and acquaintances, many of whom will have been dragooned into being there.
Their role is to throw flowers at their preening menfolk. The man who
accumulates the most flowers by the end of the parade acquires new prestige.
He is easily identifiable because he will have acquired a woman assistant
along the way to help carry his load of flowers.
Whatever else may be said about this festival, called Sechselauten, it is an
example of male domination in Swiss society. This is the country, after all,
where women have had the right to vote only since 1971, and that only at the
federal level. The tiny half canton of Appenzell Inner Rhodes (population
13,600) was finally forced by a federal court just three years ago to give
their women the vote in local matters.
Swiss women are still not permitted to work night shifts in factories and
they have so far made little headway in senior business circles. Moreover,
strong social and logistical pressures force them to stay home and look
after their children.
Primary school schedules, for example, are perversely arbitrary. A mother of
two may find that one child must attend school for two hours early in the
morning and two hours late in the afternoon, while the other has different
hours. She is thus in effect prevented from taking a regular job.
Swiss women soldiers have only been allowed to carry firearms since 1991 -
just pistols for self protection.
The army is undoubtedly one of the main clues to the strong strain of
misogyny in Switzerland. The Swiss army is a militia force in which every
able-bodied male must serve for an average of three weeks every two years
until he is 50.
While on army service, men from Switzerland's many different social and
cultural backgrounds rub shoulders and assess each other thoroughly in
trying circumstances. They then take the contacts and assessments back and
apply them in their civilian lives with a confidence that they could never
extend to women.
Meanwhile, women's main role in the country's defence is to stay home, look
after the children and do their menfolk's laundry which is sent back
regularly from the front by special free post.
There are signs Swiss leaders have finally recognised that they must change
their ways. A few leading companies have appointed a token woman to their
board. The army held its first mixed 17-week training course for recruits in
March. The air force will begin training its first women pilots in May.
But Swiss women are also growing more impatient, as was demonstrated three
months ago when a woman, Ms Christiane Brunner, was put up for election to
the federal cabinet. The overwhelmingly male parliament, which had only once
before agreed to put a woman in the country's supreme governing council,
bristled.
Ms Brunner was attacked for her militant feminism, her casual dress habits
and her past - she has had three husbands. To the surprise of the
parliamentarians, women throughout the country stood up and protested
against this muck-raking.
In the end Ms Brunner was not elected, but the parliamentarians felt obliged
to vote in another woman, Ms Ruth Dreyfuss. Ms Dreyfuss made clear that her
views were identical to those of Ms Brunner, notably on the idea that some
day women should be in the majority in the cabinet.
If that ever happened, their first move might be to outlaw Sechselauten.
