FT  30 NOV 93 / Runners in Polish sell-off stakes come under starter's
orders: Christopher Bobinski on the long-delayed mass privatisation scheme
Poland's mass privatisation scheme has survived a fraught three year
gestation and is ready to move into the final stages of labour.
Today is the deadline for the acceptance of bids from would-be managers of
15-20 national investment funds (Nifs) which are being created to manage
batches of 30 Polish state sector companies for the next 10 years. Shares in
them will be offered to all Poles for a nominal fee.
The main aim of privatisation is to get a large chunk of medium-sized Polish
industry, which is still in profit, out of the state sector and under
competent management, both foreign and domestic. The foreign managers are
expected to make the companies involved more credible and thus ease the task
of raising capital to complement and facilitate their restructuring.
The managers' task will be to enhance the Nifs' value. They will be paid an
annual performance fee, in equity form, as well as a yearly management cash
fee. After 10 years a final payment based on the performance of the fund
will also be made. The funds will be quoted sooner rather than later on
Warsaw's booming stock exchange, giving the managers an indication of how
the market values their efforts.
Despite long delays caused by frequent changes of government and skirmishes
with opponents, privatisation - which aims to sell around 600 companies in
one go - is similar to that originally put forward in 1991 by the then
privatisation minister, Mr Janusz Lewandowski, and advisers SG Warburg.
Part of the reason why even the new centre-left government is pressing ahead
with the scheme is the firm backing given by the World Bank from the very
beginning. The bank has made implementation a condition for drawing several
tranches of a Dollars 450m (Pounds 302m) loan. It also reflects awareness,
shared by Mr Wieslaw Kaczmarek, the new privatisation minister, that the
scheme's introduction is seen in the west as a litmus test of Polish
commitment to privatisation. At home, the act of putting Nif shares into the
hands of ordinary Poles is seen as a way of reconciling voters who have
grown increasingly suspicious of privatisation but who can now be seen to be
getting a small part of industry, free of charge, for themselves.
The new government, like its predecessors, is also looking to the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development to provide around Dollars 400m in
loans to the companies involved. Other potential lenders in the government's
sights are the European Investment Bank, the International Finance
Corporation and the World Bank. Other aid bodies, including the UK
government's 'Know-how Fund' have already provided vital technical
assistance.
The authorities say that around 50 consortia are 'preparing to apply' to
manage the Nifs. But they will not reveal who has already declared an
interest. Most groups will include a foreign partner such as an investment
bank or consultants working together with local banks and consulting
companies as well as accounting firms and lawyers.
A 19-person selection committee appointed by the prime minister, parliament
and the trade unions will sift the applications and produce a list of
applicants in order of merit with whom the privatisation minister will then
negotiate the final terms of the management contracts.
At the moment a list of 367 state sector companies is ready for inclusion in
the scheme and new tranches are being prepared. The selection committee,
which is being reappointed by the new prime minister, Mr Waldemar Pawlak, is
expected to finish its work early in the new year. The funds should be up
and running several months after that.
