FT  31 AUG 93 / Life and cynical times of the thirtysomethings
SINGLE parenthood is not a matter of choice but a result of marital
breakdown, according to a survey of 11,000 'thirty-somethings'.
The survey, part of the National Child Development Study that has tracked
the 11,000 since they were born in March 1958, was released at the meeting.
It shows that most single parents are impoverished.
Dr Angela Dale, deputy director of the Social Statistics Research Unit at
City University in London, said: 'When women have children they leave the
labour market, and as a result they have a permanent loss of earning power.
'If their marriage breaks down they become dependent on the state because
prior to becoming a lone parent they lost the ability to earn a living
wage.'
The survey makes depressing reading for women, showing that their gross
hourly earnings are 85 per cent of their male counterparts, despite the
Equal Pay Act of 1975.
Women who work part time are even worse off, with hourly earnings 51 per
cent of those for men in full-time jobs.
Women suffer more from depression than men, with one in eight having been
clinically depressed at some time compared with one in 14 men.
Overall the survey shows the 'thirtysomethings' in as much of a flux as the
characters in the soap opera of the same name. Nearly 20 per cent of the
sample have been divorced, with 12 per cent of divorced men and 11 per cent
of divorced women having lived with three or more partners.
More than 80 per cent of the sample owned their own homes, and despite much
publicised difficulties over mortgage arrears, only 8 per cent had ever been
more than two months behind with payments.
Other attitudes include:
90 per cent thought politicians are in politics for their own good.
29 per cent thought it did not matter which party was in power.
62 per cent thought there was one rule for the rich and another for the
poor.
50 per cent believed the government should redistribute income from the
better-off to the less well-off.
