FT  18 SEP 93 / FT Guide For The Serious Investor (17): Helpful variations
on a traditional theme - Life policies / Bethan Hutton discusses products
that can maintain one's living standard, provide assistance in times of
illness and ensure support for dependants
LIFE ASSURANCE's origins as a protective measure can sometimes be forgotten,
now that it is so commonly sold as a savings or investment product.
Its usefulness as protection has not disappeared, but it has been joined by
an array of other products, designed to protect your standard of living and
your dependants against the impact of illness and accidents.
Life, permanent health and critical illness insurance can all have a part to
play in financial planning, particularly for individuals with substantial
income or assets to cover. The first thing to check is what benefits are
provided by any employer's scheme, and work out where they are likely to
fall short. For example, a company's death-in-service benefit may be set at
four times salary, but with the salary capped at Pounds 75,000. For a family
accustomed to an annual income of Pounds 300,000, a one-off payment of this
amount might not be enough.
Arranging Pounds 50,000 of life cover can be as simple as filling in a form
and signing a direct-debit mandate. Unfortunately, arranging Pounds 500,000
of cover can be a rather more complicated process.
Medical underwriting becomes more rigorous the bigger the sum assured gets:
up to Pounds 100,000-Pounds 200,000, companies may be happy to rely on a
report from your own doctor. Above that amount, a medical will become
necessary. These days that will usually include an HIV test and an ECG.
Problems can arise when arranging really large amounts of cover if a single
company is unwilling to shoulder the entire risk, so it has to be split
between several. One company in the group may not be satisfied with the
original medical report, and will insist on a second or even third medical.
For a busy person, this can become too time-consuming.
Peter Smith, a regional director of fee-based advisers Hill Martin, says he
tries to get all the insurers involved to agree in advance to accept a
medical from a Harley Street doctor. This can have the added benefit of
being more convenient for the client, who will not usually be kept waiting
as long as at many GPs' surgeries. The equipment is also likely to be more
sophisticated than the average GP can offer.
Large contracts can require the intermediary to devote a lot of time to
shepherding the application through, and clearing up misunderstandings.
'Unless you can slot into their boxes, you do have to spend a lot of time
talking to them, and talking to the right people. It takes a lot longer to
get cover than it used to,' says Karina Challons, of independent financial
advisers Murray Noble.
She cites the case of one client who was having difficulty getting
acceptance with an insurer. They eventually discovered that the underwriter
was worried about her course of hormone replacement therapy.
Insurers will also ask why you need the cover. They are usually happiest if
it is for standard inheritance tax purposes. If it is for anything else -
for example, shareholder protection - they may demand detailed financial
information. Some would-be insureds are unwilling or slow to provide this
kind of information.
'While there are restrictions and conditions imposed by companies, part of
the difficulty in getting policies on risk for some high net worth
individuals is actually in dealing with those individuals themselves,' says
Mark Bolland, of independent financial advisers Chamberlain De Broe.
He says that one important point to look for, after choosing between
variations on whole-of-life or term assurance, is guaranteed insurability at
a reasonable cost. This means that, if your health deteriorates in the
future, you can be sure of maintaining cover.
For term assurance of less than 10 years, Lloyd's is a possibility - it has
the advantage of flexibility, and Lloyd's underwriters are less afraid of
unusual risks than some life companies, but Smith says premiums are less
competitive than they used to be.
The need for insurance against premature death is accepted almost without
question. However, the chances of dying prematurely are considerably smaller
than the chances of suffering a serious illness which may leave you unable
to work but with large financial commitments.
Permanent health insurance is designed to provide a replacement income if
you are too ill to work for an extended period. If necessary, it can pay out
until retirement. Policies can have different waiting times for payment to
begin, depending on your employer's sick-pay arrangements, if any. It is a
very useful protection product, but benefits are usually limited to about 75
per cent of an individual's salary, less state sickness benefits.
Insurers also impose cash limits on the benefit payable under PHI policies,
even if an individual's salary is very high. The maximum benefit is often
about Pounds 40,000-Pounds 50,000; a handful of companies go further
(Norwich Union's maximum benefit is Pounds 78,000), but it is rarely
possible to replace a six-figure salary under an individual PHI contract.
PHI policies taken out by businesses may be able to provide a higher income,
but for a limited period.
Anyone who either depends on unearned income (which PHI cannot cover) or
wants to top up PHI and life cover could also look at critical illness
insurance. This can sometimes overlap with PHI, but also covers different
circumstances.
Critical illness policies are designed to provide a lump sum if you are
diagnosed as having one of a list of serious illnesses. The main illnesses
covered are heart attacks, strokes and cancer, which account for the
majority of claims, as well as organ transplants, heart surgery and numerous
other conditions. The illnesses do not have to be terminal, or even prevent
you from working. The lump sum can be used for whatever purpose the insured
wishes.
Some critical illness policies automatically include a death benefit; if you
already have adequate life cover, it may be better to choose a stand-alone
policy, which should be cheaper.
Critical illness policies often have clauses including permanent total
disablement and loss of limbs, which are also the main ground covered by
personal accident policies.
