FT  18 AUG 93 / Improved public borrowing figure boosts UK markets
BRITAIN'S public sector deficit was a lower-than-expected Pounds 1.55bn in
July, but neither the Treasury nor Downing Street were ready yesterday to
revise downwards the government's forecast of a Pounds 50bn public sector
borrowing requirement for the current financial year.
Yesterday's official borrowing figures helped to boost sterling and lift
government bond prices and equities to record highs as investors reasoned
that the government might now be under less pressure to raise taxes in its
November Budget.
But a Treasury spokesman said it was still too soon in the financial year to
think of revising down the deficit forecast. Downing Street officials
cautioned against treating the July PSBR figure as a sign that there was now
less pressure on Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, to cut spending or raise
new revenues.
While several City analysts said that they now expected the 1993-94 deficit
would be less than the government's forecast, they also cautioned against
euphoria.
'The data so far this year do not yet point to a sizeable PSBR undershoot,'
said Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist of Salomon Brothers International in
London. He said he was sticking with his forecast of a Pounds 48.5bn PSBR
for this financial year.
Financial markets had been expecting a reduced deficit of about Pounds 1.9bn
last month following June's Pounds 3.97bn shortfall between government
expenditure and revenues. The July 1992 PSBR amounted to Pounds 656m.
July is traditionally a strong month for government tax receipts because of
payments by the self employed and of advance corporation tax. Government
income was also boosted last month by Pounds 1.8bn in proceeds from the BT3
share sale.
But figures released yesterday by the Treasury showed that government cash
receipts were up only 4 per cent to Pounds 66.8bn in the first four months
of 1993-94 compared with the same period last year.
Cash outlays were up 7.5 per cent to Pounds 81bn. The Treasury reported that
the cumulative PSBR in the first four months of this financial year reached
Pounds 14.9bn compared with Pounds 11.4bn in the April to July period of
1992. Excluding privatisation proceeds, the PSBR for April to July rose to
Pounds 18.2bn compared with Pounds 14.8bn in the same period of last year.
The pound closed in London at DM2.5225 yesterday, a gain of 2 pfennigs on
the day. Part of its strength reflected profit taking in the D-mark and
expectations of favourable news about UK retail price inflation today. The
FT-SE 100 index closed up 16.7 at 3,025.
Currencies, Page 27
London stocks, Page 36
