FT  17 SEP 93 / Bosnia peace hopes raised
HOPES that Bosnian peace talks could be reconvened soon were bolstered
yesterday when the international mediators, Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald
Stoltenberg, announced they had called the three warring parties to Sarajevo
next Tuesday 'to consider signing' an overall peace settlement.
The move follows a surprise accord with the Bosnian Serbs signed yesterday
by Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic, which appears to mark a further step
towards the break-up of the union of three ethnic mini-states proposed under
the peace agreement.
The accord, which was signed for the Bosnian Serbs by Mr Momcilo Krajisnik,
chairman of the Bosnian Serb assembly, provides for the three mini-states to
hold a referendum within two years of the union's establishment to decide
whether to remain part of Bosnia.
The Bosnian Serb and Bosnian Croat sides have made clear from the start of
the 18-month civil war their wish to link with their 'parent' states, and it
is expected that they would attempt to secede soon.
But, as a sign of the confusion that dogs the process, the principles of the
broader peace package drawn up during negotiations in Geneva in August,
which stipulate that the other two republics must agree if a republic wants
to secede, still apparently stand. Mr Izetbegovic finally refused to sign
this agreement because his demands for extra territory were not met.
One western diplomat in Geneva yesterday suggested that Mr Izetbegovic may
have agreed to the referendum proposal in the hope of softening Serb
resistance to further territorial concessions. Mr John Mills, the mediators'
spokesman, said yesterday's deal signalled the 'additional flexibility' the
mediators had sought before reconvening the peace talks, which broke up a
fortnight ago.
However, President Izetbegovic, returning to Sarajevo from Geneva, said
there had been no change in Moslem demands for a bigger share of the country
when it was partitioned.
Conference sources warned that a peace deal was not yet assured. It remains
unclear whether the Serbs or Croats have made any concessions to these
demands, which include extra land around the north-west Moslem Bihac region
and eastern enclaves, and access to the sea.
It is also clear that the eventual deal will be a legal minefield, with this
week's agreements superimposed on the August package of constitutional
principles, transitional arrangements and a still disputed map.
Other points in yesterday's agreement between the Bosnian government and
Bosnian Serbs include:
A proviso that in the event of a break-up of the union, which could not take
effect before the republics' boundaries were agreed, the Moslem republic
would inherit Bosnia's UN seat and take possession of assets vested in the
union.
A promise that both the Bosnian Moslem and Serb republic could have access
to the sea.
A call for an end to hostilities between the Bosnian Serb and Moslems
throughout Bosnia by Saturday noon, the release of detainees and unhindered
access for relief convoys.
On Tuesday, Mr Izetbegovic signed a similar ceasefire accord with Croatian
President Franjo Tudjman, which also sets out procedures for settling
boundary issues.
But in spite of the agreement, fighting between Moslem and Croat forces
continued to rage in Central Bosnia yesterday. The situation has been
inflamed by new Croat and Moslem offensives and reports that Moslems had
massacred 30 Croat civilians on Wednesday.
