FT  26 AUG 93 / UN fails to lift Croat siege of Mostar
UNITED NATIONS' attempts to relieve the siege of Mostar remained deadlocked
yesterday after several hundred Croat demonstrators refused to let an aid
convoy of 27 trucks pass into the city, where 55,000 Moslems have been
trapped for two months with little food.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva yesterday
indicated that the UNHCR might ask the western allies to carry out a second
airdrop of food aid into the city.
The first airdrop, by American aircraft on Tuesday night, sprinkled 13,440
food packets over the Moslem-inhabited eastern side of Mostar.
However, UN officials yesterday stressed that though airdrops had already
delivered over 7,400 tonnes of food in other parts of Bosnia in recent
months, their scope was limited.
Mr Ron Redmond, UNHCR spokesman in Geneva, yesterday said that the UNHCR was
now seeking to persuade Croat forces to disperse the demonstrators, who are
mainly women and children.
'Emotions there are running pretty high. They are demanding the release of
Croat prisoners, the return of bodies, all sort of things,' he said.
The Bosnian Croats, who have recently suffered a series of military defeats
by the Moslem-led Bosnian army in central Bosnia, have also demanded that
aid convoys should be stepped up to the besieged Croat pop-ulations in the
region.
Meanwhile, amid signs that the continued tensions on the ground could
undermine the latest peace proposals, the Dutch and German foreign ministry
yesterday voiced doubts about the plan for the ethnic partition of Bosnia.
The warnings came after Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the
international mediators, held separate meetings with Mr Pieter Kooijmans,
the Dutch foreign minister, and Mr Klaus Kinkel, his German counterpart.
After 90 minutes of talks, the Dutch foreign minister indicated that the
Netherlands remained concerned about the feasibility of implementing the
peace plan, and the practicality of putting Mostar under EC control.
Mr Kinkel echoed the concern, indicating that he was not completely
satisfied with the latest proposals to divide Bosnia-Hercegovina into three
ethnic-based regions.
The European Community is expected to delay any formal decision on whether
to accept the peace plan's proposal that it take over administration of
Mostar until all three parties to the Bosnian conflict make up their minds
on the plan as a whole.
'I don't think the 12 will want to be pinned down until they see what the
(Bosnian) parties do,' one senior EC diplomat said. But there is cautious
support in principle for the idea.
Beyond the task of choosing an administrator, EC diplomats emphasise
questions such as the number of support personnel required, how Mostar would
be policed, where funding would come from to replenish the EC's exhausted
aid budget, and the broader security implications.
The Community appears concerned to avoid establishing a link between
accepting administration of Mostar and committing extra troops to Bosnia.
Bosnia yesterday pleaded in the Hague for the World Court's protection,
accusing Serbia and its ally Montenegro of genocide, rape and torture.
'There are no limits to the cruelty, rapacity, territorial ambitions and
bloodlust of (Serbia and Montenegro),' Mr Francis Boyle, one of two agents
presenting Bosnia's case, told the court at the opening session in the
Hague.
