FT  25 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Hi-Tec retraces growth steps - Exceptional
charge and recession in UK leaves losses of Pounds 8.3m
HI-TEC Sports, the sports and leisure wear company, yesterday announced that
mounting losses and recession had forced it to close its recently expanded
continental European sales network.
The closure of the network, mainly built up with the proceeds of a Pounds
10.3m rights issue last year, led to exceptional costs of Pounds 4.82m
leaving pre-tax losses for the year to January 31 at Pounds 8.3m, compared
with profits of Pounds 9.06m.
Mr Frank van Wezel, chairman, said Hi-Tec would revert to using
distributors. 'It means in Europe we will have less clout, which hurts me.'
He claimed the closure lay behind the sudden resignation in March of two
recently appointed non-executive directors, Sir Michael Edwardes, former
chairman of British Leyland, and Mr Richard Fenhalls, former chief executive
of Henry Ansbacher.
Mr van Wezel said the two pair, who joined in January, wanted to close the
loss making network immediately while he wanted more time. 'We had different
expectations from each other,' he said, adding that he was now convinced
immediate closure was the right course.
Losses in the UK and Europe were also blamed for the turn down into losses.
Turnover fell from Pounds 127.8m to Pounds 106.9m. At the interim stage,
pre-tax losses of Pounds 2.84m compared to a Pounds 3.74m profit.
In the year the UK was worst hit, recording operating losses of Pounds 1.58m
(profit Pounds 6.88m) due to depressed consumer spending, price cutting by
competitors like Nike and Reebok and redundancy costs.
However North America performed well increasing operating profits by 24 per
cent to Pounds 2.4m, helped by sales of rugged outdoor products.
Losses per share were 18.8p (earnings 16.1p). The proposed final dividend is
cut to 1p to give a total for the year of 2p (5.5p).
Hi-Tec also announced the appointment as non-executive directors of Mr John
Sharkey, chairman of BDDP (UK), and Mr Roger Rowland, until recently
chairman of Lambert Howarth.
COMMENT
Hi-Tec has taken care to bring forward all the bad news, and will no doubt
wish to forget last year. But shareholders are unlikely to be so
accommodating, especially since proceeds from the rights issue have now been
lost in Europe, and the shares have since collapsed from nearly 200p to 40p
yesterday. At least this year the UK should return to profit, helped by
improving margins, and the US looks firm. Pre-tax profits should recover to
Pounds 4m or Pounds 5m. But the reasons for avoiding the shares remain
compelling, and include a dominant chairman with more than 50 per cent of
the shares, barely transparent accounts and lingering questions about the
sudden departure of non-executives and other senior officers. Finally,
switching back to distributors in Europe could further dent Hi-Tec's brand
name and puts its European strategy on hold pending another review once the
three year distribution contracts end.
