FT  10 AUG 93 / International Company News: Finance chief says VW on road to
profit in 1994
VOLKSWAGEN, Europe's leading volume carmaker, is on the road to a profit in
1994, Mr Werner Schmidt, finance director, said yesterday.
The recovery from losses of DM1.6bn in the first half of the current year
was under way and would continue into next year, when group turnover should
recover to 1992 levels of around DM85bn (Dollars 50bn).
However, Mr Schmidt added, there were still 'imponderables' such as exchange
rate variations to be taken into account. On Friday night, an official VW
statement said the board was convinced that the turnaround point could be
reached this year, provided market conditions did not deteriorate further.
Observers said that statement and Mr Schmidt's broadcast comments yesterday
suggested that the group was backing away from earlier, confident forecasts
that it would break even in 1993.
According to provisional statistics, the Volkswagen group's western European
market share - including sales of the VW, Audi, Seat and Skoda marques - was
16.1 per cent last month, compared with 17.8 per cent in July 1992.
While total industry sales were down an estimated 21 per cent, deliveries of
VW brands were an estimated 29 per cent lower.
Sales of all General Motors marques, including Opel and Vauxhall, were down
13 per cent and market share was up a provisional 1.2 points at 12.9 per
cent last month.
As sniping between the two groups continued in the row over suspected
industrial espionage, Chancellor Helmut Kohl suggested they should go about
their business and stop the 'highly distasteful' public debate.
Mr Schmidt said both groups would benefit if the dispute was removed from
the headlines, while Mr Gerhard Schroder, prime minister of Lower Saxony,
which owns almost 20 per cent of VW, appealed again for peace talks between
VW and Opel, GM's German subsidiary. 'Opel should not keep raising new
obstacles to a sensible and highly-necessary discussion,' his spokesman
said.
Opel has refused all contacts until Mr Schroder and senior VW executives
withdraw allegations of an American plot to damage Volkswagen and of
possible perversion of the course of justice.
According to news agency reports, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW's
production director and focus of the spying charges, arranged for the
destruction of 'magazines, clippings and correspondence' a week after he was
employed by VW.
In a statement sent to prosecutors investigating the case, he is reported to
have said he did not return any 'possibly' sensitive papers to GM or Opel
because destruction appeared to him to be the 'surest and conclusive way to
prevent any distribution'.
