FT  06 FEB 93 / As they say in Europe: Why we are what we eat - A vexing
question of taxonomy
'THE QUESTION you were trying to deal with is one of taxonomy,' said a
colleague the other day. Now, I had thought that taxonomy was a cross
between fiscal policy and getting stuffed. An FT editorial might say: 'The
beleaguered chancellor of the exchequer faces numerous problems of
taxonomy.' However, readers will know that it is mainly, but not
exclusively, the biological science of classification, of getting the
categories right.
The comment that led to my discovery was the result of my casual musings of
a month ago on the destruction of English traditions. I took as an example
the plastic pub with bars named after television series where 'villagers'
(mostly from London) would eat Indian food assembled in Huddersfield and
reheated by synthetic methods. (The taxonomic aspect is to be seen in the
overlapping of once entirely separate categories.)
I now find that in Germany the same process is at work: traces of
authenticity are being systematically uprooted in what the headline in Die
Zeit called 'Multikulti-Kuche.' Multicultural cuisine has arrived. Ulrich
Stock recounted the pleasures of a Hamburg Greek restaurant staffed entirely
by Tamils; an Indian cook at an Italian restaurant gave his specialities a
curry flavour.
The best tale was of 'another Italian' where pasta was certainly advertised,
but the owner, speaking no European language, gesticulated his disapproval.
He pointed instead to a dish on an Arabic menu which the customer then
consumed in total ignorance of what it was, because the waiter was unable to
communicate the relevant information. Stock thought he might in future go to
a typical German restaurant to sit between Scandinavians and Americans and
eat tinned cabbage.
The division between northern and southern Europe is based on consumer
categories, mainly food. In Latin countries you can scour the typical
country town and find the occasional McDonald's and Pizza Hut but no
tandoori restaurant or Chinese takeaway. When the French go out to eat they
eat French food, the Italians eat Italian and the Spanish, Spanish.
Not only that, regional specialities still hold sway, however foul. I once
sweated on the banks of the Dordogne as the mercury touched 40`C and watched
a heavily-clad workman eat a mique, a kind of gigantic dumpling stuffed with
pig's liver. That would be washed down with half a litre of wine. In the
evening the fellow would stumble home to a plateful of cassoulet swamped in
goose fat and perhaps pick at a bit of pate de foie before sleeping a full
eight hours. No wonder the burger chains find this region hard to conquer.
In local supermarkets one cannot find those special, healthy,
easy-to-prepare foods that supposedly originate from remote regions of the
sub-continent and the jungles of southeast Asia. Indeed, so un-enterprising
are these companies that even in areas infested by the British you cannot
pick up a decent piece of cheddar cheese. In Italy it is no use going to a
Tuscan store hoping to find even a Friuli wine. So limited are the clothes
shops of Perigueux and Arezzo that they offer garments made only in France
and Italy.
I scour the newspapers of these countries and fail to find the food and wine
pages that make the British papers such a joy. But then it just would not
work. Imagine reading in El Heraldo de Vizcaya: 'The barbecued besugo at
Jose's bodega is really excellent, matching as it does the exciting flock
wallpaper. My lunch partner washed her paella down with the spicy white
rioja that tops the wine list.' The next week only the name of the
restaurant would change.
So it seems that the erosion of ancient categories is primarily a northern
and Anglo-Saxon phenomenon. In this world of fluid identities it is no
wonder that many try to construct new categories into which they can fit and
thereby assert themselves; the need for recognition in a world in taxonomic
crisis becomes an overriding demand.
Thus President William Clinton, commander-in-chief of the armed forces of
the US, is compelled by political pressures to seek an increase in the
number of avowed homosexuals to throw into the fray. The Germans keep
careful count of this same group in its forces - 13,000 at the last count,
which should mean there are enough lesbians in the Luftwaffe to form their
own squadron.
In Britain it is now possible to pay Pounds 650 to choose the sex of one's
child. Even now there is a couple investing such a sum to secure a male
heir, unaware that in 20 years the said offspring will undergo a sex change
operation in order to become a woman priest in the Church of England. Will
the parents sue the child or the child the parents? If ever the world cried
out for a taxonomic genius it is now.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
