FT  29 MAY 93 / Markets: Is your insurer a good risk? - Serious Money
HOW STRONG is your life insurance company? It is an immensely complicated
subject, but one which is important. If you are waiting 25 years for your
payout, you want to be sure that the company you choose is healthy enough to
survive for a quarter of a century.
The health of UK insurance companies is monitored by the Department of Trade
and Industry and there is a safety net in the form of the Policyholders
Protection Act, which provides for other insurance companies to stump up if
one company gets into trouble.
But these give only general reassurance to the average investor. Figures on
such arcane statistics as free asset ratios have been available through the
trade press, but these are difficult for the ordinary investor to interpret.
Hence the appeal of the recent reports from Standard &amp; Poor's, which
classify companies in three simple categories: good, adequate and
vulnerable.
S &amp; P's latest report described two companies - General Portfolio and the
Life Association of Scotland - as vulnerable. Under S &amp; P's definition, the
vulnerable category consists of 'insurers who appear to have vulnerable
financial strength, and may be highly exposed to adverse economic or
underwriting conditions.'
In both cases, the insurance companies have large parent groups: the
Dutch-based Internationale Nederlanden Group in the case of LAS; and the
Societe Generale du Group des Assurances Nationales, in the case of General
Portfolio. Indeed the French government has a controlling stake in GAN. Both
LAS and General Portfolio argued that S &amp; P had underplayed the support of
their parent companies.
A second factor is the nature of the business which the company does.
Financial strength is important to with profits policyholders, because of
the nature of the bonus system. Companies declare reversionary, or annual
bonuses, which once announced, cannot be taken away from policyholders. So
policyholders want to be sure that companies have sufficient funds to pay
those bonuses - and that a sudden stock market dip will not wipe out their
reserves.
But the returns to unit-linked policyholders rise and fall along with the
market. So the financial strength of a unit-linked company is less
important. Raymond Paul, LAS's appointed actuary, argues the report 'chooses
to ignore that LAS ceased writing traditional with profits business in July
of 1992. In our case therefore, the importance of the free asset ratio to
the financial solvency of the company is substantially diminished.'
Even if LAS was still selling with profits policies, one has to question
whether many people would be choosing the company, whatever the view of S &amp;
P. In the recent Money Management survey, LAS was bottom of the performance
tables over 10, 15 and 20 years for with profits payouts.
General Portfolio has never sold with profits policies. Its business is
divided between unit-linked, and guaranteed income bonds, where the
liability to investors is matched by gilts. So the company argues that the
free asset ratio is a pretty irrelevant figure (although it also says it has
improved since the date of S &amp; P's analysis.)
So it is arguable that the only people who should be concerned by the report
are LAS's existing with profits policyholders. If S &amp; P is right (which LAS
vigorously disputes), the financial strength of the company might reduce
their returns in the long run. But their options are limited. If investment
returns have been poor at LAS, surrender values are unlikely to be
attractive; nor will there be much clamour for LAS with profits policies in
the second hand market. An independent financial adviser should be able to
give more detailed guidance.
                        *      *      *
FT readers have already shown an interest in the New Issue Register, which
aims to give private investors better access to stock market flotations.
The idea is to compile a 'mailing list' of those willing to apply for new
issues. This will give stockbrokers an easy way of widening the shareholder
base of companies they bring to the market, plus a useful source of demand.
Many investors, unless they are the clients of the right stockbroker, have
to date missed out on the smaller new issues. These are normally arranged as
placings, rather than as offers for sale, which are open to all.
Although new issues are far from a licence to make money - remember the BP
offer of 1987 - they can present lucrative opportunities. The first
impression that a public company makes on the market can be all-important,
and the banks and brokers behind the issue will want to ensure the issue is
a success. They will accordingly set a modest price  - the ideal is that the
shares start trading at around a 10 per cent premium to the issue price.
Those who want to join the register will be asked to pay a membership fee of
Pounds 75, as soon as they are offered the chance to invest in an issue. The
Register hopes to put together its first deal by the end of June.
Provided investors do not assume that every new issue they are offered is a
bargain, the introduction of the Register seems a welcome initiative.
Further details from the New Issue Register, Butlers Wharf Business Centre,
45 Curlew Street, London SE1 2ND.
