FT  19 MAY 93 / Liberals shake up Austrian politics
THE surprise showing by a new liberal party in Austria's regional elections
has altered the political landscape. The Liberal Forum, which split from the
right-wing Freedom Party (FPOe) early this year, gained 5.1 per cent of the
vote and three seats in the province of Lower Austria in its first try at
the polls.
The result reinforced the erosion of support for the two largest parties,
the conservative People's Party (OeVP) and the Social Democratic Party
(SPOe). The OeVP won 44.1 per cent of the vote, down 3.4 percentage points,
which cost it the absolute majority in the regional parliament it had held
for 48 years. The SPOe, at 34 per cent, was down by a similar margin.
The result was a personal triumph for Ms Heide Schmidt, founder of the
Liberal Forum, who, with four other members of parliament, left the FPOe in
protest against the rightward tilt engineered by its populist chairman, Mr
Jorg Haider.
The FPOe also gained in Lower Austria but because of the competition its 12
per cent share fell well short of recent results in other regions. Operating
with little money, no grass-roots organisation and with few prominent names
other than Ms Schmidt, the Liberal Forum also surpassed the more established
Greens, who fell short of the 4 per cent needed to gain a seat.
The fledgling party is now in a strong position to benefit from growing
disillusionment with the SPOe and the OeVP, which have dominated Austrian
politics since the second world war and are currently governing in a grand
coalition.
The appearance of the party has also added to the fragmentation of political
life, making the country harder to govern than in the stable two-party
system of the past. Ms Schmidt has not presented a detailed party programme,
but in public statements she has supported membership of the European
Community and more radical free-market policies.
Ever since Ms Schmidt left the FPOe following its controversial
anti-foreigner drive, Mr Haider's popularity has declined. He has become
increasingly isolated. The Liberal International has effectively expelled
the FPOe and is now poised to accept the Liberal Forum as a member.
