FT  27 APR 93 / Fraud doubles in the Community: Common agricultural policy
proves the most tempting target
REPORTED FRAUD in the European Community almost doubled in 1992, with the
common agricultural policy offering the most tempting opportunities,
according to a European Commission report released yesterday.
One in three cases involving abuse of the EC's farm export guarantee system
occurred in Italy, according to the report. France, Germany, and Britain
accounted for another third of these cases which cover false declarations
and abuse of EC support for sectors such as milk, milk powder, meat, oils
and cereals.
In agricultural funding, the number of cases reported by member states rose
last year by 616 to 820, at a cost of Ecu152m (Pounds 120m). The cases of
fraud occurring in areas such as customs duties and farm levies rose from
600 in 1991 to 1030 in 1992, at a cost of Ecu117.8m.
Two years ago, independent experts estimated that the EC was losing around
Ecu10bn a year to fraud. Yesterday, the Commission said only 10 per cent of
the money lost was ever recovered, largely because of the difficulties in
detection and lengthy prosecution in national courts.
The Commission also declared there was no reliable way of calculating the
level of fraud. 'Only one thing may be said with certainty: the scale of
fraud against the Community far exceeds the figures reported by the member
states,' according to a question-and-answer sheet made available yesterday.
The Commission paper suggests there is no such thing as a typical EC
fraudster; but in agriculture 'there does appear, broadly speaking, to be a
north-south division'.
In the north, large-scale fraud matches larger farm holdings; but in the
south, there were more cases of small farmers making fraudulent declarations
covering olive oil and other farm products, according to the paper.
Mr Emile Mennens, the Commission's senior anti-fraud official, said
Brussels' budget in this area would increase from Ecu76.5m (1992) to
Ecu133.2m this year, largely to ensure that the agreed reform of the CAP was
carried out by member states. But he stressed that the main responsibility
for tackling fraud remained with the individual EC members.
Mr Mennens added that new techniques were being introduced to fight fraud:
such as satellite photography to inspect 10 per cent of livestock and 5 per
cent of land every year. The Commission also plans faster exchange of
information among customs officials and tax officials in member states,
bolstered by new computerised systems.
