FT  30 MAR 93 / International Company News: Banks look for warmer climes -
Deutsche Bank's latest foray into Spain
WHEN Deutsche Bank paid Pta42bn (Dollars 359.9m) to acquire a Spanish bank
unit earlier this month, eyebrows were raised in the boardrooms of at least
four of the German bank's European rivals.
France's Credit Lyonnais, previously the biggest foreign retail bank in
Spain, saw itself overtaken, Barclays and NatWest of the UK found their
growth strategy in Spain challenged, and Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP) was
left at the starting post.
Deutsche is no newcomer to Spain, for it enjoyed a long relationship with
Banco Comercial Transatlantico (Bancotrans), a Barcelona-based bank which it
bought in 1989.
Following its purchase of Banco de Madrid from Banesto, the big Spanish
retail bank, it has added 300 branches to the existing 100 Bancotrans
offices.
Analysts have praised the pricing - Banesto reportedly wanted Pta60bn for
the unit - and the complementary nature of the two acquisitions. Deutsche
was already strong in the north-east thanks to Bancotrans. Deutsche has now
secured its presence in Madrid and in central Spain with the second
purchase.
The German bank has followed the path into Spain initiated by Credit
Lyonnais when it bought a Madrid network and then a Barcelona network from
Banco de Santander in 1990 and in 1991.
Deutsche, like the French bank, has essentially bought a market quota, but
there the similarities between the strategies end.
A key difference is the timing. By spacing its acquisitions out over four
years, Deutsche has given itself time to develop a complex information
system and specialist products such as mortgages and car loans that were
novel to Spain. Analysts said Credit Lyonnais's rapid acquisition policy had
still to deliver a distinctive profile for the bank in Spain.
The cost of entering Spain provides a more measurable difference. Deutsche
paid 2.1 times book value to acquire Bancotrans and 2.3 times to buy Banco
de Madrid. Credit Lyonnais paid Santander 3.1 times book value for Banco
Comercial in 1990 and 3.3 times a year later for Banca Jover. 'The French
paid demanding multiples,' said Mr Joaquin Tamames, a partner of Axel Group,
the Madrid-based analysts.
The main irony is that Deutsche has ended up with 100 branches more than
Credit Lyonnais. With the 400 offices in Spain, the German bank has a
sufficient spread to promote its products.
In contrast, NatWest entered Spain at the begining of the 1980s by building
up a business base through a joint venture with Spain's March group, while
Barclays bought a small, and bankrupt, domestic bank which it then expanded.
Like Deutsche, NatWest, which subsequently severed its March partnership,
wants to introduce products.
NatWest, with just over 200 branches has profitable peseta assets. 'But the
question is where do we go from here,' said Mr Peter Duffy, managing
director.
NatWest will probably focus on financial instruments such as syndicated
loans. While unlikely to follow the acquisition strategy of Deutsche and
Credit Lyonnais, it may still purchase individual offices. 'What is critical
is not how many branches you have but where they are,' said Mr Duffy.
Barclays, which has 228 outlets, has relentlessly pursued the step-by-step
strategy. But it has proved an expensive route. Spain is an over-banked
country with more bank branches per head of population than anywhere else in
Europe outside Luxembourg.
Nevertheless, Barclays has earned itself the compensation of choosing its
locations and of selecting and training its staff. Its products, notably the
introduction of high-interest bearing current accounts, have been the most
innovative in the domestic banking sector.
Deutsche will require up to eight years to mould its newly-acquired staff
into Deutsche's specific corporate culture and to have its employees extract
optimum benefits from its in-house technology.
BNP, which also bought a small unit in Spain in the 1980s, has meanwhile
shrunk back from an opportunity to establish a Spanish presence similar to
Credit Lyonnais. Earlier this month, it pulled out of lengthy negotiations
to acquire the 165-branch network of Banco de Fomento, a nationwide
subsidiary of Banco Central Hispano (BCH).
The reasons for BNP's withdrawal were never explained, but it is understood
the state-owned bank was unwilling to commit itself to such a large
investment in advance of the legislative elections in France.
Banco de Fomento thus remains on the market for those to follow in
Deutsche's slip stream. The problem is whether there is much margin left for
large banking forays into Spain.
