FT  29 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Wellcome boost for global ambitions -
Robert Fleming's plans for investment banking
WHEN A medium sized, low-key merchant bank says it wants to become a
world-class operator in investment banking, it raises eyebrows.
There is no shortage of British talent in that arena and both the US and
continental Europe offer their fair share of competitors as well.
But Mr John Manser, chief executive of Robert Fleming, argued that the group
had earned a place on the world stage since its role last year as global
co-ordinator of the Dollars 4.5bn (Pounds 3bn) offering of Wellcome shares
on behalf of Wellcome Trust.
'We showed when we did the Wellcome flotation what we were capable of,' Mr
Manser said.
Since the Wellcome deal a year ago, Fleming, known mostly in its capacity as
an asset management house and as a blue-chip adviser on merchant banking
matters, said its profile in investment banking had been rising.
Mr Manser said the company was now being asked to participate in so-called
beauty parades for state privatisation activities, including that of the
government's third stake in British Telecommunications.
'But no one at this time would say we are a leading corporate finance
house,' he acknowledged.
He added that the firm's chief priority was its own profitability. The
results for the 12 months to March 31 1993 made it the second most
profitable UK merchant bank with pre-tax profits of Pounds 101m, trailing
only SG Warburg.
The company did not provide details about the exact source of the profits
except to say generally that asset management, merchant banking and
corporate finance contributed.
Meanwhile, some of Fleming's competitors suggested that its desire to be
world-class in corporate finance might conflict with its aim of maintaining
profitability.
Mr Manser became coy when asked just how profitable the Wellcome advisory
role was, for instance, and would only say that it earned money.
Mr Bill Harrison, recently recruited from Lehman Brothers International to
be chief executive of investment banking, said: 'Profitability is very
important but on the other hand, we are building a business.' However,
Fleming had ruled out pursuing the sort of 'loss leader' business which
other firms had sought in breaking into the corporate finance arena.
He added that the business was likely to be the recipient of the greatest
increase in Fleming resources internally. The division had seen a 10 per
cent expansion in staff in the past year.
In building a corporate finance franchise, Mr Harrison cited the firm's
strengths in Asia where its Jardine Fleming joint venture had a commanding
market share in several sectors.
Among the recent deals driven by its Asian connections were the arrangement
for the purchase of about 100m shares in Trafalgar House by Hong Kong Land
and the subsequent Pounds 200m rights offer by Trafalgar House itself.
While assets under management worldwide had increased smartly in the past
year, Mr Manser acknowledged that Fleming Asset Management, the UK-based arm
of the firm, had had a tough time after several years of mediocre
performance in its UK balanced pension fund pools.
However, the firm was still winning mandates for specialist equity fund
management, he said, and it had taken steps to improve performance for
pooled accounts, the staple product of the UK pension fund industry.
'We have been successful in every category except UK pension funds,' Mr
Manser said. 'But to be absolutely big is not something we see as absolutely
important.'
