FT  02 AUG 93 / Industry's recovery hopes rise
RISING OUTPUT from British industry produced an increase in manufacturing
employment in July for the first time in two years, the latest monthly
survey of purchasing managers shows.
And a Confederation of British Industry quarterly survey today says smaller
manufacturing companies are planning to spend more on plant and machinery in
the next year - the first planned increase in investment for more than four
years.
The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply said its overall purchasing
managers' index fell slightly to 53.0 per cent from 53.7 per cent last
month.
But the index, based on a weighted average of movements of several
components, including new orders, output and employment, was still above the
50 per cent level that indicates expansion in the manufacturing economy for
the sixth consecutive month.
The institute, which represents purchasing managers with overall spending
power of Pounds 750bn a year, said its employment index rose above the 50
per cent level to 51.3 per cent in July, indicating expansion. They reported
that the increase was a reaction to rising levels of production.
The output and order components of the index fell slightly in July, although
they remained above 50 per cent, and have indicated rises in manufacturing
activity and new orders for several months.
The output index fell to 56.9 per cent last month from 58.8 per cent in
June, while the new-orders index dropped to 52 per cent from 53.7 per cent.
A breakdown of the new-orders index by industry shows expansion in all
sectors other than chemicals, rubber and plastics processing. There was a
big increase in order levels for office machinery, electrical and instrument
engineering, with a rise in the index from 50 per cent to 60.0 per cent.
The CBI's survey, of 853 manufacturers each employing fewer than 200 people,
adds to recent evidence that small manufacturing companies may be emerging
from the recession faster than larger businesses.
The survey found a small companies planning to increase investment in plant
and machinery in the next year. Although the positive balance was small at 5
percentage points, it was the first positive result since April 1989. It
also shows that employment in small manufacturing companies held steady and
is expected to rise slightly over the next four months.
The survey contrasts with last week's CBI quarterly industrial trends
report, which found investment intentions for all manufacturing industry
still weak and noted further sharp cuts in employment by larger companies.
Today's survey provides hope for hard-pressed suppliers of plant and
machinery such as machine tools. Mr Richard Brucciani, chairman of the CBI's
Smaller Firms Council, said an increase in plant and machinery investment
was critical for sustaining recovery.
General business confidence and optimism over exports continues but is more
muted than in April. A positive balance of 9 percentage points of smaller
companies are more optimistic than four months ago compared with a positive
balance of 33 points in the last survey.
