FT  02 SEP 93 / Israel-PLO pact could be signed 'within days'
MR YASSIR ARAFAT, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, was
last night battling to persuade his senior colleagues in Tunis to sign an
unprecedented mutual recognition accord with Israel.
According to a Palestinian source, the PLO was studying a revised draft,
conveyed to them by Egypt, of a statement announcing that Israel and the PLO
recognise each other.
Jordan, meanwhile, said it would sign a preliminary peace agreement with
Israel in Washington.
At PLO headquarters in Tunis, Mr Yassir Abed-Rabbo, an executive committee
member, said the accord could be signed within days and would be agreed
before the signing of an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, shared the optimism and said
Israel was ready to sign a recognition agreement immediately the PLO agreed
to annul its charter calling for the annihilation of the Jewish state.
Mr Peres, who arrives in Brussels today to lobby EC officials for aid to
Palestinians, said the accord was separate and independent from a peace deal
with Palestinians on interim self-rule.
He said the Israeli-Palestinian declaration of principles on self-rule for
1.9m Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, including
Israeli military withdrawal from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho,
'stands on its own legs'.
In Amman, Mr Abdul Salam al-Majali, the Jordanian prime minister, said he
expected a Jordanian-Israeli declaration of principles to be signed during
the current round of Middle East peace negotiations in Washington. 'Aside
from certain matters concerning language, we are likely to agree on an
agenda this time round,' he said.
The agenda - which contains the framework for a peace agreement - is
believed to include the return by Israel of two strips of land and increased
Jordanian water rights from the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers. It also outlines
the right of return of an estimated 100,000 Palestinian refugees who fled to
Jordan after the 1967 war.
In Jerusalem, Mr Peres said a Jordanian agreement could be signed
'tomorrow'.
King Hussein, however, reflecting Jordanian disquiet with lack of
consultation by Palestinians, urged Arabs in a TV interview to be broadcast
today to convene a summit to face dangers confronting them.
The rapidly developing Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian breakthrough showed
signs of triggering possible progress in the two other tracks of the Middle
East peace process - the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese talks.
A PLO official said Spain was hosting secret talks among the three parties
and that a draft Israeli-Syrian agreement on Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Golan Heights in return for full peace was close to completion.
However, Israel and Syria denied the claim.
Vision of peace, Page 4
