FT  24 APR 93 / Arts: Press barons - Radio
ON ST George's Day yesterday there was little celebration: a couple of
references on Radio 2, but at least Radio 4's Thought for the Day was given
by Dr English.
David Wheeler's Farewell, Fleet Street (Radio 4, Sunday) had a Radio Times
picture of Lord Northcliffe wearing an inexplicable American flag. We had
pictures of Northcliffe in our home when I was a boy; he was practically my
father's patron saint, and I got his Christian name. All in this feature
spoke well of him, inventor of the popular paper - the Daily Mail and later
the Daily Mirror. The First World War brought him influence with Lloyd
George, until as Prime Minister Lloyd George cut himself off from the Press.
By this time Northcliffe had bought The Times, but later he began to go off
his head - cardiac trouble, they said. His brother, the first Lord
Rothermere, took over, but he was a manager rather than a journalist,
besides being, says Lord Cudlipp, 'preposterously stupid'. He was stupid
enough to back Mussolini and the British blackshirts - and a rival appeared
in the field, Max Aitken, later Lord Beaverbrook, of the Daily Express and
the Evening Standard. A great journalist, he too could be stupid. He
inaugurated the Empire Crusade; he insisted in the 1930s there would be no
war; and when there was, there would be no rationing. In the War Cabinet he
did much for the aircraft industry. John Junor and others spoke of him with
respect and affection.
Murdoch and Maxwell were mentioned only transiently, but this was just the
first programme of four. More time was given to Andreas Whittam-Smith,
prompted into launching the Independent by hearing that Eddie Shah was to
start a national daily; and to the individual style of the Guardian. The
series will be worth following.
The centenary of Joan Miro, the Spanish painter, was celebrated on Radio 3
both on Friday, with Poems of Erath and Ether, a biographical sketch by
Richard Calvocoresi, and on Tuesday, in Mirooo, an 'exploration in sound and
music' of his Harlequin's Carnaval that left me cold. Miro was from
Barcelona but went to Paris in 1920. His style was called the
'mythification' of the natural phenomena that excited him. He made
preliminary drawings for his paintings, but his ideas 'ripened in his mind'.
Wrongly labelled surrealist, he was not really of them. His work was 'not
abstract but accessible'; many may have seen it in the Spanish pavilion at
the Barcelona Olympics. He was, it was decided, 'the greatest public artist
of the last half-century'. I hope Tuesday's programme did not deter
listeners from the greater fascinations of Friday's. Neither of them, of
course, gave much idea to those who have not seen them how Miro's paintings
look. Radio's great, sad weakness is its pictorial inadequacy. Last Saturday
Kaleidoscope on Radio 4 had an interesting half-hour, The Ballerina: a
Swansong, about the fading of the ideal ballerina of tradition. Great
dancers like Markova and Baronova told how dancers today lacked the needful
inner belief in what they were doing. They must 'sing in their guts' the
music to which they dance; virtuosity for its own sake 'is not art, it is a
circus.' Clement Crisp and photographer Anthony Crickmay, long-standing
commentators on the dance, were with them.
But plasticity, harmony, musicality - no dialogue, no music even, can
explain to the listener how these qualities may be seen more in one dancer
than another. Radio can pass such things on; but the most elaborate
stereophony cannot bring them to life in the home. You have to see them - on
a screen if necessary, but see them.
