FT  01 JUL 93 / Survey of German Banking and Finance (1): Determined to give
a lead in Europe - Financial services have escaped recession so far / bank
profits are up, the Bundesbank is steadfast against inflation and the
private sector strengthens Germany as a financial centre
FRANKFURT is now the undisputed financial capital of Germany. Is it on the
verge of becoming the financial capital of Europe?
German financiers, industrialists and politicians hope that Frankfurt will
be formally anointed in this role sometime later this year, when European
Community countries finally make up their collective mind where to locate
the future European Central Bank.
But to a large extent, whether the new institution is to be located in the
city or not, Frankfurt already occupies the position of Europe's financial
capital - because of the authority of the Bundesbank.
Mit Beharrlichkeit - 'with ruthless determination and singlemindedness,' as
they say in Germany - the Bundesbank has fought a successful battle with
inflation for decades. Hence its unmatched credibility in the financial
world.
Since last autumn, when the Bundesbank's refusal to give way to widespread
calls for cheaper money led to turmoil on international currency markets and
to the partial break-up of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM), that
credibility has weakened.
Germany is wrestling with a deep recession. It is belatedly counting the
cost of the 1990 reunification of the two halves of the country. Inflation
is running at an annual rate of about 4 per cent; more than twice the
central bank's target of 2 per cent, and higher than in many European
countries with less discipline in such matters.
In late June the D-Mark hit a 15 month low against the US dollar and the
French took the opportunity to cut their rates to below German levels (the
first time in 26 years that the French have been able to do so). French
government officials talk about the possibility of the franc displacing the
D-Mark as the anchor currency for the ERM. So far this has not happened. De
facto, European interest rates are still set by the members of the
Bundesbank council at their meetings on alternate Thursdays.
Calls from the French economics ministry late last month for 'co-ordinated
talks ' with Germany over easing monetary policy received short shrift from
the Germans. Theo Waigel, the finance minister, politely reminded the French
that the Bundesbank's independence was inviolable and cancelled a planned
meeting with his French opposite number in Paris.
Although interest rates have eased since last autumn (the discount rate is
down from a high of 8.75 per cent in July last year to 7.25 per cent now,
and is widely expected to be down to 5 or 6 per cent by the end of the year)
there has been no great reversal of the huge flow of international money
invested in the D-Mark in 1992-93. Economists calculate that foreign
investors invested DM190bn in the D-Mark in the 14 months to the end of
February this year, more than twice the level in 1991, the previous record
year.
This inflow helped to propel a big rally in the price of German Bunds, where
yields tumbled from over 9 per cent to a low point of 6.45 per cent in
mid-April. Since then prices have dropped and the yield is back up at about
6.75 - but in spite of pessimistic forecasts, yields of 7 per cent or higher
have not yet come to pass.
The influx also helped the profits of the Frankfurt-based financial
community. While the impetus to record profits last year at the large
commercial banks came from growth in lending business, trading gains and
commission income from securities business are the reason for double digit
increases in the banks' total operating profits over the early months of the
year.
This has allowed banks to predict 'satisfactory' earnings for the year as a
whole, meaning that these big financial conglomerates - along with
construction companies - count as one of the few sectors in the stricken
German economy to be generating healthy profits growth at this point in the
economic cycle.
The healthiness of banks' profits is exaggerated by the fact that they do
not disclose their full exposure to bad and doubtful debts. Provisions are
undoubtedly climbing - and will be revealed for the first time in some
detail when the banks report their interim figures later this summer.
But whatever the true picture of banks' earnings, they are not on the verge
of the structural crisis afflicting German manufacturing industry.
Notwithstanding predictions of a shake-out in Germany's banking community,
the only real consolidation is in the public sector, with the
Dusseldorf-based Westdeutsche Landesbank acting as catalyst to a series of
mergers and new strategic alliances among state-sector institutions.
The German financial services sector as a whole, which encompasses regional
financial centres in cities such as Munich, Dusseldorf and Hamburg, has
benefited from a series of recent measures designed to strengthen
Finanzplatz Deutschland - Germany as a financial centre.
These include the creation of Deutsche Borse, the German stock exchange  -
from the beginning of this year. This has been put together on the
initiative of the Frankfurt exchange, the biggest of the eight exchanges in
Germany, where about 70 per cent of total German securities turnover is
conducted.
The new body brings the Frankfurt Exchange and the DTB Deutsche Terminborse
(the German futures and options exchange) together under the same roof as
the Deutscher Kassenverein settlements organisation. Some 40 per cent of the
new organisation is owned by regional (non-Frankfurt) banks and the seven
regional stock exchanges (excluding Frankfurt).
According to Rolf Breuer, the first chairman of the German Exchange, this
gives Germany one of the most modern stock-exchange structures in the world
 -the only exchange which brings equities and futures trading under the same
roof as settlement services. The focus of future development will be on
technology, to bring out the benefits of this structure; benefits which,
Breuer admits, are latent rather than actual at present.
German financiers have laid heavy emphasis on technology. For example, they
have spent tens of millions of D-Marks on the development of the
screen-based DTB, founded only three and a half years ago, and on Ibis, a
computerised share-dealing service for leading equity and fixed interest
issues.
Since the service was introduced, in April 1991, this has become the second
biggest exchange in Germany, accounting for 30 per cent of trade in leading
German shares. According to Mr Rudiger von Rosen, the outgoing chief
executive of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, Ibis has also succeeded in
pulling back a significant amount of business in German shares from London
to Germany.
But in the battle with other financial centres, German financiers recognise
that the regulatory environment must be improved.
On the one hand this means a tightening of regulation. Next year Germany
will finally get legislation which will make insider dealing a criminal
offence, and create the German equivalent of the Securities &amp; Exchange
Commission, the body which regulates the US securities industry.
Calls for these measures have intensified since union chief Franz
Steinkuhler was forced to resign as head of IG Metall after he bought DM1m
shares in a Daimler holding company shortly before the shares enjoyed a
sharp increase in value.
He has denied insider dealing based on information gleaned from his former
position as member of the Daimler supervisory board. But the affair
highlighted the absence of law forbidding the practice.
On the other hand, Finanzplatz Deutschland is clamouring for deregulation
which will allow its institutions to compete more vigorously with their
rivals in London or Luxemburg. The chief complaint is against minimum
reserve requirements, which oblige banks to lodge funds with the Bundesbank
whenever they take a deposit, making it difficult for them to compete with
banks based where such reserves are not required.
The Bundesbank obligingly halved the requirement earlier in February this
year. It may do away with the requirements altogether after Mr Hans
Tietmeyer succeeds Mr Helmut Schlesinger as president of the central bank on
October 1.
