FT  25 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: The all-or-nothing share - Capital
shares are at the end of the queue but have most to gain / The Speculator
CAPITAL SHARES are one class of security issued by so-called 'split capital'
investment trusts. They pay no income and are normally the 'riskiest' class
of share in the trust.
Where there is high risk, there is the chance of high reward and this is
where the capital share may attract the speculator. According to S G
Warburg, the average capital share rose 65 per cent between January 1 and
August 20 this year, when the stock market was around its peak.
The key to understanding capital shares is to grasp that they are at the
back of the queue when it comes to paying out a trust's assets. An
assortment of other claimants - debenture holders, zero coupon preference
shareholders, income shareholders - have to be paid first. Only then, if
there are any assets left, do capital shareholders get their slice. It is
possible that the capital shares will receive nothing at all.
The good news, however, is that the claims of the other shareholders are
normally fixed. Once the assets of the trust have grown past a certain
point, all the excess gain will accrue to the capital shareholders. In a
bull market (provided the trust managers are reasonably competent), capital
shareholders should earn very high returns.
Furthermore, profits come in the form of capital gain. Since many people do
not use up their annual capital gains tax allowance (Pounds 5,800 in
1993-94), there is a good chance that a fair slice of this gain will be
tax-free.
Valuing capital shares can be tricky. On the London Share Service pages of
the FT (at the back of the first section on Saturdays), capital shares are
often quoted at a very wide discount to their asset values.
But this figure should not be compared to the discount at which conventional
investment trust shares trade. As stated above, capital shareholders are
only repaid after other claimants; the asset figure which appears in the FT
is based on the current value of those other claims.
However, in many cases, split capital investment trusts have zero dividend
preference, as well as capital, shares. The zeros have a claim on the assets
of the trust which steadily increases over the years. A more conservative
way of valuing a capital share is thus to allow for the final, rather than
the current, claims of other shares. If one uses that method, shares which
appear to be standing at a discount, can often be seen to be trading at a
premium.
Investment trust analysts tend to value trust shares by looking at their
gross redemption yields over the years until the trust is wound up. They do
so by assuming a number of different rates of growth of the assets of the
trust.
As an example, take the shares of Contracyclical Investment Trust, which on
August 31 were standing at 20p. According to the Association of Investment
Trust Companies, if the trust's assets grow at 10 per cent per annum until
wind-up (in seven years and seven months' time), Contracyclical's shares
would return a gross redemption yield of 25.3 per cent per year.
Mouthwatering stuff. But if the assets do not grow at all over the remainder
of the trust's life, the shares would return a gross redemption yield of
minus 16 per cent per year. In other words, the trust currently has
insufficient assets, if you allow for the final claims of other shares, to
repay capital shareholders at the current share price. (This despite the
fact that, on August 31, the quoted 'discount' was 65 per cent).
In cases such as this, analysts talk of the 'hurdle rate', the annual rate
of asset growth needed to repay the current price of the capital shares. On
August 31, Contracyclical's hurdle rate was 1.8 per cent, according to the
AITC.
Contracyclical was not the most extreme case. On August 31, the hurdle rate
for Scottish National capital shares was 4.4 per cent, ie the trust's assets
needed to grow at 4.4 per cent per year to repay the then share price of
34p. But, if you took a bullish view and assumed that Scottish National
could achieve 10 per cent per annum asset growth over the remaining five
years, one month of its life, the yearly gross redemption yield to capital
shareholders would be a staggering 49.2 per cent.
A capital share such as Scottish National offers an extremely hairy rise as
the graph shows. But some capital shares have lower risk-reward profiles.
Take Aberforth Split Level. As of August 31, the trust had more than enough
assets to repay the then capital share price of 166.5p. Indeed, the trust
could afford to see an annual rate of asset decline of 3.8 per cent over its
remaining 10 years, 10 months of life, and still repay the capital
shareholders at the August 31 price. If the assets of Aberforth Split Level
do not rise at all over the rest of its life, capital shareholders will
still enjoy a 4.2 per cent gross redemption yield.
But for those who take a really bullish view of the market, the rewards are
much less attractive. As of August 31, a 10 per cent annual growth in assets
would earn Aberforth Split Level shareholders a gross redemption yield of
only 14.8 per cent.
For those who do not fancy the mathematics involved, a simpler route might
be to invest in the Exeter Capital Growth fund. This is a unit trust, run by
Exeter Fund Managers, which invests in a broad portfolio of capital shares.
The investor is spared the chore of stock selection, at the cost of a 6 per
cent initial charge and a 1 per cent annual charge.
The Exeter Capital Growth fund was third in the UK equity growth sector over
the year to September 1, with a return of 83.16 per cent (offer-to-bid with
income reinvested, source Micropal). But it is, by its nature, a highly
volatile trust.
If your stockbroker cannot give you access to statistics on capital shares,
the Association of Investment Trust Companies will send out a free sample
copy of its Monthly Information Service. Thereafter, the service is payable
on an annual subscription of Pounds 28 (for monthly issues) or Pounds 15
(for quarterly issues). Write to the AITC at: Park House (6th floor), 16
Finsbury Circus, London EC2M 7JJ.
