FT  16 APR 93 / The Italian Upheaval: Naples learns to do without 'jobs' -
How Naples shows the strain
A Naples businessman recounts angrily how he was obliged to employ someone
'recommended' by one of the city's political bosses. Getting a call from the
politician after three weeks, he expected to be thanked for taking on a
person he didn't need.
'I told you to give him a job: not make him work]' the politician
complained.
In this endearing metropolis, the most chaotic and crowded in Italy, jobs
and work are not synonymous. The adage goes: 'Jobs you have; work you do.'
Yet the system which has permitted people to have 'jobs' without working is
now under siege in a way unimaginable even a month ago.
All the top Christian Democrat, Socialist and Liberal politicians who have
run the city for the past decade face charges which begin with corruption
and extend to maintaining links with the Camorra, the local Mafia.
The once untouchable big names - Gava, Pomicino, Scotti, de Lorenzo, Di
Donato - have had their reputations destroyed. One of their own political
class, the Christian Democrat deputy, Mr Alfredo Vito, decided to talk; and
explosive evidence came from Mr Pasquale Galasso, a key figure in the
Camorra. As the financial brains behind the L1,500bn (Pounds 630m) empire of
Alfiero Carmine, the most powerful Camorra boss, Mr Galasso knows intimately
how things worked in Naples.
He has talked of vote-buying and of the 'business committee' formed by the
politicians, businessmen and Camorra to carve up the big contracts. The
revelations are breaking a year behind the corruption scandals in the north;
but the pace has snowballed much faster in Naples as people lose their fear
of retribution and confess to magistrates who in turn are dusting off files.
The confessions are laying bare what has long been publicly assumed: the
largest economy in southern Italy has thrived thanks to abusive use of state
funds and official tolerance of organised crime.
An array of criminal activity has been tolerated, ranging from extortion,
gaming, lotteries, recycling stolen goods and drugs to contraband
cigarettes, arms dealing, importing illegal immigrants and an extensive
counterfeit trade. This illicit activity expanded in the 1980s on the back
of a booming drugs trade.
The other economic prop has been the politician's exploitation of
assistenzialismo - the helping hand of the state. A large public sector
pay-roll in Naples combined with a steady stream of financial transfers from
Rome and a big programme of public works have been fertile ground for
patronage.
The Naples municipality has more than 20,000 employees, excess labour has
been stacked into the local health authorities, fictitious jobs found in the
port.
The public works programme has been sustained by inflated and fake
reconstruction contracts after the 1980 Irpinia earthquake and the 1990
World Cup football preparations or by spinning out projects such as new
hospitals or the metro (after 17 years work only one tranche is complete).
Public-sector spending, coupled with criminal activity in its various forms,
is reckoned to generate two-thirds of the income in the Naples area. But now
the flow of public funds is cut because of budgetary constraints in Rome;
the big contracts have ended and the large industrial groups are shedding
labour at a time when unemployment is touching 25 per cent, among the
highest rates Italy.
The drama of disinvestment is symbolised by the recent plight of SME, the
state-run agribusiness group due to be privatised.
SME occupies the sole fully-used building in an ambitious downtown
commercial property development of a dozen glass skyscrapers. On January 25,
SME's offices were taken over by the workforce in an attempt to block
privatisation or at least prevent this from being an an excuse to move the
headquarters from Naples and reduce jobs.
The main computer was switched off causing delays in privatisation. Even so,
the authorities did not dare to remove the protesters by force.
This week after lengthy secret negotiations between management and
employees, the workers occupying the building agreed to leave in return for
some concessions on employment.
The sense of anger over rising unemployment concerns the authorities.
'Naples is the Italian city most at risk from an explosion of social
protest,' observes a senior policeman.
Indeed, one reason why the illicit economy has been tolerated and justified
is because it has provided a safety valve.
However, most Neapolitans regard the cleansing process as temporary. No new
party like the Lombard League in the north is ready to emerge, either on the
right or left. The Naples council, renewed this month after half the members
were compromised by corruption scandals (the only place for a quorum was in
jail), is based on the same Christian Democrat-Socialist axis. It merely
contains the names of lesser figures who have ridden on the coat-tails of
the former bosses.
