FT  16 JUN 93 / Venables to fight on to buy Sugar's Spurs stake
MR Terry Venables, Tottenham Hotspur's sacked chief executive, yesterday
vowed to continue his attempt to buy Mr Alan Sugar's 48 per cent stake in
the north London soccer club.
Replying from the club's headquarters, a confident Mr Sugar declared the
legal 'game was over'. He said: 'The message to fans and players was
'business as normal and please be a bit patient'.
Mr Venables' battle cry came a day after a High Court judge declined to
extend an injunction preventing the Tottenham board, chaired by Mr Sugar,
sacking Mr Venables.
Mr Sugar said getting the right management at the publicly quoted company
was essential but that there was no hurry to appoint a team manager. Mr Ray
Clemence and Mr Doug Livermore, the coaches, were continuing to manage the
club on a day-to-day basis.
Earlier Mr Sugar returned to court and admitted to a technical contempt of
court. Vice-chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls accepted Mr Sugar's apology,
given the 'disgraceful' behaviour of some Spurs supporters outside the
court.
The Tottenham chairman also said he would be returning to court to seek
assurances that any further legal costs would be paid by Mr Venables and not
Spurs.
Mr Venables said he would be seeking to acquire Mr Sugar's stake in
Tottenham Hotspur in a court action due to be heard in October.
He is seeking this under section 459 of the Companies Act, which is rarely
applied to publicly quoted companies.
Spurs supporters yesterday continued to call on fans not to renew season
tickets and to boycott the club. Mr Sugar said ensuring season tickets were
renewed had been a tough job even before Mr Venables was sacked and launched
his High Court action and it would continue to be tough.
Despite predictions of mass defections by players only two formal requests
had been received and these had been turned down.
Mr Sugar joined Mr Venables in 1991 to save heavily indebted Tottenham
Hotspur from the unwelcome attention of the late Robert Maxwell.
Spurs' own goals, Page 22
