FT  17 JUN 93 / 'You suddenly think: that bloody Lloyd's': Richard Lapper
and Gillian Tett talk to stricken Names who have given up hope of being able
to repay their debts
YESTERDAY'S an-nouncement that Names on the Gooda Walker syndicates face
fresh calls for cash will make little difference to a particularly hard-hit
group of more than 250 Gooda Names who have long since given up hope of
meeting the bill.
Mr Norbert Mallet, 61, says: 'The numbers now are just academic really. We
can't pay. The thing is that if you're drowning, it doesn't matter if you're
drowning in the Atlantic or a pond - you're still drowning.'
Mr Mallet's Lloyd's affairs were handled by the Gooda &amp; Partners members'
agency, which gave its Names - the individuals whose assets support the
market - shares on the loss-making catastrophe reinsurance syndicates
managed by its sister agency, Gooda Walker.
He and his wife are both Names, and their combined losses for 1988 from the
Gooda Walker syndicates came to Pounds 270,000. They were able to meet those
by selling possessions, but additional losses in 1989 and 1990 left them
facing a total bill for Pounds 250,000. They are effectively ruined.
The Mallets are among more than 2,000 Names who have applied to the Lloyd's
hardship committee for help to avert bankruptcy.
Under 'hardship', Names reschedule their debts to Lloyd's and are allowed to
retain a 'modest' income - of Pounds 10,000 to Pounds 15,000 - and a home of
up to the value of perhaps Pounds 150,000 if in the London area.
Lloyd's suspends action to recover debts while hardship applications are
being considered. Only about 150 hardship offers have been accepted and many
applications have been pending for months. As a result most damaged Names
are living in a curious limbo world, and many say they simply file or throw
away demands for cash.
'The day of reckoning is coming closer. We are all living on borrowed time,'
says one woman who has a hardship application pending. She joined Lloyd's in
1980, shortly after being divorced, and faces losses of more than Pounds
800,000.
Few Names have declared bankruptcy, or sold their houses. More than 70
hard-hit Gooda Names are based in Surrey and West Sussex, yet Hampton's
estate agency in Horsham, Surrey, which specialises in up-market properties,
reports that it has done limited business for Names in the past year. For
the moment, for example, Mr Mallet is still living in his elegant farm house
in Copsale, near Horsham.
What has gone is most of the artworks, family jewellery and furniture, sold
to the local office of Sotheby's, the auctioneers.
Some Names are refusing to apply for hardship because they do not want to
acknowledge that the losses are justified, or because they are unhappy about
providing the detailed breakdown of their finances that Lloyd's requires.
But many are critical of the hardship committee.
'We went to Lloyd's last year and said 'why don't you let us live on a bit
of our land and keep chickens - we're not proud, we can live in a caravan','
explains one 50-year-old ruined Name as he stands in the kitchen of his
house that will shortly be repossessed. 'But then Lloyd's said no, we
couldn't even keep that bit of land. So now we've lost everything, all our
houses, everything,' he adds with a desperate laugh.
Under pressure from the banks over his property business, he sold his houses
and applied to the Lloyd's hardship committee. After extensive wrangling
with the banks, they offered to let him live in 'what's just about the
cheap-est property' in the area.
To add to the uncertainty, many of the Names are party to legal actions
alleging negligence by Lloyd's agencies and believe they have some chance of
recovering a sizeable chunk of their losses through the courts. Some Names
harbour hopes that Lloyd's may move to settle the actions outside the
courts.
Mr Richard Godden, a retired businessman and former Conservative councillor
and magistrate, expects to have to apply for bankruptcy eventually. He is
living on a pension and savings and says that the stress is wearing him
down. 'You wake up at five in the morning and think it can't work out like
that. You've got this ghastly despair. It takes over sometimes when you're
out gardening or when you go to dinner. You suddenly think: 'that bloody
Lloyd's'.'
