FT  06 NOV 93 / Collecting: Picasso triumph - Enthusiasm in the market for
Impressionists
ART market Jeremiahs were proved wrong when 88 Picassos were auctioned at
Sotheby's in New York on Thursday. The single-collection sale was the most
keenly awaited of the season after the pundits decreed that the convalescent
international art market was not strong enough to support such a deluge of
work by one artist. Moreover, the works on offer were not of the first
quality, and a number had been on the market recently.
What happened? All 88 found new homes. Even more remarkably, they realised
Dollars 32m around Dollars 5m more than the Swiss-based American collector
Stanley J. Seeger paid for them.
The number of bidders and the feverish competition transformed a genteel
black-tie evening sale into a gruelling three-hour marathon - bringing to
mind the boom days of the late 1980s when numerous thwarted underbidders
made sure they secured subsequent lots.
Dealers - conspicuously absent in the Impressionist and modern sales of the
previous two days - came back into the picture. Alex Apsis, of Sotheby's,
said: 'Quite frankly, I'm astounded. I knew the sale would be a success but
I was not prepared for this.' The sale's success can be partly explained by
the breadth of the collection.
It spanned the artist's multi-faceted career, and ranged from a doodle from
the master's hand, and the odd piece of sculpture or ceramic, to paintings
fetching several million dollars. Equally effective were the purposely low
estimates that enticed people into the sale, and the even more accommodating
reserves.
While works such as the top lot, 'Femmes et enfants au bord de la mer', had
been acquired by Seeger for Dollars 1m and sold for Dollars 4m, it was also
possible to secure a drawing for a quarter of the price that he had paid for
it.
Who could resist? Those crowding Sotheby's rooms and telephone lines
apparently could not. The Paris-based dealer and collector Heinz Berggruen
exhibited characteristic discernment in acquiring arguably two of the most
impressive pictures in the group.
Perhaps they will join the works in his collection on loan to the National
Gallery in London. Ironically, Seeger was not out to make a killing or to
recoup his spending. He is the heir to a Mid-West oil fortune who has
described himself as an 'art shopaholic'. The Picasso collection was 13
years in the making. It was simply time to move on.
Sotheby's and Christie's enjoyed more variable fortunes earlier in the week.
At Sotheby's on Wednesday, a handsome price of Dollars 13.7m was found for a
large, exuberant Matisse cut-out, 'The Wine Press', the first of these late
works on and of paper to appear at auction.
It is said to have been bought in Paris in 1987 for the equivalent of
Dollars 2.5m. (The two outstanding works of the season, the Matisse and the
portrait of Joseph Brummer by Henri 'Le Douanier' Rousseau, offered at
Christie's yesterday, were both sent to New York from Europe rather than be
auctioned in London.)
Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza secured 'Road, Sun in Winter and Snow', Pissarro at
his best, for Dollars 2.2m, double the lower estimate, and he also snapped
up the artist's 'Field at Eragny'. The success of Schiele's powerful and
highly experimental 'Lovers (Man and Woman I)' of 1914 is eloquent proof
that if a picture is good enough it does not have to be fresh to the market.
Bought by a Japanese buyer at Sotheby's in London in 1984, and bought in at
Christie's three years ago, it sold on Wednesday for a healthy Dollars 4.6m.
But only two-thirds of the lots found new owners. . Christie's Tuesday
evening sale fared marginally better with 75 per cent sold, but the total of
Dollars 51.3m similarly fell short of expectations.
The surprise of this sale came when a decorative Degas pastel of dancers
taking a curtain call doubled its lower estimate to sell for Dollars 7m. It
was last on the market in 1952. Far less surprising was the fate of Renoir's
earthy modern Madonna depicting his mistress Aline feeding their -
conspicuously male - baby. Described by the auction house as 'A difficult
picture', and not in ideal condition, it came bearing the heavy estimate of
Dollars 8m, the price it had fetched at auction in 1988. Bidding stopped at
Dollars 4.8m.
Enthusiasm for the Impressionist and early modern market has returned -
along with standing room only in the saleroom. However, there are still too
few zeros flickering across the saleroom's electronic tote, and even fewer
major works of art. Auction houses are still struggling to persuade
collectors to chance their possessions at auction.
It is arguably even more difficult to get them to agree to realistic
reserves. Both Alex Apsis and Christie's James Roundell claim that for every
picture in their sales, six more are turned down because of the owner's
ambitious expectations.
The New York sales have confirmed the upturn in the market seen over the
last year or so, and should prove a great filip to a market suffering lack
of confidence. They have also shown that the parachute has opened on the
free-fall of Impressionist and early modern art prices - and that good
quality and appealing pictures offered at the right price can sell extremely
well.
