FT  29 JAN 93 / SNCF may sue over impact of BR sell-off
SNCF, the French state-owned railway, has strongly hinted that it will sue
the UK government if Britain's rail privatisation plans hit cross-Channel
railfreight.
It says the introduction of track charges could push freight onto the roads
and cause cross-Channel traffic to fall short of levels envisaged in
SNCF/British Rail agreements.
Mr Alain Poinssot, SNCF's freight director, says in a written submission to
the Commons transport committee that the SNCF and BR contract with
Eurotunnel commits them to buying capacity for cross-Channel trains on the
basis of traffic forecasts made in 1988.
He says the creation of a track-owning body charging train operators for the
use of its tracks would be 'completely discriminatory' because road
transport operators face no such charge for the use of the roads.
'In fact, such a policy would preclude the achievement of virtually any of
the traffic goals which formed the basis for calculating the financial
commitments of the two national rail companies vis-a-vis Eurotunnel,' Mr
Poinssot says.
'The financial consequences of this state of affairs would be serious for
SNCF and it would be entitled to ask itself where responsibility lay for the
change in circumstances since the original agreements were signed.'
SNCF's criticisms came as the government attempted to limit the damage
caused by the leak of an internal document raising doubts about the future
of cheap fares and other passenger benefits after privatisation.
The draft submission to ministers, headed 'policy in confidence' and dated
January 7 this year, suggests:
Railcards offering network-wide fare discounts are unlikely to survive under
the new regime because they do not make much money.
Cheap fares between one franchise area and another should be a matter for
negotiation between train operators, not imposed on them.
Tickets for one company's train are unlikely to be valid on another's
'because it runs contrary to commercial interests and trends towards market
segmentation'.
The Department of Transport tried to play down the importance of the
submission, saying it was drafted by a junior official and did not represent
ministerial thinking. However, it was stung into giving an unconditional
guarantee that the national railway timetable would survive.
'We have given an absolute commitment that through ticketing will be
maintained, and privatisation will bring new opportunities for discounted
fares and marketing initiatives,' the department said.
