FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (2): Reform programme as right as rain -
Three seasons of bountiful harvests have helped boost the economy
SO FAR the gods have smiled upon Tunisia's economic reform programme. Or,
perhaps more accurately, rained on it.
Four growing seasons of good rain and correspondingly bountiful harvests
have, as much as anything else, helped Tunisia raise GDP by an average of
6.6 per cent a year over the past three years. Further good rains promise
also to lift this year's growth above government budgetary forecasts of 2.9
per cent.
Tourism receipts have been equally buoyant, rising 34 per cent last year to
around DT1bn as the industry bounced back from its reverse during the Gulf
war - a rebound which largely accounts for the disproportionately big 8.4
per cent rise in GDP for 1992 over 1991.
But Tunisia's harvests, tourist crop and, indeed, yields from all other
sectors of its economy need to be abundant. The government, in its eighth
and present development plan, has stencilled in an annual average growth
rate of 6 per cent a year to 1996. Only at that rate, the government
estimates, can the economy deliver the 313,000 new jobs the labour market
will demand over the period.
That target is ambitious for at least two good reasons. The first is that it
must be achieved by export-led growth into the teeth of a recession in
Europe, which at present swallows more than 77 per cent of Tunisia's
overseas sales. The second is that this growth must also come as Tunisia's
structural adjustment programme begins to cut more deeply into the softer
underbelly of Tunisian industry.
Tunisia's vulnerability to Europe's economic malaise is already becoming
evident. Even with 1992's banner growth figures, Tunisia's merchandise trade
deficit widened 55 per cent to DT2.1bn: exports rose only 4 per cent against
an 18 per cent rise in imports. Already this year, provisional figures
suggest exports have risen only 0.3 per cent in the first three months while
imports are up 10.2 per cent.
A big surplus in Tunisia's services is likely to offset much of the
merchandise trade deficit, with tourism revenues in particular expected to
grow by as much as 18 per cent. But some western economists believe Tunisia
is likely nevertheless to see its current account deficit exceed last year's
figure of DT722m in 1993.
The weakness of Tunisia's main markets may also have the effect of worsening
the damage to its less competitive industries wrought by the continuing
structural adjustment programme, now in its seventh year. 'The effect of the
reforms would have been quite small had there been no international crisis,'
says Mr Nouri Zorgati, the finance minister. 'Unfortunately more firms will
be affected than might have been the case - and sadly above all in
textiles'.
Mr Zorgati reckons that some 10 per cent of the country's hundreds of
garment manufacturing companies could be directly at risk as Tunisia
continues to dismantle import, tariff and price controls under its
International Monetary Fund and World Bank guided reforms. As part of those
reforms, the World Bank is to commit a line of credit worth Dollars 100m, to
be disbursed through the banking sector, to help alleviate some of the pain
among less competitive companies.
This restructuring process is already well under way - indeed, Mr Mustapha
Nabli, planning and regional affairs minister, says the process should be
almost complete by 1994. Already, he says, Tunisia has freed 87 per cent of
producer prices and half of consumer prices. Some 85 per cent of imports
have been freed of restrictions, with the remainder due to be freed by 1994.
Tariffs, meanwhile, have been cut from pre-reform levels exceeding 200 per
cent in some cases to an average of 43 per cent.
Nevertheless, the toughest effects of these reforms are still to come in
many cases, and some of the most sensitive barriers remain to be dismantled.
For one thing, some western economists calculate that although 85 per cent
of imports have been freed from restrictions in total, restrictions have
been lifted entirely on only 30 per cent of imports which compete directly
with local products.
Some additional tariff barriers also remain. As a temporary and transitional
cushion to some sectors of the economy the government in 1992 introduced a
phased and diminishing additional tariff on some goods falling 30-20-10 per
cent over three years and disappearing by 1995. Furthermore, a 'temporary' 5
per cent import surcharge introduced to help cope with the economic shock of
the Gulf war remains in place.
Nevertheless, there is no question either of the government's resolve to
push through the full gamut of liberalising reforms, albeit at a pace which
it feels it can politically afford, or of its success in managing those
reforms already undertaken. Subsidies, for instance, have been trimmed
substantially from around 3.3 per cent of GDP two years ago to a little over
2 per cent. Further cuts in basic subsidies are being examined.
On the revenues side, the introduction at a stroke in 1988 of value added
tax, combined with a complete overhaul and rationalisation of income and
corporate taxes has seen the tax take rise considerably - from Dollars 400m
in 1991, for instance, to Dollars 590m in 1992. Top marginal tax rates were
cut on income tax to 35 per cent from 68 per cent, and on corporate tax also
to 35 per cent from 45 per cent, but the coverage increased substantially
while, in the words of one banker, making the whole tax structure
'brilliantly clear'.
The budget deficit, as a result, has slimmed from 3.9 per cent of GDP in
1989 to an expected 2.3 per cent this year. The figure is expected to fall
by 1992, the end of the present plan, to 1.2 per cent. As another measure of
the government's disengagement from the economy, the government's budget as
a share of GDP has fallen from 40 per cent in 1989 to 35 per cent this year.
A privatisation programme has begun with the sale of more than 40 state-held
interests, although the World Bank and IMF are understood to be pressing the
government to accelerate the process. Among the bigger state interests
potentially under the hammer is Tunisair, the national carrier. However, Mr
Tahar Hadj Ali, the transport minister, says that for the time being the
sale of up to 10 per cent of the airline's stock is being 'prudently
considered'.
The one area where perhaps most remains to be done is in the development of
Tunisia's banking industry and, more broadly, of its capital and financial
markets. The latter, at present, extend little further than the interbank
market and the country's small bourse, on which only 16 companies are
traded.
The financial system has been given a considerable shake-up under the
post-1987 administration, to clear away many of the dirigiste cobwebs
accumulated under the more collectivist Bourguiba regime. Central Bank
controls on bank credit and investment licencing have been removed. Interest
rates have been largely freed to the market, bank lending rates liberalised
with a fixed margin but no ceiling on maximum rates. All remaining lending
and deposit rate restrictions are set to go next year.
But the country's numerous domestic banks, many of them laden with bad debts
to companies of dubious competitiveness, still have far to go - almost
certainly by way of mergers, recapitalisations and restructurings - before
they will be at ease in Tunisia's fast-opening economy.
