FT  21 MAY 93 / Saarland steelworks 'victim of EC failure'
AN ABANDONED steel plant, corroded by rust, lies next door to Saarstahl, the
near-bankrupt steelmaker in depressed German Saarland.
Workers have nicknamed the sprawling structure, once the jewel of the now
defunct steel group Rochling, the 'museum'. But as closure looms at
Saarstahl itself, they say the whole area will soon be more like a
mausoleum.
Saarstahl, the French-owned steel producer employing 7,500 workers, filed
for protection from its creditors this week. Usinor-Sacilor, which owns 70
per cent of the holding, said it could no longer sustain losses of DM30m
(Pounds 12m) a month.
For workers, trade union and Saarland state officials alike, Saarstahl is
the victim of the European Community's inability to devise a coherent steel
policy.
'Why is the plug being pulled on us when other steel groups in Europe get
free doses of oxygen in the form of state subsidies?' Mr Werner Fries, an
official at the plant's workers' council, asked angrily.
But other German steel makers, equally quick to accuse Brussels, have
watched as Saarstahl and Klockner-Werke, a steel producer with its
headquarters in the Ruhr valley, filed for protection from creditors. The
steelmakers fear their rivals will be able to come back fit and trim and
attractive to foreign buyers.
Klockner-Werke recently filed for a 'composition' procedure, a legal step
short of outright bankruptcy. The move should allow the ailing steel maker
to write-off DM1.4bn of its DM2.7bn net debt. For Saarstahl, the proceedings
will allow it to suspend interest payments on its debt. Its payroll will be
covered by funds from the federal labour office. Saarland state officials
said the company's liquidity crisis would be at least temporarily resolved.
Thyssen, Germany's largest steel group, complained that susbsidies could not
be pumped indefinitely into ailing steelmakers. Allowing both Saarstahl and
Klockner-Werke to go on, freed from their debt burden, would lead to a 'a
drastic distortion of competition in Germany and Europe, with negative
consequences for the rest of the steel industry,' the company said.
The closure of Saarstahl, which produced 2.2m tonnes of long products in
1992, threatens 7,500 jobs. Long products, such as rods, wires and steel
sections, have been hit hardest by cheaper imports from eastern Europe.
A total rescue mission for Saarstahl is now ruled out, however. But the
company has four or five mills which operate competitively as a result of
heavy investments made in the last decade, according to Mr Lothar Kramm, the
official responsible for steel in Saarland's state government.
Already the most subsidised steel maker in Germany, it will not receive
additional funds from the federal budget, however. Pointing to some DM3.7bn
received in direct subsidies, soft loans and credit guarantees since 1978,
when the company first ran into difficulties, the federal economic ministry
has turned a deaf ear to calls for fresh money.
For the state Social Democratic government, keeping Saarstahl alive is
vital. Its fate may indeed be tied to the ailing steel giant. Promises to
keep it alive are on the top of the electoral agenda of Mr Oskar Lafontaine,
the state premier, who in 1985 came to power after 25 years of conservative
rule.
Saarstahl workers believe their state government will rescue the steelmaker
from total collapse, as it did when the company was bought back from Arbed
of Luxembourg for a notional DM2 in 1986.
They say the blame lies with Usinor-Sacilor, which, according to Mr Fries of
the workers' union, refused pleas for a new capital injection made by the
state government, which owns a 27.5 per cent stake.
'Steel is all politics,' said Mr Fries, suggesting that job losses mattered
less to the French than to the Saarland government. The state already has
the second-highest unemployment rate in western Germany after Bremen, home
of the Klockner-Werke plants.
But then, Saarland's ambiguous relations with France are historical, Mr
Fries added. Saarland voted twice, in 1935 and 1955, to be re-attached to
Germany after falling under French administration at the end of both world
wars.
'But maybe, if we were French steel workers, we would have kept our jobs,'
said one of the plant's workers.
