FT  30 APR 93 / Howard's way on energy
The thought that a spot of sunbathing this summer may give us skin cancer
serves to concentrate the mind. In November it scared governments into
agreeing at Copenhagen that the production of most chlorofluorocarbons will
be phased out by 1996, some years earlier than previously envisaged. This -
the fear factor - is the first law of environmental policy. We do respond to
threats, as with the news that the ozone layer over Europe is thinning out.
Believe me, restrictions on CFC substitutes, some of which also destroy
ozone, will follow the next upward blip in the graph of reported cancers.
There is no similar bogey that might have such a dramatic effect on the
burning of coal, oil, gas or other fossil fuels. The threat of global
warming is neither clear nor imminent. The damage will not begin to be felt
until the middle of the next century. The most serious harm comes much
later. Yet 'do nothing' is not a serious option. Mr Norman Lamont may still
be chancellor on April 30 2093 but everything else will be different. 'Do
nothing' would probably result in the planet, and our own species, being
afflicted by a mostly adverse change in climate patterns.
If human behaviour was rational the precautionary principle would therefore
inform the actions of individuals and governments alike. Emissions of
greenhouse gases would be steadily reduced in order to minimise global
warming over a long period. Humans are, however, irrational. We enjoy
ourselves that way. This devalues the government's presumption in favour of
using economic instruments to reduce emissions of CO. For the market alone
will not save the global environment. It depends too much upon rational
decisions by the mythical robot known as 'economic man'. We lunatics have to
be bribed, cajoled or coerced. into reducing our consumption of energy.
Just how much of the mix the British polity will take will be debated in
London next Friday at a conference called by Mr Michael Howard, secretary
for the environment. This exercise in open government is aimed at producing
a British strategy for meeting the country's commitment to reduce CO and
other greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2000, as agreed at last
year's Earth Summit in Rio. There is no need to get carried away by this.
Britain is responsible for just a twentieth of the world's emissions. It can
do little on its own. It might, however, do a lot if it became a model of
both economic and green behaviour. Then when it tries to press a particular
strategy on, say, China, it can argue from example.
Mr Howard's conference papers will address three broad possibilities. First
comes voluntary action, such as a partnership agreement between the
chemicals industry and the government on monitoring energy efficiency.
Further specific taxes, such as the extension of value added tax to domestic
heating fuels, are not ruled out. Yet we all know that the chancellor does
not favour a specific carbon tax. Other mechanisms, such as regulation, come
third.
The last should be placed first. The limits of both the price mechanism and
voluntary behaviour became clear to me on Tuesday. Always a sucker for
seminars on greenhouse gas emissions, I could not resist an invitation from
Green College Oxford. This charming institution owes its name to its
founder, not Tuesday's subject matter, although the college does house a
centre for environmental policy.
The talks after the first coffee break, as ever the ones for which I am most
awake, should be reprinted and forwarded to the environment secretary. For
example, Dr Mary Archer, chairman of the National Energy Foundation, told of
a marketing exercise aimed at selling home energy ratings. These estimate
payback periods for various ways of insulating your house. A bargain deal on
ratings at Pounds 50 a throw was advertised on regional TV, but the results
were disappointing. Plenty of 'awareness' was created, but few orders.
Then Dr Brenda Boardman, research fellow at Oxford's environmental change
unit, rattled out some fascinating figures of her own. Rational householders
would all insulate their lofts tomorrow. It is cheap, and the payback is
quick. Yet between 1974 and 1989 only 17 per cent of 9.3m insulated
properties in Britain laid the woolly stuff in their attics as a result of
private initiative. The rest is there because it is obligatory in new
buildings, or because there has been a government grant, or because it was
installed by the landlord - usually in the public sector. Annual value:
Pounds 40m. Against that about 7m homeowners spent some Pounds 1.4bn a year
on double glazing, the 'energy-saving' measure with the most unlikely
payback ever. This was entirely the market at work: we can all picture the
salesmen and their lists of mostly spurious reasons for installation. I
bought some myself, fool that I am.
Very well, you might say, individuals have their own reasons for buying
things. Industrialists are more sensible. Perhaps. But Dr Tim Jackson of the
Stockholm Environment Unit showed us slides depicting savings made by
various energy-efficiency strategies, such as switching fuels (greatest
saving) to advanced coal technology (additional cost). He then flashed a
slide showing no savings at all. He had simply changed the discount rate in
his model. The moral is clear. When Mr Howard flourishes an agreement for
voluntary action by this or that energy-intensive industry, or when he talks
of tradeable pollution permits, ask the simple question - at what rate of
interest?
Please do not conclude from all this that I see no value in the price
mechanism, particularly when it is manipulated by adding green taxes or
subsidies. The switch to unleaded fuel is an example of how this can work.
Voluntary action also has its place, as with the growing fashion for taking
rubbish to recycling points. But stop there. At Oxford Dr Philip Goodwin of
the university's transport studies unit, said that the average out-of-town
supermarket is filled by seven 38-ton lorries every day - and emptied by
5,000 cars. Multiply the mileage, and, I would add, take in an extra 20 per
cent for trips to recycling depots, and bang goes your CO reduction plan.
The government will have to regulate. If it shrinks from that, there is one
possibility left: nuclear power.
