FT  05 FEB 93 / Technology: Hoping for a clean sweep - Alice Rawsthorn meets
a man who has devoted himself to building a better vacuum
It is slightly strange to watch an apparently sane man brandishing a vacuum
cleaner and waxing lyrical about it. But if anyone has a reason to enthuse
about vacuum cleaners, it is James Dyson, who has spent the past decade
designing them. Dyson, 45, is one of that rare breed: successful British
inventors and industrial designers. The G-Force, his first vacuum cleaner
launched in 1986, sells in Japan for Pounds 1,200 and pops up on white
plinths in design museums.
His latest model is the Dyson Dual Cyclone, which is destined for the
British mass market rather than Tokyo trendies. It goes on sale this month
in several UK retailers - John Lewis, Rumbelows, Littlewoods - and
electricity showrooms with a price-tag of Pounds 199.
Dyson is more interested in how his products work than how they look. He
trained in product design at the Royal College of Art, but sees himself as
an inventor, rather than a designer. 'It's the technology that interests
me,' he said. 'I'm not turned on by the idea of designing a case for a
machine that someone else has developed. My thrill is coming up with
something new and embodying it in an exciting way.'
He worked for an engineering group for a few years after leaving the RCA,
but then set up on his own to develop and produce the Ballbarrow, a
wheelbarrow with a pneumatic ball instead of a wheel. The idea for his first
vacuum cleaner came while he was making a machine for the Ballbarrow
factory.
'One of our cleaning machines kept clogging up with dirt,' he said. 'We
needed a cyclone system but didn't have Pounds 70,000 to buy it, so I
decided to make my own. I realised that I could use a miniaturised version
in a vacuum cleaner.' He sold the rights to the Ballbarrow in order to
finance the development of the vacuum cleaner. The result was the G-Force.
Conventional vacuum cleaners work by sucking in dirt and air, then
separating them through a filter. The air escapes and the dirt collects in a
paper bag. The problem is that the filter gets blocked, making the machine
progressively less efficient. Dyson's cyclone system performs the same
function as a filter by whizzing the dirt and air around at high speed, but
does not clog. The dirt collects in a plastic container which can be clipped
off and emptied.
He designed the G-Force so that its handle operated as a hose. At the time,
most upright vacuum cleaners had clip-on hoses which were not part of the
machine. Although the mainstream manufacturers rejected Dyson's design when
he showed it to them in the early 1980s, an integral hose has since become a
standard feature on upright vacuum cleaners.
He chose to make the G-Force look different from the sober-coloured machines
then on sale. It has a jaunty pink plastic case and a clip-off container in
transparent plastic that reveals the guts of the machine. 'I wanted the
design to underline the fact that the G-Force was different from other
models,' said Dyson. 'I also liked the idea of a vacuum cleaner being fun to
look at.'
The G-Force design was licensed to a Japanese manufacturer. Dyson has used
the income (30,000 models are still sold each year) to set up a
product-development unit near his country home in Bath with a team of 15
designers. They have since developed vacuum cleaners for the US, including
an industrial model for Johnson Wax. But the biggest project is the Dual
Cyclone. Dyson has invested Pounds 1.75m to develop the design, register the
patents and to tool up a Wrexham sub-contractor to manufacture the machine.
This time, he has installed two cyclones. One operates at 200mph to process
bigger bits of dirt and the other at 800mph to treat tiny dust particles.
The Dual Cyclone has the same playful quality to its design as the G-Force,
although the shape is less exaggerated and Dyson has chosen the more subdued
shades of grey and yellow. 'I wanted it to look more functional,' says
Dyson. 'Pink would be a bit roue today.'
He hopes to introduce the Dual Cyclone to other countries once it is
established in the UK, and to plough the profits into a new vacuum cleaner,
just as he did with the G-Force. 'Sometimes I'm tempted to try other
products, but if you want to do something really well you have to find a
small area and work at it,' he says. 'We've still got lots of new ideas for
vacuum cleaners.'
