FT  15 DEC 93 / Curriculum tests rapped by Ofsted
The national curriculum tests which were boycotted last summer by teachers'
unions in England and Wales were 'too burdensome for effective teaching',
government inspectors said yesterday.
Teachers' unions said the report vindicated their industrial action and
predicted that they would win enough concessions to be able to call off
their dispute.
The report by Ofsted, the education watchdog, confirmed union claims that
less than 5 per cent of state secondary schools took the tests last summer.
It added that there were 'significant failings' arising from the complex
structure of the tests, and that the tests in English for 14-year-olds,
which aroused strong and widespread opposition, were 'flawed'.
It recommended a cut in the range and number of assessments across the
curriculum.
The government stressed the report's few positive findings. Baroness Blatch,
education minister, said it 'provides further confirmation that the
assessment arrangements are raising educational standards'.
But she admitted that the curriculum had become too prescriptive and
difficult to manage, and said the government had already agreed to cut
testing and marking times for seven and 14-year-olds by 'roughly a half'.
The National Union of Teachers, the largest teachers' union, said government
concessions needed to go further. Mr Doug McAvoy, NUT general secretary,
welcomed the report's findings as proving that the teachers' dispute had
been educationally and not politically motivated and said: 'The government's
so-called slimming down of the tests for next year will be as inaccurate as
their so-called slimming down in the past has been.'
The other two teachers' unions held out more hope of a resolution. Mr Peter
Smith, of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said: 'Ofsted are
absolutely right. Educational standards cannot rise until the bureaucracy is
reduced.'
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, of the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of
Women Teachers, said Ofsted had 'hit the workload nail on the head'.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, said the report confirmed
Labour's belief that national testing was 'an overload'. She said: 'Mr
Patten has attempted at every opportunity to force through an overloaded,
overprescriptive syllabus and highly bureaucratic testing procedure.'
Assessment, recording and reporting, 1992-93. Ofsted. HMSO. Pounds 3.50.
