FT  13 AUG 93 / The Property Market: A ride on the rollercoaster of recovery
 -The recent sharp upturn in the UK
The UK property market's recovery is gathering pace. A spate of
better-than-expected news on the economy, together with a sea change in
sentiment, is fuelling a far stronger recovery than forecasters expected at
the start of the year.
Since the spring, the amount of money waiting to be invested in the property
market has built up rapidly. Some Pounds 7bn of money had been earmarked for
the property sector, according to Hillier Parker, chartered surveyors.
James Capel, a broker, is now expecting capital values to rise by 10 per
cent this year; and 10 per cent in 1994. 'The investment market is hotter
than at any time since the late 1970s,' says Mr Alan Carter of its property
team.
Some of this enthusiasm is shared by the stock market. On Wednesday when the
FT-SE 100 index broke through the 3,000 mark, property was the best
performing sector of the market with a 2.2 per cent rise.
The value of property shares has nearly doubled in the past year, as
investors look forward to an improvement in the underlying market. The
property sector is now on a premium of 10 per cent to estimated net asset
value, according to brokers UBS. That compares with a 10 year average
discount of 23.7 per cent.
Not everyone is convinced that the enthusiasm for property is justified. The
market is overheating in the view of some participants, such as Mr Clive
Lewis, president of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Certainly, there is little evidence that the end of the recession has had an
impact on tenant demand. Rents are still falling: Richard Ellis, a firm of
surveyors, estimates that they have fallen by 7.3 per cent this year.
Improvement in tenant demand is still extremely weak, not least because many
occupiers still have empty space in their buildings.
Some observers also feel disconcerted that property appears to be bucking
its traditional role of being one of the last sectors of the economy to
respond to an upturn in the economic cycle.
But this point begs the question of how much the current behaviour of the
property sector has in common with previous cycles.
In some respects, there are strong parallels. Consider, for instance, this
assessment of the market in the FT's Lex column in February 1975. With the
exception of the quantity of bank debt overhanging the market, the comment
would have been valid 18 years later:
'The immediate problem, however, is establishing a new level of values,
given the unsettling influences of the amount of property for sale, the
Pounds 2.8bn of banking lending to the property sector still to be unwound,
the recessionary threat to rents and the uncertainties about the
government's detailed land proposals.
'But the longer-term bull arguments remain - property's record as an
inflation hedge, the weight of institutional money in short-term assets and
the impact of the current cutback on new development on the supply of space
in two or three years' time.'
But the differences between these periods are possibly more striking than
the similarities. Consider, for instance, property's relationship with gilts
and equities, which is entirely different from the 1970s. Property yields at
about 9 per cent are now higher than gilt yields and far higher than equity
yields, which stand at 3.7 per cent. In the 1970s, by contrast, property
yields were close to equity yields and far below gilt yields.
The consequence of this changed relationship is that property responds far
more readily to changes in the bond market. 'For the first time in 30 years,
property has bond characteristics, rather than equity characteristics,' says
Mr David Tunstall of Smith New Court.
As a result, the current bull market in bonds is forcing down property
yields. Hillier Parker this week said that yields had dropped by a further
0.1 percentage points for August, pushing the All Property average yield
down to 9 per cent. In some sectors where reasonable rental growth is
expected, yields have dropped by 1-1.5 points over the last six months, it
says.
According to Hillier Parker, this is the first improvement in yields since
August 1988, when yields stood at 7.2 per cent. It believes the improvement
in yields is set to continue. 'With renewed interest, particularly from
institutional investors, the market is now gradually moving from one of few
buyers and many potential vendors of a year ago, to many more buyers than
sellers,' it says.
Some agents are forecasting an extremely rapid fall in yields. Savills, a
firm of chartered surveyors, believes that yields will move by an average of
2 percentage points by the end of the year. It expects retail warehouse
yields to be 7 per cent, office yields to fall below 7.5 per cent, prime
retail yields to drop to 5-5 1/4 per cent and industrial yields to fall to 8
per cent.
Can the market maintain this pace? Some analysts believe the unexpected
strength of the recovery this year means next year's growth will be slower
than anticipated.
In the view of Mr Chris Turner of BZW, the improvement in values will slow
down next year. If falling gilt yields cease to bolster the market, the
continued progress in property values will depend on the outlook for rental
growth, which is still uncertain.
Most surveyors do not expect rents to begin to grow until the second half of
1994. But it is hard to generalise. Much depends on the economic performance
of different cities and the balance of supply and demand. A recent report by
Chesterton showed that vacancy rates for new or refurbished office property
ranges from 0.7 per cent in Manchester to 8.4 per cent in the City of London
and 38 per cent in Docklands. London's vacancy rate stands at 17.8 per cent,
while outside London, the average city vacancy rate is 11.5 per cent.
Overall, about 44m sq ft of office floorspace is available to let in the
UK's largest 16 cities, representing 15.3 per cent of their total stock. New
and refurbished floorspace accounts for over 40 per cent of the total
available space. As demand improves, this space will become more attractive
to potential occupiers at the expense of the secondary market. 'Poor quality
secondary properties, or those in fringe and unproven locations, may be
suitable only for redevelopment,' it says.
The question of how fast rental growth will return depends on several
factors, such as the amount of second-hand space that is taken out of the
market for redevelopment and the speed of the recovery of the development
market.
More than anything else, however, the outlook for rental growth depends on
the robustness of the economy. The UK needs a period of low interest rates
and strong growth, if the recovery in the property market is to keep its
momentum.
