FT  26 OCT 93 / Survey of Technology in the Office (1): A revolution on the
desk-top - Networks of powerful personal computers and workstations, along
with cordless telephony and data systems, are transforming the way that
companies operate
TECHNOLOGY and the office are inextricably intertwined. Without the
telephone and keyboard there would be no modern office, and without the
office there would be a much smaller market for technology.
The modern office has evolved over the last 150 years, aided by
technological breakthroughs like the development of the telephone in the
19th century. However, the pace of change has accelerated dramatically over
the past 15 years.
Since the late 1970s, digital technology has transformed the way information
is collected, analysed, manipulated, transmitted and stored.
It has not led to the creation of the 'paperless office' as some had
predicted. Nevertheless, it is making possible the closer integration of
data processing and telecommunications.
Perhaps the most dramatic change has been the arrival of the personal
computer on to the office desktop. Increasingly these PCs are hooked
together into networks in order to share data and digital peripherals, such
as printers.
This step has put the power of yesterday's mainframe computers at the
disposal of most office workers in a process which has become known as
'downsizing', or more recently 'rightsizing' - to acknowledge that the
mainframe or departmental mini-computer can still play a crucial role,
especially where large databases are involved.
There is no doubt that the computer has changed the way business is
conducted. As IBM, the master of the mainframe, is keen to point out, if all
the automated financial transactions in the UK, including direct debits,
were handled manually it is estimated that 72,000 extra banking staff would
be needed.
Similarly the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency in Swansea holds over 60m
records on its mainframe computer. Normally the agency returns documents
within three days of receipt, but if each file were checked manually it
would take 114 years.
However, as a recent joint report from IBM and the Cranfield University
management school confirmed, chief executives are not concerned about the
type of computer 'platform' used in their business, 'they want solutions,
not boxes'.
What matters increasingly is how technology is used and, in particular,
whether it enhances competitive advantage and contributes to cost savings
and greater efficiency.
For example, one of most often quoted statistics in the telecommunications
industry is that more than two thirds of business telephone calls fail to
reach their intended target.
One possible solution to this problem would be to introduce cordless office
telephone lines and handsets. Indeed, GPT Communications Systems, Northern
Telecom and Ericsson have all recently launched cordless PBX systems in
Europe.
Ericsson, whose system is based on the digital European cordless telecoms
(Dect) standard is predicting that the cordless PABX will 'revolutionise
office communications during the 1990s'.
The Swedish company expects the global market for cordless PABX extensions
to be worth some Dollars 5bn a year by 1998, while some independent analysts
have predicted that cordless extensions will account for a third of the
market for all business telephones by the end of the century.
IN time, Mr Chris Gare, Mercury's manager of strategic technologies,
believes cordless office-based telecommunications systems will be integrated
with other digital telecommunications services including personal
communications networks (PCNs), such as Mercury's One-2-One service in the
UK and the next generation of personal digital assistants, (PDAs).
Within the office, wireless local area networks linking desktop computers,
workstations and other devices, without the need for fixed cabling have been
launched by both NCR and Motorola.
Such developments raise questions about whether a centralised office
structure will be needed in the future at all, or whether virtual private
telephone networks and other advanced facilities, such as desktop
video-conferencing systems, will enable office staff to be dispersed - or
even to work from home.
'Demand for cordlessness will result because the technology facilitates many
of the changes that are already gathering momentum,' says Philip Ross, head
of research at the Business Design Group consultancy in London.
'Flexibility and mobility will become the imperatives of the 1990s and the
freedom that cordless telephony and data transfer allows can only accelerate
this process as we move towards the virtual office.'
Mr Ross argues that organisations are already moving towards greater
flexibility as they 'downsize', contract out services, and use consultants
and part timers.
'We will see the emergence of a 'virtual office', more akin to a hotel,
where individuals have flexible space where and when they need it, sharing
facilities,' he predicts.
Networks of smaller and more powerful workstations, linked to central
databases are predicted in a new study by architects DEGW and the Building
Research Establishment.
'Many of the problems associated with the introduction into offices of the
first wave of distributed intelligence will be overcome. Workstations will
be freed from the locational constraints of the traditional office,' says
the report.*
Already a growing number of businesses are using cellular telephony,
portable computers and mobile data networks to exchange information between
a central office database and employees while they are on the move. Business
customers are also integrating their PC networks and telecoms to take
advantage of value-added network services, such as electronic mail and
electronic data interchange (EDI), which can remove the need to send and
receive standard paper forms such as invoices, orders and bills.
DESPITE the advent of EDI and other office technology, about 95 per cent of
information used in the office is still stored on paper, rather than
electronically. Indeed far from dispensing with paper, office employees are
handling ever increasing volumes of it.
At one organisation interviewed as part of a 1992 study by management
consultants Touche Ross, the 2,000 staff dealt with 45 tonnes of incoming
mail a year, and 48 tonnes of outgoing mail - equivalent to generating 25kg
of paper per person.
The study also shows a dramatic growth in the use of electronic data, and a
clear trend towards optical storage.
New hardware such as digital optical scanning, storage and retrieval devices
and CD-Rom systems have begun to appear in the office, but so too have paper
generators like high-volume electronic demand printers which link directly
to computers and digital copiers which scan a hard copy once before
reproducing multiple copies.
Indeed, office-based electronic printing is becoming increasingly
sophisticated. For example, earlier this year Indigo, a small
entrepreneurial Israeli company, demonstrated the first high quality colour
digital offset press, which it described as 'the marriage of offset printing
and digital imaging.'
The development of digital offset colour mirrors developments elsewhere in
the office where previously unconnected pieces of electronic hardware are
becoming integrated.
For example, multifunction digital devices which combine some or all of the
features of a facsimile machine, photocopier, laser printer and scanner have
begun to appear and fax and other communications capabilities are being
built directly into personal computers and office networks, removing the
need for paper print-outs entirely.
Technological improvements, dial-up high-capacity digital telephone lines
and tumbling equipment prices are also beginning to make video-conferencing
a real option for a much broader group of companies.
Already, the first desktop video-conferencing systems, usually using a card
plugged into a PC and a small video camera, have begun to arrive.
Some computer companies - including Olivetti, Europe's largest PC
manufacturer - have developed systems designed to integrate data processing
and video-conferencing into a single desk-top unit.
In order to deliver multimedia services such as real-time video, graphics
and data across a personal computer network, new high speed, high capacity
packet-switched technologies, such as ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), have
been developed.
These technical advances will further erode the distinctions between
traditional computer companies and service providers such as
telecommunications network operators. They also underline the growing
importance of software and services.
The shift of computing power on to the desk-top has already had dramatic
repercussions for the traditional computer hardware vendors which have been
increasingly forced to respond to shrinking margins by trying to provide
their office customers with higher valued-added services, such as system
integration and facilities management.
At the same time, the advance has turned Intel, whose chips power most PCs,
and Microsoft, which dominates PC-operating systems and software
applications markets, into household names.
Where these dynamic forces reshaping the office are all leading is the
subject of much speculation. Gazing into his crystal ball, Philip Ross of
Business Design predicts that over the next few years, as the various
technologies in computers, media and communications converge, office workers
will be allowed a greater degree of flexibility and freedom to choose where,
when and how to work - 'the office of the future will be a very different
place,' he says.
*'The Responsible Workplace,' a study by DEGW and the Building Research
Establishment, sponsored by Steelcase Strafor. Details in the UK on 0753 680
200
