FT  19 FEB 93 / Letter: Top managers should show the way in radical rethink
on pay
Sir, Shares can go down as well as up, circulars from my bank and insurance
company have warned me since the collapse of the 1987 financial 'bubble'.
Can executive salaries do the same?
I have followed the debate in your columns on the troubles of the financial
sector; the mistaken judgments which led to over-lending to property
speculators and players of stock markets; the attempts to rebuild balances
by increasing charges to customers; and the laying-off of junior staff.
Entirely missing has been the question of whether the disproportionate
increases in top salaries of the early 1980s, justified on grounds of the
quality of judgment of senior executives, should be reversed.
I appreciate that a cut in remuneration for board members and general
managers would contribute only a little to redressing the balance of bank
reserves and profits. But such a signal that top management recognises its
share of the responsibility for the evident errors of the last decade, and
is prepared to share in the cuts and added burdens of the 1990s as fully as
it shared in the added profits of the 1980s, would do much to rebuild the
battered confidence of staff and customers. No such signal has yet been
given.
There is a wider point at issue. If the British economy is to hold to low
inflation - as bank economists exhort - attitudes to salaries throughout the
economy have got to change radically.
No stronger signal could be given of the acceptance of radical change than a
reversal of the continuing trend for top salaries to increase.
The Quaker families who laid the foundations for more than one of England's
clearing banks understood the importance of gestures and symbols, and of
demonstrating by the way they behaved the responsibilities they shouldered
towards their fellow men. I fear that their descendants have lost sight of
that sense of shared responsibility to the wider community. The impact on
bank profits of a 10 to 20 per cent cut in board remuneration would be
minimal. But think of the potential impact on the economy and on British
society]
William Wallace,
49 St James's Drive,
Wandsworth Common,
London SW17 7RN
