FT  27 AUG 93 / Technology: Epilepsy drugs enter a new era - The size of the
anti-convulsant drugs market is about to double
A new generation of drugs to treat epilepsy is set to transform the
anti-convulsant market and the lives of the 53m people afflicted with the
condition worldwide.
After nearly 15 years without new treatment, four drugs are being launched
for the condition which affects about 3m people in Europe, a similar number
in Japan and 2.5m in the US.
Analysts at Merrill Lynch, the US investment house, believe the new
medicines will, within the next few years, double the size of the worldwide
anti-epileptic market. At present the sector is small, worth only Dollars
1.2bn (Pounds 857m) in 1992. Most existing treatments are off-patent and are
therefore cheap.
The four new drugs expected to drive market growth are: Felbatol, developed
by Carter-Wallace of the US and marketed outside America by Schering-Plough;
Neurontin developed by Warner-Lambert, the US group; Lamictal, discovered by
Wellcome of the UK; and Sabril, developed by US Marion Merrell Dow.
Additional compounds in development include Trileptal from Ciba of
Switzerland.
The new treatments are expected to be more effective than existing therapies
at controlling epileptic seizures and to have fewer side effects. The
established medicines include Warner-Lambert's Dilantin which has more than
50 per cent of the US market, Ciba's Tegretol, with 24 per cent of the
market, and Abbott's Depakote.
Existing treatments unfortunately do not prevent seizures in about 30 per
cent of patients, and all epileptics taking them risk side-effects.
The drugs' effectiveness is dose related - the higher the dose the more
effective they become. But as patients' intakes are increased to improve the
control of their epilepsy, so they tend to suffer more side-effects -
drowsiness, depression, weight gain, impaired gait and hair loss. In rare
cases, the medicines prove so toxic they can kill.
The side-effects mean that from 42 per cent to 60 per cent of patients fail
to comply with medication, according to the UK's Office of Health Economics,
a pharmaceutical research organisation.
In failing to take drugs properly, those susceptible increase the risk of
seizures. One study suggests missed doses and lack of sleep accounted for
about 79 per cent of seizures.
Trevor Flannagan, strategic business manager at Wellcome says: 'Epilepsy is
the most serious central nervous system problem confronting us. The
epileptic population is seriously disadvantaged, with a significant
proportion whose lives are significantly affected by seizures or
side-effects or both.'
'We need to have better products on both the safety and efficacy count,'
says Mark Pierce, vice-president clinical research for the central nervous
system at Warner-Lambert.
The established generation of medicines were mostly developed through the
classical method of widespread screening projects in the 1960s or 1970s,
although Dilantin was patented in 1938.
Since the 1970s, however, scientists have been using improved knowledge of
the biochemical process of epilepsy to design compounds. Researchers have
discovered that epilepsy is caused at least in part through the
malfunctioning of naturally occurring amino acids that act as
neurotransmitters.
Normally, the electrical activity in the brain's nerves is regulated by two
classes of amino acids. The first are excitatory amino acids such as
aspartate and glutamate, thought to help stimulate electrical signals from
one nerve to another.
The second class of amino acids is inhibitors, the most important being
gamma aminobutyric acid, known as Gaba. Their function is to stabilise
electrical activity in the brain. To do this, they open certain channels in
the membrane of the nerve ending that are designed to admit negatively
charged ions. Once the negative ions have been let into the nerve ending -
or neuron - it becomes incapable of firing electrical signals. To be able to
fire, the neuron has to be positively charged. The more Gaba available, the
slower the neurons' firing rate.
In most common forms of epilepsy, the normal balance between the excitatory
amino acids and the regulatory ones breaks down. The result is the brain's
nerve endings start firing electrical signals out of control, triggering
neighbouring neurons until a seizure takes place.
The earlier drugs, Dilantin and Tegretol, worked by preventing the excessive
signals being triggered. Scientists are unsure of exactly how the prevention
mechanism worked. Some believe it blocked certain channels in the neurons'
membrane that allow positively charged ions such as sodium to pass into the
neuron. Once the neurons are positively charged they have greater potential
to trigger excessive electrical signals.
More recently, researchers have been following two main theoretical routes.
The first is to discourage the production or action of the excitatory amino
acids. This would prevent the seizure spreading through the brain. The
second route is to enhance levels of Gaba, the regulatory substance, and so
stop the seizure by stabilising the neurons.
The first of the new medicines to be given a licence in the US by the Food
and Drug Administration is Carter Wallace's Felbatol, which gained approval
this month.
Peder Jensen, vice-president for clinical research at Schering Plough
Research Institute, says the drug was discovered through traditional
techniques rather than rational drug design, following a mass-screening
programme by the US National Institutes of Health at the beginning of the
1980s.
Scientists are still struggling to find out how it works, admits Jensen. One
study of patients whose previous medication was ineffective, showed a 34 per
cent reduction in seizure frequency compared with a 9 per cent fall among
those on placebo. The drug also has low toxicity, allowing for safe higher
dosing.
Felbatol's main drawback is that it interacts with existing medications such
as Dilantin. This is important because few patients are willing to swap
medications, and at best will only add to their regimen - the majority,
whose seizures are under control, have little incentive to switch to an
unknown medication. Jensen says the interactions are predictable and can be
avoided.
Warner-Lambert's Neurontin was designed with the knowledge of at least some
of the biochemical processes of epilepsy. The drug is an analogue of an
amino acid and is supposed to emulate Gaba.
Elizabeth Garofalo, associate director of clinical research at the company,
says that although the compound was synthesised to mimic Gaba, it does not
appear to do so. It does reduce seizures, however. One theory is it affects
aspartate and glutamate, the excitatory amino acids. It does not interact
with other drugs.
Marion Merrell Dow's Sabril was also designed with knowledge of the
biochemical processes. Its unique mechanism is that it inhibits the
production of an enzyme that breaks down Gaba and so increases Gaba levels
in the brain.
Wellcome's Lamictal appears to work by preventing the excessive release of
glutamate. It probably does this by blocking the sodium channels.
Ciba's Trileptal also interferes with the sodium channels in the membrane of
the neuron, although it may also open potassium channels, according to
Markus Schmutz, head of the company's pre-clinical epilepsy project.
Most of the new drugs are being recommended as add-on therapies because
there have been few trials testing them as single treatments.
'They are all in their infancy. We are at the start of a very long process
as we start the long-term comparative trials,' says Pierce.
It is too early to know which drugs will win commercially. With luck, the
winners will be those coping with epilepsy on a day-to-day basis.
The series will continue next month with an article on diabetes.
