FT  12 AUG 93 / Submarine refit decision was flawed say MPs
THE GOVERNMENT used 'flawed and potentially unfair' methods to reach an
'unsafe' decision last month to refit Trident nuclear submarines in
Devonport, Plymouth, rather than Rosyth, Scotland, a Commons select
committee report said yesterday.
The work, worth between Pounds 3bn and Pounds 5bn over 20 years, was given
to Devonport after a two-year struggle between the yards.
The report, from the cross-party committee chaired by Conservative MP Sir
Nicholas Bonsor, said the government's claim that Devonport's bid to build
new docks was Pounds 64m cheaper than Rosyth's was unsafe because it was
less than the margin for error in the calculations.
'No commercial enterprise would rely solely on such a small marginal
difference in estimated costs,' said the report.
It also criticised the elimination of competition in submarines at a time
when it was being encouraged in surface ship work. The MoD should now
publish details of how it evaluated 'non-cost factors', it said.
The MoD argued yesterday that the savings that would arise from maintaining
competition were much less than the Pounds 300m to be saved by allocating
the work to just one yard. The ministry plans to produce more detailed
figures and publish them in a formal written reply, probably before
parliament is recalled after the summer recess in October.
At the time of the decision, the government softened the blow to Rosyth by
promising it refitting work on surface ships. But the report argued it was
'essential that ministers should seek to enshrine their commitment to
allocation of refits to Rosyth in some binding form'.
Mr George Foulkes, Labour defence spokesman, said he would be writing to Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, secretary of state for defence, asking him to provide this
guarantee. In his evidence to the committee last month, Mr Rifkind said a
legally-binding contract covering warship refitting would not be suitable
because the future management of the dockyards would be dec-ided in 1995
when current contracts with private sector managers expire.
The report urged an early decision on the management of the Royal Dockyards
beyond 1995. 'Uncertainty will tend to inhibit the ability of the Royal
Dockyards to attract non-MoD work,' it said, adding that the time taken to
reach such decisions was 'highly regrettable'.
Until 1991, the MoD planned to proceed with a scheme to build a new dock at
Rosyth for refitting the 16,000-ton Trident submarines. Then Devonport
submitted an unsolicited proposal suggesting the upgrade of its existing
docks as a cheaper alternative. The MoD then formally invited both dockyards
to make proposals for nuclear refitting work.
Defence Committee. Seventh Report: The Royal Dockyards, HMSO, Pounds 15.60.
Defence agency loss, Page 7
