FT  30 NOV 93 / VW links with Wales in project to transform car assembly
A small North Wales company is partnering Volkswagen in developing a process
that could transform the way cars are assembled.
Germany's largest vehicle maker is considering progressively scrapping spot
welding as a way of joining car body panels in favour of a self-piercing
riveting process. The system, which will be used to build the group's
aluminium-bodied Audi car for launch next year, has been developed with
Henrob, a company which employs 34 people.
The project has been kept secret for nearly four years and is now covered by
patents held jointly by Audi and Henrob. 'We're just glad that Audi are at
last letting us talk about it,' said Mr Keith Jones, managing director and
majority shareholder of the privately owned Henrob.
Under a confidentiality agreement, Henrob would have been required to pay a
DM1m (Pounds 390,000) penalty to Audi for any breach of confidence that
prejudiced the DM1.1bn aluminium car project.
Self-piercing riveting as a technology for joining sheet materials is around
30 years old and Henrob acquired the rights to the basic processes 12 years
ago. But the bulk and inflexibility of the plant and equipment, and the
corrosion risks associated with the way the system then worked, severely
restricted its application. It has been largely ignored by the motor
industry.
However, the process and equipment developed by Henrob and VW produces
joints 30 per cent stronger than spot welds and virtually eliminates the
corrosion risk, according to Mr Klaus Gugisch, Audi's manufacturing planning
director. 'Another advantage is that it requires a lot less energy than spot
welding,' he said.
Crucially, the two companies say it is as fast and flexible as the robotic
multiwelders now used to assemble conventional steel car body shells and
requires less electrical energy than spot welding.
The new Audi, to be called the 300, will have 68 per cent of its body joints
made with the riveting process.
Driving a new product to the heart of carmaking, Page 11
