FT  21 AUG 93 / World Stock Markets: Arguments range over Swiss share
prospects - The high-performance Zurich bourse
The all-share Swiss Performance Index (SPI) climbed to new record heights in
heavy volume this week. While it eased over the last two days to 1,566.51 by
yesterday's close, it still finished 0.6 per cent up on the week, bringing
its advance this year to an impressive 26.5 per cent.
Ironically, this latest show of strength came just after an influential
broker, London's James Capel, had launched what looked like the definitive
tract on why the great Swiss bull run, like all good things, was coming to
an end.
The Capel argument was that the Swiss market might still not be that
expensive, but it would now enter a phase in which it would not perform
relatively as well as others, especially the German market.
This was because the Swiss market was composed mainly of defensive and
interest rate-sensitive shares. Now that economic recovery was in prospect,
investors would turn increasingly to cyclical shares and thus to markets,
such as Germany, in which cyclicals were heavily represented.
Other Swiss market analysts accept the logic of the Capel argument. 'I agree
that it is not a good market for cyclicals,' says Mr Attela Molnar, head of
investment strategy at Swiss Bank Corporation.
Where opinions differ is on the timing and the extent of any reduction in
the weighting of Swiss equities. Some Swiss advisers, such as those at Swiss
Volksbank, for example, have already reduced their recommended weighting of
Swiss shares in European portfolios.
'In terms of valuation, the Swiss market is still attractive,' Mr Urs
Brunner, head of the bank's Swiss equity research team, says. 'But
Switzerland does not have the same potential on the interest rate side as
Germany and France.'
Mr Molnar says that SBC has dampened its recommendation from heavily
overweight last year to neutral.
Others are less sure that the time has come to switch, and they were
reinforced in their view by Thursday's announcement of flat profits by the
big transnational engineering group ABB Asea Brown Boveri.
Shares in Brown Boveri, the Swiss member of the Swedish-Swiss group, have
risen sharply in recent months in anticipation of economic recovery in
Europe, but they fell SFr18 on the news, and SFr11 more to SFr920 yesterday.
Some analysts say there could be more disappointments like that one in the
next few months. 'So many people have been afraid of missing the cyclicals
train that they have jumped on too soon,' Mr Beat Philipp, head of research
at Bank Vontobel in Zurich says. 'We think there is still too much fantasy
in the prices of some cyclicals.'
Mr Molnar adds that when the economic recovery in Europe does come, it will
probably be weak and slow to develop, just like that in the US.
Mr Philipp argues that the Swiss market will continue to perform well, even
relatively well, for some time to come, citing its still modest valuations
and supportive inflation and interest rate trends.
'In any European portfolio, we think investors would be well advised to have
Switzerland fully weighted,' he says.
He estimates that the market is valued at only 12 to 13 times prospective
1994 earnings, well below the level of the German market. Moreover, the
potential for further liquidity-driven gains may still be considerable, as
fixed-term bank deposits remain at about double the normal level for
Switzerland.
Mr Philipp and others agree that this liquidity does not have to flow into
Swiss equities, but they believe that much of it will, partly because Swiss
institutions are still in the process of increasing the weighting of
equities in their portfolios.
Also 'some people still want to have some of their investments in Swiss
francs, and it is no longer sensible to buy bonds,' said Mr Jean-Max Villar,
an analyst at Lombard Odier in Geneva.
Swiss analysts see the momentum in the market now being taken up again by
the traditional defensive stocks, Nestle, which has recovered smartly from a
weak spell in July, the big three pharmaceutical groups and especially the
big three banks.
They point out that the SMI index, which is dominated by these shares, has
advanced significantly less than the all-share SPI this year. And the bank
shares, in spite of big rises, are still on price-earnings ratios below that
of the market as a whole.
Sparkling interim reports from Union Bank of Switzerland and Credit Suisse
in the past week have made the bank share prices look even more modest, some
analysts say. Both reported pre-tax profit gains of over 50 per cent. As the
banks are still having to make very large provisions for bad loans, their
potential for further big profit gains in the next couple of years seems
strong.
For all its defensive nature, the Swiss market has its risks. The strong
downward trend of Swiss interest rates has been helped by turmoil in other
European currencies. Now that leading European currencies seem to face a
calmer period, the franc could lose some of its premium rating.
