FT  05 OCT 93 / Dublin warms to IRA peace move: Hume-Adams talks seen as
'potentially significant' - DUP anger persists / Bomb attacks in north
London
THE IRISH government has described as 'potentially significant' the
unprecedented statement at the weekend by the Irish Republican Army
supporting the peace initiative launched 10 days ago by Mr John Hume, the
leader of the SDLP and Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein.
Details of the initiative are still private, but Mr Albert Reynolds, the
Taoiseach (Irish prime minister), and Mr Dick Spring, the foreign minister,
are expected to discuss them with Mr Hume tomorrow in Dublin, when he
arrives after a nine-day visit to the United States where he met
Congressional leaders and advisers to President Bill Clinton.
Last night Mr Spring said: 'Any statement that gives the appearance of
wanting to establish peace in Ireland is something that has to be dealt
with.'
'But if they are serious about wanting to establish peace . . . I would say
to them 'Stop the killings, stop the bombings', and let people know that
they are serious.'
An Irish government spokesman said yesterday: 'The Taoiseach is keeping an
open mind. He is looking forward to hearing what progress has been made (in
the Hume-Adams talks) and if they can advance the progress to peace, then
there will be a positive reaction to the initiative.'
The Dublin government has maintained that it has not yet received any
details of the Hume-Adams initiative, although a senior foreign ministry
official is reported to have met Mr Hume a few days before the Hume-Adams
announcement.
The foreign ministry would neither confirm nor deny these reports. 'Our
officials have many contacts in Northern Ireland and it is not our policy to
make comments on individual meetings,' it said.
The UK government is also believed to have been informed of the initiative,
when Mr Hume met Mr John Major on September 16.
As a result, the hard-line Democratic Unionist party headed by Rev Ian
Paisley has angrily ruled out any further participation in the round-table
talks process.
DUP leaders walked out of an acrimonious meeting in Belfast last Friday with
Mr Michael Ancram, minister of state for Northern Ireland, claiming that the
government had refused to discuss fresh DUP proposals for a new
constitutional assembly in Northern Ireland, which were first presented to
Mr Major more than two weeks ago.
A Northern Ireland Office spokesman said last Friday's meeting: 'was not a
fruitful meeting'. He said that the DUP proposals had been on the agenda,
'but Dr Paisley instead launched an attack on what he claimed was a
government dialogue with Sinn Fein'.
He said the NIO had not yet decided whether to attempt to reconvene the
round-table talks, which have been stalled since last November, without the
participation of the DUP, 'but it has not been ruled out either'.
It has also emerged that Mr Spring and Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary,
met in New York last week when the latest developments on Northern Ireland
were discussed.
Mr Spring had been in New York to address the General Assembly of the United
Nations last Friday. In his speech he said: 'The pieces of the jigsaw are
all to hand if only we can find the right way to fit them together . . we
will bring to any resumed talks the resources of goodwill, flexibility and
imagination which we believe all participants must display if a new
agree-ment is to be achieved.
'It is painfully obvious that all traditional approaches have failed and
that new thinking is urgently required . . . we are ready to accept the need
for radical and innovative compromise as part of a new accommodation which
will bring lasting peace and reconciliation to the island of Ireland.
'Peace is now the imperative; and the continuation of violence is the single
greatest obstacle to the realisation of our hopes. An end to violence would,
at least, help to clear the way for compromise and negotiation'.
As if to underline that statement, the IRA yesterday exploded bombs in both
Belfast and London.
Two bombs exploded in Belfast, one at a tyre depot in the docks area, and
one at an electrical wholesalers in the north of the city. No one was
injured in either blast but both bombs caused extensive damage.
Five bombs were set off in north London yesterday morning, causing havoc
with rush-hour traffic but apparently causing no injuries and only minor
damage. Commander David Tucker, head of the Anti-Terrorist Squad, said that
the lack of a usual telephoned warning was a 'sinister change of strategy'
by the IRA. The IRA has confirmed that it planted three bombs in north
London on Saturday which injured five passers-by.
