FT  11 NOV 93 / Japanese contract confirmation boosts Thorp
JAPAN has reconfirmed its commitment to the use of plutonium for nuclear
fuel. The move is encouraging for the Pounds 2.8bn Thorp nuclear
reprocessing plant in Cumbria.
The commitment, restated in the Japanese government's annual report on
atomic energy, indicates that the country is likely to honour contracts to
buy reprocessed fuel from the Cumbria plant.
Japan would be Thorp's biggest foreign customer, if the plant wins approval
from the UK government. A decision is expected shortly.
The Japanese Atomic Energy Commission report said recycling was 'an
important element' in the country's energy policy, citing the country's
scarce natural resources and heavy energy consumption.
It aims to lift nuclear-generated electricity from the present 28.2 per cent
of electrical power capacity to 40 per cent over 20 years.
A fledgling environmental movement, which includes members of parliament
from four of the seven ruling coalition parties, is lobbying for an end to
plutonium imports because Japan has a surplus. They fear that weapons-grade
material could fall into the wrong hands.
But the report says Japan will have a plutonium fuel shortage until the end
of the decade, when its own reprocessing plant is due to open.
Stocks now stand at 4.5 tonnes, of which 1.6 tonnes are stored in Japan and
the rest at reprocessing plants in France and Britain. They will be consumed
at a prototype reactor at Monju, on Japan's west coast, due to start
operation next spring.
Officials estimate that stocks will last about three years, after which
Japan will have to import another shipload of plutonium from Britain or
France. In January Japan shipped 1.1 tonnes of plutonium from a reprocessing
plant owned by Cogema, the French nuclear fuels group, causing an
international outcry from environmentalists.
David Lascelles adds: British Nuclear Fuels, the owner of Thorp, said its
main German and Japanese customers had reaffirmed their commitment to Thorp
contracts.
In an open letter, Mr Takeo Matsunaga, secretary-general of the overseas
reprocessing committee which represents the 10 Japanese utilities with
contracts to reprocess their fuel at Thorp, says: 'The Japanese government
as well as the Japanese utilities strongly support the early commencement of
Thorp operation.'
Dr Karl Staebler, chairman of the VDEW nuclear sub-group which represents
Thorp's German customers, said German utilities would abide by the contracts
they had signed with BNF for the first 10 years of Thorp operation.
