FT  21 MAY 93 / Waigel suffers political setback at home
A CHASTENED Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, is set to stay on
in Bonn to wrestle with the budgetary headaches of German unification, after
he failed in an attempt to take over as prime minister in his home state of
Bavaria.
The man now regarded as odds-on favourite for the Bavarian job is Mr Edmund
Stoiber, the conservative interior minister in the Bavarian government and a
close confidant of the late Franz-Josef Strauss, the longest-serving
post-war Bavarian premier.
The solution, to be presented to a meeting of the party leadership of the
Bavaria-based Christian Social Union (CSU) today, is good news for
Chancellor Helmut Kohl. He will not have to find a new man to fill the
unpopular job of finance minister at a time of acute budget stringency, and
in the run-up to a whole series of state and national elections.
It amounts to a serious setback, however, for the political ambitions of Mr
Waigel, who had clearly set his heart on the state premier's job in Munich.
He now knows that in his home base, he cannot match the support of Mr
Stoiber, the hard man of the CSU and now seen as a certain future party
leader.
The planned compromise will leave Mr Waigel as party leader in the CSU, with
his position ostensibly enhanced, provided he remains in Bonn. There he has
always shown himself to be a loyal and likeable lieutenant to Mr Kohl in the
ruling coalition. As far as Bavarians are concerned, he may have been too
easy to accommodate, unlike the prickly Mr Strauss before him.
An important factor in the outcome is the decision of CSU party barons on
who can best resist the advance of the far-right Republican party in next
year's state, national and European elections. Mr Stoiber, who has taken a
strong anti-immigration and tough law-and-order stance, is seen to be the
obvious local leader. Mr Waigel's problem is that the Bonn Finance Ministry
is a poisoned political chalice - above all at such a time of almost
permanent budget cutting.
Only on Wednesday, Mr Kohl served notice that another ferocious round of
savings was needed to keep the 1994 budget under control. Tax revenues are
estimated to fall more than DM100bn (Pounds 40.6bn) short of the original
forecast up to 1996, because of the current recession and rising
unemployment.
