FT  21 JAN 93 / International Company News: Tenneco chief reveals illness
MR MICHAEL Walsh, chief executive of Tenneco for just over a year and the
architect of a rapid turnround in the company's fortunes, revealed yesterday
he was suffering from a brain tumour, but said this would not affect his
ability to carry out his work.
He said he had been advised that the median survival rate for patients with
this condition, detected this early, and undergoing the kind of radiation
and chemotherapy treatment he intended, was approximately five to six years,
with half doing better than that, and some much better.
Tenneco's shares dropped Dollars 1 3/8 in morning trading and finally closed
Dollars 2 down on the day at Dollars 42.
Mr Walsh, 50, is a tough manager who revitalised the Union Pacific railroad
before joining Tenneco in late 1991, with a mandate to shake up the ailing
conglomerate.
He quickly turned around its earnings and cut its burdensome debt to capital
ratio but Wall Street analysts are still waiting for proof of a sustained
recovery at its most troubled subsidiary, agricultural equipment
manufacturer JI Case.
Mr Walsh said the 'mid-grade tumour' had been identified at an early stage
and the only symptom was a slight limp in his left leg. The ailment in no
way affected his commitment to the company.
His doctor declared that he could continue to 'carry out the full range of
his responsibilities at Tenneco now, during treatment, and for the
foreseeable future'.
He only discovered he had a tumour on Tuesday. His remarkably rapid and full
disclosure of the problem is in line with his face-the-facts style of
management and contrasts with much greater privacy over medical matters at
most US companies.
TLC Beatrice, a large, privately-owned food company, disclosed that its
chairman, Mr Reginald Lewis, had brain cancer on Monday, by which time he
was in a coma in hospital. He died on Tuesday.
Mr Walsh said he had decided to announce his condition because not to have
done so would have led to rumours and speculation which could have put
investors at risk.
