FT  13 JUL 93 / Action plan for World Bank: Moves to improve project
supervision
THE World Bank has increased its budget for supervision activities by 12 per
cent for the current year as part of its efforts to improve the
effectiveness of its lending.
Mr Ernest Stern, a World Bank managing director and acting president while
Mr Lewis Preston, the president, is recovering from surgery, said yesterday
that the new action plan agreed at a board meeting last week would
accelerate a cultural change within the bank and should help to improve the
management of the 1,850 projects in its portfolio.
'Central to the plan is the commitment to make the management of projects
under implementation as important as making new loans. Only sound,
on-the-ground results - the development impact of projects - are true
measures of the bank's contribution to sustainable development,' Mr Stern
said.
The new action plan comes in response to last year's report by a taskforce
headed by Mr Willi Wapenhans, a World Bank veteran, which identified a sharp
decline in the quality of the bank's portfolio, with particular problems in
Africa and in the agricultural sector.
At the heart of the plan is a new determination to manage the bank's entire
portfolio of projects within each country as a unit, instead of project by
project.
Mr Stern said country reviews would in future be conducted annually for big
borrower countries, and on a regular basis for smaller borrowers.
Over half of the bank's biggest country portfolios, however, have already
undergone review, and as a result a number of projects have been cancelled
or redesigned.
In India, a review led to the cancellation of projects totalling Dollars
1.3bn (Pounds 866m), while a similar review in Brazil brought the
cancellation of five big projects worth Dollars 800m, substantial redesign
of 14 more projects, mostly in the agricultural sector, and lesser changes
to 14 others.
Mr Stern insisted, however, that the fundamental responsibility for ensuring
that projects were properly implemented lay with the borrower, not the bank.
'The bank's efforts to improve the development impact of its work,
ultimately, can only be as successful as the efforts taken by our borrowers
to help themselves,' Mr Stern said.
The action plan also sets out new criteria for climbing up the World Bank
career ladder, with staff winning promotion less for their ability to push
through new loans and more for their ability to follow through on existing
projects.
