FT  04 DEC 93 / Arts: Louvre spreads its wings - The power and politics
behind the new Richelieu wing, one of President Mitterrand's Grand Projets
Winter descended on Paris this week. An icy chill fell over the city. Snow
fell only to melt into ugly slush. Yet day after day hundreds of people
queued patiently, and not so patiently, in the freezing courtyard of the
Louvre Museum to see the sumptuous new Richelieu wing.
The new wing is the old home of the French finance ministry that has been
reclaimed by the Louvre, or the Grand Louvre, as it is now called, to house
some of its finest collections: from the splendid salons of Napoleon III and
the 7th century BC Assyrian Palace of King Sargon II to the exquisite
paintings by Rubens that depict the life of the Marie de Medicis.
The Louvre collections have long been regarded as the richest in the world,
thanks to the relish with which the 1789 revolutionaries ransacked the
French royal family's possessions and the efficiency with which Napoleon I's
soldiers executed his order to plunder everything that glistened on their
military expeditions. The opening of the Richelieu wing finally furnishes
the museum's treasures with a fitting home.
But the triumph of the opening masks a bitter political battle between
President Francois Mitterrand, who commissioned the Grand Louvre
construction scheme as part of the Grands Projets that he initiated under
the 1980s socialist governments, and the current conservative government,
which favours a very different approach to architecture.
The conservatives were out in force for the opening ceremony. Edouard
Balladur, the prime minister, was there; as was Jacques Chirac, the wily
mayor of Paris who is still (barring a last minute challenge by Balladur)
the right's likeliest presidential contender, accompanied by his old ally,
the current arts minister, Jacques Toubon. But their forced smiles did
nothing to disguise the fact that the stars of the ceremony were President
Mitterrand and the former socialist arts minister, Jack Lang.
The Grands Projets are Francois Mitterrand's most visible legacy to France.
The Grand Louvre scheme, conceived by IM Pei, the Chinese-American
architect, is the biggest and boldest of all the projets. By the time it is
completed in 1997 the work on the Louvre will have taken ten years and cost
Dollars 1bn.
The Richelieu wing has enabled the museum to add 21,500 square metres of
extra exhibition space and to show 12,000 works, a quarter of which were
previously in storage including the Renaissance tapestries (too big to be
squeezed into the old galleries) and an Islamic collection that has not been
seen by the public for 50 years. By comparison, the National Gallery in
London crams 2,200 works into 10,334 square metres.
The style of the new Louvre bears the unmistakable stamp of Francois
Mitterrand. The leitmotif of his architectural policy has been the marriage
of the monumental and the modern that Pei evoked in the first phase of the
Grand Louvre scheme: the uncompromisingly contemporary glass pyramid that he
plonked in the centre of the grand, old Cour Carrousel.
Pei has adopted the same strategy of blending the old with the new in the
Richelieu wing, but the effect is far subtler. At the centre of the new wing
are three magnificent courtyards with glazed roofs. The Cour Marly and Cour
Puget contain the sculpture that once graced the royal gardens. The Cour
Khorsabad is dominated by a pair of gigantic winged bulls from ancient
Assyria. Any contemporary features, such as the giant circle that Pei has
carved out of the Cour Puget wall, are so elegant and economical that they
blend perfectly with the original interior.
So far the Richelieu wing has been a roaring success. The number of weekly
visitors to the Louvre has doubled to 230,000 since the opening.
The new galleries not only cement the Louvre's reputation as the doyenne of
the world's great museums, but strengthens Paris's claim to be the cultural
capital of Europe.
This is, of course, exactly what President Mitterrand intended when he
initiated the Grands Projets. But it also poses a dilemma for the Balladur
government given that such a prominent part of French cultural policy is
indelibly linked to the socialist president.
