FT  16 SEP 93 / Florida struggles to limit damage to tourist industry
FLORIDA was yesterday scrambling to limit the damage to its biggest-earning
industry, tourism, after the killing of a British holidaymaker on Tuesday.
The state government ordered police to guard rest areas off main highways 24
hours a day and to patrol trunk roads. It also set up a free telephone
number for tourist safety tips, and asked for Dollars 4m (Pounds 2.5m) of
emergency federal aid to pay for police surveillance around Miami.
The police search for the killers of Mr Gary Colley, murdered outside
Tallahassee in northern Florida, intensified yesterday. Police found the
getaway car in Monticello, near Tallahassee. They believe the killers are
still in the area and are rounding up teenagers who fit the description.
Mr Colley was the ninth foreigner to be killed in the state in the past
year, and his murder came less than a week after a German tourist was shot
outside Miami airport.
Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand and his pregnant wife were driving their rented car
when it was hit from behind. The tourists drove on, but assailants opened
fire from their car, killing the 33-year-old German.
Travellers arriving at Miami airport at night are advised to stay in hotels
close by, and those who rent a car and take the road from the airport to
Miami Beach are given detailed instructions on how to arrive safely.
The Avis rental agency has large signs inside its cars advising drivers not
to stop on the way from the airport under any circumstances, especially if
bumped from behind.
Mr Greg Farmer, state commerce secretary, said about 25 per cent of European
package bookings were now being cancelled. 'There is no question that the
European market will be affected,' said Mr Mayco Villafana, of the Miami
Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau.
The Florida tourism industry is worth about Dollars 31bn a year, employs
about 650,000 people - 12.4 per cent of the non-farm workforce  - and is the
state's largest industry.
About 40m tourists visit Florida every year, 17 per cent of them from
abroad.
Florida has the worst violent crime rates in the US, slightly ahead of New
York, though crime rates have recently fallen.
Dr John Crotts, an assistant professor at the University of Florida, says an
out-of-state visitor has a 91 in a 100,000 chance of becoming a victim of
crime - better odds than for Honolulu in the 1980s.
Picture, Page 4
