FT  26 MAY 93 / Steinkuhler's exit leaves left in disarray
THE FALL of Mr Franz Steinkuhler, the one real star in the German trade
union firmament, was in the end entirely self-inflicted.
Few of his senior colleagues in the mighty IG Metall, the 3.3m strong
engineering workers union, really wanted him to go. He was an outstanding
union leader, a tough negotiator, a good speaker, and an instinctive
politician.
He quit yesterday 'against the advice and the requests of many colleagues',
in his own words. And yet few doubted that he had to go.
But then his offence was entirely self-inflicted too: to speculate in the
shares of companies controlled by Daimler-Benz, the industrial giant on
whose supervisory board he sits. It was the fact of his share-dealing - to
the tune of more than DM1m (Pounds 300,000) - rather than the question of
whether he had insider knowledge, which finally destroyed him in the eyes of
his peers.
His loyal spokesman, Mr Jorg Barczynski, admitted on Monday night: 'There is
fundamental criticism of his share-dealing from all concerned. But then
there are two factions within the union.
'One group says he must resign regardless. The second group, which is much
larger, says we did not elect him as a good share-dealer. We elected him for
his strength and experience as a union leader.'
In spite of such loyalty, Mr Steinkuhler decided yesterday to quit, and his
resignation may help to limit the damage to his union in particular, and the
trade union movement in general. What is certain is that the whole affair is
another devastating blow to the left in German politics, still reeling from
the resignation of Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the Social Democrats (SPD),
only three weeks ago.
It also raises questions about the exploitation of the supervisory board
system in German companies, and has finally focused attention on the absence
of any legal control on insider dealing in Germany. That must raise the
pressure for early legislation, promised by the government but proving very
slow in the drafting.
Mr Engholm and Mr Steinkuhler were probably the two most popular single
figures on the left, and their departure leaves the SPD and its union
supporters in serious disarray, in the run-up to a mammoth election year in
1994 (with no fewer than 19 separate national, state, local government and
European elections).
Mr Steinkuhler's most likely successor is Mr Klaus Zwickel, the current
number two, and the union's main wages expert. He is a safe pair of hands,
but a good deal less inspiring than his chief. That may well mean a less
militant IG Metall, at least for the immediate future.
Perhaps more damaging for the union has been the fact and outcome of the
strikes in east Germany, where no one has been the winner of a largely
pointless dispute. The union has been forced to concede a two-year extension
of the process of wage equalisation with the west, and, more seriously, the
option for any company to plead extraordinary circumstances and re-negotiate
a plant-level deal. Given the pressure for similar plant-level bargaining in
the west, it could be the thin end of the wedge.
The supervisory board system in German companies, although not for the first
time seen as a source of insider dealing, is too well established to be
questioned. The fact that Mr Steinkuhler has quit, and not tried to stay in
office, will also counter those who challenge the wisdom of putting trade
unionists on the board.
As for the pressure for legislation against insider dealing, it has not yet
had much effect on the Finance Ministry. A draft law, including stiff fines
and the ultimate penalty of jail, is promised by the summer. It is unlikely
to become full law until well into 1994.
One other consequence is that the affair may make companies like
Daimler-Benz more careful about the handling of price-sensitive information.
