FT  25 AUG 93 / Management: Success tool or passing fad?
As management fashions go, few have been more pervasive than Total Quality
Management. Over two-thirds of Britain's largest companies are converts to
TQM, fervently believing that it holds the secret to business success.
But experience suggests otherwise. Evidence is emerging that TQM schemes are
failing because they have been poorly designed and implemented.
There is also a growing belief that the concept may be flawed - rather than
being a management panacea, TQM is beginning to look like another fad.
A recent survey of Britain's largest 500 companies by marketing consultancy,
Abram, Hawkes, shows that many of the schemes are half baked: two-thirds do
not set quality performance targets, and even when they do exist, less than
half have a mechanism for reward when those targets are met.
Perhaps more alarming, TQM schemes do not seem to be delivering their
supposed financial benefits. Although most companies surveyed say that the
schemes have increased customer satisfaction, only one-third have noticed an
increase in sales and only a half have reported higher profits.
Overall, less than 50 per cent of the companies say they are satisfied with
TQM, and only 8 per cent are 'very satisfied'. The results are particularly
surprising as the questions were addressed to managers responsible for the
quality programmes.
One of the reasons for the frequent failure of TQM programmes to deliver
so-called quality, the study suggests, is they are sold to the companies by
outside consultancies that have little interest in the long-term success of
such schemes. The research shows that nearly 60 per cent of companies use
external quality consultants when planning total quality implementation.
Alternatively, schemes may be failing because they are not properly
implemented: many companies complain that middle managers have not supported
or understood what TQM entailed.
A report on TQM within the UK's 500 largest companies, available from Abram,
Hawkes. Tel 0444-441176.
