FT  03 DEC 93 / World Trade News: Cruise ship lifeline for Cuban economy -
Castro's latest attempt to attract dollars from tourism
When the cruise ship Santiago de Cuba sails later this month from Havana, it
will underline the extent to which revolutionary fervour is giving way to
pragmatism as Cuba tries to adjust to economic hardship.
On board ship, there will be gambling - although it will not be allowed in
Cuban ports. The government of President Fidel Castro is now accepting an
activity it banned when it closed Havana's notorious gambling parlours after
the 1959 revolution.
Compared with the previous policy shifts forced on the Cuban government by
the collapse of the Soviet Union and its financial support for Cuba, this is
small. Among other things, the government has been aggressively pursuing
previously unwelcome foreign investors and has legalised use of the
once-banned US dollar.
The cruise operation - a joint venture between the state-owned Havanatur and
European interests, including the Italian ship agents Fratelli Cosulich - is
the latest attempt to attract tourist dollars to the country.
Mr Castro is now laying much emphasis on the promotion of tourism. He turned
up last month on the holiday island of Cayo Coco at a ceremonial signing of
a Spanish-Cuban joint venture and mingled with tourists, even at one stage
watching a dance performance in a discotheque. The joint venture involves
the Spanish group Guitart Hotels investing Dollars 20m (Pounds 13.4m) over
10 years and the local Cubanacana SA contributing the equivalent in local
currency.
He spoke of fighting the country's financial problems through tourism and
told Cubans to prepare for an influx of foreign visitors.
The president has also heaped praise on Spain, probably the most important
source of foreign investment in the Cuban tourist industry, and has
described Spanish skill and enterprise as a great advantage to the island.
He even told an audience of Havana Communist party delegates this month that
sugar was 'no longer the country's main economic source' and that the
tourist industry had developed to such an extent it was now 'Cuba's main
financial lifeline'.
The number of visitors to Cuba has increased from 289,000 in 1987 to 460,000
last year, and is forecast to grow again this year. Visitors are also
spending more. According to the government, daily spending rose to Dollars
67 a day in 1990 to Dollars 89 in 1992, and is predicted to increase to
Dollars 100 in 1995.
But there are doubts among external observers whether tourism is as
important as the government suggests. Mr Jorge Dominguez, a Harvard
professor and visiting fellow at the Washington-based study group
InterAmerican Dialogue, says that total foreign direct investment in Cuba is
an elusive figure, but probably amounts to less than Dollars 1bn. 'That
means the claim that tourism is significant rests on its generation of
foreign exchange.'
Yet the foreign exchange earnings usually quoted by Cuban sources represent
gross, rather than net earnings. A report produced in March by the Cuban
Grupo de Turismo said that tourism generated Dollars 530m in gross
hard-currency receipts in 1992 - four times the 1987 level - and directly
accounted for 62,000 jobs, 1.6 per cent of total employment.
A report published in April by La Sociedad Economica, a moderate
London-based exile group which favours the country's transformation to a
market economy, also points out that the policy of keeping tourists in
enclaves 'limits the market for locally-produced goods and services, so
reducing the beneficial effect that tourism could generate in the wider
economy'.
The net hard-currency benefit is thus significantly less than the gross
receipts. Tourists have to be serviced by imports, such as Scotch whisky and
video cassettes. Sales commissions, tour operating profits, and aviation
expenses must also be paid.
This suggests, says Mr Dominguez, the net annual hard currency gain to Cuba
is between Dollars 100m and Dollars 300m.
While this compares with the Dollars 220m earned in 1992 from nickel
exports, it is still significantly less than its earnings from sugar
exports, even though they fell to their lowest level this year since 1963.
This year's harvest of 4.2m tonnes would generate Dollars 800m-Dollars 900m
in export revenues.
'Tourism, as at present structured, offers only very limited relief to
Cuba's economic crisis,' argues La Sociedad Economica. This could change if
Americans were allowed to go to Cuba - but the end of the US embargo still
appears a long way off.
