FT  05 NOV 93 / US Rethink on Drugs: Clinton's commitment doubted
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's new director of drug control policy, Mr Lee Brown,
received a frosty welcome last month when he presented the administration's
interim drug strategy to the Senate.
Democrats joined Republicans in criticising the skimpy document. Senator
Joseph Biden, judiciary committee chairman, complained that the
administration had not 'taken this seriously enough.'
The 'war against drugs' waged in the past four years has been viewed in many
quarters as a failure. Although casual and first-time drug use has declined
dramatically since 1988, marijuana and LSD consumption seem to be on the
rise again.
Hard-core use has barely been dented: the purity of cocaine sold on the
street - an indicator of the supply situation - has risen again in the past
two years after declining from 1987 to 1990, and drug enforcement officials
fear a dramatic resurgence in heroin abuse.
Critics complain that the drug war strategy has focused too much on the
supply end, with more than 70 per cent of the drug control budget spent on
law enforcement and on interdiction efforts to stop drugs arriving in the
US.
The demand end, they charge, has been neglected. Treatable drug addicts
cannot obtain places in the inadequate drug treatment centres, and even
addicts convicted and sent to prison are released without treatment.
Mr Brown's interim strategy appears to answer many of these complaints. Step
one in his document is 'an aggressive drug treatment strategy with hard-core
use as its primary target.'
The strategy cites a study by the Rand Corporation, a think tank and
consultancy, pointing out that only around 20 per cent of cocaine users are
heavy addicts, but that they account for two-thirds of total consumption. It
also argues that hard-core use harms society most, fuelling the wave of
drug-related violence that has ravaged US cities.
Two things, however, annoy the administration's critics in Congress: the
absence of any noticeable changes in funding to back up the changes in
rhetoric, and the lack of presidential involvement.
This year's drug control budget may not be a fair indication of the
administration's ultimate intentions. Drafted in a hurry, and before Mr
Brown was even named to his post, the Dollars 13.1bn budget submitted by Mr
Clinton bore a striking resemblance to his predecessor's.
The White House showed little willingness to fight for this budget.
Officials accepted cuts in treatment programmes proposed in the House of
Representatives until Mr Brown turned and fought.
But the lack of any indication in the interim strategy that resources will
be shifted among the different components of the anti-drug programme, as
well as the absence of any pledge of increased overall funding, has raised
questions in Congress.
When Mr Brown was appointed his position was raised to cabinet level, but
his staff was cut from 146 people to 25. Mr Clinton needs to put more
substance into his anti-drug drive if he is to convince Congress that that
move was not symbolic of his lack of commitment to the issue.
