FT  22 JUL 93 / Kenyans close bank in bid to placate donors
THE KENYAN government has closed down a scandal-tainted local bank, an
important step towards mending relations with the World Bank and other
donors.
Exchange Bank and its sister trading company Goldenberg International were
at the centre of a scandal based on 'ghost exports' of gold and diamond
jewellery to Switzerland and Dubai.
By forging export receipts for more than Dollars 50m (Pounds 33.3m) worth of
jewellery, Exchange Bank was able to bid for scarce foreign exchange at
central bank auctions and obtain a 35 per cent refund from the government on
its fictitious exports.
When Exchange Bank ran into trouble in May the Central Bank of Kenya bailed
it out with an advance of Ks15bn (Pounds 128m) in short-term Treasury bills.
To date there is no evidence that this has been repaid.
The scandal was one of the big issues worrying the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund. IMF officials, who have visited Kenya four
times in as many months, had insisted that action be taken to clean up the
financial system as a pre-condition for resumption of balance of payments
assistance, suspended in November 1991.
On Monday a short statement signed by Mr Musalia Mudavadi, finance minister,
said Exchange Bank was being closed immediately following the results of an
external audit into its operations.
'Its records are not in order and not kept up to date. Moreover, there is
evidence of malpractice,' Mr Mudavadi's statement said. 'Its management has
tended to engage in speculative activities which are not only inconsistent
with established banking practices but are prejudicial to the interests of
depositors and the general public.'
Four other financial institutions, dubbed 'political banks' due to the
patronage they enjoy from high-ranking members of government, are also being
subjected to external audits at the request of the IMF. The opposition
FORD-Kenya party, which has led a campaign to expose the activities of the
'political banks', yesterday welcomed Mr Mudavadi's decision.
'Exchange Bank, along with a handful of other banks, threatened the fabric
of Kenya's financial and economic infrastructure and are a major cause of
our inflation problems,' said Mr Robert Shaw, FORD-Kenya's economic
spokesman.
Mr Shaw urged the government to arrest and charge the owners and directors
of the bank with economic sabotage. He said government and central bank
officials who aided Exchange Bank in its operations should be dismissed and
prosecuted.
Mr Mudavadi, who took over the finance portfolio in January, has won the
respect of foreign bankers in Nairobi for his efforts to clean up the
banking system.
Financial corruption lies at the heart of the political patronage enjoyed by
leading members of President Daniel arap Moi's government, but foreign
bankers question whether Mr Mudavadi has sufficient clout within government
to force the sacking of corrupt officials.
Vice-President George Saitoti, the former finance minister, who is also
minister for planning and development, last month defended the operations of
Exchange Bank in parliament, saying he had approved them in compliance with
the law.
