FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (1): Anxieties on the Nile - Early progress
in IMF-led reforms has been encouraging, but the pace of structural
adjustment proves more stubborn. The government is determined to crack down
hard on the threat posed by militant Islamic groups
EGYPT has suffered an unsettling year: a bomb inside one of the pyramids,
tourists shot at and bombed, bloody security force reprisals against an
intensified campaign of Islamic extremist violence, all this and an
earthquake which ravaged some of Cairo's poorest districts. For the
apocalypse-minded, of whom there are growing numbers among Egypt's
disconcerted middle classes, it all betokens ill.
These Jeremiahs point anxiously at an apparently co-ordinated campaign of
terror waged by the underground Gama'a al-Islamiyya extremists and at the
rising joblessness and economic dislocation on which they seem to feed. They
point at the Islamic 'infiltration' and control of most of Egypt's
influential professional associations. The most alarmist speak of an
irreversible tide of Islamic fundamentalism now directly threatening the
state. 'These people are carrying out a plan to destroy Egypt,' says Mr Said
Ashmawy, chief justice of the supreme court for state security. 'What is
going on now is a civil war between the police and the terrorists'.
But if any of these concerns are shared within Egypt's government, there are
scant signs. President Hosni Mubarak, in an interview before his recent trip
to Washington, was relaxed, even jocular. 'It is not a threat to the
regime,' he insists, a message he carried with him to the US where, standing
beside President Bill Clinton, he declared Egypt 'as strong as ever', its
leadership 'firm and confident'.
Of the government's firmness there can be little doubt. Its response to the
Gama'a's attacks against tourist targets and police has been, by the
president's admission 'heavy handed'. Thousands of alleged activists have
been detained and 49 tried by military court. Thousands of troops entered
the Cairo suburb of Imbaba in one raid to round up 600 suspects. Almost 50
people, including at least 11 security officers, died in gunbattles during
raids on suspected Gama'a hideouts in March alone. Amnesty International,
echoing growing concern among human rights groups, said that the government
appeared to be waging a shoot-to-kill policy against the extremists.
Few of Egypt's middle class worriers oppose such state violence. The local
and foreign business community, in particular, having seen the Gama'a
attacks wipe up to Dollars 700m off this year's precious tourist revenues,
believe that only such a crackdown will, in the short term, safeguard
Egypt's secure image for investors and restore to its previous buoyancy a
tourist industry which is Egypt's most sparkling economic prospect.
Few, equally, think repression alone is the answer. However much President
Mubarak jabs a finger of blame at Iran for sponsoring recent extremism - a
factor even senior foreign ministry officials privately play down - there is
near consensus elsewhere that the roots of the violence, and indeed of
creeping 'Islamisation,' are home-grown and more likely to spread than
wither if confronted solely by force. 'Ninety per cent of what you see is a
rising tide of protest, more than a rising tide of Islamic fundamentalism,'
says Mr Said al-Naggar, a former executive director of the World Bank who
last year set up New Civic Forum, a liberal think-tank and lobby group.
The protest, runs this widely held view, rises from the increasing hardship
of the great bulk of Egypt's 58m people for whom impressive macro-economic
progress under early stages of the country's International Monetary Fund and
World Bank reform programmes has yet to produce any real benefits. The
protest takes an Islamic voice, goes the critique, because the government
has closed or controlled almost all remaining space for political
expression.
The rise of Islamists to fill widening gaps, both economic and political,
was starkly suggested by the response of the Moslem Brotherhood and other
Islamic groups after last November's earthquake. Before the government's
creaky bureaucracy had begun to deploy shelter and food to the broken
streets in Cairo's poorest quarters, Islamic activists had smartly moved in
to provide at least some of both.
To be sure, the government is waging hard the economic battle. Earlier this
year Egypt sealed its first IMF agreement since it broke off discussions
with the Fund in 1987, having slashed its budget deficit, stabilised the
currency, bolstered reserves, pushed its balance of payments into surplus
and embarked on structural reforms to the real economy, including a
four-year privatisation programme.
These will be the focus of a second deal, under discussion.
The imperative for reform is urgent. By official estimates Egypt's
inefficient dirigiste economy needs to be sufficiently rejuvenated,
preferably by the private sector, to produce up to 500,000 new jobs a year
for Egypt's young and still fast-growing population. Mr al-Naggar, who says
such figures ignore massive underemployment in the sprawling public sector,
believes the figure nearer 900,000 jobs yearly - implying annual growth
rates of a presently implausible 8 per cent. The economy this year may grow
by 1 per cent.
But the next, structural, reforms will also be the toughest to achieve in
the face of deep vested interests, which will be threatened by further
tariff cuts and sharpened competition, and the government's limited capacity
to enforce increasing complex measures.
Further, the government has been extremely cautious about pushing reforms
too far too fast, haunted by clear memories of the severe rioting after food
price rises in 1977.
In these concerns, the IMF and World Bank are exceptionally sensitive,
heavily influenced by US-led emphasis on Egypt's strategic value to the
west. This importance, which both the US and Egypt mutually reaffirmed
during Mr Mubarak's trip to Washington, was highlighted by Cairo's staunch
role as shepherd of the Arab allies during the Gulf war. Recognition of this
alone won Egypt tremendously favourable debt-relief, both through the the
write-off of US and Gulf debts totalling nearly Dollars 13bn and through
staged forgiveness of its then Dollars 20bn Paris Club owings tied to
progress with the IMF.
Since the Gulf war, Mr Mubarak has sought to burnish this strategic value by
attempting to place himself and Egypt at the heart of the Middle East peace
process, capitalising on the country's unique ability to be interlocutor
with the Palestinians, the other Arab parties and the Israelis in efforts to
resolve the crisis over the Israeli-deported Palestinians. His anti-Iranian
rhetoric also chimes in neatly with similar such statements recently
emanating from the US State Department.
But if the west can offer a strong buttress for Egypt's economic reforms,
not least by the continued provision of aid, it cannot address directly the
political challenge offered by Egypt's Islamic groups, moderate and
extremist alike. The challenge, or even threat, was clearly voiced recently
by Mr Mahmoun Hudeibi, spokesman for the formally banned Moslem Brotherhood.
'Unless the political system changes in Egypt, and there are more freedoms,'
he says, 'terrorism will intensify. The only way towards political and
social rectification is reform of the regime itself'.
In the Brotherhood's eyes, these changes would be to allow it to participate
directly in the country's political system, from which it is barred by a
constitutional ban on parties based on religion. But Mr Mubarak will have
none of this. Not only has the government introduced legislation aimed at
diluting Brotherhood influence in the professional associations it now
dominates, but Mr Mubarak also brandishes the example of Algeria to show
what happens if Islamic parties are given their head.
But neither do Egypt's liberals, either secular or Islamic, believe that
they are being allowed sufficient political space in which to develop an
articulate response to the militants. Expressing such grievances recently,
Mr Nabil Abdel-Fattah, of the Al-Ahram centre for political and strategic
studies, wrote: 'The ground rules do not exist for the kind of political
game which makes it possible to reach consensus among various political
parties, and imposes obligations and duties as well as providing guarantees
for competing political forces'.
Political options in Egypt, argue such liberals, are being narrowed to a
false choice between Islam of an increasingly militant stripe and the
coterie of figures which has run the country, largely unchanged, since Mr
Mubarak took power more than a decade ago. The call for at least a
rejuvenation of the regime is widespread among prominent Egyptians. 'There
are at least 500 people in this country who could run it as well as the US,'
says one leading businessman. 'But the government will not allow them in'.
Such a choice looks the more unhealthy amid newspaper stories of scandal in
high places and the increasing willingness of critics to brand the
government as not only out of touch, but as touched with corruption. 'The
rising tide is nothing but a protest at what people see as injustice,
corruption and the violation of human rights,' says Mr al-Naggar.
While the government has political control, and a preponderance of force, Mr
Mubarak is probably right that violent Islamic extremism poses no immediate
threat. It is almost equally certain that the government's reliance on
political control and force alone will do nothing for the confidence of
Egypt's Jeremiahs - or to thin their ranks.
