FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (17): Tough task for Basu - Profile, State
Bank of India
FINANCIAL sector reforms are ushering in unprecedented changes at the State
Bank of India. It will have to reach Basle norms for capital adequacy before
March next year and meet increasingly stiff competition in the market place.
This is tough time for the bank, which is recovering from India's worst
securities scandal and facing the possible loss of monopoly business for
state-owned enterprises following economic liberalisation.
The State Bank of India came into existence 38 years ago after the Reserve
Bank of India, the central bank, purchased a majority stake at Imperial Bank
of India, the Scottish-owned bank, in order to make the State Bank an
instrument of economic development. It has now 8,800 branches and deposits
of Rs663bn.
Many of the bank's problems stem from government policy requiring leading
banks to be nationalised and the entire banking system to set up branches in
rural areas and lend 40 per cent of their credits to sectors - such as
agriculture and small businesses - designated as priority areas by the
government.
This meant that around two-thirds of all lending by banks was in effect
directed by the state. Under the social policy of extending credit into
rural areas and supporting smaller companies the banks have been required to
subsidise loans and shoulder bad debts.
The government is now pushing ahead with reforms of this over-staffed and
slow-moving sector as part of the reform programme. In January it said that
it would allow private banks to be established.
Reforms come on the heels of a setback suffered by the bank last year when
it had to provide Rs7.06bn for losses in the Bombay securities scandal that
rocked the financial system. In the wake of the scandal, the bank lost its
chairman, MN Goiporia, who retired prematurely and its managing director Mr
V. Mahadevan, who was sacked.
Several top bankers left the bank for greener pastures and many are targeted
for hiring by the new commercial banks that are being floated.
Never before has competition been so intense. All banks are now seeking blue
chip customers so that they can make lower provisions to cover risks. The
State Bank has reached 5 per cent capital adequacy on its Rs663bn deposits
and will hit the target of 8 per cent through recapitalisation.
The bank's new chairman, Mr Dipankar Basu, is treading warily to stabilise
operations, boost staff morale and stem the flight of talent. Mr Basu has
hired management consultants to advise him on enhancing the staff response
to customer needs in the changing environment.
An equity issue is planned later this year, making the State Bank the first
to go to market. The Reserve Bank, which now owns 98 per cent of the bank,
will see its stake fall by a third to 70 per cent.
Mr Basu, enjoying the newly ordained freedom, plans to close uneconomic
branches. 'The exercise will not be worth it unless (closure) is in
hundreds,' Mr Basu says. Nearly 2,400 of the banks's 8,800 branches are
making losses at present.
But his determination to have a lean bank does not go beyond network
reduction and certainly does not extend to staff reduction. This is to be
taken care of by natural wastage and a ban on new recruitment, Mr Basu adds.
Two other components of cost cutting will be 'significant automation', as Mr
Basu puts it, and elimination of subsidies in the pricing of products. The
minimum balance of Rs100 for a savings deposit account with cheque facility
stipulated 20 years ago when the the rupee was worth three times its present
value, is in urgent need of review.
As the country's, and probably the world's, largest bank in terms of
branches, the State Bank has the sector's best reach. The second largest
Indian bank has half the number of branches. 'We are not unduly perturbed
about competition. Our strength is the network,' says Mr Basu.
The State Bank is aiming to be a universal institution offering all types of
services under one roof. Rationalisation will affect the bank's seven
subsidiaries, which have a combined 4,000-branch network and deposits of
Rs188bn. A proposal has been put forward to merge them into a single bank to
eliminate duplication.
SBI Capital Markets, one of the bank's subsidiaries, is a merchant bank and
undertakes leasing. SBI Fund Management is a mutual fund. The bank is also
involved in factoring and housing finance.
The London-registered SBI European Bank administers the bank's international
network and provides its parent with banking intelligence.
The next big initiative for the State Bank is in the Far East and the former
Soviet Union where it plans to set up branches.
