FT  06 DEC 93 / Hopes dashed of subsidy curbs on shipbuilding
US hopes of negotiating multinational limitations on shipbuilding subsidies
were dashed last week when negotiations in the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development were adjourned until next year.
Mr John Stocker, president of the Shipbuilders Council of America and one of
the prime movers behind the effort to reform shipbuilding subsidy, dismissed
as 'a ploy on the part of our trading partners' the alleged reason for delay
 -that the negotiators wanted to concentrate on completing the Uruguay
Round.
'They have succeeded in dragging their feet for 4 1/2 years, so why would
they change their behaviour now?' Mr Stocker said. He accused the
negotiators from Japan, South Korea, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the
European Union of wanting only 'to continue their market-distorting
shipbuilding and repair subsidy practices'.
The US wants to restrict direct and indirect subsidies to shipbuilders in
the form of loans, grants, debt forgiveness, tax benefits and research
funding above defined limits. The negotiators were reportedly unable to
agree on a permissible level for shipbuilding export financing or dumping of
ships in foreign markets.
The Clinton administration has set December 31, 1993, as a deadline for
agreement. The OECD talks were in response to an unfair trade petition filed
by US shipbuilders in 1989. Deadlines were set and ignored by the Bush
administration in 1990 and 1991.
Meanwhile, the Clinton administration has announced support for a 10-year
Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 800m) shipbuilding subsidies programme to help the US
maritime industry survive the end of Cold War production cuts. The bill
provides Dollars 2.1m a year per US ship in operating subsidies;
construction differential subsidies will cover the difference in costs
between a US ship and a comparable foreign-built one.
Congress may force the administration to act against foreign subsidies early
next year, according to Mr Stocker. Both congressional houses may begin to
move legislation, introduced last year, which would levy fines on ships
entering US harbours if they are registered in, owned or controlled by
countries which subsidise shipbuilding.
