FT  29 APR 93 / Leading Article: Diagnosing Africa's ills
WHEN OXFAM, one of Britain's leading aid agencies, warns that Africa's
economic crisis has put the continent on a knife edge, the world should take
note. From Ethiopia in the mid-1980s to Somalia in the 1990s, Oxfam and
other non-government organisations have sounded alarm bells that have
aroused public opinion and jolted western governments out of complacency or
indifference. This time, says Oxfam, the continent, not just a country, is
in jeopardy.
If its fledgling democracies are to survive and fragile peace agreements are
to hold, sub-Saharan Africa needs more help. Much of its external debt
should be written off; aid flows must be increased; and structural
adjustment programmes reformed, Oxfam argues in its recovery plan for the
region.
Oxfam's proposals would be enhanced by a more detached and comprehensive
examination of the causes of Africa's crisis. It puts most of the blame on
external villains: the IMF and the World Bank; the banks that lent money to
Africa in the 1970s; western governments which spend too much on defence and
too little on aid; industrialised nations which defend protectionist trade
regimes.
A markedly more cautious and inhibited approach characterises Oxfam's
analysis of Africa's shortcomings, past and present. Zaire's Mobutu and
Malawi's Banda are roundly and rightly condemned; but there is no appraisal,
for example, of ex-president Julius Nyerere's disastrous pursuit of African
socialism in Tanzania.
Harmful omissions
The report is right to note that the slump in world commodity prices has
cost Africa dearly. But it overlooks the fact that domestic policy failures
caused Africa's share of the market to fall. Western defence budgets may be
too high; but Africa's own military spending is still excessive.
These omissions undermine Oxfam's assertion that the structural adjustment
policies urged on Africa by the World Bank and the IMF have not halted the
continent's decline. Its analysis suggests that this 'failure' is almost
entirely the fault of the doctor and has little to do with the behaviour of
the patient. Yet in Nigeria and Kenya, World Bank-supported reforms have
been undermined by vested interests and endemic corruption.
Oxfam barely touches on Africa's compelling need to attract foreign
investment. The rate of return on foreign investment dropped from around 30
per cent in the 1960s to 2.5 per cent in the 1980s. Today, Africa's share of
global foreign direct investment is 0.6 per cent.
Alarming symptoms
Whatever the dispute about the cure, however, the symptoms of the disease
are alarming. The external debt crisis is getting worse not better, while
rescheduling has done little more than prolong the agony. Africa's debt was
Dollars 56bn in 1980, 29 per cent of GNP. Twelve years later, further
enervated by war and drought, it owes Dollars 180bn, over 100 per cent of
annual gross national product.
The IMF and the Bank are hard-pressed to find an African country where
structural adjustment has led to a sustained recovery that has not been
supported by continuing aid. Recovery is made all the more difficult by
trade hurdles. The average tariff on cocoa beans, an important African
export, is only 2.6 per cent, on chocolate nearly 12. Such tariff escalation
reinforces Africa's dependence on primary commodities by discouraging
investment in local processing.
However serious the constraints imposed by an unfavourable external
environment, there can be no excuse for the way that Oxfam underplays
domestic shortcomings. This may have something to do with the fact that it
has to live with the governments it criticises. But the report's inhibited
treatment of Africa's faults suggests some members of Oxfam are still
fighting under the banner of a discredited ideology, reluctant to surrender
a vision that harks back to the heyday of African socialism.
Oxfam weakens its own case. Its warning that Africa is in peril is timely.
But to the extent that its assessment of structural adjustment is
inadequate, the alternatives it proposes lose credibility. If Oxfam allows
erring African governments to avoid shouldering their share of the blame for
the continent's crisis, it does a disservice to Africa's citizens.
