FT  04 SEP 93 / Rise in M0 dashes hope of rate cut: Cheaper credit unlikely
by Budget
LINGERING HOPES for an early cut in interest rates were suppressed yesterday
by the news that the amount of money in circulation increased again in
August.
Bank of England figures showed that M0, mainly notes and coins in
circulation, grew a seasonally adjusted 0.3 per cent last month, to give a
year-on-year growth rate of 5.2 per cent.
This was the highest annual growth rate since July 1990 and compares with
4.8 per cent in July and 4.4 per cent in June.
The figure will be taken as a further sign of economic recovery because M0
has acted as a fairly reliable guide to levels of activity in the retail
sector since the end of the recession last year. Mr George Magnus, economist
at SG Warburg Securities, said: 'These figures suggest that the recovery is
going to continue at a reasonable pace.'
The rate of narrow money growth is now 1.2 percentage points above the
ceiling of the government's zero to 4 per cent monitor range for M0. Its
buoyancy indicates a steady recovery in retail spending.
However, economists said that the particularly sharp rise in the
year-on-year growth rate was partly due to a large increase in the annual
rate of bankers' operational deposits which make up a small proportion of
M0. These deposits are more influenced by conditions in the money markets
than by economic activity.
Mr Don Smith, UK economist at Midland Global Markets, said: 'The large
annual rise in M0 is due mainly to bankers' balances. The underlying trend
remains pretty flat.'
If bankers' balances are stripped out of the figures, notes and coins grew
by 4.8 per cent in the year to August, compared with 5.2 per cent in the
year to July.
Nonetheless, the resilience of M0 will reduce pressure on the government to
ease monetary policy in the near future.
There is some expectation for another base rate cut at the beginning of
October when the three political parties hold their annual conferences, but
many analysts do not expect to see lower rates at least until the Budget at
the end of November.
The Bank also announced no revision to broad M4 money. M4, M0 plus bank and
building society deposits, grew by 0.9 per cent on a seasonally-adjusted
basis in July to give an annual rise of 3.6 per cent.
The Treasury has set a 3 per cent to 9 per cent monitoring range for broad
M4 money growth. This has remained weak throughout this year.
