FT  16 NOV 93 / Puerto Rico seeks to strengthen its US links
MR Miguel Hernandez Agosto, leader of Puerto Rico's opposition Popular
Democratic party, is to ask the US Congress to expand the island's
'commonwealth' link with the US, by increasing tax incentives for industry,
removing limits on food stamps and imposing tariffs to protect agriculture.
This follows Sunday's referendum in which Puerto Ricans indicated by a slim
margin that they favoured an enhancement of their current quasi-colonial
ties with the US, rather than becoming the 51st state of the union.
Political independence was soundly rejected.
Figures published yesterday by the State Elections Commission indicated that
the commonwealth option received 48.4 per cent of the 1.7m votes cast,
statehood was supported by 46.2 per cent and independence by 4.4 per cent.
The result was a setback for Mr Pedro Rossello, the island's governor, whose
incumbent New Progressive party advocated statehood.
'The people have spoken on status and I heed the result,' Mr Rossello said.
'It was my commitment to hold this plebiscite, and I assume full
responsibility for its results.' The governor said he would pursue his
government's programmes based on the mandate he received in last year's
election.
Mr Agosto said he would begin negotiations soon with congressional leaders
in Washington to extend and make permanent tax incentives which have brought
mainland manufacturing companies to the island, but which are subject to
frequent review and changes in Washington.
The PDP leaders will also seek a statement from President Bill Clinton
defining the 'uniqueness' of Puerto Rico's current status. Saying Puerto
Rico was a territory of the US, President George Bush rescinded an executive
order by President John F Kennedy which allowed special treatment for Puerto
Rico.
Puerto Rico is officially described as having a 'freely associated'
relationship with the US. Puerto Ricans are US citizens, but cannot vote for
a president and do not pay federal income tax. The island's representation
in Washington is limited to a commissioner who has no vote to influence
legislation.
Mr Rossello claimed that the advocates of statehood had scored a victory in
the referendum, because they had 'brought the ideal nearer, closer to
becoming reality'. He said that in the 1952 referendum statehood was
supported by 12 per cent of Puerto Ricans, rising to 39 per cent in the 1967
vote, and had almost tied with votes for the commonwealth on Sunday.
