FT  31 JUL 93 / VW head seeks talks with GM over espionage dispute
THE HEAD of Volkswagen has asked for talks with his counterpart at General
Motors in an attempt to defuse the increasingly bitter row between the two
automotive groups over charges of industrial espionage.
Mr Ferdinand Piech had contacted Mr Jack Smith, proposing a meeting to
'discuss the matter between our concerns without influencing the legal
conflict', VW claimed yesterday.
He had also been in touch with Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics
minister, to discuss his initiative, ministry officials said. Mr Piech's
call to Bonn followed an offer from Mr Rexrodt to act as a mediator.
A ministry spokeswoman said Mr Rexrodt hoped the two sides would moderate
their language, and allow legal procedures to take their natural course.
Mr Rexrodt warned both sides in a television broadcast on Thursday night to
take care not to damage Germany's reputation, as too many jobs were at risk.
General Motors officials yesterday could not confirm that VW had made
contact with Mr Smith, who is travelling during the group's two-week summer
break.
But they admitted they were surprised by the initiative so soon after Mr
Piech had been reported as saying that he would not let anyone 'pee on our
leg'.
VW spokesmen were also apparently unaware that Mr Piech had spoken to Mr
Rexrodt. They were unable to confirm that the VW chairman would renew
contacts with Mr Smith at the start of next week, as the group said in a
press release yesterday.
In an unexpected outbreak of diplomacy, Mr Piech appeared to be responding
to mounting political pressure to break the spiral of charge and
counter-charge.
He told a press conference earlier this week that he saw little hope of a
peaceful or early end to the row, which is focused on the US group's
allegations that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, its former global
purchasing director, and several associates, systematically plundered
industrial secrets from GM and its European subsidiaries before defecting to
VW in March.
Describing the conflict as a 'war', Mr Piech also insinuated that GM, its
German subsidiary Adam Opel or their agents could have conspired to pervert
the course of justice by planting evidence implicating Mr Lopez and his
team.
His suggestion of talks also followed confirmation from the US Justice
Department in Washington that it had opened inquiries into the case on its
own initiative because of interest within the department in industrial
espionage in multinational companies.
