FT  16 FEB 93 / Technology: Robot rubber tappers are ready to march - Labour
shortages in Malaysia are doing away with the traditional 'jebung'
Strange things are happening on Malaysia's rubber plantations. Machines are
taking over from the traditional rubber tappers. Before long, robots could
be moving down the lines of trees, collecting the latex which goes to help
make the world's tyres and condoms, raincoats and surgical gloves.
Malaysia's rubber growers are facing serious problems. With one of the
fastest-growing economies in the Asian region, Malaysia is rapidly
industrialising.
A combination of acute labour shortages in the agricultural sector plus a
period of low prices has forced many rubber growers to abandon their trees.
Since 1988, Malaysia's rubber production has fallen by as much as 26 per
cent to 1.22m tonnes last year. Both Thailand and Indonesia are now bigger
producers.
Technicians at the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia are now battling to
prevent any further decline in what was once the country's premier industry.
The traditional method of extracting latex, the milky white raw rubber
liquid, is for the tapper to use his 'jebung' or tapping knife to cut a
groove at about 45 degrees round a quarter or half section of the tree.
The process requires considerable skill. The cut must not be too deep or the
wood or cambium of the tree will be damaged. The cut must also be done in
such a way as to allow a steady flow of latex into the collecting vessel.
In the conventional system, tapping takes place every other day. It is
carried out in the early morning when the pressure which forces the latex
out of the tree is at its strongest: a skilled tapper can tap between 400
and 700 trees in three hours. He then returns to collect the latex and take
it for processing into rubber bales at the factory.
RRI calculates that labour now accounts for about 70 per cent of rubber
production costs. The tappers - many of them descendants of Tamil workers
imported from southern India and Ceylon, now Sri Lanka, by the British - are
an ageing group. Rubber plantations are hot and often full of insects; most
young people prefer factory or office jobs.
A new method of mechanised tapping could provide the answer to many of
Malaysia's problems. Under the new system, a battery-driven machine the size
of a computer keyboard - remote control may be introduced later - and fitted
with a timing device, is tied to each tree, running round the trunk on a
notched wire. Every 24 hours, a small needle is pressed into the bark,
starting a latex flow.
'Puncture tapping could be one of the ways to preserve our rubber industry,'
says Zahid Mohammad, a researcher at RRI's 1,300-hectare experimental
station at Sungei Buloh outside Kuala Lumpur. 'It can be left on the tree
for a year and checked occasionally by the latex gatherers. The difficult
business of manual tapping could be eliminated.'
But the puncture-tapping method has its difficulties. The latex flow is not
so strong as with the conventional cut method. Various stimulants therefore
have to be given to the tree. One version of the machine comes with a small
gas canister attached. At intervals, the gas is funnelled into the tree to
stimulate latex flow.
'The trees are very like humans,' says Zahid. 'The latex is like the blood
flow. In the same way that you have to squeeze the arm and find the right
vein to get a good blood sample, so we have to establish the right place to
puncture the tree and apply the right stimulants to encourage the flow.'
Malaysia has about 1.8m hectares of its land planted with rubber, amounting
to about 700m trees. If the machines are mass produced, RRI calculates that
the cost of each will be less than MDollars 5 (Pounds 1.30). But RRI
realises that the machines do not provide all the answers.
Only about 20 per cent of Malaysia's rubber production comes from
plantations - the rest is carried out by many thousands of smallholders with
individual plots of between one and two hectares. Smallholders tend to be
considerably less efficient than the plantations and they are resistant to
change.
Some time ago, RRI invented a motorised tapping machine. The tapper would
cut the tree in the conventional way but could work much faster, covering
nearly 1,000 trees in a morning. But machines distributed by RRI were not
serviced properly by the smallholders and, at MDollars 250, were considered
to be too expensive.
While RRI continues to look at other machine-driven methods - including the
possibility of using robot machines to work up and down the rows of trees -
it is also working on other projects.
At one time, rubber trees had to be left to grow for eight years before
tapping could start. Now, trees of between four and five years are producing
latex.
Through cloning and seed research, it is hoped to bring the maturation
period down still further, while preserving the existing production lifespan
of more than 30 years.
