FT  03 MAR 93 / Arts: Not Fade Away - Fringe Theatre
'Do you know how scared that makes me? Every day I feel I'm going to cave in
if I give way to one of these memories.' Frances, a young woman, is haunted
by her own past; and she is possessed by it. So possessed that she feels as
if she has no freedom to act independently; and so haunted that she has had
to isolate whole facets of her personality and sometimes to banish them from
her present life.
It emerges that she was sexually abused by her grandfather from the age of
six onwards; that she was called 'the devil's child'; that her mother
visited so sporadically that Frances did not realise who she was; and more.
All of which Frances tells herself. Part of the wit of Not Fade Away is the
way you do not know for some time that the man she is talking to is a
psychoanalyst; or that Frances contains so many selves that she is a
traumatic case of schizophrenia. By the time you know, you care. She has
done horrific things; you never fully understand her, or all that has
happened to her; but you care.
The author is Richard Cameron, whose Pond Life had a notable success at the
Bush last year. The most tormented character in that play about adolescents
was a girl called Togo, from whom Frances seems to have been developed. But
here Cameron has a different angle. We never see Frances in everyday social
context. She is either alone or talking to the analyst. And we (unlike him)
keep hearing (on tape) the several voices in her head - except when, alone
on the performing stage of her mind, she sings, powerfully, pop classics.
Sometimes it is as if we are in her head.
Any description, however, must detract; as with Pond Life, the best
enjoyment comes simply in watching it surprise you as it unfolds. It is full
of truth, right down to details of the pyschoanalyst's body language. Only
once or twice do you sense that this tour de force has been conceived for
wow effect - there are scenes of possession that recall The Dybbuk - and
that Frances's more poetic locutions do not ring true to her character. You
always watch her objectively, aware of her ultimate unknowability. The play
simply shows you fragments from her progress; sometimes too fragmented for
clarity.
Kelly Hunter is Frances. This is an astonishing performance, not least
because most of its virtuosity is invisible. With complete ease, she shows
Frances as child, slut, prude, innocent, victim, tormentor, and the various
ways these facets conflict or combine.
Not Fade Away, like Pond Life, is directed by Simon Usher and designed by
Anthony Lamble - the duo who have also staged James Robson's remarkable King
Baby for the RSC, currently at the Pit. It is now evident that Usher (though
I presume he is responsible for the white-voiced and raised-eyebrow version
of childish innocence that here repeats from Pond Life) has a rare gift for
handling plays that deal with psychological anguish and confession. And
Lamble, as in Pond Life, shows great skill in turning the small Bush space
into three wholly distinct interiors. Congratulations to all concerned.
At the Bush Theatre, W12, till March 20
