FT  17 FEB 93 / Leading Article: Health care in London
MRS VIRGINIA Bottomley, the UK health secretary, yesterday announced her
response to the Tomlinson report on the future of London's health services.
While she is stopping short of fully implementing Sir Bernard Tomlinson's
recommendations, she has given the green light to much of the report. Mrs
Bottomley has thus launched the first serious attempt to rationalise the
capital's health services in a century, in marked contrast to the shelving
of earlier reports.
London's hospitals consume 50 per cent more resources per head than those in
other large cities. The internal market in the National Health Service
leaves health authorities increasingly free to shop around for hospital
treatment. As that freedom is exercised, health authorities in the home
counties will send their patients to cheaper local hospitals rather than
more expensive beds in London. It already requires a subsidy of Pounds 50m
to keep open London's teaching hospitals; this could double next year unless
surplus beds are eliminated.
And while London's hospitals consume a disproportionate share of the NHS
budget, Londoners are ill-served by their community health services. Family
doctors outside the capital often work in large practices housed in modern
health centres offering a range of services, including some day surgery and
other forms of treatment. In London, too many family doctors are working
single-handed from lock-up premises and able to offer little by way of
screening or day care. The government will give an immediate boost to
primary health care in the capital, with innovative experiments to improve
services locally to reduce demands made on hospitals.
Mrs Bottomley has delayed final decisions on hospital closures until the
completion in May of a review into where particular specialties should be
located. But she has made it clear that many of the Tomlinson
recommendations will proceed. She has also sensibly accepted alternative
strategies where they have made sense, as, for example with the plans to
relocate the Royal Brompton and the Royal Marsden.
On the most controversial of the proposed closures, Bart's hospital in the
City of London, Mrs Bottomley has deferred a final decision. Bart's has
waged a brilliant campaign to remain open, using its connections in City and
the media with skill. Mrs Bottomley accepts that Bart's cannot survive in
its present form, but has given the hospital another six months to come up
with alternative strategies for consideration.
It is understandable that ministers have adopted a risk-averse strategy in
delaying the decision. With a 21-seat Commons majority and confidence at a
low ebb since last year's setbacks in economic policy, ministers are as
vulnerable to a parliamentary challenge on hospital closures as on pit
closures. Given these constraints, Mrs Bottomley has done well to keep the
momentum of rationalisation, even if Bart's has been awarded a temporary
reprieve.
