FT  29 MAY 93 / Multiple birth adds fuel to NHS rationing controversy: The
world's latest set of surviving sextuplets has sparked a very public ethical
debate
A POTENTIALLY combustible debate about rationing healthcare has smouldered
this week following the birth of sextuplets to a woman who received
fertility treatment.
The fact that the sextuplets are only the sixth surviving set in the world
was soon overshadowed by the revelation that the parents are not married and
do not live together. This has prompted discussion about the ethics of
fertility treatment and, more broadly, whether it should be available in the
National Health Service when financial pressures are high.
Ministers and many NHS managers try to avoid speaking of healthcare
rationing, referring instead to priority setting. The disguised issue
appeared again this week in a report from the Audit Commission on
strengthening the role of healthcare purchasers - district health
authorities, family health services authorities and GP fundholders.
The report said: 'Positive decisions about what to commission should be
openly set alongside any decisions about what is unaffordable.'
In reality treatment is rationed in all healthcare systems, but the NHS's
traditional rationing mechanism - the waiting list - managed to maintain the
illusion that everything was eventually available. But under the 1991
reforms purchasing authorities have to make explicit decisions on the
amounts of treatments they are prepared to buy.
There is growing recognition in the medical profession that rationing is
unavoidable. A significant turning point came last year when the British
Medical Association accepted it as 'an unfortunate fact of life' and called
for it to be formalised by agreement between the Department of Health and
the medical profession.
The government has shied away from establishing national treatment
priorities, however, believing that specific decisions should be taken
locally within broad requirements for treatment to meet the needs of
patients, to offer good outcomes related to quality of life and represent
value for money.
In response a number of health authorities have launched consultation
exercises to involve the public in priority setting decisions. In West
Yorkshire the Bradford and Airedale authorities and their local family
health services authority published details of a draft 1993-94 health plan
in local newspapers and sought comments.
Public responses highlighted concerns that might have gone unconsidered by
planners - such as the need to focus more attention on accident prevention
among elderly people - but also illustrated the difficulty of such
exercises. The greatest number of public objections was to proposed
increases in provision for terminations of pregnancy, chiefly on grounds of
principle.
Another problem with rationing is a lack of consensus about priorities
between doctors and the public. City and Hackney district health authority
in London asked members of the public, GPs and hospital consultants to rank
16 potential services in order of importance.
High-technology operations such as heart and liver transplants, rated fourth
in importance by the public, came 12th in the doctors' rankings. Less
glamorous services such as community care and mental illness provision,
which were among the doctors' top priorities, came much lower down the
public's list. Consensus was reached only at the bottom of the list with
fertility treatment, alternative medicine and cosmetic surgery gaining low
marks.
Final decisions are made by doctors and managers, whose priorities are not
always the same. The doctors' traditional stance is to shun anything that
smacks of making choices between patients, but the increase of managerial
tasks for the medical profession has drawn them into the rationing debate.
Another step towards formal recognition of rationing will be taken this year
when medical students at St Andrew's University become the first in Britain
to take a course in priority setting as part of their professional training.
An all-party group of MPs recently visited the university to examine the
course, which has been running informally this academic year.
Dr Mo Malek, a health economist responsible for the course, said there was a
recognition among young people entering medical training that priority
setting could not be avoided.
He said: 'There was a time when doctors would react with horror on moral
grounds to any suggestion of rationing. But it can be argued that it is
immoral not to ration if a doctor is devoting resources to one patient
without considering the impact on others.
'Acceptance that priorities must be set at least means decisions can be made
in a way that is democratic and open to discussion and criticism.'
