FT  16 AUG 93 / VW workers put their trust in Lopez
EVERYTHING is concrete in Wolfsburg: the town hall, the post office, the
shops, the tidy apartment blocks.
The uniformity confirms that the visitor is in a company town. For Wolfsburg
has been dominated by Volkswagen, Germany's second largest industrial group,
since the foundation stone was laid in May 1938 for its car factory.
'Wolfsburg is Volkswagen,' said Ms Christine Noack, a town hall official.
'Every family has some member working at the plant. Our past and future is
linked to Volkswagen.'
The local swimming pool is named after Mr Ferdinand Porsche, who engineered
the original 'people's car', the beetle. Volkswagen has built the athletics
track and has helped build and finance the town's housing for 129,000
inhabitants.
But for the first time since the second world war, the locals talk about
unemployment. 'We keep hearing about how uncompetitive we are, that we have
to cut costs,' said one worker.
The problem is that the executive brought in to cut those costs, Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, is under investigation for allegedly acquiring
confidential documents from General Motors, his previous employer.
Mr Ralph Sieber is an outgoing, single, 28 year-old, who has spent 12 years
working for VW. But he is worried about the future. 'I hear that Lopez can
make VW great again,' he said. Mr Sieber admitted he had no idea whether the
allegations against Mr Lopez were true. 'I don't know what to believe. This
public dispute is not good for our image.'
A similar concern about VW's tarnished image, and a faith in Mr Lopez's
talents, is shared by workers coming off the morning shift. 'I'm confused
about the whole scandal. I want Lopez to put things right. Its the first
time I have questioned my security. We have to offer our children some
hope,' said Mr Harold Pfeiffer, a 51-year-old technician.
However, VW's public relations personnel are keen to project the culture of
abiding corporate loyalty. 'The board has thrown its support behind Lopez.
Everybody is innocent until proven otherwise,' said Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs,
VW's executive director of public relations.
'Of course, none of this is good for our domestic or international image.
Some of our critics say we have over-reacted in our response to these
allegations about industrial espionage. But that is not the issue,' he says.
'This row is not so much a confrontation between VW and General Motors/Opel.
It is about the personality of Mr Lopez. GM is hurt because Lopez left.
Lopez made General Motors and Opel much more competitive. GM knows that
Lopez can make VW leaner and more competitive. Piech (VW's chairman) and
Lopez make a great team,' says Mr Wachs.
'And after two, three, or four years with Lopez, VW will be much more
competitive. So the other side has only one choice: discredit Lopez. In that
sense, it is an industrial confrontation between two main competitors.'
Indeed, Mr Wachs and his colleagues asked whether GM might itself have
planted the documents.
'We wonder about it. Look, Lopez and VW have no need of these documents,'
said Mr Wachs. 'But if he is forced out, the chance to create the 'third
industrial revolution' will have been lost, and with it the chance to help
the industry get more competitive. I hope he will pull through.'
