FT  09 DEC 93 / France returns to ERM track
The French franc yesterday returned to its previous narrow trading bands
within the European exchange rate mechanism for the first time since the
summer's currency crisis which forced a widening of trading ranges in the
currency system. The franc rose to FFr3.428 to the D-Mark, breaching its
previous floor rate of FFr3.4305.
Currency analysts in Paris said the strength of the French franc was more a
reflection of D-Mark weakness and optimism concerning a successful
conclusion of the Uruguay round of international trade negotiations than a
reappraisal of French economic prospects.
They added that the French monetary authorities were likely to continue
their policy of cautious cuts in borrowing costs, following the Bundesbank,
in spite of the increased room for manoeuvre afforded by the level of the
franc.
The rise in the franc coincided with the announcement that gross domestic
product grew by 0.2 per cent in the third quarter of this year, confirming
official forecasts of a stabilisation in activity but underlining the
fragility of economic recovery.
The rise in GDP, announced yesterday by Insee, the national statistics
office, was given a guarded welcome by economic officials in Paris. 'We have
reached the bottom of the decline,' said an economics ministry spokesman.
'But we do not expect any significant recovery before the end of the year.'
The increase in economic output, which follows a similar rise in the second
quarter and a sharp contraction in the previous two quarters, was partly the
result of stronger than expected consumer spending. Household consumption
increased by 0.7 per cent on the previous quarter, stronger than expected.
Exports also increased, rising by 0.8 per cent in the third quarter after
three consecutive quarters of decline. The housing market showed signs of
revival, with sales of new houses increasing by 2.5 per cent compared with
the previous quarter.
The bright spots were, however, offset by continued evidence of weakness in
industrial confidence. Investment, which declined by 1.3 per cent in the
second quarter, contracted by 0.5 per cent in the July-September period.
The government said yesterday's statistics were in line with its projections
of a 0.8 per cent contraction of GDP this year and growth of 1.4 per cent in
1994. But private sector economists believe these projections are
optimistic.
