FT  20 MAR 93 / Purchase of Southam stakeby The Telegraph delayed
MR CONRAD BLACK's plan to sell half his private company's stake in the
Canadian Southam newspaper group to The Telegraph, the UK-listed company he
controls through Hollinger Group, was delayed yesterday after The
Telegraph's independent directors learned that another investor is buying
Southam shares much more cheaply.
The directors learned early this week that Mr Black had agreed to Southam's
issue of 13m shares at a price of CDollars 14 (Pounds 7.80) each - only days
after they recommended that the Telegraph should pay CDollars 18.10 a share
for half of Hollinger's 22.5 per cent stake, at a total cost of Pounds
72.3m.
The purchaser of the newly issued shares in Canada's largest newspaper group
is Power Corporation, the holding company of Montreal financier, Mr Paul
Desmarais.
The Telegraph yesterday decided to adjourn an extraordinary general meeting
scheduled for March 30, at which shareholders would have voted on the
purchase. The independent directors said information would be sent to
shareholders 'as soon as possible' once they and their advisers, N M
Rothschild, had examined the new development.
Their scrutiny will focus on the price. It is possible they may demand some
reduction before an EGM, although it is unlikely to be as low as that paid
by Power. Southam's share price rose sharply yesterday on the news of
Power's involvement from CDollars 14 to CDollars 15.88.
Mr Black said from Palm Beach, Florida, yesterday that Power's involvement
would 'considerably' enhance the desirability of the Telegraph investment in
Southam. He said Southam's share price would have climbed to more than
CDollars 20 if Power had bought its shares on the open market. According to
Mr Black, the EGM is being delayed simply to allow time to draw up an
amended circular. 'All our readings are that shareholders are coming in
nicely,' he said.
The arrival of Power at Southam acts as a counterweight to Mr Black. The
deal makes it increasingly difficult for either Mr Black or The Telegraph to
take control of Southam, which last year incurred losses of CDollars 263m
after restructuring charges.
In its circular to shareholders which originally recommended the purchase,
Telegraph directors described the Southam investment as a 'unique
opportunity'. Mr Joe Cooke, Telegraph managing director, had said the group
would be able to influence Southam through three directors nominated by
Hollinger and The Telegraph.
The issue of shares to Power, however, will dilute the Hollinger holding
from 22.5 per cent to 18.7 per cent. Power, which already holds 1.4m Southam
shares, will have roughly the same stake. Both investors will have three
seats on the 16-strong board, and have agreed to vote together.
Each has the right of first refusal on the other's holdings, and each can
own up to 23.5 per cent of Southam. Power said its block was being acquired
for 'investment purposes', but it might buy additional Southam shares
'depending on market conditions' and other factors.
Hollinger has offered a 'put' option which would allow The Telegraph to
require it to buy back Southam shares at the CDollars 18.10 price for up to
a year.
