FT  11 JAN 93 / US and EC in last-ditch Gatt effort
NEGOTIATORS from the US and the European Community are meeting in Geneva in
a last-ditch effort to resolve their outstanding differences in the Uruguay
round of trade talks before President-elect Bill Clinton takes office on
January 20.
Officials from other key countries have also been drawn into the
discussions, which began on Friday and are expected to intensify in the
coming days. Trade diplomats hope that an outline deal, or evidence of
progress towards one, can be presented to the meeting next Friday of senior
Uruguay round trade negotiators.
However, US and EC officials acknowledged last night that little progress
had been made in the weekend talks. 'Things are still exceedingly
difficult,' one senior US official said.
Since the US and EC settled their farm trade wrangles last November, the
six-year-old round has been beset by a host of other disagreements and by
political uncertainties on both sides of the Atlantic.
In Washington, top officials are packing their bags and looking for new
employment while the Clinton transition team scraps over trade policy. In
Europe, France has been snapping at the heels of the Community's negotiators
over services as well as farm trade, and the key Community trade and
agriculture portfolios have just changed hands.
Mrs Carla Hills, President George Bush's trade representative, and Sir Leon
Brittan, the EC's new trade commissioner, nevertheless decided on January 2
to aim for an outline deal by next Friday.
This would enable President Clinton, if he chose, to submit a more-or-less
complete accord to Congress by March 2, when the administration's
negotiating authority expires. Failure to catch that deadline could delay
the round by months, if not years.
The teams in Geneva headed by Mr Warren Lavorel, US chief negotiator, and
his EC opposite number, Mr Hugo Paemen, are trying to agree a package of
industrial tariff cuts and narrow differences elsewhere.
EC officials say an early agreement will require restraint by Washington in
re-opening the draft package of Uruguay round agreements drawn up 13 months
ago.
Washington has asked for renegotiation of some 25 issues, including
anti-dumping and subsidy rules, patent and copyright protection, and
establishment of a multilateral trade organisation.
The revised US tariff offer, belatedly produced on Friday, entails tariff
cuts of just over one-third, but this includes zero-for-zero deals which
have not yet been agreed by the EC or others. It does not include cuts in
very high tariffs on textiles and some other sensitive products, although
officials have said cuts could be made in exchange for a satisfactory
zero-for-zero package.
