FT  19 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Good news from Denmark
To the palpable relief of every European government the Danes have voted Yes
to the Maastricht treaty. Nowhere will the relief be more intensely felt
than in London, where the probable consequences for Mr John Major's
administration of a second No from Denmark were too shattering to
contemplate. Now the prime minister may focus on rebuilding the Conservative
party, which remains as sorely divided over Britain's place in Europe as
over any issue in its history.
His first task is to get the remaining stages of the ratification procedure
over with as quickly as possible. The bill will return to the Commons for
third reading tomorrow. Since Labour plans to abstain, the bill is likely to
pass with a convincing majority. The anti-Maastricht rebels will mount a
further assault in the Lords, but the government is confident that it has a
majority there. It also believes that it can see off further challenges,
such as the planned final debate on the social chapter, and lawsuits likely
to be sponsored by Conservative dissidents (to be heard in the British
courts) and trade unionists (to be heard, ultimately, in the European
Court). This lengthy tidying-up process may seem hazardous, but the positive
Danish vote changes the political climate in which it will be undertaken.
So much for Maastricht itself. The damage that this imperfect treaty has
done to the British body politic remains. Mr Major's best bet is to be true
to his convictions, in the expectation that if he does so the broad mass of
his party will rally behind him. A cabinet reshuffle whose principal effect
was to promote known Thatcherites would be a sign of weakness; Mr Major
should pay more regard to the fitness of the individual for the office than
to the party's factional balance.
For the same reason Mr Major should resist the temptation to pander to the
Eurosceptics. His stated policy, which is to take the lead in tabling
proposals for the 1996 review of the progress of European Union, is in line
with the public's lukewarm Europeanism. He will therefore press for
enlargement, decentralisation, and more emphasis upon intergovernmental
decision-making. Further discussion on whether Britain should return to the
exchange rate mechanism has been indefinitely postponed. This package is
unlikely to play well with continental enthusiasts for a Europe that looks
like a federal state, but it is probably the most the Conservative party
will accept.
It may sound unduly optimistic to propose a period of steady, competent,
undramatic government, but that is what the prime minister will probably now
aim for. He said last week that with a small majority a certain amount of
tacking and trimming was inevitable. Granted, but the Maastricht bill has
been the single most potent cause of parliamentary manoeuvrings. With that
behind him, he has to recover his reputation for down-to-earth
effectiveness.
