FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (6): More
to grades than just graft and grind - John Authers finds that the best
schools are not just exam factories with Oxbridge forever in their sights
IF EXAM league tables have achieved anything they have at least identified a
group of schools which are firmly entrenched in the top 10 each year.
Nothing seems to move them.
With two exceptions - Eton and Winchester, both of which are internationally
renowned boarding schools - all of them are day schools, single-sex (at
least until the sixth form) and based in big cities.
The list includes King Edward's Birmingham, Manchester Grammar, North London
Collegiate, St Paul's and St Paul's Girls', both based in west London, and
Westminster.
However, recognition has brought them problems. High A-level grades achieved
with such regularity look intimidating. This leads to the belief that such
grades can only be achieved by sacrificing everything else which creates a
broad education.
An old boy of Manchester Grammar summed up this Dickensian view perfectly in
an article published by the FT three years ago. In it he attacked his
'conveyor-belt education' and judged that 'imprisonment, Oxbridge, the work
ethic (even the workhouse ethic) were the themes of my years there'.
Exam success was brought brutally to the fore at St Paul's Girl's last year
when its high mistress resigned in the face of complaints from parents that
their daughters were doing too few GCSEs. Her idea had been to allow a
broader education and greater concentration on the ultimate objective of
A-level. The school nevertheless gained the nation's best results at GCSE
this year.
One Paulina (as St Paul's old girls are known) puts it brusquely: 'I don't
feel I was educated. I was just trained to do exams.'
Attacks like this are deeply resented by the schools themselves. Dr Martin
Stephen, currently head of the Perse School in Cambridge, who will next year
take over as high master of Manchester Grammar, says: 'It is natural to
assume that schools pay a price in human terms for academic success, and
very wrong. It is natural to assume that schools with the most selective
entry are ruthlessly competitive and even destructive to what in their terms
are the lesser-able, and also wholly wrong.'
Dr Stephen points out that unhappy or bored children do not get outstanding
results, and that university entrance procedures encourage pupils to show a
wide range of extra-curricular involvement. Academically successful schools
are likely therefore to encourage a broad range of activities.
In any case, the good, ambitious teachers such schools need are unlikely to
be happy unless they have the opportunity of deep involvement with
extracurricular activities as well.
Manchester Grammar, for example, answers the charges with the words
'Atherton' and 'Crawley'. Both Michael Atherton, the new England cricket
captain, and John Crawley, the 21-year-old tipped by several Australians as
his successor, are Mancunians who went on to Oxbridge - suggesting that they
found time in the school timetable to practise sport as well as swot for
A-levels.
King Edward's in Birmingham, top over the last five years, even advertised
the spectacular success of its sports teams in the match programmes for this
season's local derby match between the Birmingham City and Aston Villa
football teams.
St Paul's, top on A-level performance this year, has a two-hour lunch break,
during which boys are expected to make the most of the facilities - they are
excellent, expensive, and well-used. The music rooms shake with jazz and
orchestral music, while the theatres, art rooms, and playing fields are all
heavily occupied.
All the top schools accept that the degree to which they can select - far
greater for large big-city day schools than for others - is crucial to their
success. One St Paul's boy expresses this with self-confidence typical of
the school: 'If you only take boys who are going to get As at GCSE it's not
difficult to come top of the league table is it?'
This leads to perhaps the most important caveat about league table results -
that if your child is not particularly academically able, he or she is
unlikely to be admitted to one of the top schools. They would, in any case,
be unlikely to flourish there.
Whether parents should actually consider sending their children elsewhere
even if they get in to a top academic school is more debatable. John Trevis,
schools consultant with Gabbitas, Truman and Thring, suggests that pupils
who only narrowly win entrance to such schools might find the pace too fast,
and prefer to be somewhere less heated. This is another fiercely contested
idea.
For example Joan Clanchy, headmistress of North London Collegiate, this
year's top girls' school for A-level results, is relieved when parents are
nervous about the school's high league table position because 'it shows that
parents are asking the right questions'.
But this does not mean that any girl who wins admittance should be worried
that the pace will be too great. The school recruits extensively from the
state sector and gives its pupils close attention, which leads to an
obviously friendly atmosphere. According to Clanchy, this close attention is
as useful in helping those nearer the back of the class as it is in
fostering the more eye-catching gifted children.
Certainly all the top schools take academic subjects at a brisk gallop, with
GCSE only viewed as a brief stopping point, and not an objective in itself.
The target at which they take aim is A-level, which in itself is a gateway
to university.
Oxford and Cambridge then loom on the horizon.
Approaches vary. Joan Clanchy starts the sixth form with a talk on Oxbridge
which all the girls describe as 'deeply discouraging'. Those who choose
other universities are put under no pressure to change their minds.
Manchester Grammar's Oxbridge applications system is likened by one old
Mancunian to a military campaign. Boys fill out their application forms, and
then teachers, who know most of the admissions tutors, fill in the colleges.
St Paul's Oxbridge mechanism is subtler, but has a deadly effectiveness. One
boy in the lower sixth puts it thus: 'It's kind of understood. Some power up
there knows who's going to be in the Oxbridge set. It happens, but it's not
a pressure that's put upon you.'
Another boy then chirruped up to say that 'teachers hate being wrong'. Five
minutes later his tutor was able to assure me that the sixth-former in
question would be reading English at Cambridge.
That academic intensity will deter some parents, and attract many. But a
close look at the top academic schools must at least dispel any notion that
they are stultifying factories for bored children.
Far from it. Viewed at close quarters these schools seem exciting and
vibrant.
