FT  22 OCT 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (20): Be patient if
you buy at the top / Alarm bells ring when private investors pile in. But
the industry believes this sales boom will be different, because it is
fuelled by those seeking income rather than capital gain
SEPTEMBER 16, 1992, may be known as 'Black Wednesday' to some, but it proved
a golden day for the unit trust industry.
Sterling's departure from the European exchange rate mechanism led to the
ideal conditions for unit trust sales: a sharply rising stock market, and
falling interest rates.
The two factors are, of course, closely connected. Falling interest rates
relieved the pressure on corporate balance sheets, battered by years of
recession; they also, by reducing financing costs, promised an increase in
profitability. Add in the potential boost to exports from a devalued pound,
and there was scope for a sharp increase in earnings.
Lower mortgage rates also gave rise to hopes of a revival in the previously
moribund housing market, generally seen as the key to consumer spending.
Most important of all, lower interest rates made cash much less attractive
as an investment. Institutional funds accordingly flowed into bonds
(particularly, in the light of the subdued outlook for inflation) and
equities.
Crucially for the unit trust industry, private, as well as institutional,
investors, reacted to this trend. Once base rates had fallen to 6 per cent,
unit trusts were able to offer income returns which, when held tax-free
within a personal equity plan (Pep), were able to match and beat the best
returns from a building society, with the hope of capital growth thrown in
on top.
Furthermore, the rise in the FT-SE 100 Index and the even greater jump in
the share prices of smaller companies, have allowed unit trusts to produce
performance statistics which should impress even the most cautious small
investor. Over the year to September 1, the average UK equity growth fund
returned 40.96 per cent (offer-to-bid with net income reinvested: source
Micropal) and UK equity income funds returned 44.73 per cent.
All these factors have duly had their impact on both unit trust sales and
funds under management. In July 1992, gross sales of unit trusts were Pounds
600m, and net sales were minus Pounds 142m (ie companies repurchased more
units than they sold). By July 1993, gross sales were Pounds 1.63bn and net
sales were a positive Pounds 948m. Net sales for the first seven months of
the year were Pounds 5.25bn.
With the help of the impact of rising stock markets, the industry's funds
under management rose from Pounds 53.9bn at end of July 1992 to Pounds
78.8bn at the end of July 1993.
Alarm bells start to ring with seasoned stock market observers whenever
private investors start to pile into unit trusts. The previous sales peak
was in 1987, immediately before the stock market crash of October that year.
It is easy to see why private investors may be doomed to buy at the top of
the market. In part, it is because of their natural caution, which is often
overcome only by greed; temptation comes when your neighbour tells you he
has just doubled his money in shares. A sudden widening of investor interest
can create a surge in the market, by introducing additional demand. An old
US adage is to sell the market whenever your elevator boy starts passing out
stock tips.
But the unit trust industry seems to believe that this latest sales boom
will be different, because it is fuelled by investors seeking income, rather
than, as it was in 1987, by those chasing capital gain in ever more
speculative areas.
Dividends are much less volatile than share prices. In theory, therefore, an
income-seeking investor should be able to disregard a sudden fall in share
prices, provided he is satisfied that his dividend stream will be
maintained.
In practice, it remains to be seen whether investors will be sufficiently
stoical in the face of, say, a 20 per cent fall in share prices. In the US,
where interest rates fell both further and sooner than in the UK, there has
been an immense flow of savings from cash into mutual funds (the American
equivalent of unit trusts). Commentators are expressing great concern that
these new equity investors could have a destabilising influence on the
market.
However, there are grounds for hope that recently-recruited UK investors
will be more patient. The main reason is the popularity of Peps, in which
capital gains and income accumulate without tax. Net sales of unit trust
Peps were Pounds 1.6bn in the first half of 1993.
The phrase 'tax-free' has always had a seductive appeal for British
investors. Now that the tax-cutting 1980s seem to have given way to the
tax-raising 1990s, investors will be all the more keen to seek out tax
shelters such as Peps.
It is a UK tradition that tax changes are not retrospective. So, even if
some future government were to abolish Peps, money already invested in plans
would continue to accumulate tax-free.
Furthermore, the advantages of a Pep are much more apparent in the long term
than in the short term. It takes a while for dividends to grow sufficiently
for the income tax saving to be worth much more than pocket money (for
basic-rate investors, at least), and for profits to grow enough for the
investor to gain much from the capital gains tax exemption.
According to the Association of Unit Trusts and Investment Funds, someone
who had invested Pounds 1,000 in the median UK equity income fund would have
seen his money grow to Pounds 21,945 over the 25 years to July 1; but had
the same fund been available in Pep form for 25 years, the investment would
have grown to Pounds 38,073.
All in all, there is a strong incentive, once Pep money is invested, not to
withdraw it. Provided the Pep regulations remain in place, therefore, the
unit trust industry can face the future with some confidence.
One area which the industry would like to exploit further is bonds. Bond
funds are a substantial part of the mutual fund industry in the US, but have
failed to catch on in the UK, perhaps because of inflation, perhaps because
of the impact of high initial charges on investor returns.
With inflation now low and long-term interest rates above short-term rates,
bond funds may have a chance to develop. Some managers, such as Fidelity,
have cut initial charges to attract investors. But the Association of Unit
Trusts and Investment Funds wants the chancellor to help out in next month's
Budget by allowing a Pounds 3,000 Pep-style allowance for gilts and
corporate bonds. A tax-free bond income would undoubtedly be attractive to
many retired investors.
 -------------------------------
 NET INVESTMENT IN UNIT TRUSTS
 -------------------------------
1992
 -------------------------------
February      -32.6
March         234.6
April         252.2
May           235.1
June          -23.6
July         -141.7
August         59.1
September    -260.9
October        37.0
November      256.9
December      -21.2
 -------------------------------
1992
 -------------------------------
January       509.0
February      581.5
March         768.9
April         967.5
May           914.2
June          611.3
July          947.7
 -------------------------------
Source: AUTIF
 -------------------------------
