FT  08 NOV 93 / Jordan on alert for polling
JORDANIANS go to the polls today in the kingdom's first multi-party
elections for nearly four decades. More than 550 candidates and 15 political
parties are vying for seats in the 80-member lower house of parliament.
In spite of what many observers have described as a lacklustre campaign, the
turnout is expected to be high. Nearly 1.2m people have collected their
voting cards which is more than twice the number who voted in the last
elections in 1989, when candidates ran as independents rather than for
parties.
King Hussein has urged voters to show moderation and common sense when
choosing their MP. 'Let us be on a high level of responsibility and caution
so as not to fall for the crackle of loud voices, fake glittering slogans,
or words of good meant to be bad,' he said in a speech to members of
Jordan's centre for democratic studies and research, which was later
broadcast.
The government has tried to improve voting procedures. On Sunday, police
officers were each assigned a ballot box and ordered to guard it until its
contents had been counted and checked tomorrow. Tight security will be
enforced during voting with around 16,000 police officers for the 2,906
polling stations. A ban on small firearms will be strictly enforced to
prevent celebrators shooting in the air if their candidate wins.
Officials at the Ministry of Interior, which is overseeing the election, say
they intend to outsmart candidates who might have paid in cash or kind for
votes. In the 1989 elections, bribed voters had to feign illiteracy at the
ballot box and call out loud their preferred MP. In this way representatives
of candidates, who are present in each voting station, could monitor the
paid-up votes.
This time 'illiterate' voters will be interrogated and candidates'
representatives forbidden from entering or leaving the voting station until
the ballot is over. However, there have been numerous accusations of
vote-buying with rates varying from 50-150 Jordanian dinars (Pounds
48-Pounds 144) per vote.
All eyes will be on how many seats the Moslem fundamentalists win. The
Islamic Action Front, which is the biggest and most prominent political
party standing in the elections, has 36 candidates in 16 out of the 20
voting districts. Despite a controversial change in the election law aimed
at reducing the number of fundamentalists in the next parliament, they are
expected to be the largest group as in 1989.
