FT  10 SEP 93 / Lloyd's to raise board payments
LLOYD'S OF LONDON is to spend nearly Pounds 500,000 on extra payments to 26
business executives who sit on its market and regulatory boards as part of
efforts to improve the standard of management at the insurance market.
Among those benefiting are Mr Paul Myners, chairman of Gartmore, Mr David
Newbigging, chairman of Rentokil, the environment and property services
group, and several leading Lloyd's underwriters.
The 26 members of Lloyd's market and regulatory boards will receive Pounds
20,000 a year, while 15 of these executives who are also part of the
20-strong Lloyd's council - the market's governing body - will also receive
an extra Pounds 5,000 per year.
Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive, said the changes were necessary to
'make sure we can get quality people'. He said that including regular
fortnightly meetings and background reading, board members could expect to
spend between 10 and 12 hours a week on Lloyd's matters.
Both boards were set up last year after a report by Sir Jeremy Morse into
the market's governance. Previously, seven members of the market's council
nominated by the Bank of England were paid Pounds 15,000 a year, while eight
external members, elected by Names, were simply reimbursed expenses.
Mr David Rowland, chairman, Mr Middleton and other employees of the Lloyd's
Corporation receive no extra payment.
Meanwhile Lloyd's announced that Mr Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities
and Investments Board, had resigned from the council and the regulatory
board on because his commitments as chairman of the SIB did not allow him
sufficient time to devote to Lloyd's.
He will be replaced by Mr Robert Owen, deputy chairman of European Capital
Co and a former chairman of the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong
Kong.
Mr Large's departure came two days after that of the former deputy chairman,
Mr Stephen Merrett. Mr Rowland said that he recognised the 'very
considerable demands made upon (Mr Large's) time as chairman of the SIB'.
