FT  10 FEB 93 / Iraq muddies water of Turkey-Syria dam deal: Threats over
Euphates project
IRAQ'S recent threat to take legal action against foreign contractors on a
Turkish dam project was more than just another warning shot across the bows
of Ankara's multi-billion-dollar south-east Anatolian project. The outburst
is seen as an indication of growing concern in Baghdad at the possibility of
a water deal between Turkey and Syria which could leave Iraq high and dry.
Iraq's anxiety follows the recent accord signed in Damascus committing
Turkey and Syria to find a 'final solution' to the allocation of the
Euphrates river this year. Some diplomats in Ankara discount the move as yet
another 'agreement to disagree'. However, for both countries, there seems to
be ample reason to push for a more permanent settlement to this long
riparian dispute.
Ankara's control of the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers, both of which rise
in its central highlands and flow into the Gulf, has long soured relations
with its Arab neighbours. Turkey's irrigation project, known as Gap, has
been the main bone of contention - in particular, its plans to irrigate 1.7m
hectares along the Syrian and Iraqi borders.
Turkey has long resisted calls for a more comprehensive solution, reluctant
to become embroiled in the disputes of Syria and Iraq, which in the
mid-1970s came close to open conflict.
With Iraq's continuing international isolation, any deal with Syria would
undermine the case for an internationally ratified agreement on the water
issue.
Modest progress on the security front helped pave the way for the Damascus
accord, in particular Syria's assurances to curb Turkish Kurd separatists on
its territory.
There was also a technical reason for the meeting. In 1987 Turkey agreed to
guarantee to Syria a discharge of 500 cu m a second where the Euphrates
crosses their border. Under that agreement, Turkey was committed to review
the water allocation, once the reservoir behind the vast Dollars 4bn (Pounds
2.6bn) Ataturk dam was filled. That day has arrived.
But more than that, western diplomats say Turkey's decision to push for a
deal is a measure of the desperate financial constraints facing the Gap
project. Hitherto, the World Bank and other donors have refrained from
supporting the project directly because of the outstanding water issue.
According to western officials, only if Turkey solicits international
finance can it afford to invest in the more costly water conserving
equipment, an issue vital for the downstream users. That will only happen if
a solution can be found to the dispute.
Donors now believe the day of financial reckoning is fast approaching. The
Gap has already consumed Dollars 9bn, much of it financed from the state
budget. By next century, when the irrigation infrastructure and the 21 dams
and 19 power plants are in place, the project will have cost a heady Dollars
32bn.
As Turkey prepares to irrigate the first hectares on the Harran plain close
to the Syrian border in May, the need to address the issue has acquired a
new urgency. Turkey will want to reassure the Syrians of continued
co-operation, although the Turks seem unlikely to agree to Syria's demands
to increase the water supply.
Iraq's latest snipe may thus cause a few ruffled feathers for the commercial
banks and export credit agencies now being approached to finance the DM2bn
(Pounds 833m) Birecik project.
The consortium led by Philip Holzmann of Germany has been quick to point out
that there are no plans for irrigation, only hydro-electric generation. In
addition, the Turks argue that Iraq has already given implicit approval to
the project, having signed up to a separate plan linking the power grids of
Turkey and its Arab neighbours: the Birecik plant is the first stage of this
five-country project and would transmit power to the Syrian city of Aleppo.
Iraq's concern over Birecik may still prove premature. Hermes, the German
export credit agency, is understood to have second thoughts about supporting
a project which the Turks seem intent on financing using the more complex
and largely untried technique of Build Operate and Transfer. Under such an
arrangement, the contractor owns and finances the project, recovering its
cost by selling its product, in this case electricity, back to the public
utility. The public outburst from the Iraqis can only further deepen the
misgivings of the lenders.
