FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Rhone-Alpes (5): Risky flagship - William Dawkins
takes a close look at three important industries in the region
A FUTURISTIC blue steel and glass building, glittering at the foot of the
snow-capped peaks that ring the Gresivaudan valley near Grenoble, is the
latest site for the flagship of the French and Italian semiconductor
industries.
SGS-Thomson, the microchip maker jointly owned by French and Italian state
interests, will start production in the spring. Its Dollars 700m plant is
one of the world's most modern semiconductor facilities and one of the most
important high technology projects the Rhone-Alpes region has ever hosted.
As a consumer of power and services it will have a significant impact on the
local economy.
It was Grenoble city hall's fierce lobbying which contributed, first, to the
merger of France's and Italy's state-owned computer groups in 1987, and then
to the merged company's decision to choose a flagship site near Grenoble -
rather than the group's Italian headquarters near Milan.
The plant, near the village of Crolles, costs Dollars 100,000 a day to run.
'With overheads like that, we cannot afford to run idle, so the existence of
potential equipment suppliers in the region has been important to us,'
explains Mike Thompson, director of the centre.
Some suppliers have set up in Grenoble, or expanded there specifically to
sell to SGS-Thomson - such as Lam Research and Applied Materials, two US
semiconductor equipment suppliers, and Metron, a UK distributor of
semiconductor equipment; examples of how existing high technology projects
have acted as a magnet to new investment.
SGS-Thomson itself is not a significant employer: 184 staff are expected to
be in post by the end of this year. Fifty more will come from France
Telecom, whose research division contributed half the Dollars 200m start-up
cost, and a further 30 from Philips, the Dutch electronics group which is a
research partner of SGS-Thomson.
However, SGS-Thomson's presence is expected to attract other international
technology projects - which is why the local economic development body,
Alpes-Gresivaudan Developpement, has kept a neighbouring industrial site
empty, says Marie-Claude Dupuy, the organisation's secretary general.
Grenoble has all the more reason to thank its lucky stars that this prestige
project has come off: until recently SGS-Thomson's very future was
uncertain; Grenoble could have ended up with a white elephant rather than an
electronic flagship on its doorstep.
SGS-Thomson was Dollars 102m in the red in 1991, the latest in a string of
heavy losses caused by the huge investment demands needed to keep pace with
technology at a time of intense price competition from the US and Japan.
The Italian government, in the face of French persuasion, hesitated for many
months over pumping badly needed fresh capital into the group. Late last
year it changed its mind, paving the way for a Dollars 1bn capital increase
from both governments. The first Dollars 500m is expected to be disbursed in
the next few months.
The Italian administration was probably encouraged by evidence of recovery
in SGS-Thomson's fortunes. The group managed a Dollars 3m profit increase
last year (on sales up 12 per cent - well ahead of the 9 per cent growth in
its markets) to Dollars 1.6bn, officials say.
It is too early to say whether SGS-Thomson has completely turned the corner
in its high-risk industry, but the white suited technicians padding around
the Crolles clean rooms assume they are there to stay. Even Mr Thompson, a
Scot who used to work at Inmos, the Scottish semiconductor maker taken over
by SGS-Thomson, has started to learn French.
