FT  21 JUN 93 / Bombs raise suspicion and fear in Egypt / Analysis of a
series of fatal outrages in Cairo
EGYPTIANS this weekend digested with anger, apprehension and confusion the
latest in a recent series of apparently random terrorist attacks  - a bomb
that on Friday killed seven Egyptians and maimed at least 20 others. It
seems to mark a sharp change of tack in the violent anti-government campaign
by Islamic extremists.
The blast, which resounded across central Cairo like a thunderclap, was the
fourth in the capital within a month and brought to 16 dead and 69 injured
the number of Egyptian casualties in the latest attacks. The bomb exploded
in a main street of the poor north-eastern suburb of Shubra, where it was
certain to inflict civilian Egyptian casualties. Like the previous three
bombs since May 21, it had been packed with nails to cause serious injury if
not death.
The attack was immediately condemned by the Moslem Brotherhood, Egypt's main
and professedly moderate Islamic grouping, which decried it as an 'ugly
crime' in a strongly worded denunciation yesterday.
It was met with rage by locals in Shubra, where impromptu demonstrations
called on the government to exact bloody revenge on the terrorists.
The attack appears to have been a bad own-goal for Islamic militants and a
propaganda coup for the government, which had tried to rally equal
indignation over attacks on tourist targets and security personnel. These
have crippled the country's tourism industry and provoked a sweeping and
brutal security crackdown.
However, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya, the underground Islamic militant group
which has previously claimed responsibility for attacks on police and
tourist targets, has stayed silent over the latest bombings.
Moreover, in previous claims of responsibility for attacks on tourist buses
or sites, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya routinely distanced itself from attacks on
individuals  - making an exception for their bloody vendetta-like war
against the security forces.
The attacks were on 'tourism, not tourists', it said, emphasising its aim to
undermine the government by ruining the economy.
This raises puzzling questions over the aim, and the perpetrators, of the
latest bombings, which include a car blast in a busy street on May 21,
killing seven, and an explosion in a central Cairo underpass on May 27 which
claimed two Egyptian lives and injured five British tourists in a bus which
happened to be passing as the time-bomb was detonated.
Senior government officials yesterday, however, were in no doubt that the
Gamaa al-Islamiyya was behind the attacks, and claimed that the randomness
of these indicated its increasing desperation. 'These people are in retreat,
politically speaking,' said Mr Mamdouh Beltagui, state information director.
'They have lost political direction'.
This, he said, was the result of the effective decapitation of the Gamaa by
a security crackdown in which thousands of suspects have been detained,
dozens shot by security forces or tried by military courts, and more than 20
sentenced to death.
Western diplomats in Cairo argue that there may be some truth to the
government's claims, particularly given the duration, intensity and strength
of the security effort against the Gamaa. 'The latest attacks could just be
a last-gasp attempt to prove they are still in business,' one said
yesterday.
But this analysis offers most Egyptians limited reassurance. The latest
attacks have been the bloodiest  - and the bombs used among the most
sophisticated  - of the extremists' campaign. Each fresh attack, moreover,
has defiantly followed fresh rounds of mass detentions of suspected
extremists. Just yesterday, police claimed to have found and defused another
nail bomb in Assiut.
Even the propaganda value of the latest attacks may prove of limited
political value to the government, which has generally enjoyed little
sympathy, in its battle with the Gamaa, among many Egyptians who see it as
increasingly corrupt, unresponsive to their material needs and generally
aloof. In a town prone to rumour and conspiracy theory, Cairenes are already
wondering whom the latest attacks serve better than the government itself.
Mr Abdel-Halim Mandour, a lawyer who has defended Gamaa suspects in recent
trials, said yesterday the latest bombings ran counter to the Islamic
group's strategy. They were, he concluded, the work of 'foreign or local
parties who are hostile to the Islamists', seeking to 'justify the random
punishment and death sentences taking place against them'.
In the end, there appears, for the moment, to be no other discernible motive
for the bombing on Friday and its recent precedents than to heighten a
feeling of apprehension and fear in the capital. That, whoever is
responsible, has been achieved.
