FT  30 NOV 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (5): How Ted Turner hit the
headlines - Martin Dickson enjoys the fast-paced story of a modern media
mogul
IT AIN'T AS EASY AS IT LOOKS
By Porter Bibb
Crown, Dollars 25, 468 pages
In the appropriate setting of Las Vegas, gambling capital of the world,
Atlanta television station owner Ted Turner announced to a sceptical world
in May 1979 that he was about to steal a march on the entire communications
industry and launch the first 24-hour-a-day television news network. It
would be called Cable News Network, or CNN.
The event was classic Turner: a combination of inspired business acumen,a
touch of bombast, immense risk-taking,and an ability to fly by the seat of
his pants.
Turner, while a growing force in the industry, was no heavyweight, and
several of America's largest television conglomerates were also considering
an all-news network - though very cautiously, given the potential this
offered for heavy losses.
Indeed, at the time of the announcement Turner lacked any clear blueprint,
structure, organisation or offices for the new channel he was committed to
launching in just 11 months. Just minutes before the Las Vegas press
conference, to give credibility to the venture he signed a hurried contract
on a sheet of hotel writing paper to hire CNN's first Washington
correspondent.
What Turner did have was a remarkable instinct for trends in the television
industry and a knack of hiring extremely able lieutenants who could
translate his grandiose visions into practical ventures.
Not long after the Las Vegas meeting, Turner disappeared to indulge his
passion for competitive ocean sailing, leaving the detailed planning of the
network to the man widely regarded in the industry as the real founder of
CNN - television news veteran Reese Schonfeld.
Many pundits predicted disaster, particularly when media giant Westinghouse
Electric launched a short-lived news station of its own. Forbes magazine
said Turner was likely to 'crash in flames.' Yet CNN triumphed and,
according to Porter Bibb, has redefined news from 'something that has
happened to something that is happening.'
Bibb, an investment banker and former journalist, has written a readable
biography of Turner, ranging over his remarkable business and yachting
achievements (including his 1977 America's Cup victory) and his colourful
character and private life.
Turner takes the drug lithium to control his violent mood swings, which,
says Bibb, are typical manifestations of a manic-depressive illness known as
clothymia.
Bibb also reckons that unhappiness in Turner's childhood helped turn him
into a 'lonely, defiant outsider.' His father, who ran a successful
billboard advertising business, sent him to live with his grandparents at
the age of three and at the age of six he was sent to boarding school.
Throughout his life, says Bibb, Turner has been driven to outdo his remote,
harsh father, who committed suicide in 1963 when Turner was just 24.
Instead of selling the family business, Turner started to build it up, and
took his first steps into broadcasting, buying up radio stations on the
grounds that he could use his empty billboards to advertise their
programmes.
In 1970 he acquired his first television station, a failing Atlanta
operation, which he built into America's first super-station offering a
combination of entertainment and sport.
'At first,' says a colleague from that time, 'nobody took him seriously. Big
mistake. He is eccentric. Maybe even crazy. But Turner's bright and he is
driven.' It is Turner's oddball nature, his willingness to take a contrarian
position, that has repeatedly brought him business success, often against
big odds.
The takeover battle currently raging over Paramount Communications, the
entertainment group, reflects the growing belief among communications
companies that access to programming will be a key to success in the new age
of multi-media interactive entertainment.
But Turner has acted on that principle since the start of his career. When
he was building up the Atlanta super-station he went against conventional
wisdom and bought films outright rather than licensing them for a limited
number of showings.
As long ago as 1981 he opened negotiations with Californian investor Kirk
Kerkorian which ultimately led Turner to buy the MGM studio's library of old
movies for Dollars 1.2bn in 1986 - a transaction mocked at the time as
over-priced but which may turn out to have been shrewd.
'The game I'm in is building assets,' Turner once said, 'and I've never
minded overpaying if I know the values are there.' His recent expensive
acquisition of two small Hollywood studios, Castle Rock and New Line, fits
the same pattern.
However, as Bibb notes, the domestic growth of Turner's established channels
is likely to slow over the next few years as the US cable market approaches
saturation. The company will have to look overseas for growth, where it
faces increasing competition, and to new domestic channels or acquisitions.
Turner has long been interested in buying a television network and made an
abortive bid for CBS in 1985. Bibb suggests that a merger with any of the
big three US networks would make business sense, though it might be blocked
by the cable companies which hold large stakes in Turner.
Still, in the midst of a media takeover wave, no such alliances can be ruled
out. Many more chapters remain to be written in the Ted Turner story.
