FT  10 FEB 93 / Gas complaint figures disputed
BRITISH Gas and its regulator were in dispute yesterday over the number of
complaints received from customers last year.
Sir James McKinnon, the director-general of Ofgas, the regulator, said in
his annual report that complaints increased 89 per cent to 1,624. British
Gas said it had no knowledge of more than half those complaints.
The Ofgas annual report said the rise 'tends to confirm the belief that
complaints are on a rising trend generally'.
However, the Gas Consumers' Council, which represents customers, said it had
received 19,281 complaints in 1992 - 13 per cent fewer than the year before.
Mr James Cooper, chairman of the council said: 'The 89 per cent annual
increase says more about Ofgas's public profile than it does about British
Gas's performance.'
British Gas said Ofgas had referred 506 complaints to the company - one
complaint for every 35,000 customers.
But Sir James dismissed these claims as being made by British Gas 'spin
doctors'. Ofgas said that in the nine months to December last year, British
Gas had processed between 17,000 and 18,000 complaints that resulted in
compensation being paid and these would be a tiny fraction of the overall
number of complaints received.
Many complaints were by customers having difficulty paying their bills.
Others complained about difficulty in being connected to the gas main. The
number of disconnections for non-payment of bills fell to 16,991 last year
from 18,009 the year before.
Sir James said he was looking carefully at the 'flimsy evidence' provided by
British Gas in support of the price freeze it announced on Monday. But he
said his reading of the index that governs prices showed no room for a rise
as the company claimed.
He said he was pushing British Gas to provide competitors with terms for
transporting interruptible gas supplies. Interruptible gas is the cheapest
supply available to industrial users - the supply can be cut off during
times of peak demand.
No rivals have entered the market yet, although one company tried to
negotiate terms for transporting interruptible gas along British Gas's
pipelines. British Gas has not provided terms. Sir James said: 'It would be
regrettable if Ofgas had to have recourse to its statutory powers before
British Gas honoured its earlier agreement to do so.'
Competitors supply 20 per cent of the overall industrial market and British
Gas will not be able to fulfil its commitment to the Office of Fair Trading
to halve its share of the market by 1995 without opening up the
interruptible sector.
