FT  26 OCT 93 / Northern Ireland industry upbeat after years of gloom:
Ulster is still the UK's poorest region but, some manufacturers are
optimistic about its prospects
IT TAKES an almost religious zeal to promote Northern Ireland as a good
investment opportunity. But even the province's most ardent flag-wavers must
have dropped their heads in their hands on hearing of the bomb that killed
10 people in Belfast at the weekend.
Persuading people to invest is tough enough and the latest atrocity will not
help Northern Ireland's Industrial Development Board to attract private
investors, whether indigenous or from overseas.
Yet persuade them it must, for even though the economy is in better shape
now than it was during most of the last decade, Northern Ireland remains the
UK's poorest region. It can ill afford an intensification of sectarian
violence.
Northern Ireland was less affected than any region by the UK recession. In
the worst year of the downturn - 1991 - its output was flat, compared with a
drop of 2.4 per cent for the UK in total. Similarly, employment was barely
affected by the nationwide fall.
One helpful factor was the high level of government spending in the region.
In 1991-92, government spending per head, including security costs, was
Pounds 4,191 in the province, compared with Pounds 2,963 in England, Pounds
3,506 in Scotland and Pounds 3,268 in Wales.
But the region was also cushioned by the prudence of its manufacturers and
consumers, who entered the recession with a lower burden of debt than their
counterparts on the mainland and were thus less exposed to the very high
interest rates of 1989-90.
As a result, some of Northern Ireland's industrialists are feeling upbeat
about prospects.
'Things have suddenly brightened after years of gloom,' said Mr Norman
Stewart, company secretary of James Mackie and Son, a west Belfast-based
manufacturer of textiles machinery. With orders from China and Africa
swelling the order books, Mr Stewart believes the company may soon expand
its 300-strong workforce.
The company's smart new factory overlooks the Springfield Road, which
separates Protestant and Roman Catholic areas. The road is boarded on either
side by high barriers to keep the two sides apart and is sometimes referred
to as Belfast's Berlin Wall.
Mr Stewart admits that the company is a 'political animal' and only survived
the 1980s because the government was determined to see the big west Belfast
employer survive.
But in spite of the company's sensitive location Mr Stewart is more
concerned about getting help from the government for overseas contacts and
seeing an end to the recession in Europe than he is with the problems of
security.
At Desmonds, a textiles factory in Derry that supplies exclusively to Marks
and Spencer, Mr Sean O'Dwyer, deputy director, said he believed Northern
Ireland's troubles could be costing the economy up to 20,000 jobs, but he is
optimistic that if places such as Derry - an awkward spot, close to the
border and with a large Catholic community - can shake off its bad image,
then so can the rest of the country.
'Derry has done very well over the last two years - it has improved its
image and there is a lot of optimism in the town,' said Mr O'Dwyer.
But in spite of the optimism of individual companies, the Northern Ireland
Economic and Research Centre, an independent research organisation, has
estimated that output in Northern Ireland would have to grow at about 10 per
cent a year to reduce unemployment to the UK average within a decade.
That is not likely while the violence continues.
Productivity was only 83 per cent of the UK average last year, according to
the centre. And although the region's wage levels are low, they are not low
enough to outweigh the productivity gap - unit labour costs in manufacturing
are 5 per cent to 6 per cent above the UK average.
But political problems can only be part of an explanation of the economy's
weakness. Mr Tony Dignan of the centre points out that between 1971 and 1991
average gross domestic product growth per annum in the province actually
exceeded the UK average.
Referring to Saturday's bombing, he said: 'Over the last 20 years you have
had more than enough incidents of this type, but Northern Ireland has kept
apace. Political uncertainty is something that investors don't like, whether
they are foreign or indigenous, but people still get up in the morning and
go to work, as they have been doing for the past 20 years.'
The deeper problems include the size of the private sector, which last year
employed 23.9 per cent of male employees in manufacturing compared with a UK
average of 28.6 per cent.
By contrast, males in the public sector in Northern Ireland accounted for
almost one third of the workforce, compared with one fifth in the UK. For
women the figures are even more startling. Last year, 53.9 per cent of
female employees worked in public administration in the province compared
with a UK average of 44.6 per cent.
Many of Northern Ireland's industrialists complain that the overwhelming
presence of the public sector holds back development of the private sector.
'The public sector is a very safe haven for a lot of people,' said Mr Nigel
Smyth, director of the Confederation of British Industry in Northern
Ireland. 'It would be nice to see some of them working in the private
sector, but somebody at a reasonable level in public administration can live
very pleasantly in Northern Ireland.'
Manufacturing is concentrated in old-fashioned areas such as textiles and
aerospace, with limited chances of growth. The small-business sector is also
relatively underdeveloped.
And, according to the CBI, 35 per cent of Northern Ireland's employees have
no qualifications - compared with 29 per cent in Great Britain - while the
province's population grew twice as fast as the UK average at 0.6 per cent
last year and higher than any other UK region except East Anglia. Such
growth puts pressure on the economy and government-funded training schemes.
Yet in the past financial year the province claims to have attracted almost
2,000 jobs through inward investment. This was the development board's
second best performance since it began in 1982.
'The most important thing is to get people to come here,' said Mr George
Forster, executive director of the board's international investment
division. 'If they only go on the media, then they won't want to know
Northern Ireland.'
At best, Saturday's bombing will prove a temporary discouragement for
overseas investors. At worst, it will have stopped the latest peace
initiative in its tracks. This will leave the province still struggling to
overcome a host of deep-seated structural problems, but without any hope of
shedding perhaps the worst image of any region in Europe.
