FT  22 JUL 93 / Book Review: When the party came to an end
BEYOND THE WALL: Germany's Road to Unification
By Elizabeth Pond
Brookings Institution Pounds 22.50 367 pages
Of the many wonderfully described events leading up to the collapse of the
Berlin Wall in Elizabeth Pond's book, there is one that is particularly
poignant. In early October 1989, when the people of Leipzig were beginning
to shake off their fear of the Stasi, or secret police, Kurt Masur, director
of the Gewanthaus Orchestra, and five other Leipzigers, drafted an appeal
for calm. The eloquent document was printed on smudged carbon copies and
read out to thousands gathering at the Nikolai Kirche, focal point of
growing opposition to the communist regime.
To make sure the message would get through, Masur recorded the statement and
had it broadcast by the local radio station. Afterwards, he returned to the
Gewandhaus to conduct that night's concert. It was as if it was entirely
natural for a classical conductor in his 60s to help shape a peaceful
revolution in one of the world's most highly militarised countries in the
late 1980s.
Yet, as Pond shows, the revolution could have ended in bloodshed and death.
The Stasi and East German police were heavily armed. The authorities,
expecting violence, had ordered blood supplies to be flown to hospitals in
Leipzig. But nothing happened. The Stasi held back. Their orders from Berlin
were confused. And, once the people had found their voice and courage, the
leadership crumbled.
There are many reasons why East Germany's communists caved in so easily.
Pond argues that the communists were out of touch not only with the rapidly
changing mood in the country but also with events in the rest of eastern
Europe. They thought they could buy time by merely tinkering at reform. But
communist leaderships were falling one by one elsewhere. Had Erich Honecker,
or his inebriated successor, Egon Krenz, used force, East Germans would
simply have voted with their feet by leaving the country through Hungary.
Indeed, once Hungary refused to send back the thousands who had sought
refuge through the summer of 1989, they realised they had found a way around
the wall. It was the beginning of the end of the party's omnipotence.
The collapse of the wall would not have been possible, however, without
Mikhail Gorbachev. Here Pond is at her best. Gorbachev had to be careful not
to rush German unification for fear of alienating hardliners in Moscow.
Bonn, Washington and London worked hard to preserve his fragile power base
through judicious statements reassuring the then-Soviet Union about Nato's
role in a united Germany. This gave them a chance to work out the mechanics
of unification.
Pond, who has relied on German and US sources, rather than British or
French, shows that the US state department believed early on unification was
inevitable. It realised, however, that unification was moving much faster
than Britain wanted. Indeed, Margaret (now Lady) Thatcher was more than
sceptical about the merits of a united Germany, fearing a bigger Germany
would upset the balance of power in the European Community and Europe
generally. Yet, once unification was sealed, Helmut Kohl, basking as first
chancellor of the new united Germany, shifted his attention to anchoring
Germany into Europe and made the realisation of the Maastricht treaty a
priority.
In retrospect, perhaps Kohl has devoted attention to Europe which could have
been better spent helping foster understanding between the two halves of
Germany. Pond's book, too, might have given more attention to the internal
dynamics of German unification and looked forward to how it might work
itself out.
On many levels, Germany continues to experience a revolution. Unlike the
countries of eastern Europe, which are making a slow transition to the
market economy and democratic institutions, eastern Germany is being
completely transformed. Its entire economic, social and political base has
been uprooted and replaced by western German institutions. Judges, school
teachers, diplomats, factory managers and professors have been sacked or
replaced.
The result has been debilitating in one important respect: eastern Germany
has not yet produced local political elites. No wonder the easterners
complain about colonisation by the westerners, who in turn resent how deeply
they are digging into their pockets to pay for unification.
There have also been profound effects on economic and foreign policy. The
high cost of modernising eastern Germany means Bonn is slowly reconsidering
the consensus-based corporate capitalism which shaped Germany's postwar
development in favour of more competition. East Germany itself is too small
a market to force this change. Yet the way in which the east Germans -
backed by the Treuhand, the agency overseeing privatisation, and the finance
ministry - are beginning to demand greater access for foreign investors,
particularly in the energy and electricity sectors, shows they are not
prepared to accept monopolies being imposed on them.
Unification has also meant that Bonn is having to decide the role it is
prepared to play in international organisations, particularly in the United
Nations. This has meant much soul-searching - predictable, according to Pond
 -about the tasks Bonn, Washington and the EC should perform in the
post-cold war era.
But this quest, contrary to Mrs Thatcher's grim predictions, has not created
a pushy Germany. If anything, unification has exposed Europe's, and
Germany's, limitations in dealing with the consequences of the collapse of
communism, as the Balkans confirm.
As for Kurt Masur, unification has allowed him to bask in his own new-found
freedom by conducting in New York.
