FT  27 NOV 93 / Just who is taking the Mickey? - Dominic Lawson explains why
Europeans want to wash that mouse right out of their hair
Five years ago, I sat at a table basking in the late autumn heat of inland
Florida. Unfortunately I was unable to nod off, or to become pleasantly
squiffy on one of those wonderful long American cocktails. The trouble was
there were three other men around the table: big serious business
executives, with big serious plans which they wanted to show me.
They reminded me of those diagrams one used to see during the cold war, of
the effects of a nuclear bomb in the heart of London: the blob in the middle
would be the impact in Whitehall, and the rings blossoming out denoted
diminishing degrees of carnage.
These maps also charted flows of population and vulnerability, but to
something else: the power of Mickey Mouse, and, in particular to Mickey's
new site, then being planned at EuroDisney.
The three executives were from the Disney corporation and were attempting to
show me the ideal suitability of northern France for their first venture
into theme parks outside the motherland. The rings denoted population
density, and speed of population movement. I forget now how many millions of
people they claimed were within four hours travelling of EuroDisney - thanks
to the wonderful TGV - but it was a number which, if these men had been
characters in a Disney cartoon, would have turned their eyes into cash
registers.
In part they were trying to convince me, a British journalist, that the
outskirts of Paris was, on purely objective grounds, a far better site then
anything that Britain could offer. I assured them that I was not in the
least offended, and nor were the people of Britain. As it turned out, the
people who were offended were the Spanish, but their government could not
afford the - entirely legal - financial inducements offered by France.
Now we are all, particularly the investors in Euro-Disney, much wiser. It is
not just the lack of sufficient passing trade that is the problem. It seems
that Europeans find the working practices of the Disney corporation rather
too onerous. A number of these disgruntled employees have gone into print on
the matter: in Friday's Daily Telegraph one Christin Ruble, who gave up
after only eight weeks, complained that 'We were remade in Walt's image'
(although I think she looked sweet in the accompanying photograph, wearing
her Mickey Mouse hat).
If Miss Ruble had been reading my column more attentively, she could have
spared herself the embarassment. As I reported 18 months ago, on that trip
to Florida, I stumbled across a document setting out the dress code for
employees. They made the British army seem lax. So as a service to
similarly-minded potential employees, I will quote it again: from the
section headed 'Women: Hair'. It stipulated, among other things: 'Hair below
shoulder length should be worn combed away from the face so that it will not
fall forward or over the face when performing normal job duties. Side
tendrils, if worn, should not extend below the bottom of the ear lobe. If a
yarn or hair ribbon is worn it should be no wider than one half inch, or
longer than four inches when tied. Stick-pin barrettes (both leather and
plastic), and knitted chinon (bun) holders are not acceptable.'
The 'Men: Hair' section was scarcely less strict, and, among many other
points, it demanded that: 'Sideburns should be neatly trimmed and may be
permitted to extend to the bottom of the ear lobe, following their natural
contour. Flares or muttonchops are not permitted'.
Americans seem happy to put up with such rules. Theirs is a society which
not only tolerates homogenisation, but worships it. But we in Europe are
quaintly obsessed with individualism, particularly in matters of dress and
appearance.
The Americans also are happy queueing. I was amazed, in Florida, to see
families standing for two hours to spend a minute on some new attraction. I
could never see that happening in northern Europe. But the reason was not
anthropological. It was the weather. It was simply too cold or wet, most of
the year, for any sane family to want to queue. That is a point which it
never occurred to me to put to those Disney executives five years ago, as we
sat in our shirt sleeves in the heat of Florida in October.
Dominic Lawson is editor of the Spectator.
