FT  29 JUN 93 / EC tightens van exhaust rules: Catalytic converters will
have to be fitted from next year
PASSENGER vans and light goods vehicles in the European Community will have
to be fitted with catalytic converters from next year, environment ministers
decided yesterday. This will bring them into line with exhaust emission
controls on cars and lorries.
Ministers were also aiming to reach a political deal setting even more
stringent emission targets for cars for 1996 and 2000, which carmakers say
would add 5 per cent to manufacturing costs.
The emissions regime for cars, in force since January, is now extended to
new models of van from October, and all newly registered vans from October
1994. It covers passenger vehicles carrying up to nine people and goods
vehicles under 3.5 tonnes. Broadly, current standards seek to cut emissions
of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons and carbon particulates by
85-90 per cent from 1970 levels.
Only the Dutch dissented on the vans decision, but from a 'greener'
standpoint. The Netherlands, along with Germany and Denmark, want more
generous fiscal incentives for cleaner cars than now allowed in order to cut
emissions faster. Britain, France, Spain and others fear too big 'green' tax
discounts could distort competition in the EC's single market.
Though there is consensus on the European Commission's approach to cutting
vehicle emissions, disagreement over fiscal incentives loomed last night as
a barrier to an early accord. Under the current vehicle regimes, incentives
have to be 'substantially lower' than the cost of the technology needed to
reach the emissions standard. Despite car manufacturers' cost forecasts,
many EC environment ministries maintain that it is impossible to gauge now
the technology cost of 1996 emission standards - let alone targets for 2000
and after.
Chances of a deal were further diminished because the European parliament
has not yet supplied its opinion, meaning that ministers would have to
decide unanimously. Parliament may be holding out for a greater say in
shaping the deal once the Maastricht treaty is ratified. But when car
emission standards were set two years ago, Strasbourg muffed the chance to
write in the 1996 targets then - which Brussels and the Twelve were disposed
to accept - because it failed to muster a quorum of MEPs for the key vote.
Ministers also agreed on measures to control emissions from petrol
distribution and vehicle refuelling, and were due to discuss better fuel
quality as part of the new generation of emission controls.
There was hope, too, of agreement today on reducing emissions such as
sulphur dioxide and hydrogen chloride and fluoride, through cleaner burning
of industrial waste.
