FT  06 OCT 93 / Arts: A pianist, and some pianos - Concert
Twenty years ago, Martin Jones's recordings of Busoni piano music made a
fine impression. Those of us who thought Busoni's 'modernism' hugely
overrated by an earlier generation were stirred nonetheless by the pianist's
sharply musical commitment, and his stinging polish. Since then Jones has
become an 'academic' pianist: 17 years as pianist-in residence at University
College, Cardiff and now a Guildhall professor, recording the 'complete'
Mendelssohn, Debussy and Percy Grainger and doing the occasional concert.
He gave an occasional concert in the Wigmore Hall on Monday. The programme,
appealingly off-beat - early, mostly unfamiliar Debussy and Szymanowski,
noble but low-profile Mendelssohn and Ravel, a pair of Alun Hoddinott
sonatas - attracted the tiniest of audiences. It included, however, a lady
with multitudinous plastic bags (but not necessarily a bag-lady), searching
noisily among them for some nameless thing while Jones began the limpid
Andante of Hoddinott's 10th Sonata - and then, interminably, folding them up
again. Jones displayed admirable restraint by simply giving up, remarking
that he was trying to 'create a quiet atmosphere', and asking was she
THROUGH?
Shades of the old Wigmore, when audiences were often so sparse that anybody
could wander in] . . . but Jones was playing below his best commanding form.
In Mendelssohn's Variations Serieuses and Ravel's lean Valses nobles et
sentimentales, his indulgent pedalling left harmonic smudges that would have
offended both composers' ears. (Though Chopin called the pedal 'the soul of
the piano', on all the evidence British pedal-training remains even now the
crudest in Europe.)
Despite that, Jones secured a broad, expressive arc for Mendelssohn's
faultlessly crafted set, and in Ravel's svelte, exacerbated fantasies he
struck to the heart of the matter again and again. It is some while since
I've heard the second Waltz sound truly haunting, or some of the later ones
pointfully distraites - as Jones rendered them here. All that one missed was
his super-accurate pounce of old (there were a lot of finger-slips, and in
Ravel even some ingrained misreadings), and his old high-definition attack.
He should spend much more time performing, and less on academically
'interesting' stuff.
He played on a Steinway, presumably the Wigmore's own. I stand rebuked by
the Wigmore director's letter-to-the Editor last week: the Nash Ensemble
pianist did not play the Hall's 'big, booming Bosendorfer', but the
Steinway. In the absence of any programme-warning to the contrary, I
supposed that he must have that Bosendorfer under his hands. How else could
a pianist so adept at adjusting to string-colleagues' dynamics find himself
swallowing them up instead?
It would be wrong to claim that the big new Bosendorfer must make everybody
sound opaquely loud, for (as the Wigmore's William Lyne has protested) some
pianists have been able to make it sing - in the Viennese repertoire. For
pianists with different specialities, and for chamber-players, it needs more
practised handling than they can afford; but that is no peculiar fault. Many
Francophile pianists and Liszt exponents love their Bechsteins (and in
America, their gentle Baldwin cousins too), despite perennial difficulties
with keeping their pearly trebles in good order.
Though European Steinways are good all-rounders, many European pianists find
American-made Steinways designed for gross, clangorous noise. (When Alicia
de Larrocha complained to a local American piano-technician that she could
not make soft repeated-notes sound, as in Ravel's Gaspard, he explained
cheerfully that she had to do it like this] - stabbing one note repeatedly
and rapidly with his thumb: not really a feasible option.) It would have
been nice to hear Jones striving harder to light up his piano-sound in
detail, and not just relying upon his chunky, virile grasp of the whole
keyboard, whatever its brand-name.
