FT  02 JUN 93 / Survey of Shanghai (3): Big ideas on dance floor - Stock
exchange aims to become a world force in capitalism
IT IS spring in Shanghai and the fancy of many Shanghainese has turned not
towards love, but money.
In the first three months of the year, turnover on the Shanghai Securities
Exchange exceeded that for the whole of last year, and activity continues to
accelerate. Investors are crowding dozens of suburban securities sales
outlets in their efforts to catch the stock market wave. Frenzied scenes at
these sales centres resemble those one might encounter at a betting shop in
the last seconds before an important race such as the Derby.
At the Shanghai Securities Exchange (SSE) itself, located in a converted
ballroom of an old-style hotel on the banks of the Huangpu river,
hard-pressed staff battle to keep up with developments in the face of a new
bout of investment fever. Madam Li Qian, an SSE official, said that apart
from dealing with fast-moving events such as new listings and the
introduction of foreign brokerage houses to the market, staff were also
being overwhelmed by a stream of visitors.
'This exchange has become an important tourist spot,' she observed wearily.
The SSE, with its modern electronic quotation board, scripless trading and
hundreds of yellow-jacketed brokers' clerks, is one of the most striking
symbols of the new free-wheeling capitalism that is sweeping China after
years of drab central control.
Officials make no secret of their ambition to turn the SSE into not only a
powerful national institution, but an international one as well. 'Our aim,'
said Madam Li, 'is to be a major international market by the year 2000.'
Judging by plans for the construction of a new exchange to be located in the
Pudong development zone across the Huangpu river from the present site, the
SSE is preparing for the day when it might match the New York, Tokyo or
London exchanges for business volume. The new Shanghai exchange would be
housed in a 30-storey building of three trading floors, equipped to
accommodate 3,000 traders, including a main floor of 2,000 trading seats.
As a reminder of several of Shanghai's grand historic buildings from an
affluent past, the new exchange is to be called Shanghai Securities Mansion.
The SSE has developed extraordinarily quickly since it officially began
operations on 19 December, 1990 - the first of China's two exchanges.
Initially, it offered what became known as 'A' shares denominated in local
currency. 'B' shares issued in dollars and restricted to foreign investors
followed last year. Market capitalisation in both 'A' and 'B' shares reached
Rmb57bn in 1992. Turnover exceeded Rmb141bn.
At the end of the year, 29 'A' shares and nine 'B' shares had been listed.
Listed companies had grown to 47 'A' and 10 'B' by mid-April with plans this
year for many more listings. The 'A' share market dominates with 70 per cent
of turnover.
The SSE is also formulating plans to list what Madam Li described as 'C'
shares on the Hong Kong stock exchange. Leading Chinese companies such as
Qingdao Brewery and Shanghai Petrochemical are engaged in the arduous
process of satisfying stringent foreign listing requirements.
The SSE began in 1986 as a bond trading centre before it developed into a
full-blown stock exchange. It was also used for over-the-counter (OTC)
trading, mostly in stocks issued by state-owned companies to staff in lieu
of bonuses.
With the official 1990 launch of the SSE, OTC trading in Shanghai has
withered. Some 270 securities companies from all over China are represented
on the SSE. The exchange offers 563 trading seats, of which 80 are still
vacant. Twenty-three have been set aside for foreign brokerage houses, and
Madam Li expects these to be filled this year.
The SSE official acknowledged teething problems in the operations of the
exchange. Trade in 'B' share was sluggish, for example, because the process
of buying and selling required 'two steps' involving foreign underwriters
and local brokers. This was a disincentive to trade.
The SSE was also looking forward to the promulgation of a national
securities law that would be aimed at strengthening regulatory procedures
and thus engendering greater confidence in the market which has been subject
to wild fluctuations.
Local investors, Madam Li said, were becoming more sophisticated and were
attempting to analyse the strengths and weaknesses of particular companies.
But she added that 'some people still want to speculate and turn the market
into a casino.'
For the moment the SSE has no plans to list foreign companies. Its immediate
priorities, apart from developing the Shanghai market itself, are to promote
the listing of Chinese firms on the Hong Kong exchange. This year promises
to continue to be busy for both the SSE and the Shenzen exchanges following
the announcement by the central government that it was providing a Rmb5bn
fund to assist companies throughout China to secure listings with a
restriction at this stage of a maximum of two enterprises per province.
Madam Li expects a rush of applications which would test the SSE's and
Shenzen's regulatory resources (Shenzen on the border with Hong Kong is the
only other official exchange). Companies seeking a listing would be required
to have minimum paid-up capital of Rmb10mn, and to have shown a profit in
each of the past three years. They would also be obliged to provide detailed
information about assets and liabilities.
In its efforts to promote orderly trading and to improve basic knowledge
about the operations of the exchange, the SSE has begun publishing the
Shanghai Securities Weekly. It also issues its own index based on a weighted
market capitalisation of all stocks with December 19, 1990 (the first day of
trading in 'A' shares) as the basis with an index of 100. The 'B' share
index is calculated from February 21, 1992, the first day of B share
trading.
It is not impossible that before long Shanghai's SSE index will be quoted in
the same breath as London's FTSE, Wall Street's Dow Jones, Tokyo's Nikkei
and Hong Kong's Hang Seng.
