FT  29 OCT 93 / World Stock Markets: KSE rally on Bhutto win and the 1993
cotton crop - Pakistan's equity market gains
After 13 gains in succession, and breaking through 1,500 this week, the
Karachi Stock Exchange's KSE-100 index eased a token 11.20 to 1,541.23
yesterday, 44 per cent up from its 1993 low on April 19.
That low came the day after Mr Nawaz Sharif, the former prime minister, was
sacked, ending a bitter confrontation between his administration and Mr
Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the president. The rally followed the election of Ms
Benazir Bhutto's PPP (Pakistan People's Party) government in the October 6
elections, ending a year-long period of intense uncertainty; but recent
projections of a bumper 1993 cotton crop in Pakistan have added to the
optimism.
In addition to Ms Bhutto's electoral success after almost three years in
opposition, the PPP has succeeded in forming a government for the Punjab,
the country's largest and wealthiest province. The PPP's control over the
centre and the Punjab has strained the perceived ability of its opponents to
destabilise the government, and created fresh optimism over continuation of
economic policies.
As for the cotton crop, latest estimates are that this year's total output
will exceed the government's target of 12m bales. As a result, the textile
groups forming nearly one-third of the KSE's 644 listed companies are
expected to earn larger profits due to cheaper raw material costs.
Signs of fresh optimism are evident around the exchange building along
Karachi's Chundrigar road, right in the heart of the business district. 'The
KSE has suddenly become so crowded with investors in the last two to three
weeks, that it has become even more difficult to find a parking spot than
before,' says Mr Aslam Motiwala, a broker. He expects the index to rise
further, to a level above 1,700 by the year-end.
According to Mr Arif Habib, president of the KSE, the newly generated
optimism is also based on hopes that Ms Bhutto will be more successful in
attracting foreign investors to Pakistan, given her personal charisma and
her ability to establish a better rapport with foreign leaders and the
business community.
'Investors feel that Ms Bhutto is good in foreign policy and that she can
sell the economic policies of her government in a better way to foreign
investors,' he adds.
Mr Yasin Lakhani, another leading broker, agrees. 'With Benazir being the
darling of the west, people expect that she would be in a better position to
get things done and put the Pakistani view across much better than any other
person on the political scene.'
Some brokers say that fresh optimism has also been generated due to
expectations over improvements in government finances.
Ms Bhutto is widely expected to continue with many of the painful economic
reforms introduced by Mr Moeen Qureshi, the former prime minister, during
his three-month tenure which began this summer.
As a result, Islamabad is expected successfully to conclude negotiations in
which it is seeking up to Dollars 1.2bn in fresh International Monetary Fund
credits over the next three years.
In spite of these optimistic sentiments, some analysts are still watching to
see the result of next month's presidential elections, to determine the
extent to which Ms Bhutto's government is likely to remain stable in the
coming years.
Since 1985, the year when martial law was lifted, four governments have been
elected. Each one was sacked before completing its term under presidential
powers which allow for the dismissal of any government.
'We have to see if the presidential elections conclude smoothly, to know if
the Bhutto government has good chances of lasting its five-year term,' says
one leading businessman in Karachi. However, such long term concerns over
the political future seem to have been shelved for the time being, with
investors and brokers cashing in.
