FT  07 APR 93 / International Company News: Tense house of Tata stands
divided against itself - Stefan Wagstyl looks at the bitter war of
succession engaging two generations of managers in Bombay
THE HOUSE of Tata, India's largest business group, likes to exude an air of
quiet authority.
Its Bombay headquarters, a drab brown building with brass plaques by the
door, resembles an old-fashioned merchant bank. A bust of the the group's
19th century founder commands the entrance hall. From the day executives
start, they are taught that Tata's greatest asset is the Tata name.
But Tata's self-assurance has been disturbed by a bitter boardroom battle at
Tata Iron and Steel (Tisco), its flagship company. The fight centres on the
last-ditch effort by Mr Russi Mody, Tisco's flamboyant 75-year-old chairman,
to delay his enforced retirement.
Ranged against him are Mr JRD Tata, the group's 88-year-old patriarch, and
Mr Ratan Tata, 55-year-old cousin and chosen heir. Last month, Mr Mody
stormed out of a Tisco board meeting when the issue of his retirement was
raised. The board decided that Mr Mody should leave this year, but the exact
date will involve delicate negotiations.
The battle highlights the difficulties India's family-based businesses face
in satisfying the conflicting ambitions of family members, professional
managers, and shareholders.
Tata Sons, the group's privately-owned nerve centre, mostly holds only small
stakes in its large publicly-listed operating companies, which have a
combined annual turnover of Dollars 4.5bn in everything from lorries to
lipstick, as well as steel, cement and chemicals.
Mr Ratan Tata, a thoughtful man who took over as chairman of Tata Sons from
Mr JRD Tata in 1991, says his aim is to bring greater focus and cohesion to
the group. To succeed, he must stamp his authority upon the group's ageing
chiefs - including Mr Mody - and promote a new generation of managers.
Mr Ratan Tata's task might have been easier if he had started sooner. His
advance to the chairmanship of Tata Sons was delayed by Mr JRD Tata's
determination to stay at the helm. Even now, the elder Tata remains on the
Tata Sons board, creating the impression that Mr Ratan Tata is not yet his
own master.
Mr JRD Tata's reluctance to retire is understandable. He had run Tata since
taking over at the early age of 34 in 1938; he founded Air India -
subsequently nationalised - and piloted its first flight.
His easy-going manner endeared him to managers and workers alike. At
Jamshedpur, Tisco's home and a company town of 700,000 inhabitants, the
annual founder's day ceremonies turned into acts of homage to the greatest
living Tata.
Mr Mody was Mr JRD Tata's ablest protege. He was outside the family, but
like the Tatas he is a Parsee, a member of a wealthy and close-knit
religious community which survives in Bombay centuries after its ancestors
fled persecution in Persia.
While Mr Tata directed the group from Bombay, Mr Mody ran the steelworks at
Jamshedpur, presiding over decades of strike-free production. He is also a
pilot, an accomplished chef and a pianist. As a student at Oxford, he once
accompanied the violin-playing Albert Einstein.
A man of modest height and great ambition, he compared himself with Napoleon
and once declared that Harrow School, his alma mater, had produced only
three great men in the 20th century: Winston Churchill, Jawarhalal Nehru,
and Russi Mody.
When Mr JRD Tata finally indicated in his early 80s, that he was preparing
to retire, Mr Mody saw himself as the natural successor. Family ties and the
advantage of youth favoured Mr Ratan Tata.
Mr Ratan Tata, who had studied engineering and architecture in the US before
working his way up the group, inherited a tricky position. Tata's cohesion
was based less on intra-group shareholdings - as low as 8 per cent in Tisco
 -than on Mr JRD Tata's personal authority.
The crunch came when the Tata Sons board last year passed a resolution
requiring all group managing directors to retire at 65 and chairmen at 75.
Mr Mody claimed that the resolution was aimed personally at him.
In scenes unprecedented in Indian business, both sides last May appealed to
the prime minister, Mr PV Narasimha Rao. Mr Rao stayed out of the fight. Mr
Mody admitted defeat, but managed to secure a compromise - the right to
remain as non-executive chairman with some executive powers, including
control of exports, with Mr Aditya Kashyap, his close friend and protege, to
assist him.
The public feuding ended last summer, but tensions remained high in Tisco
with Mr Mody and Mr Irani barely on speaking terms. The atmosphere was
poisoned by, among other things, a dispute about whether Tata should bid to
take over a state-owned steel plant which the government wanted to
privatise. Mr Mody was in favour. Mr Irani refused on the grounds that Tisco
was in the middle of a large-scale factory modernisation programme.
The two men also quarrelled over a Dollars 1.5m private jet which appeared
in Tata's hangars in Jamshedpur airport in 1990. According to Mr Mody, the
Citation aircraft was sent to India by Korf, a large German engineering
concern and a joint-venture partner of Tisco. It was intended to be used by
Korf personnel and remains Korf's property, says Mr Mody.
The plane has been flown almost exclusively by Mr Mody, its running costs
have been paid by Tata companies, and it is regarded by Tata employees in
Jamshedpur as the chairman's personal toy.
The argument is not trivial since Indian foreign exchange law forbids
Indians from buying imported private jets.
Mr Mody says he has no regrets about the way he has been treated by the Tata
family. 'They treated me like a prince,' he says. But he believes that after
his years of service he should not be harried out of the group.
Mr Ratan Tata says the retirement rules must apply to everybody. Everybody,
that is, except Mr JRD Tata. 'JRD is unique,' he says. And, Mr Mody might
add, he is also a Tata.
