FT  22 OCT 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (25): Postpone the
bill until it's smaller - Offshore funds / A 40 per cent taxpayer, about to
retire, could roll-up cash offshore and then withdraw it when he drops into
the 25 per cent tax bracket
SLOWLY BUT surely, Europe is developing a market in offshore funds which may
one day represent a challenge to the UK unit trust market.
It is a challenge which the industry recognises only too well. Earlier this
year, the Association of Unit Trusts and Investment Funds finally persuaded
the Treasury to agree to remove a competitive disadvantage. UK unit trusts
will be allowed to pay income gross of tax to non-UK investors (a measure to
this effect is expected in the Budget). Without that concession, fund
management business which might have come to London would simply have headed
to Luxembourg.
For the domestic UK investor, the attractions of offshore funds are actually
quite limited. Although such funds can pay income gross, taxpayers are
obliged to declare that income to the Inland Revenue.
Non-taxpayers may still find it a lot more convenient to use an offshore
bond fund, for example, than to use an onshore fund and wait to claim their
tax back. But for taxpayers, the only real advantage is the ability to
postpone tax. So-called roll-up funds accumulate income, rather than pay it
out; UK investors are only liable to pay tax when they withdraw their money.
So a 40 per cent taxpayer, who is about to retire, might find it convenient
to roll-up cash offshore and then withdraw it when he drops into the 25 per
cent tax bracket. Similarly, someone who is planning to work overseas, or
emigrate, might roll up cash until he moves out of the UK tax net. Since the
fund is rolling up gross, rather than net, there should be some enhancement
to performance.
The danger, however, is that tax rates may rise in the future and you could
end up with a higher, not a lower, tax bill.
The second question is that of regulation. Investors with memories of Barlow
Clowes, or indeed Bernie Cornfeld, might be suspicious of any offshore
investment. The safest bet is to stick with those funds which are recognised
by the Securities and Investments Board; ie the UK's chief regulator has
accepted that regulation in the offshore centre is equivalent to that in the
UK, and that the funds are run in the proper manner.
When it comes to investment performance, there are many well-known UK names,
such as Fidelity, GT and Henderson, which run offshore funds. And the UK
investor who ventures offshore can gain access to the expertise of some US
groups which have yet to set up in the UK; for example, Scudder Stevens
operates a range of bond and equity funds out of Luxembourg.
A lot of funds are managed within 'umbrellas', in which a variety of
different types of fund are lumped together. Investors can switch between
the different funds at low cost, and there is an enormous variety to choose
from. Some funds, such as the currency deposit funds, are not available
onshore. But they should be aware that, since 1988, switching may attract a
capital gains tax liability.
Charges are an important factor to watch. Offshore funds operate on a single
price system, in which investors buy and sell units at the same price, with
the charges thrown in on top. The performance figures quoted by groups such
as Micropal do not allow for the effect of initial charges, which inevitably
flatters the performance of offshore funds by comparison with their onshore
counterparts. Furthermore, some offshore funds have been criticised for the
scale of their charges, which can be considerably higher than those onshore.
September saw a welcome development in the market when Charles Schwab, the
US discount broker, launched its International FundSource service. This
offers to sell investors offshore funds with no initial charge.
Only three fund management groups are taking part in the service at the
moment: Guinness Flight (for currency, equity and bond funds); Rothschild
Asset Management (for currency funds); and Wright Investors' Services (for
equity funds).
In fact, there is no initial charge on the currency funds of either Guinness
Flight or Rothschild Asset Management. So the real benefit of the service is
the ability to buy the bond and equity funds without the upfront charge.
Schwab, which runs a very similar service in the US, earns its profit by
getting a proportion (around 0.3 per cent) of the manager's annual fee. It
says the cost is not passed on to the investor. The manager is willing to
pay Schwab because of the increased funds under management the broker can
generate.
Investors must open a Schwab account to use the service, and the minimum
investment in each fund is Dollars 2,000. As the system is dollar-based,
sterling investors will face a currency risk and the cost of conversion
(around 0.2-0.3 of a percentage point). UK investors interested in the
service can call freephone 0800 526027.
The day when the average UK investor regularly sends cheques to Luxembourg
may be some way off. But enough fund management groups are convinced that
they need to tap the market of wealthy international investors to ensure
that the offshore funds market is set to grow for some years to come.
