FT  29 JAN 93 / BHF and Credit Commercial poised to buy Charterhouse
ROYAL BANK of Scotland is poised in the next few days to announce the
long-awaited sale of 90 per cent of Charterhouse, its merchant banking
subsidiary.
In a deal expected to value Charterhouse at around Pounds 200m, BHF, a
German bank, and Credit Commercial de France, the French bank, are each
expected to buy 45 per cent of Charterhouse. RBS is expected to retain a 10
per cent holding.
RBS has been looking for a buyer for Charterhouse since January last year.
Negotiations with the French and German institutions, which are being
advised by the UK merchant bank Schroders, have been dragging on for several
months, according to a banker with an intimate knowledge of the talks. Talks
are now entering their final phase.
RBS, advised by SG Warburg, has been holding out for an improved price,
though bankers are now hopeful that the two sides are not far apart. However
one banker added: 'Until the deal is signed, something could still go
wrong.'
If completed, the deal would be the first time that a UK merchant bank had
been bought by a Franco-German banking partnership. CCF and BHF, which both
have investment banking operations of their own, aim to build up a
pan-European merchant banking business with Charterhouse at its centre.
CCF and BHF were found separately by RBS as possible buyers of Charterhouse.
However, CCF and BHF already knew each other well and each holds 1 per cent
of the other's shares.
A price of Pounds 200m for Charterhouse is equivalent to a small premium to
the net value of Charterhouse's assets. These net assets are shown in its
last balance sheet as being worth Pounds 136.6m at September 30, but that
figure takes no account of its hidden, undisclosed reserves, which are
thought to total around Pounds 50m.
Charterhouse has been a successful investment for RBS, which paid Pounds
150m for it in January 1985 and has since taken out dividends totalling more
than Pounds 120m. In the autumn of last year, it withdrew Pounds 61.4m in a
cash dividend from the merchant bank, which has consistently earned a return
on capital over the past few years between 12 per cent at its low point in
1990 and well above 20 per cent.
