FT  15 JUL 93 / Attali comes under harsh attack: EBRD chief may bring
forward departure after critical audit report
MR JACQUES ATTALI, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, will be severely criticised in a report on financial
mismanagement at the bank to be published tomorrow.
Following a two-month investigation, the bank's audit committee is putting
the finishing touches to the report. Bank employees who have seen the
initial draft say it focuses on four areas of financial mismanagement by Mr
Attali. It says the EBRD chief:
Wasted thousands of pounds by taking more than 40 flights on private jets
supplied by French company, Air Entreprise.
Received fees for giving speeches on several occasions, contrary to the
bank's code of conduct.
Charged personal expenses to the bank, including several trips to the London
nightclub, Annabels. These have been reimbursed but in some cases there was
an 18-month delay before the reimbursement was made.
Had a close relationship with Mr Jean-Louis Berthet, the architect used in
the Pounds 55.5m project to furnish the bank's headquarters, which
undermined the ability of the building contractor, Bovis, to control the
construction project.
Also criticised are two other executives, Mr Pierre Pissaloux, who until
recently held the posts of director of the cabinet and of the budget, though
he is now only cabinet director, and Mr Anders Ljungh, the bank's
vice-president in charge of finance.
Mr Pissaloux is accused of poor judgment in his management of the building
project, allowing overspending in certain areas. However, he is praised for
the speed with which the project was finished. Mr Ljungh is accused of not
keeping sufficient control of bank spending.
The bank's board of 23 directors, who represent the countries and agencies
which own the bank, are also rebuked for approving and then increasing the
budget for furnishing the office without receiving sufficient information on
why more than Pounds 50m was required.
In June, Mr Attali announced his intention to resign as president following
disclosures that he had taken Dollars 30,000 in fees for speaking at a
conference and had also been reimbursed twice for a first-class return
flight to Japan.
He said at the time he would go when a permanent successor took up office,
which is unlikely until September. He was not at the bank yesterday. One
bank executive said: 'The audit report is so critical of him, I suspect he
may decide to quit this week.'
Mr Pissaloux is praised for other actions. At the end of last year, Mr
Pissaloux took away the corporate credit card issued to Mr Francois Olive,
Mr Attali's personal assistant, who organised Mr Attali's travel and
entertaining, when he became concerned at the expenses charged to it.
At the beginning of this year, Mr Pissaloux also forced Mr Attali to get
competing quotes from aircraft charter companies before renting private
jets.
The audit committee, chaired by Swedish director, Mr Claes de Neergaard,
employed consultants from Coopers &amp; Lybrand to carry out much of the
investigation, which concentrated on the building refurbishment, the use of
private jets and Mr Attali's management of his expense account.
