FT  03 MAR 93 / Business and the Environment: Paraguay's parrots get the
last word - John Barham describes how the country is cracking down on the
illegal trade in live animals
Good news about the trade in endangered species is rare, especially when it
comes from Paraguay, where the illegal trade in live animals, birds and
skins flourished for decades.
During the 35-year regime of General Alfredo Stroessner, corruption and
contraband were central to Paraguay's political system. Paraguayans hunted
down caymans in wildlife refuges by the hundreds of thousands to sell their
skins.
The capital, Asuncion, became a centre of the shady international trade in
live parrots, snakes and monkeys, though it was banned under Paraguayan law
and international treaties. What is more, the smugglers moved in the same
underworld as gun-runners, drug traders and car thieves.
But in 1989, a military coup toppled Stroessner and Paraguay began making
rapid, if uncertain, strides towards democracy. The government is anxious to
improve Paraguay's dreadful image by taking action over human rights
violations, corruption, smuggling and the illegal trade in animals.
During the last 18 months, Paraguay has sharpened its environmental laws and
promoted determined, honest individuals. The result is more seizures of
skins and live animals that were once openly traded. Rich and powerful
merchants find their links to the military no longer provide immunity.
Even the Swiss-based United Nations' Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (Cites), once a bitter critic, now recognises Paraguay is
improving. Obdulio Menghi, Cites' scientific co-ordinator, says the
Paraguayans 'are working like never before, because of the professional and
political (commitment) that the country has assumed for the first time'.
Change has come almost entirely as a result of intense international
pressure from groups such as Cites. Luz Aquino-Shuster, head of the
government's Cites liaison office, says: 'When I went to conferences, I
would be pointed at and people would say Paraguay is a bad country. It was
terrible.' Now, she gets letters of support. Moreover, she says: 'Biologists
are in charge now. This is important, because before the politicians were in
charge and they did not care.'
The US Fish and Wildlife Service is advising the government on improving
controls, a further sign that Paraguay's search for respectability is
something more than a public relations stunt. However, the Paraguayans have
little hard data to show for their work, although they do provide some
graphic accounts of their seizures.
For instance, in February, Aquino's staff seized 1,125 skins, coats, belts
and shoes from a trader. They also fined a shop selling illegal furs and
skins Dollars 37,500 (Pounds 26,600) - a princely sum by local standards.
Since then, traders have become warier and seizures less frequent.
Furthermore, some foreign governments caution that Paraguay's improvement is
overrated, warning that corruption and smuggling still continue, if only
with greater discretion.
Nonetheless, the government is co-ordinating wildlife control operations
with the army, police and customs, since the trade in animals is part of a
wider underground market in drugs, arms and stolen cars. It is also
sponsoring an environmental law in congress and Aquino hopes that smuggling
animals - at present a civil offence - will be made criminal.
Falling international prices have made her work easier. Hunters have glutted
the market and demand in once lucrative Asian markets is declining.
Warehouses around the world are stacked with enough cayman, iguana and boa
constrictor skins to last many years.
There is still a lot to be done. Menghi says: 'You have to struggle
permanently against contraband, whether of animals, drugs or arms.' And
several important European markets are still importing animals and skins, to
the Paraguayans' fury.
Clamping down on smuggling hits peasants and Indians, who are used to
supplementing their incomes with hunting. Experienced hunters can easily
catch a pair of adult parrots or shoot between 15 and 20 caymans a day,
although they are paid very little. It is the middlemen who reap the
profits: a parrot can retail for up to Dollars 10,000 in Los Angeles.
The government is trying to ease this problem by allowing controlled exports
of a few species whose numbers are not in danger. The main candidate for
'rational exploitation' is the heavily hunted Teyu Guazu iguana, whose skin
is used to make handbags, belts and cowboy boots. In 1980-85, between 1.5m
and 3.6m Teyu Guazu were exported.
Closer co-operation is needed at regional level. Paraguay's neighbour,
Argentina, is often criticised for lax controls and its security and
conservation forces lack co-ordination. Smugglers habitually exploit its
generous export licences to 'launder' species hunted in Bolivia, Brazil and
Paraguay. However, Menghi says even Argentina is improving its controls.
However praiseworthy these efforts may be, they do little to alleviate the
destruction of habitats, the principal threat to wildlife. The situation is
worsening by the day, as Paraguay's forests are cut down and farmers
encroach on virgin territory.
