FT  12 JUL 93 / Visa plans small payments cross-border service
VISA INTERNATIONAL, the credit card group, plans to launch a new service
allowing individuals and small companies to make payments across borders in
Europe next year, after testing the idea with a group of banks in 10
countries this autumn.
The Visa transfer system, which will compete with the Swift system
established by European banks 16 years ago, comes amid signs of growing
competition in the hitherto small market for low value cross-border
payments.
Visa is to use its existing data network that allows member banks to debit
others for credit card payments. Banks will for the first time be able to
credit accounts in other countries through the network, and so make
cross-border payments.
Individuals will be guaranteed safe transfer of sums from their own account
to any other European bank in the Visa network within six days. Charges and
currency exchange rates will be set by the transferring bank.
Visa will charge the transferring bank for each transaction, and believes it
can undercut transfer prices set by Swift for its network based in Brussels.
Swift is working on plans to reduce its prices through bulk transfer of
small sums.
Banks have been under pressure from the European Commission over high costs
and long delays faced by people attempting to transfer money across borders.
The Commission believes this is hindering the development of the single
market.
However, banks have started to compete more strongly for low value payments
 -defined by Visa as below Ecu2,500 (Pounds 1,930). Although only 1 per cent
of non-cash payments currently cross borders, this is expected to grow.
Visa believes its transfer services will mainly attract individuals, but it
also plans to gain business from small companies such as retailers making
value added transfer tax refunds to customers in other countries.
Mr Patrick Bowden, Visa's European marketing director, said the company
believed there was 'an excellent opportunity' to provide a cheaper, clearer
and more reliable service than individuals are currently offered by European
banks.
Mr Bowden said the Visa service would probably allow most payments to
transfer within four days, but would guarantee a six-day transfer. He said
it would also guarantee a clear quotation of charges and exchange rates at
the start.
Royal Bank of Scotland is planning a corporate launch of its Ibos transfer
system run with Credit Commercial de France, Banco Santander in Spain and
Banco de Commercio e Induistria in Portugal. Ibos offers virtually instant
transfer.
National Westminster Bank is also thought to be working on a new
cross-border payment system with Societe General of France and Commerzbank
of Germany.
