FT  03 APR 93 / One-day strike provokes tough British Coal reaction
MOST of Britain, outside London, worked normally yesterday in spite of the
one-day strike which affected almost the entire rail system, 38 out of 50
coal mines and some London buses.
British Coal reacted by announcing that the 'check-off' system, by which
union dues are deducted from pay by employers, would be stopped immediately
at those pits which had joined the strike.
Separately, the company revealed that it had decided to defer a payment of
Pounds 109m into the staff pension fund which has a Pounds 1bn surplus.
BACM, the mine managers union, said the Pounds 109m payment could not be
stopped unilaterally and it would consider legal action against the move.
The main coal, rail and bus unions hailed the strike as a 'success' in their
fight against job losses. Coal and rail unions threatened further action. Mr
John Major, the prime minister, described the strike as 'perfectly
pointless'.
The RMT rail union will meet in the next few days to decide whether to take
further action, although it has agreed to meet British Rail for talks next
week.
ASLEF, the train drivers union, which did not take part in yesterday's
action, is already balloting its members on industrial action.
British Rail officials warned privately that any further one-day strikes
would provoke a much firmer reaction. That could include recourse to the law
on the grounds that the strike was 'secondary action' taken on behalf of
mineworkers. Other possibilities include following British Coal by
withdrawing the check-off service. This would would be likely to hit RMT
finances and membership.
'If we do nothing again the British Rail management will be discredited in
the run-up to privatisation,' said one official.
Mr Arthur Scargill, leader of the National Union of Mineworkers, said it had
been an 'extremely successful' day. Mr Kevan Hunt, British Coal's employee
relations director, said such action would consign the UK coal industry to
history.
Most collieries in Nottinghamshire, dominated by the breakaway Union of
Democratic Mineworkers, worked normally. BR shut down almost totally apart
from a few driver-only trains. Checking out from check-off, Page 6
