FT  10 SEP 93 / Minnows but no whales
Be daring. Assume that Mr John Major survives as prime minister. Go on. It
is a fair assumption. Put the odds at about 50-50 against, which is more
favourable to the incumbent than his behaviour this week might suggest.
Whatever his intentions, Mr Major has given the impression that he is
running scared. What other interpretation can be placed on the actions of a
politician who celebrates the return of the busy season by popping up among
regional party officials here and there, seeking to 'restore morale'? The
ordinary observer must assume that he is trying to save his job. It could
have the opposite effect. The Liberal Democrats, which have been identified
as the principal threat to the Conservatives in the south-west, will
doubtless benefit from the attention thus focused upon them.
The prime minister invariably wins friends and admirers when he appears
before small groups in person, but there is a physical limit to the number
of people he can reach in that manner. There is no way around it. Mr Major
will stand or fall by what he does in Number 10 Downing Street, by how he
minds the shop. He needs a string of successes, or at least a period free of
political disasters.
His chances of such a happy outcome are, as I say, a hair's breadth less
than evens. The government still looks disunited, partly as a result of the
cheeky public statements of a few cabinet ministers, Mr John Redwood
prominent among them, and partly in consequence of the willingness of
right-wing MPs to rush to the microphones and proclaim their aversion to
this or that tax increase should it be brought forward in the November
Budget. In reality nothing has changed since Mr Kenneth Clarke became
chancellor in the late spring and immediately intimated, as I recorded at
the time, that he saw little room for further spending cuts and could not
rule out tax increases. He said as much in public before the summer
holidays, and again this week.
If anyone can traverse the budgetary minefield and live to tell the tale, it
is Mr Clarke. This may be less difficult than it seems. The chancellor and
the prime minister are both aware that a vote against a finance bill is a
vote of no confidence that could bring the government down and put Labour
in. Few of the posturing rebels would risk that. It is therefore reasonable
to postulate that Mr Major may see an end to his period of lame-duckery.
If so, he may derive satisfaction from the promotion of a series of small
improvements to everyday life. The schemes to bring about 'open government',
the citizen's charters, and the plans for deregulation are all close to his
heart. None of these, taken separately or regarded as a bundle, will make
heroic headlines. All of them reflect the character of the prime minister.
Details fascinate him. Small incremental improvements are his stock in
trade.
With some passion, he has inscribed the word 'deregulation' on his banner.
Expect many minnows, but no whales. A 1985 white paper, Lifting the Burden,
trumpeted the forthcoming removal of red tape. Silence followed. It was
disturbed only by the soft flap of pages of new regulations as they
accumulated on lawyers' shelves. When Mr Major entered Number 10 he found a
'deregulation advisory panel' with an address somewhere in Whitehall. It has
been lost again, but may still exist. His undertaking at last year's
Conservative party conference to send Mr Michael Heseltine swooping through
the regulatory jungle has been followed up, in spite of Tarzan's illness, by
the appointment of eight 'taskforces', most of them headed by businessmen.
Departments have dutifully presented lists of good intent. The taskforce
reports must be in by October, to support a deregulation bill to put before
the new parliament in November. The government is not open enough to
indicate whether this will specify laws that must be amended or scrapped or
whether, as some propose, it will be a 'Henry VIII' bill - the type that
says, in effect, that a given minister (Mr Heseltine?) may do as he pleases
and let the House of Commons know when it is done. Many existing regulations
can anyway be withdrawn or changed in the same manner as they were imposed:
by ministerial fiat. So can departmental procedures, circulars and advisory
notes.
Rest assured. Something will come of it. How much? As little as civil
servants and ministers think must be sacrificed in order to get the prime
minister off their backs. It was the same with open government and the
charters. Improvements will unquestionably result. I have seen some myself,
as with the charter's effect on social security office turnround times. But
officials and ministers retain control over important information, internal
working practices and the power to regulate. Mr Major might revolutionise
the culture of Whitehall if he had a decade in office, but that length of
tenure is no longer certain.
It is not only civil service cunning that is in the way of radical reform.
Most regulations are there for a reason. Entrepreneurs, instinctive
anarchists to a man or woman, naturally cheer when the government promises
to tear up thousands of rules - unless the ones that are scrapped protect
them or their immediate interests. You may rejoice at the news that care
homes, in some of which some FT readers have invested substantial amounts,
may be freed from the costly attentions of pettifogging inspectors. You
would react quite differently if you heard that elderly residents, confused
and helpless, had fallen victim to unscrupulous managements of laxly
regulated establishments. This week's hullabaloo over the possible
relaxation of the rules governing the registration and inspection of private
residential and nursing homes is a perfect illustration of the deregulators'
dilemma.
Last month a report prepared under the chairmanship of Sir Peter Levene
recommended the creation of a regulatory review commission. The government
rejected it. You can see its disadvantages. It might conduct business in the
open. Citizens might have access to its workings. And it might take control
of deregulation away from the permanent secretaries. It would be almost as
bad as a freedom of information act. The mandarins' defensive strategy,
which is to give little while seeming to give a great deal, would be blown.
They need have no fears. At least for now. Whitehall is safe in Mr Major's
hands.
