FT  17 MAR 93 / Hussey urged to quit the BBC by Checkland
SIR Michael Checkland, former BBC director-general, last night called for
the resignation of Mr Marmaduke Hussey, chairman of the BBC's board of
governors, over the John Birt affair. Sir Michael blamed Mr Hussey for the
furore surrounding the freelance status and tax position of Mr Birt, who
became director-general on January 1.
It was revealed this month that Mr Birt had not been on the BBC staff
payroll. His salary was paid into his own company, John Birt Productions,
and he paid a lower tax bill as a result.
Mr Hussey, who is not due to retire until November 1996, is the first BBC
chairman appointed for a second five-year term.
As the battle over Mr Birt's position moved towards a climax, the board of
governors gave him full support last night, after a four-hour meeting at BBC
Television Centre, where Mr Hussey is due to host a farewell dinner for Sir
Michael tonight.
The governors said after their meeting they acknowledged public and staff
concern that Mr Birt had not been on staff, accepted full responsibility for
the errors made, and apologised.
However, their statement seemed less clearly supportive of Mr Hussey than Mr
Birt. Several governors before last night's meeting expressed anger that
they had not been told of Mr Birt's freelance status.
The statement simply referred to the board, 'under the leadership of the
chairman', being committed to further measures to enhance the BBC's openness
and accountability. A statement expected tomorrow could give more details on
the measures.
Sir Michael, in a speech to the Royal Television Society in London last
night , blamed Mr Hussey, and his vice-chairman, Lord Barnett, for not
insisting Mr Birt joined the staff of the BBC when he became
director-general.
Sir Michael said Mr Birt had been advised by senior colleagues to join the
staff payroll when he became director-general. 'He did not, and that was a
gross error of judgment, which the press corrected in 24 hours.'
However, Sir Michael said Mr Birt should not be made to resign. 'If John
Birt were to offer his resignation, the board of governors should refuse to
accept it. A vacuum of executive leadership now would be foolish for the
BBC. The board should however make clear that his (Mr Birt's) position would
be reviewed in 12 months' time by the board, a new chairman and new
vice-chairman.'
The BBC's 41-member general advisory council is due to meet the governors
today. Mr Birt's position is expected to be raised.
