FT  16 JUL 93 / Lopez obtained GM papers before VW move, court told
A GERMAN civil court was yesterday told that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, a General Motors executive who left for Volkswagen in March,
obtained a sheaf of about 100 documents from the US company shortly before
his departure.
It was one of several statements from witnesses and written affidavits which
contradicted claims and formal declarations from Mr Lopez, now VW's
production director. According to statements by Mr Lopez, both yesterday and
previously, he remembered asking for only four or five charts.
GM employees yesterday also contested Mr Lopez's reasons for wanting
translations into German of about 300 overhead projection slides relating to
GM's future purchasing policy. A statement read by his lawyer said Mr Lopez,
who was head of global purchasing at GM, needed German versions for
presentations to suppliers of components to Adam Opel, GM's German
subsidiary.
According to an affidavit from a GM employee he asked for the translations,
he wanted them because of possible difficulties with the VDA, the German
motor industry association, over his purchasing policy. Mr Lopez has a
confirmed reputation as a hard negotiator on prices.
'It was unusual because Mr Lopez was not very good at German,' the affidavit
said.
The hearing in Hamburg was related to an attempt by Der Spiegel, the weekly
news magazine, to remove a court gagging order imposed at VW's request. The
order was imposed following the publication of articles alleging that Mr
Lopez and colleagues systematically assembled company secrets while still
working for GM.
The reports also suggested that Mr Lopez, who abruptly joined VW in
mid-March, and colleagues who followed, took the secrets with them or sent
them in advance.
Imposing the gagging order, the court had ordered Der Spiegel to print
formal rebuttals by VW executives of most of its allegations.
It also emerged yesterday that the GM legal department asked for a search of
an office occupied by Mr Jose Gutierrez, a close associate of Mr Lopez,
while Mr Gutierrez was away on a business trip in Japan on GM's behalf. The
search, on March 17, two days after Mr Lopez quit, failed to uncover 'highly
confidential' documents on a new diesel engine, which Mr Gutierrez has
subsequently denied ever having.
