FT  02 DEC 93 / UK women lag in 'Euroleague'
Women in Britain live less long and are less likely to become MPs or
ministers than almost anywhere else in western Europe, according to the
European statistics office Eurostat.
They have to cope with lower levels of maternity benefit than in most other
European Union states, and a larger gap compared with male wages.
The Eurostat report, published yesterday, paints a mixed picture of the
social and economic position of European women. Female unemployment is
higher than male in every EU country apart from Britain. The female rate is
more than twice the male level in Greece, Belgium, Italy and Portugal.
British women's relatively low unemployment is partly explained by greater
opportunities for part-time work.
In nearly every other category, British women are at or close to the bottom
of the Euroleague. Ms Jill Chesworth, spokeswoman for the Equal
Opportunities Commission, an independent body set up to counter sex
discrimination, said the findings confirmed British men and women alike were
getting 'a raw deal' as a result of UK economic decline.
Life expectancy for UK women is 78.6 years, ninth lowest in the EU.
Maternity benefits are paid for a shorter time and at a lower level than in
any other EU state.
British women seem particularly prone to become single mothers: of women
aged 20-39, 10.1 per cent are living alone with children, more than in any
other EU member. The corresponding figures elsewhere range from 2.3 per cent
in Italy and 2.4 per cent in Greece to 7.7 per cent in Germany and 7.1 per
cent in Belgium.
North European women suffer from a larger gap between male and female wages
than in the south. In the retail trade, British and German women employees
earn respectively 36 and 30 per cent less than their male counterparts. In
Portugal and Greece - where the overall level of wages is much lower - the
differential is 20 per cent.
The Eurostat survey says women account for only 7 per cent of total members
of the UK government. The proportions elsewhere range from 8 per cent in
Luxembourg and Greece, and 10 per cent in Portugal, to 21 per cent in
Denmark and 24 per cent in the Netherlands.
