FT  06 MAR 93 / BA and Virgin continue brinkmanship
THE BRINKMANSHIP between British Airways and Virgin Atlantic will continue
this weekend beyond the 'final' deadline set earlier this week by Mr Richard
Branson, the Virgin chairman.
Only hours before Mr Branson's deadline expired, BA presented a fresh set of
counter-proposals centred on its demands that Virgin be banned from ever
again exploiting the affair and a plan by BA to destroy court documents
referring to its campaign to undermine its competitor.
In spite of Mr Branson's warning that he would consider further legal action
against BA unless an agreement to end their 'dirty tricks' dispute was
reached yesterday, the two airlines have decided to make a last attempt to
seek a peace deal.
Given the sensitivity of the position, neither side last night was prepared
to shed light on the latest twists in the month-long negotiations. With both
sides within sight of agreement, however, another obstacle emerged last
night as lawyers began another round of talks.
Virgin is understood to have agreed to return to BA court documents, used
during its January libel hearing and detailing the UK flag carrier's covert
operations. But Virgin is insisting the records are held by lawyers until
normal relationships between the two airlines are resumed. Mr Branson is
concerned that the documents should be available for use if the airline
finds itself embroiled in any future legal action arising from the 'dirty
tricks' affair.
Although Mr Branson is understood to have originally asked for about Pounds
13m to cover commercial damages and to settle a long-running aircraft
maintenance dispute, he is ready to accept BA's cash offer of Pounds 9m. But
he has rejected signing a confidentiality clause demanded by BA as an
unreasonable attempt to gag him.
He has also insisted on BA signing a pledge never to indulge again in
anti-competitive behaviour.
Both sides still appear anxious to resolve the time-consuming and costly
dispute. In spite of the continuing tensions, they remain hopeful they can
finally resolve their differences by early next week.
During four weeks of often acrimonious and sometimes sterile negotiations
the two airlines have found grounds for compromise on several issues. These
include agreement on the use of airline computerised passenger reservation
information, and a code precluding any further poaching of customers.
BA is conducting an internal investigation into allegations that its
California-based operations have continued attempts to persuade Virgin
passengers to switch airlines.
Mr Branson, who is flying to the US tomorrow for three days, is involved in
complex talks with aircraft manufacturers to acquire new, widebody jets to
renew and expand his fleet.
Like BA's new management team, he regards the talks as a damaging
distraction from the business of running an airline in difficult market
conditions.
However, sources close to both sides acknowledged last night that the
principal issue keeping them apart and threatening to bring the talks down
remains the problem of securing an agreement on confidentiality.
In spite of a series of false deadlines both sides accept that failure to
agree by early next week could lead to a breakdown of talks which, in turn,
might open up prolonged legal action in Europe and the US.
