FT  22 DEC 93 / Arts: 'Beauty and the Beast' runs riot in Battersea -
Pantomime
The term 'directed by Ken Campbell' is in theory relative and in practice
absolutely chaotic in the Battersea Arts Centre's Christmas show, Beauty and
the Beast. There is little evidence of Campbell's own brand of strategic
lunacy. But it has moments of glorious fun all its own.
Of course there is no plot, and only a stab at continuity. The performers
(Chris Lynam, Kate McKenzie, Berny Richards and Kevin Sargent) are uncertain
about when the show begins, but this is probably when a box of beach is
dragged across the stage; or when it ends, possibly when the audience starts
heckling over the fate of a watch smashed in one of Lynam's non-magic
tricks.
Each actor tries a variety of roles, with Lynam roaming around like a
night-club compere high on drugs. Opposite him the silver-voiced McKenzie
sings as a chanteuse, Carmen, a figurehead on a ship's prow, and as a club
duettist with Lynam in 'Stars Fell on Alabama', the show's closing number
during which the credits are held up on cardboard flaps.
But to reach the nirvana of the ending, what trials have we to suffer? Lynam
plunges the action into chaos by his virtuoso unpredictability. His first
entrance as a gibbering figure of anger gives way to his second, crabwise in
a cardboard bicycle box. The other performers (and Richards takes the prize
for versatility as a maid, delivery boy, deep sea fish and Russian acrobat)
should be straighter against Lynam's madness, but still sustain the fiction
of each unconnected scene.
In a show of this sort, the audience has to assert itself, join in, play
along, shout out, interrupt and give the performers back some of the madness
they have been dishing out. Passivity means discomfort.
At the start of the second half, Lynam skims a washing bowl into the
audience, urging us to throw it to each other; 'I invented the game myself,'
he boasts.
He has already blindfolded a volunteer and put her on a swing which whisks
her, screaming, up above the stage while he smashes her watch down below.
She is then asked to hold the scenery for the next scene, a tender deep-sea
romance.
Of course there is an escaped German gorilla, a sailing tableau that evolves
into a French cafe song, and some wonderful kitchen sink drama which erupts
into domestic violence, shootings and pulped melons. The pantomime horse is
part-naked, and a Beatnik painting scene collapses when Lynam removes his
clothes, rolls in the paint and, Tarzan-like, propels himself at the canvas.
The show runs until December 23. It is the nuttiest thing I have seen this
year, and manages to combine genuine talent with specious nonsense. It takes
risks and is a challenge to see. Not for children or Rolex wearers.
Battersea Arts Centre (071 223 2223)
