FT  03 JUN 93 / Milosevic condemned over assaults on opponents
SERBIA'S President Slobodan Milosevic came under stinging attack yesterday
over the arrest and beating of more than 20 opposition politicians and
journalists in Belgrade.
Leaders of Serbia's democratic opposition denounced the violent crackdown -
in the wake of the ousting of Yugoslav federal president Dobrica Cosic
earlier this week - as 'a brutal crime'. Mr Cosic, too, breaking his
silence, added to the criticism of the Serbian leader, likening him to
Hitler.
Democratic politicians demanded the release of those arrested and the
resignation of the interior minister.
But their call for a mass demonstration outside the federal parliament
yesterday went unheeded. The violence with which police broke up Tuesday
night's protest against the removal of Mr Cosic apparently succeeded in
intimidating opposition supporters.
Serbia's democratic opposition has become increasingly marginal as radical
nationalist leaders, backed by paramilitary groups, have gained ground.
'There is a new ascendancy of the ex-Communists. We are heading for worse
troubles,' said Mr Borislav Mihailovic, a member of Depos, a coalition of
democratic groups.
On Tuesday night police fired rubber bullets and tear-gas at several
thousand people gathered outside parliament, the largest demonstration in
Belgrade for more than two years. One police officer died from gunshot
wounds and more than 30 people were injured in street battles.
Mr Vuk Draskovic, head of the Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO), the largest
opposition party, was in serious condition with a fractured jaw and other
injuries after he was beaten by police who burst into the party offices
early yesterday morning, an SPO spokesman said.
Mr Draskovic, a charismatic figure who led violent demonstrations against
the Milosevic government in 1991, was arrested with senior party officials
and local journalists.
Mr Nicola Milosevic, head of the Serb Liberal party, said it was 'an
unprecedently violent action instigated by Slobodan Milosevic and his
police. It is a totalitarian regime that arrests the leader of the biggest
opposition party'.
Commenting on his ousting by radical Serbs backed by socialists in the
federal parliament, Mr Cosic accused President Milosevic of 'despotic
self-will' and a 'classical Stalinist act'. In an allusion to Adolf Hitler,
Mr Cosic described the Serbian president, a former ally, as 'Fuhrer of the
Serbian Radical Party'.
Bosnian Serb troops were reported to be closing in on the Moslem enclave of
Gorazde yesterday, as an upsurge of fighting threatened to disrupt aid
operations across the former Yugoslav republic, Reuter reports from
Sarajevo.
The UN yesterday halted relief flights to Sarajevo after snipers wounded
four French soldiers and a US relief aircraft was hit by a bullet. A Belgian
TV cameraman was killed by a sniper in central Bosnia.
