FT  04 MAR 93 / Derivatives - a delicate balance
Derivatives trading has become the most significant growth area in financial
services. BlS estimates of amounts outstanding in important exchange-traded
and over-the-counter contracts show growth from some Dollars 1,000bn five
years ago to Dollars 8,000bn at the end of 1991.
These figures give an exaggerated impression. Credit exposure in any
contract at any time is only a small proportion of the nominal amount. We
cannot be complacent, however, in the face of the great weight of these
markets. Chief market participants include banks, whose earlier credit
judgments led to over-commitment to sovereign debt and then to highly geared
or over-concentrated domestic lending. The intermeshing of markets exposes
the system to risk of cross-infection and mishap on a larger scale than
ever.
Conversely, these markets have brought benefits in an uncertain environment,
enabling investors and corporate treasurers to identify risks to which they
are ready to be exposed and to take insurance cover where they are not.
Derivatives do not add risks to the system. They provide the ability to
identify, price and transfer existing risks.
A balanced approach to regulation is needed, neither cramping the energy and
innovation of these markets, nor tolerating inadequate standards or risk.
Five principles of a viable approach might be these:
Initiative on an international basis. The flexibility and mobility of
derivatives trading mean that the possibilities for regulatory arbitrage, if
playing fields are not level, are enormous. Development of regulation should
be collaborative and international, building on the work of the BIS, Iosco
and the Group of 30. The first requirement is for a shared understanding of
problems.
Practitioners must be involved. The complexity of modern financial and
derivative markets means that no regulator can be confident of sufficient
understanding without practitioner input. It was partly the inflexibility
and inadequacy of some national regulation which drove substantial
derivatives business off-exchange, off-shore and off-balance sheet. Concern
at the risk of regulatory capture is insignificant compared with the need
for the best market knowledge practitioners can contribute. The work of
senior market practitioners in the Group of 30, led by Sir Dennis
Weatherstone, and the efforts of the International Swap Dealers' Association
in establishing standard contracts are welcome.
As derivatives contracts provide an efficient, flexible means of covering
against specific forms of market risk, the focus should be on credit or
counterparty risk. The preference of some exchanges to push all derivatives
business into exchange-traded contracts should be resisted, as the
flexibility of OTC contracts has greatly benefited market participants. The
greater the determination to leave the customising capability of the OTC
markets undisturbed, the greater the priority of enhancing legal certainty
in the netting of transactions, thus shrinking the outstanding counterparty
or credit exposure in the market. The aim should be to give some regulatory
acknowledgement to netting through appropriate structuring of capital
requirements, akin to the inducements provided by securities regulators to
diversification of liquid equity portfolios.
There is need for improvement in reporting and disclosure standards to
promote understanding among market practitioners of the complex risks they
are undertaking, above all in writing options. Importance should be attached
to the establishment of credit assessment and audit arrangements separately
from the trading desk.
National regulators should question and even curtail the operations of
entities in their sphere of responsibility where there are doubts.
Henry Kaufman has argued that these issues cannot be dealt with without a
dedicated institutional capability, and that a new international institution
should be established.
On the other hand, this business is concentrated in the financial centres of
the G7 countries. There is need for promoting adequate regulatory initiative
and convergence among these countries before concluding that there is need
for a new international bureaucracy. A high-level international oversight
group may eventually be necessary.
The author is deputy chairman of Lloyds Bank and former chairman of the
Securities and Investment Board.
