FT  20 NOV 93 / Brussels sets price for salmon imports
THE European Commission yesterday reacted to pressure from the Irish and
British governments by imposing a minimum price on imports of Norwegian
salmon into the European Union until the end of the year.
Scottish and Irish salmon producers have been hit by what the Commission
described yesterday as 'massive imports of Norwegian salmon at low prices'.
On Thursday the Norwegians rejected Commission calls to restrict salmon
exports. Yesterday, Mr Yannis Paleokrassas, the fisheries commissioner, took
action under the safeguard rules of the EU's common fisheries policy.
The decision comes at a sensitive time for Norway, which is negotiating
membership of the EU. Finding a way to preserve Norwegian fisheries is one
of the trickiest aspects of the membership talks.
The Commission's move was also attacked for not going far enough by the
Scottish Salmon Growers Association. Mr Jim Payne, chairman, said: 'The
levels of minimum import prices simply cement the market price at Norwegian
dumping levels and do nothing to resolve the crisis in the industry.'
The new minimum import price for fresh and frozen whole (ungutted) salmon is
Ecu2,860 (Pounds 2,633) per net tonne.
The Scottish Salmon Growers Association says that works out at Pounds 1.22
per pound, below the current weighted average price of Pounds 1.32 per pound
for salmon at fish markets. Prices have risen slightly since touching a low
point recently of about Pounds 1 per pound.
However, Norwegian sources said last night that the minimum price would
represent an increase 'in relation to the price of the last few weeks'.
Officials claim that total exports of Norwegian salmon for this year are
forecast to rise by only 5 per cent.
Norwegian salmon farmers say output is set to grow faster in Scotland and
Ireland than in Norway. They recently ended talks with Scottish and Irish
farmers on creating a network of producer organisations aimed at controlling
production.
The Irish government had formally requested safeguard measures, but the
British authorities - to the irritation of Scottish salmon farmers - had
only asked for 'appropriate measures' to deal with the problem.
