FT  06 NOV 93 / World Stock Markets: Brussels mulls bias towards cyclical
stocks - Analysts are cautious about recent strength in industrial equities
Belgium did not escape the turmoil on world stock markets yesterday. The
Bel-20 index of the largest and most heavily traded stocks on the Brussels
bourse closed at 1372.21, down 19.78 from Thursday's record high of 1391.99.
But yesterday's correction aside, this seems to have been a comparatively
good year for Belgian equities. The value of the Belgian stock market
increased by 24 per cent between the beginning of the year and the end of
last month. Records have been consistently broken, volume has risen by about
45 per cent and a new campaigning president, Mr Henri Servais, has taken
over at the head of the bourse.
The problem is that Brussels - hampered in the past by illiquidity, and a
bias towards cyclical stocks - still lags behind its European rivals. Most
European markets, with Britain and France notable exceptions, rose by more
than 30 per cent in the first 10 months of the year.
The background to the last three months of trading on the exchange has
certainly been turbulent. Changes to the ERM after the August crisis allowed
the Belgian franc to fluctuate much more widely against the D-Mark than
under the old, discredited ERM constraints. But the Belgian National Bank
has continued to shadow the D-Mark, keeping interest rates relatively high.
That, according to analysts, has put a damper on Belgian stock prices while
other markets have forged ahead.
Hopes of a cut in interest rates are now pinned on the government's pledge
to push through a series of measures aimed at improving Belgian industry's
competitiveness, cutting labour costs and reducing the country's social
security and budget deficit. The original aim of a 'social pact' between
government, unions and employers has already been dashed by the powerful
socialist unions, which walked out of the talks. The centre-left coalition
is trying this weekend to thrash out a plan on its own. If it succeeds, this
should at least 'create a more stable environment for interest rates to
fall', as one stock market analyst put it last week.
The question is whether Belgian stock prices already take account of
anticipated falls in interest rates. Looking at the best performers over the
last year, it seems that they do. Whereas 1991-92 saw investors looking for
defensive stocks such as the country's big banks, the last 12 months have
seen a surge of interest in the cyclical stocks.
The beneficiaries have been companies like Arbed, the Luxembourg steel
producer which plunged into loss in the first half of this year; Bekaert,
the steel cord and wire company, which has undergone substantial
restructuring over the last two years; and Societe Generale de Belgique, the
holding company which has been trying to reduce its exposure to cyclical
industry.
By contrast, the worst performers over the last 12 months include the big
retailers, GIB Group and Delhaize Le Lion. These essentially defensive
stocks enjoyed a sunny first quarter in 1992, but since then a fierce price
war in Belgium and problems at Delhaize's US arm have dragged down the
prices.
One consolation is that the turmoil on Belgian currency and bond markets
seems to have persuaded some foreign investors to take a closer look at the
bourse. Under Mr Servais, Brussels has also continued to promote itself by
encouraging new derivative products, including warrants, and introducing
'Belix' - a basket of Bel-20 stocks which corresponds to the weighting of
the index itself - for institutional investors.
Belgian analysts are cautious about the cyclical rally of recent months.
They agree that the Belgian economy probably touched bottom during the
summer; but as Mr Guy Lerminiaux of the Brussels broker Petercam says, 'the
recovery will be very very gradual, and we feel that there's already too
much anticipation in the industrial companies'.
