FT  16 SEP 93 / Air France to shed 4,000 jobs in FFr5bn cost-cutting plan:
Attempt to stem mounting losses leads to second set of crisis measures
involving suspension of destinations and disposals
AIR FRANCE, the French state-owned airline, yesterday announced a FFr5bn
(Pounds 560m) cost-cutting package, including the loss of 4,000 jobs by the
end of 1994. The plan is an attempt to stem mounting losses that the company
said had more than doubled to FFr3.8bn in the first half of this year.
The package, Air France's second set of crisis measures in the past two
years, also involves the suspension of about 15 of the airline's 203
destinations, the sale of part of the group's 57 per cent stake in the
Meridien hotels chain, and the disposal of its Saresco duty-free shops.
The French airline also plans to bring other shareholders into its Servair
catering subsidiary and to maintain a wage freeze.
Air France, which is under strong pressure from the French state to reduce
its losses, said the plan should enable it to return to profit in 1995. The
group declined to forecast its losses for this year. But in an interview in
yesterday's Le Monde newspaper, Mr Bernard Bosson, the French transport
minister, forecast a net loss of FFr5.5bn for the year, a sharp increase
over last year's FFr3.2bn deficit.
Mr Bernard Attali, Air France's chairman, said the company's financial
position had left it with no choice in implementing further cost-cutting
measures and that it had to 're-centre' its activities.
A spokesman for Air France said the airline had been particularly badly
affected by the recession in France and Germany and that it was less
competitive than international rivals because it had been late in
implementing cost-cutting programmes.
The measures announced yesterday are aimed at reducing expenditure by about
19 per cent between now and 1995, with most of the savings coming this year.
The 4,000 job cuts, which come on top of a programme to cut 4,600 jobs
between 1991 and the end of this year, will comprise 3,000 ground staff and
1,000 navigation staff.
By 1995 Air France will have about 39,000 employees, about one-fifth fewer
than at the beginning of 1991.
Air France said it would minimise the number of involuntary redundancies,
but the plan has run into resistance from trade unions. 'It is necessary to
fight this plan, not to negotiate,' the company's central union committee
said.
Mr Bosson said that 'redressing the financial situation of the company was a
priority', and that this would have to be done before the group was
privatised. Air France is one of the 21 state-owned groups that the
government plans to privatise.
The transport minister said the government 'would do its duty as a
shareholder', but industry ministry officials declined to say how much
financial support would be made available to the airline.
The destinations to be suspended are likely to include Kuala Lumpur, Lusaka
and some routes to northern Africa. The closing of such destinations, the
company said, would allow it to concentrate resources on more profitable
routes.
According to Mr Attali, there are some encouraging signs. The airlines'
passenger traffic has been increasing since May. But in spite of this, he
said, 'the current difficulties of Air France are far from being resolved'.
