FT  25 AUG 93 / UK Company News: GRE to launch direct insurance operation
GUARDIAN ROYAL Exchange, the composite insurance group, is to launch a new
subsidiary to sell motor and home insurance direct to the public,
underlining the growing popularity of direct telesales operations in the UK
market.
Mr Ray Pierce, a senior financial services executive, is to head up the new
company, which will begin underwriting before the end of the year.
GRE will also continue to sell personal lines policies through brokers, but
Mr John Sinclair, head of the UK operations, said: 'We recognise there is a
growing customer requirement for direct marketing of insurance.'
GRE, which said it had made the decision following 'an extensive study of
the trends in the UK, US and European personal insurance markets', is
following the example of Direct Line, a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of
Scotland, which pioneered telesales of motor insurance in 1985 and has
recently reported impressive profits.
Other direct writers include Churchill, a subsidiary of Switzerland's
Winterthur. Among the six biggest composite companies, Royal Insurance has
the biggest direct writer, The Insurance Service, while two other companies
 -General Accident and Eagle Star - have also established separate direct
writing subsidiaries.
Analysts criticised GRE's delay in responding to the trend, especially in
view of the company's experience in Ireland where its PMPA subsidiary is a
leading direct insurer.
'Everyone is talking about direct writing as if it is something that has
miraculously emerged in the last 12 months,' said Mr Steven Bird, an analyst
with Smith New Court. He expects direct writers to win a growing share of
the home and motor insurance market.
Mr Bird drew attention to the cost advantages enjoyed by the bigger direct
writers. For example, Direct Line has an expense ratio (expenses as a
percentage of premiums) of less than 15 per cent compared to an industry
average of between 25 and 30 per cent.
GRE has not yet decided either the name of the new subsidiary or where it
will be based, postponing either decision until Mr Pierce assumes his
position next month.
As head of Robson Rhodes, Mr Pierce was the first non-accountant to head a
leading accounting firm. Now 47, he was previously chief executive of the
Mortgage Corporation, where he launched Mortgage Corporation Direct.
He has also been a vice-president of American Express Europe.
