FT  26 MAR 93 / Russia in Turmoil: Who gives what in the aid stakes - The
trail of western assistance to the CIS
FINANCIAL support for Russia is back on the international economic agenda.
It now seems likely that finance and foreign ministers from the Group of
Seven leading industrial nations will meet after Easter to discuss
additional help for economic reform in Russia.
Such a meeting could prove difficult. As expectations of new financial
support for Russia have been rising, so have doubts over the efficacy of
such action. In G7 capitals, officials are seeking to play down expectations
of massive financial support and shift the debate to low cost and possibly
more effective micro-economic measures such as help for small businesses and
privatisation.
The issue of new assistance for Russia could also expose tensions among the
G7 nations if the question of a fair sharing of the west's burden emerges in
the talks.
The burden sharing issue has cast a cloud over past G7 meetings on help for
former Soviet republics. Germany, in particular, feels it has borne too much
of the cost. Officials in Bonn say Germany has provided DM80bn (Pounds
33.8bn) in cash and guarantees for credits for Russia since 1989, more than
half the western total.
One cause of misunderstanding is uncertainty about the scale of western
support for Russia. Institutions such as the European Commission and the
International Monetary Fund publish figures as do national governments. But
they are difficult to reconcile with one another and provide only part of
the picture.
The Commission, for example, has published detailed estimates of commitments
made by the EC, its member states, other countries and institutions since
September 1990 to former Soviet republics.
They show, for example, that the total commitments of the EC and its member
states of Ecu52.4bn (Pounds 43bn) in the period amounted to 70.6 per cent of
promised global assistance. There is a wide divergence among member states'
contributions, with Germany providing 53.2 per cent against the UK's 0.63
per cent.
But the EC figures do not provide a breakdown for each former Soviet
republic. Nor do they say how much has been disbursed or the scale of debt
rescheduling or grants from private sources. The Commission says the
commitments may take some years to fulfil.
The IMF in Washington collates information from western donors and creditors
and Russia itself and has disclosed some overall figures on disbursements.
But it refuses to say what individual western member governments are doing.
Many governments are reluctant to disclose up-to-date figures, and still
less to place them on a comparable basis with the efforts of others.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Paris has a
mandate from its 24 industrialised member governments to record flows of
concessionary assistance, other official financing and private capital flows
to the former communist countries.
The OECD has virtually completed its figures for flows to the former Soviet
Union in 1991 and hopes to publish these soon, providing it gets the
go-ahead from member governments. The earliest estimated time of arrival for
1992 figures is mid 1993.
In this climate it is hardly surprising that controversy surrounds the
Dollars 24bn of staged financial assistance and debt relief pledged at last
year's G7 economic summit in Munich in support of President Boris Yeltsin's
reforms and political leadership. In Russia, there is a widespread belief
that funds pledged in Munich have not been forthcoming.
Figures obtained from the IMF and several western governments this week
suggest that the G7 has gone some way to meeting its Munich pledge - but not
exactly in the way promised.
G7 bilateral assistance totalled around Dollars 12.2bn in 1992 - slightly
more than the Dollars 11bn promised. Financial support from the IMF and
World Bank amounted to Dollars 1.06bn, which was well below the Dollars
4.5bn pledged, reflecting Russia's inability to meet IMF conditions. A
promised Dollars 6bn rouble stabilisation fund was not put in place because
of adverse economic conditions in Russia.
However, the G7 countries were more generous than planned in providing debt
relief. While the Munich package envisaged rescheduling of Dollars 2.5bn,
overall debt relief last year was about Dollars 7.2bn, although most of this
resulted from Russia failing to meet its obligations.
The role of individual G7 countries in the total Dollars 20.5bn of support
is less clear. The US Treasury says it provided Dollars 2.1bn, Dollars 100m
more than planned. Its contribution comprised Dollars 1.54bn of export
credits for food, Dollars 218m in humanitarian assistance and Dollars 350m
in export credits to enable Russia to buy US goods.
The German finance ministry says it has provided up to DM5bn of guarantees
to enable Russia to buy German goods on credit. Britain's share of the
Dollars 24bn package is obscure. But Britain has provided Pounds 441m of
assistance in the form of know-how, export credits and emergency animal feed
supplies to Russia over the past two years as well as its share of EC and
IMF support.
The true state of western support for Russia is unclear to experts who have
been monitoring the flows for years. Mr Keith Savard, chief economist of the
Washington-based Institute for International Finance, says he believes
international financial institutions such as the IMF also have no precise
idea of actual support for Russia because they rely partly on data supplied
by Russia. Mr Savard believes the IMF-based figures of disbursements to
Russia from the 1992 G7 package are too high.
The uncertainty should be taken seriously by the G7, Mr Savard believes.
'When considering what the G7 and others might do for Russia, we ought to
know first what they have done,' he says.
