FT  04 SEP 93 / Designer materials offer new solutions to industry
A NEW AGE of designer materials is about to dawn. The materials behave in
startling ways - one form gets thicker as it stretches; another changes to a
particular shape at a given temperature.
Professor Colin Humphreys, of the Department of Materials Science at
Cambridge University, unveiled the 'Age of New Materials' at the British
Association meeting in Keele yesterday.
He said purpose-designed materials with special properties would dominate
the manufacturing industry and health care in the next century.
The plastic which thickens when pulled was developed by Mr Ken Evans, a
member of the engineering department at Liverpool University. It has the
same chemical composition as Teflon, better known as the non-stick coating
on frying pans.
Uses for the material could range from bullet proof vests that expand to
deflect incoming bullets to waterproof sealant using plastic that could be
pulled into shape and expand to create a leak-free joint.
Prof Humphreys said ICI, the UK chemicals company, has expressed an interest
in the material. 'Shape memory' metals which change form at different
temperatures could be applied as replacement tooth roots to expand firmly
into the jaw when they react to body temperature.
More prosaic applications could include windows for greenhouses that open
and close when the temperature rises or falls.
Other new materials have a range of medical applications. Artificial bone,
developed by Professor Bill Bonfield, of Queen Mary and Westfield College in
London, is now being tested in clinical trials to replace the cheek bones of
accident victims.
If successful, artificial bone could also replace metals in hip
replacements, avoiding the annual spending of up to Pounds 30m for the
thousands of replacement operations carried out in the UK each year.
Implants fail when the patient's bone shrinks away from the harder metal of
the replacement and the joint becomes loose.
A new plastic has been designed to create artificial arteries. It is
kink-resistant, micro-porous like a real artery and compatible with the
human body. 'A fundamental reversal in the relationship between human beings
and materials is taking place,' according to Prof Humphreys.
'Historically humans have adapted natural materials, for example extracting
iron from iron ore,' he said. 'Now it is possible to start with a need and
then develop a material to meet it.'
