FT  25 OCT 93 / Bomb puts Ulster peace talks in doubt
THE Hume-Adams initiative to end the fighting in Northern Ireland appeared
doomed last night as Mr John Major led a fierce denunciation of the IRA's
bombing of a busy Belfast street.
As the death toll from Saturday's attack in the Protestant Shankill Road
rose to 10, including one of the terrorists who planted the bomb, Mr Major
ruled out early dialogue with the Republican Sinn Fein movement.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, and Mr Dick Spring,
Ireland's foreign affairs minister, announced they had postponed a meeting
of the Anglo-Irish inter-governmental conference on Wednesday. Mr Spring had
been expected at that meeting to pass on to Sir Patrick details of the
Hume-Adams plan.
Sir Patrick is expected to make a House of Commons statement later today.
British ministers expect that the London and Dublin governments will now
press ahead with their own efforts to devise a new constitutional settlement
to provide an umbrella for fresh talks between the legitimate political
parties in the province.
In the wake of Saturday's massacre Ulster Unionists demanded an end to the
so-called peace initiative framed by Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist
Social Democratic Labour party, and Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president.
Mr Hume called on the two governments to speed up their consideration of the
proposals, which he said offered the best hope in 20 years of ending
sectarian violence in the province. However, Mr Major, who is expected to
hold talks with Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, during
Friday's European Community summit in Brussels, said the bombing had
seriously undermined hopes for dialogue.
Speaking at the Commonwealth summit in Cyprus, Mr Major said he wanted one
message from the IRA: 'We have given up violence for good.' He added: 'The
message I want to hear is quite clear. It is quite simple. But I haven't
heard it yet.'
Apparently dismissing the Hume-Adams proposals, the prime minister said: 'I
have read about it, I have heard about it, but I have not seen it.'
Senior ministers added the bombing had reduced to 'practically zero' the
already slim prospect that Mr Hume's efforts could lead to participation by
Sinn Fein in talks to secure a political settlement in Ulster.
One member of the cabinet said the government would be accused - and rightly
so - of bowing to the terrorists if it opened contacts with an organisation
which explicitly supported IRA terrorism.
Mr Reynolds said the bombing was another atrocity which showed that the path
of violence led nowhere.
He said: 'All sides, even at this late stage, must desist from killing and
allow the dialogue to develop between those who believe in peace.'
Mr Adams said last night that the bombing had been 'wrong' after the IRA
indicated that it had intended to give a warning before the bomb was
detonated, but that it had exploded prematurely.
