FT  05 MAY 93 / Premadasa leaves legacy of growth: Slain Sri Lankan
president's gains set to live on
THOUSANDS of Sri Lankans yesterday stood in line on the beach of Colombo
waiting to enter the waterfront mansion of the assassinated President
Ranasinghe Premadasa to pay their last respects.
Among them were businessmen who wished to honour a man who had done much for
his country's economy. Mr Premadasa presided over rapid liberalisation,
solid economic growth, a sharp rise in share prices and an unprecedented
surge in foreign investment.
Businessmen in Colombo believe Mr Premadasa's economic achievements will
survive his bloody death at the hands of a suicide bomber last weekend. They
think that even though the assassination could bring confusion in politics,
Sri Lanka's economy will survive the shock.
As Mr A S Jaywardena, chairman of Sri Lanka's Securities and Exchange
Commission, says: 'There will be a loss of confidence but it will be
moderate.'
Sri Lankan executives have grown used to doing business amid political
turmoil. For 10 years the country has been split by a civil war in the north
and east in which the Tamil Tigers insurgents are fighting for a separate
homeland for the minority Tamil community against the wishes of the majority
Sinhalese.
However, businessmen do have one concern - that the president's death and
the assassination the previous week of Mr Lalith Athulathmudali, an
opposition leader, might trigger more general violence in the relatively
prosperous south and west of the island.
The danger yesterday seemed remote - Sri Lankans have reacted remarkably
calmly to the president's assassination. But the risk exists: the JVP, a
Singhalese anarchist group, resorted to violence in the late 1980s and was
ruthlessly suppressed at considerable cost to Sri Lanka's international
reputation.
If calm continues to prevail now, much credit will be due to the way in
which the caretaker government, led by Mr D B Wijetunga, the acting
president, and the opposition parties have refrained from inflaming
passions. As a western diplomat said yesterday: 'People are behaving very
well because they know how quickly the situation might slip out of control
if they try to exploit it.'
To businessmen's relief, Mr Wijetunga has also committed himself to carrying
on with Mr Premadasa's economic policies, including deregulation of trade,
financial services, and privatisation. Moreover, there are strong signs that
the opposition leaders would also broadly favour Mr Premadasa's economic
policies if they were to come to power.
The two assassinations have come at a time when businessmen are fairly well
placed to withstand a moderate blow to confidence. The economy has been
growing at an average annual rate of 5 per cent in the last three years,
including 1992 when the rate slipped to 4.3 per cent because of a severe
drought.
Mr Wimal Hettiarachchi, director of economic research at the central bank of
Sri Lanka, expects to see 5 per cent growth this year. 'We hope to see
further progress. Politicians have their differences, but no one wants to
sabotage the national economy.'
Foreign investment, which has grown from USDollars 50m (Pounds 32m) a year
in the mid-1980s to Dollars 200m last year, could suffer from the political
upheavals as those investors who have yet to commit themselves to Sri Lanka
may decide to hold back. Foreign investment in the country largely consists
of small investments in businesses which require little capital - such as
garment-making, shoes and toys.
Tourism, an important earner of foreign exchange for Sri Lanka, is
particularly vulnerable to the effects of violent incidents. Fortunately for
the country's hoteliers, the assassinations have occurred at the end of the
tourist season.
'If this had happened in November, we would be in trouble,' said one Colombo
hotel manager. The industry, which is mainly in the south, has only just
recovered from the effects of the JVP insurgency. The number of tourists in
1992 rose 24 per cent to 394,000 - a level last seen in 1984.
Sri Lanka cannot afford another prolonged period of economic disruption. The
country's high literacy rate of more than 90 per cent is the envy of other
developing nations. But these well-educated people are more likely than
their uneducated peers to demand good jobs. Without jobs, they are more
likely to voice their anger.
As a leading Colombo economist sys: 'Sri Lanka needs to keep growing at
least as fast as it has in the past few years.'
