FT  23 FEB 93 / HK airport project hits turbulence again: But new chief
executive is confident of government support
THE ATTEMPT to build a new airport for Hong Kong claimed its second victim
last week when Mr Richard Allen, the Provisional Airport Authority's chief
executive, was replaced by Mr Hank Townsend, a senior executive with Bechtel
International, the US construction company.
The airport was high on the list of reasons which led Mr John Major,
Britain's prime minister, to announce at the end of 1991 that Lord Wilson,
the colony's governor, would be replaced. Mr Chris Patten was appointed last
April.
But the project, which in different ways came to obsess Lord Wilson and Mr
Allen, remains what it has always been: the safeguard of Hong Kong's future
as southern China's premier port. Together with its related infrastructure
projects - land reclamations, a railway, and roads - it is one of the
biggest single projects of its kind in the world.
In spite of the benefits to both China and Hong Kong, the airport has been
one of the casualties of the present row between Britain and China about the
colony's political development.
The apparent thaw in Sino-British relations, which is expected to result in
the resumption of negotiations about Hong Kong's political structure, may
end with China stamping its seal on the overall financing of the project. If
agreement can be reached the general expectation is that the dispute about
financing can be settled very quickly.
But in the absence of an agreement, the project exists in a curious twilight
world where, in spite of the diplomatic impasse, work proceeds on projects
that do not need China's agreement. The Hong Kong government has let
HKDollars 21bn (Pounds 1.92bn) of these contracts, covering bridge
construction, land reclamation and roads. According to officials they are on
time and about Dollars 2bn under budgeted estimates.
Although all are important pieces in an integrated infrastructure
development plan encompassing nine 'core' projects, the two most important
ones - the airport itself and its connecting railway - are faring less well.
The airport proper is like a patient on limited life support. Funding for
the PAA's headquarters will run out at the end of June. If Britain and China
cannot agree terms and the Legislative Council, the local law-making body,
refuses to vote it more money - which it came very close to doing last
November - then the PAA may not be able to pay salaries and may have to lay
off staff.
Mr Townsend, who moved into the chief executive's office at the PAA last
Friday, does not like to talk about such an eventuality. He simply states:
'The government is committed to the project.'
As if to underline the increasingly surreal nature of the PAA's position,
construction of the airport platform on Chek Lap Kok, a small island to the
north of Lantau, proceeds apace.
The HKDollars 9bn contract, which was awarded to an Anglo-Chinese consortium
at the end of last November, is now three months into the 41 months
allocated for the preparation of the site. It is fully protected financially
and will proceed even in the absence of further funds for the PAA.
Mr Townsend says that in spite of a three-month delay in awarding the
contract, the PAA and the contractor have been able to keep to 'critical
turnover days' ensuring that areas of the site will be ready on time for
facilities to be erected. Detailed design work on Sir Norman Foster's vision
of the terminal complex is also proceeding - an effort designed to make the
terminal as 'passenger-friendly' as possible ensuring the smoothest
procession from aircraft, through immigration and baggage collection to
customs.
The uncertain political outlook has, however, led the PAA to hasten slowly
in holding final tenders for large-scale airport services, such as cargo
handling and aircraft maintenance. These franchises need Beijing's agreement
before the contracts can be awarded.
Similarly the airport railway. Some preliminary design work is being done
and staff are being recruited but until China approves financing, the Mass
Transit Railway is treading water.
With Beijing's response uppermost in mind, the government has still to
decide whether to call tenders for the Central and Wanchai reclamation, part
of which will be used for the airport railway's terminus on Hong Kong
island.
Another important project is also stalled. The Hong Kong government is still
in negotiations with Wharf and CITIC Hong Kong, one of Beijing's biggest
companies in the colony, about the construction of the Western Harbour
Crossing, a tunnel linking Hong Kong with a reclaimed site in west Kowloon.
This contract involves awarding an operating franchise to the companies,
which will need China's approval. CITIC is keeping its head low with no
inclination to settle until there is an improvement in Sino-British ties.
Since 1989, when Lord Wilson announced the government plans to build an
airport, China has been the critical factor in ensuring its success. More
than three years on that remains the case.
