FT  08 JUN 93 / Boycott by teachers holds firm
TEACHERS' unions in England and Wales yesterday thwarted any chance of
drawing useful conclusions from this year's national curriculum tests in
English reading and writing.
Their boycott of the test, the first of six papers due to be taken by 14
year-olds over the next two weeks - with another two papers in Welsh for
children in Wales - appeared to have been almost totally successful, with
only a handful of exceptions across the country.
In the Conservative-controlled London borough of Wandsworth, where schools
were offered extra staff to invigilate the tests, preparation had been so
inadequate that only one school actually asked its pupils to sit them. The
council said that more schools would implement tests in other subjects,
which require less specialised preparation.
Neighbouring Westminster reported that none of its eight secondary schools
had implemented the tests, despite well-publicised threats to dock teachers'
pay if they went through with the boycott.
City Technology Colleges, such as Hatcham CTC in New Cross, south London,
which are directly funded by the government, provided the only broad
exceptions to the norm. They reported that their pupils had done the tests
as planned.
In Buckinghamshire only one school, Leon comprehensive in Milton Keynes,
attempted to implement the tests. However, the test papers were delivered
hours late, causing what the headteacher described as 'serious
inconvenience'.
Elsewhere some schools used the tests but do not intend to publish the
results, except to parents, pupils and staff.
Audenshaw High in Manchester, a grant-maintained school, was one of the few
known to be carrying them out. Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool and Sheffield
all reported that none of their schools had implemented the tests.
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general secretary of the National Association of
Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers which was the first union to boycott
the tests, described the boycott as '99.9 per cent effective'. He listed 18
counties where no schools had carried out tests, although he admitted that
some had been done in Hampshire, the Isle of Wight, Lincolnshire,
Northamptonshire, Stockport and Surrey.
The National Union of Teachers and the Association of Teachers and Lecturers
also claimed success for their industrial action.
The National Association for the Teaching of English said there was no need
for pupils to take the tests 'if the intention was only to find out how
deeply flawed they are', and said that schools had spent Pounds 3.75 per
pupil in trying to implement them.
But the Campaign for Real Education launched a spirited defence, persuading
128 MPs, educationalists and industrialists to sign an advertisement calling
for children to be tested. Signatories included Lord Hanson, Sir Simon
Hornby, chairman of WH Smith, and Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons.
The Department for Education said: 'We firmly believe that there will be
more schools doing the test than are indicating they will. Those children
who do not take these tests today will have been denied the benefits of a
test for which they have worked for three years, and that can only be sad
for the children.'
Additional reporting by Roland Adburgham, Paul Cheeseright and Ian Hamilton
Fazey.
