FT  06 NOV 93 / EC may ban cash-with-order demands
THOUSANDS of companies that use small advertisements in newspapers to sell
their wares could go out of business if a draft European Community directive
becomes law, the Advertising Association warned yesterday.
The directive would make it illegal for companies to insist that customers
enclose payment for goods with their orders. Consumers would be entitled to
wait for the goods to arrive and then forward their cash.
Larger organisations would be able to cope with the delay in payment, but
small companies could face 'unwarranted financial damage', the association
said.
The 'distance selling' directive in its present form would also outlaw
unsolicited selling by telephone. Consumers would have to give consent in
advance to being phoned, although it is unclear how, in practical terms,
this could be achieved. It is possible this clause will be dropped.
Selling by fax and electronic mail without consent would also be banned. Few
homes have these facilities yet, and none of the regulations would apply to
business-to-business selling.
The association argues that UK consumers are already well protected by
voluntary agreements. These include the mail order protection scheme, which
has existed for more than 20 years, and the telephone preference scheme, set
up recently to allow householders to opt out of being canvassed on the
phone.
The draft directive is due to be discussed at a meeting of the EC Council of
Ministers on November 19. The measure would probably need to be opposed by
at least three countries before being thrown out. The association is
lobbying for support among other member states but, at present, the UK is
the directive's only opponent.
An earlier version of the directive allowed for voluntary agreements to
operate but the European parliament insisted the provisions were
strengthened and underpinned by law.
If the directive does progress, many points will need clarifying. For
example, it is unclear whether companies would be able to request, but not
insist, that money be sent with an order, and whether a company would be
obliged to supply the goods if the customer refused to pay in advance.
Payment by credit card would probably continue as now, but there would have
to be a delay before payment was activated.
Even a demand in an advertisement for a stamp-addressed envelope in return
for a catalogue could fall foul of the directive, said the association.
National newspapers is one industry that could be badly hit by the
directive.
Mr David Pollock, director of the Newspaper Publishers Association, said: 'I
estimate that hundreds of millions pounds worth of advertising could be lost
if this directive is accepted. Newspapers like the Daily Mail and the Daily
Express have a substantial proportion of their advertising from distance
selling.'
Mr Colin Fricker, legal services adviser to the Direct Marketing
Association, said: 'One industry which will be severely hit will be travel.
Think of how many holidays are booked with the money being paid up-front.
This directive, if accepted, will just encourage bad debts.'
Royal Mail said it regretted the directive because it could be
self-defeating. 'This directive could result in a lowering of standards in
distance selling, because companies will start mailing from outside the
(European) Community,' it said.
