FT  30 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Mines give way to condominiums
 -Why one Malaysia's tin industry has been in steep decline
ON THE outskirts of Kuala Lumpur a condominium project called 'The Mines' is
nearing completion.
The site was once one of the area's biggest tin mines. Malaysia's tin mining
industry - once a vital part of the economy - is rapidly disappearing. These
days mine owners find real estate development far more lucrative.
Last year Malaysia's production of tin-in-concentrates was 14,339 tonnes,
down from 20,710 tonnes a year earlier. The 1992 production figure was well
below the figure earlier estimated by the Ministry of Finance (18,000
tonnes), indicating that the decline of the industry has been a good deal
faster than expected.
Rising production costs and the depletion of high grade tin reserves have
contributed to the fall-off in production. But low prices on the
international market are the key factor.
In 1981 Malaysia was earning between between MDollars 32 (USDollars 12) and
MDollars 34 per kg for its tin on the international market. Prices now seem
stubbornly stuck round the MDollars 14 mark. Malaysia's average production
costs are estimated at MDollars 16 per kg.
Mr Hew See Tong, president of the All Malaya Chinese Mining Association,
says production is likely to fall further. 'The industry is doomed if
current prices and demand continue. Many miners will not be able to sustain
operations.'
Malaysia's economy grew by more than 8 per cent in each of the last five
years. Labour shortages and consequent rising wages are forcing more and
more mines to close. In 1990 there were 141 tin mines in Malaysia. Now there
are less than half that number.
Tin mining has been going on in one form or another in Malaysia for
centuries. Until recently, the country was the world's premier producer. In
the mid-19th century large tracts of land were given over to tin
concessions. Chinese immigrants flooded in to work the mines. By 1900,
Malaya - as it was then - was producing 50,000 tonnes of tin each year, more
than half the world's output.
In the 1960s annual production was up to between 60,000 and 70,000 tonnes.
In 1913 there were 200,000 employed in the tin industry. In 1980 the number
had declined to 39,000. Now only about 4,000 work in the tin mines.
The critical year for the worldwide tin industry was 1985 when the
international tin council's buffer stock operations collapsed and more than
100,000 tonnes of stockpiled tin was released on to the market. Prices went
through the floor and tin mining operations round the world  - particularly
those involved in high cost hard rock mining - were forced to close down.
Some low labour cost countries - notably Brazil, China and Indonesia -
encouraged by the high pre-1985 prices, had raised output. All three are now
bigger producers than Malaysia.
Quotas on tin exports introduced by the Association of Tin Producing
Countries (ATPC), do not seem to have had much effect on international
pricing. The ATPC links Australia, Bolivia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nigeria,
Thailand and Zaire, countries which together account for about 60 per cent
of world production. But Brazil and China are not members.
Hopes for a tin market revival in 1992 proved to be ill-founded. Prices in
Kuala Lumpur did rise in mid year to the MDollars 18 per kg mark. But
Malaysia's miners - who saw more lucrative investment opportunities in other
sectors of the economy - did not rush to re-open mines. Their caution was
justified. The price quickly dropped back to under MDollars 13 per kg by the
end of the year.
Increased tin sales by China was one cause for the price decline. There was
also nervousness about plans by the US Defence Logistics Agency (DLA) to
sell some of its substantial tin stockpile.
Malaysia's problems were further compounded by the strengthening of the
Malaysian dollar against the US currency which caused local tin prices to be
at a premium compared to the price on the London Metal Exchange. In
consequence, foreign buyers tended to stay away from Kuala Lumpur.
There are some brave miners who are determined to carry on one of Malaysia's
oldest industries. One of the country's most extensive mines, Sungei Lembing
in Pahang on peninsula Malaysia's east coast, has been reopened.
But many others have turned their backs on the industry. The Berjuntai
company, once Malaysia's biggest tin mining operator, is now planning to
diversify into brick manufacturing.
Meanwhile miners watch their industry disappear - with mining sites turned
into condominiums for Malaysia's newly affluent.
