FT  22 FEB 93 / Row over deportees dogs Christopher tour
MR Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, carried his listening tour of
the Middle East from Damascus to Riyadh yesterday, having heard Jordanian
and Syrian assurances of their resolve to continue the faltering peace
process.
But leaders in both countries stressed that Israel's deportation of
Palestinians continued to obstruct a return to the talks, adjourned since
mid-December.
Mr Christopher said after meeting President Hafez al-Assad that the Syrian
leader had 'emphasised his commitment to the process of direct negotiations'
in the peace talks.
King Hussein of Jordan told Mr Christopher on Saturday that he was anxious
to return to the talks, but the continued exile of the Palestinians deported
by Israel two months ago remained an obstacle. Mr Farouq al-Sharaa, Syrian
foreign minister, made a similar statement on Mr Christopher's arrival in
Damascus. The peace talks remained the sole option for countries in the
region. 'What is the alternative except disaster?' he asked. 'Hopefully the
obstacles can be removed from our path.'
Mr Al-Sharaa told reporters he had advanced some new ideas to help resolve
the impasse over the deportees, although he refused to give details. 'We
shall work together to have the peace talks resume in a convenient and
admirable atmosphere.'
US officials have repeatedly stated that the secretary of state has no
immediate plans to resolve the stalemate over the deportees. Officials
travelling with Mr Christopher said he would, at best, gently encourage
Israel to speed up a judicial review of the deportees' cases.
Mr Christopher said over the weekend that he stood by a formula worked out
between Israel and the US whereby Israel would take back 101 of the 396 men
immediately and the rest within a year. Arab parties to the peace talks have
rejected this.
Mr Christopher flew last night to Saudi Arabia for a brief visit before he
travels to Kuwait, where talks are more likely to focus on Gulf security
issues than on the peace process.
