FT  22 OCT 93 / Ministers blamed for Pounds 56m extra cost of Malaysian aid
THE NATIONAL Audit Office yesterday fiercely criticised the government for
approving aid funding for a Pounds 417m hydro-electric power plant in
Malaysia against the overwhelming technical and commercial advice of civil
servants.
Its report says the funding arrangements, chosen by the government, will add
at least Pounds 56m to the aid provided by the UK taxpayer over the 14-year
life of the project, led by Balfour Beatty, the UK construction group owned
by BICC.
The total Pounds 234m cost to the taxpayer is the largest cash sum ever
provided by the British government for a single aid-funded scheme.
The report traces how Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, gave the
green light in July 1991, overriding more than two years of advice to the
government that the hydro-power project, on the Pergau river in peninsular
Malaysia's eastern state of Kelantan, was uneconomical. It will mean
Malaysians pay Pounds 100m more in electricity costs than less expensive
alternatives.
The report makes it clear that foreign policy factors, rather than any
commercial logic, dictated the decision to go ahead. The government was
anxious to patch up relations with Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime
minister, who had followed a 'buy British last' policy for almost a decade
in retaliation against increases in fees for foreign students at UK
universities.
If the government had followed the most economical financing arrangements,
UK taxpayers would be spending not Pounds 234m in aid support for the
project but Pounds 108m.
'Even if costs were discounted to their present values, the chosen method of
implementation would cost the UK Pounds 56m more than it might otherwise
have done,' the report says. From as early as 1987, when a World Bank report
concluded that Malaysia should concentrate entirely on gas-fired electricity
generation until the turn of the century, all technical advice to the
government pointed to the Pergau hydro-power project being uneconomical.
In 1989, after increases in the project cost, the Overseas Development
Administration, which manages the UK aid programme, concluded the project
would be 'a very bad buy' and a burden on Malaysian consumers.
Government budget constraints apparently blocked the most sensible funding
arrangement - providing a large grant in the early years of the project in
the form of mixed credits. This would have involved a commitment of about
Pounds 70m in the peak payment year. Instead, soft-loan funding was
arranged.
The ODA's accounting officer 'emphasised to ministers that his
responsibility was to ensure that aid funds were administered in a prudent
and economical manner, and believed that providing funds for Pergau would
not be consistent with this'.
Power aid project, Page 11
