FT  18 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Germans and Dutch get bulk of
CIS aluminium
GERMANY AND the Netherlands have been given by far the biggest allocation of
aluminium from the Commonwealth of Independent States under the terms of
import restrictions imposed last week by the European Commission.
France, from where Pechiney, the state-owned aluminium group, led a campaign
for the EC to take action to 'safeguard' European producers, can import only
48 tonnes.
Traders complained yesterday that application of the ECrestrictions were
chaotic. Germany is already imposing rigid regulations but Italy is still
permitting unrestricted imports of CIS aluminium.
Meanwhile, protests about the EC's action continue to grow. Mr Alan Bekhor,
managing director of Trans-World Metals, which claims to be the biggest
trader in Russian aluminium, said the EC made no attempt to consult the
trading houses that handle most of the CIS aluminium exports before taking
action. He said the futility of the commission's attempt to limit the free
flow of a global commodity was illustrated by the fact that aluminium's
price had fallen by Dollars 30 a tonne since restrictions were imposed on
August 7.
The commission says that only 60,000 tonnes of CIS aluminium may be imported
to the EC between then and the end of November. Germany, whose manufacturing
industry is a big consumer, has been allocated 25,210 tonnes and the
Netherlands - the arrival point for most of the CIS metal coming into Europe
 -24,552.
Other allocations include: Denmark and Ireland, nil; Italy 5,778 tonnes;
Belgium and Luxembourg 1,254 tonnes; Greece 454 tonnes; Spain 1,548 tonnes;
Portugal 306 tonnes and the UK 762 tonnes. Once imported the metal can be
freely transferred between EC countries.
Mr Bekhor has written to Sir Leon Brittan, EC commissioner for external
economic relations, suggesting that the imposition of restrictions
'demonstrates how far the EC commission has become little more than the
instrument of the depressed European producer lobbies'.
He points out that, as EC aluminium production totals only 2m tonnes
compared with consumption of about 4m tonnes, 'the EC proposal will hurt
twice as many people as it is presumed to benefit.'
Mr Bekhor said yesterday that the commission's decision was based on
outdated information. The price of alumina (aluminium oxide) had been
deregulated and energy prices were also gradually being freed. Transport
costs were rising - it now cost Dollars 25 a tonne to ship aluminium from
Siberia to the coast compared with Dollars 1 under the old Soviet regime.
Significantly, CIS aluminium exports had stabilised at about 1m tonnes a
year and the marketing of Russian metal had been so effective that the EC
was no longer importing most of it. The bulk was now attracted to Japan and
the US, which did not impose the 6 per cent import duty levied by the EC.
This trend was accelerated after the US granted CIS republics 'most favoured
nation status' in June last year.
Western traders had been helping the CIS industry regain stability. For
example, Trans-World had provided pre-payments to CIS smelters when they
were short of hard currency to buy raw materials a year ago.
Mr Bekhor said that aluminium was one of the most robust, profitable and
efficient industries in the CIS. Many smelters had plans to improve their
processes and to cut pollution. 'The EC has made a very bad decision based
on a seriously flawed report. The consequences have not been thought through
and this will become a very big public issue because it is such a scandal'.
