FT  10 JUL 93 / Sport: Why Formula One is running on empty - Motor Racing
EVERY big sporting event needs a little hype, preferably with a domestic
angle. For tomorrow's British Grand Prix at Silverstone the angle is: can
Damon Hill edge out his team-mate Alain Prost and win. But I fear it is all
a sham. Hill may win, but his victory will have more in common with
professional wrestling, or an arranged marriage, than high noon on the race
track. If he wins, it will be because Prost lets him and the Williams team
deem it good public relations at their home grand prix.
Hill has done well. With almost no grand prix experience, and little
evidence in his career to suggest that he was a high-flier, he has performed
as a competent number two driver should. But no-one should be deceived by
the hype into thinking Hill is Nigel Mansell. In anything other than the
Williams, a car without peers in Formula One, Hill would look like what he
is, a competent midfield runner. But for the F1 authorities, the hype is
important. Something is needed to inject life into a tedious season.
One-team domination is by no means unusual in F1. If anything, it tends to
be the rule. In 1986 and 1987 it was Williams-Honda. In 1988 and 1989, it
was McLaren-Honda. In 1992 and 1993 it has been Williams-Renault. But for
the most part the dominant team has fielded two topline drivers who have
slugged it out on the race tracks: first Mansell and Nelson Piquet, then
Ayrton Senna and Prost. Riccardo Patrese, Mansell's team-mate in 1991 and
1992, was not in the same league as the Englishman, but he was a serious
competitor, at least in 1991. Hill is not. The result has been boredom.
The decision of Mansell, the most popular driver in F1 and one of its two
most charismatic performers, to join the Indycar series has left a hole.
Only three virtuoso races by Senna, the other charismatic driver, has kept
the season and the formula alive.
The most dramatic feature of tomorrow's race could be the size of the crowd.
Ever since Mansell won his first grand prix on British soil at Brands Hatch
in 1985, there has been a love affair between the crowd and the driver. They
came in their tens of thousands and Mansell rewarded them with some great
drives. But Mansell has gone and the race is bound to prove an emotional
anti-climax. The organisers expect the attendance to be down by 20 per cent.
That, I suspect, is a serious underestimate. There is no Mansell. We are
halfway through a numbingly boring season. And the crowds have been well
down at the previous European rounds, in at least three cases by as much as
half. F1 is in crisis. This was already evident last season. There were
rumours that television, the key to the success of F1, was unhappy with the
spectacle. Viewing figures were falling. Mansell's flight has brought the
matter to a head.
The rumblings of discontent have found a focus, there is an alternative by
which F1 can be measured. It has been found wanting. In Indycar, the key is
entertainment The technical regulations are designed to equalise the
performance of the cars and place the emphasis on driver ability. If racing
gets a bit processional, then the pace car can always balance things.
The highlight of the motor racing season has been this year's Indianapolis
500: no grand prix could compare with the excitement and openness of the
occasion. But that is not all. In Indycar there are parade laps before the
race when the drivers are introduced to the spectators. The public is free
to mingle with the drivers in the paddock. Admission prices are reasonable:
a full-day's entertainment at Indianapolis costs a mere Dollars 20 (Pounds
13).
The centre of interest has begun to shift. Every Indycar race is receiving
serious coverage in the UK. When the Canadian Grand Prix was held within a
few hours of the Milwaukee Indy race last month, the two received almost
equal treatment. The viewing figures for Independent Television's Indycar
coverage are not far behind those for the BBC's grand prix programmes.
Brands Hatch is negotiating to bring Indycar to Europe for the first time in
September 1994. If it is successful, and Mansell is still in Indycar, the
crowd will dwarf that at the British Grand Prix next July.
Fisa, motor racing's governing body, is fighting back. It knows F1 is in
crisis and that something must be done. It wants to ban the latest gizmos,
such as active suspension, semi-automatic transmission and traction control,
which have been the main source of Williams' domination and which it sees as
limiting the role of the driver. This is a volte face in the philosophy of
F1. Hitherto it has prided itself on being technologically-driven. Those
days are over. The emphasis in future will be on entertainment. The leading
teams, Williams and McLaren, are resisting, but they will lose. Too much is
at stake.
But if F1 is to prosper, these changes can only be a beginning. The motor
racing authorities, in which Bernie Ecclestone, now vice-president of Fisa,
is the key figure, presided over enormous growth in the popularity of grand
prix racing in the 1970s and 1980s. But it was a sport packaged for
television. The spectator was largely ignored. Now television companies are
having second thoughts and the spectators are staying away.
Grand prix racing is paying the price for ignoring the public. Silverstone
this weekend will say it all. The racing will, in all probability, be
tedious and boring. The general admission price, at Pounds 57, is
ridiculous. And the paddock will resemble Fort Knox: the F1 elite and the
public are never destined to mix. There has been a welcome decision to hold
a parade lap. Indycar is exerting an influence.
F1 has been slow to recognise the warning signs. Like many sports it remains
desperately introverted. Conflicting interests divide it. The top teams
cannot see beyond their own advantage. The sport is ill-served by most
journalists who lack a wider sense of motor racing's place in the world. At
last, however, Fisa seems to have woken to the dangers. Banning gizmos is
the first step. The interests of spectator and viewer must become paramount.
In the meantime, the return of Mansell in 1994 would help.
