FT  17 FEB 93 / UK and Germany in crisis talks on Eurofighter
BRITAIN and Germany are to hold confidential talks this week to try to
resolve a looming funding crisis in the four-nation Eurofighter 2000
aircraft project.
Mr Jonathan Aitken, the British defence procurement minister, will seek
assurances on Bonn's share of payments in discussions over the next three
days with General Jorg Schonbohm, secretary of state responsible for
armaments at the German defence ministry.
The Ministry of Defence said Mr Aitken's visit to Germany, which starts
today, was to attend an Anglo-German seminar in Hamburg and was not
specifically linked to the Eurofighter project. However, the future of the
programme is expected to feature prominently in his discussions with Gen
Schonbohm, which are due to continue during a two-day visit to eastern
Germany.
The discretion surrounding the talks is explained by the UK's anxiety not to
embarrass German officials into making public statements which could worsen
the financial stalemate.
German industry officials said that finance from the Bonn government would
run out in about two months and that some payments were already overdue.
Under work-sharing arrangements between Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain,
each government is responsible for paying its industry for its part in the
Pounds 8bn programme for development of the aircraft.
Failure by Bonn to release more money means that Daimler-Benz's Deutsche
Aerospace subsidiary has to bear the burden of continuing with the project.
There is concern that some German sub-contractors could face severe
difficulties as a result.
A senior British official said the UK regarded the problem as one that
Germany had to resolve. 'It's up to them,' he said.
The financial shortfall calls into question the agreement reached by the
four countries last December to continue with a modified Eurofighter
project, overcoming the threat of German withdrawal. The agreement was based
on cost cuts and a slowing down of development work.
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, had already reduced Bonn's 1993
budget allocation to the project by about DM300m to DM520m (Pounds 220m). Of
this, DM180m was owed to industry for work done in 1992. The remaining
DM340m is not expected to cover Germany's share of work beyond April.
Prospects for raising Bonn's funding provisions have been hit by cuts in the
defence budget.
Armed forces confusion, Page 2
