FT  13 AUG 93 / Paradise lost in the west: Two of a kind - How bishops are
responding to the divisions within their countries
Joachim Meisner of Cologne, dispatched to the Rhine by God and the pope, has
taken on an exacting task: to plough a furrow of catholic rigour straight
and narrow across Germany's churned-up soil.
A former citizen of East Germany, a long-time protege of Pope John Paul, and
a cardinal in Rome since 1983, he scans the Germans and their weaknesses
with hawkish eastern eyes.
In residence in west Germany for 4 1/2 years, the archbishop ostensibly
bridges the gap between the two parts of the reunited nation. Yet he also
shows how large and uneasy the divide still is.
Clashes of theology and personality were inevitable from the day this
conservative Prussian cardinal arrived in Cologne, a bastion of west German
liberal catholicism. But the ferment generated by his onslaughts on
Germany's spiritual shortcomings has surpassed all expectations.
On a chill morning in his office near the cathedral, the archbishop
illustrates why he provokes passion. He speaks in fiery parables, lacerating
his enemies in a voice rising and falling with the cadence of psalms.
The archbishop says members of the ruling Christian Democrat party who
support liberalisation of west German abortion laws 'betray' Christian
principles. His doctrinaire views on this, along with issues such as
remarriage of divorcees or the religious status of women, have exposed him
to strong criticism, and prompted thousands of Rhineland catholics to quit
the Church.
However, such reactions to his moral offensive strengthen his conviction
that he is right. 'It is better that the Church becomes smaller and remains
faithful, than if it seeks popularity through false adjustment to society.
The Church is in the world, but not of it.'
The bishopric of Cologne - the largest in Germany, with an extensive welfare
network of homes, schools and hospitals - has a temporal as well as a
spiritual role. As a young man in East Germany, the archbishop was once an
apprentice bank clerk.
Could he have become not bishop but banker? Softly, he points out that he
sits on two Vatican finance committees. 'It is not unimportant that I know
something about finance. God moves in mysterious ways.'
There is nothing mysterious about the archbishop's relish for strife. Born
on Christmas Day 1933 in Silesia (now Poland), he fled in 1945 with his
family from the Soviet advance and settled in what became communist East
Germany. After taking religious orders, during the 1980s he became the head
of the East German catholic Church, a tiny hotbed of defiance to the
communist regime.
Commanded by the pope - whom he has known since 1975 - to take his
ecclesiastical orthodoxy westwards, the cardinal moved from Berlin to the
Rhine in 1988, a year before the fall of the Berlin Wall. The collapse of
communism took him, like so many, by surprise. He thought he would never
live to see German reunification; the pope, he says, saw it coming. 'He told
me in 1987: 'The tide is turning.' I said: 'Holy Father: I don't believe
you.' '
For the reunification celebrations in October 1990, a triumphant fragment of
Berlin Wall graced the Cologne cathedral altar. Nearly three years later,
the joy has disappeared. 'I am shocked and shaken at how quickly the gift of
freedom and the gift of human rights seem to have faded into the background
as the economic situation has deteriorated.'
The west Germans' reluctance to make sacrifices for the east is one more
sign of human frailty, he says. 'Man's overall spiritual condition is the
situation of original sin. How does a human being come to the world? A child
is not born with outstretched hands, to give, but with clenched fists.'
Overall selfishness in united Germany has been exacerbated by a sorry
combination of materialism in the west and the residues of Marxist-Leninism
is the east.
'A people composed of pure egoists; a people who have been deluded into
thinking, in both east and west, that everything they want, they shall have:
how can such a people, from one day to another, learn how to share?'
To illustrate the lack of brotherly love, the archbishop relates a wry
Rhineland joke. ' 'Why do the Chinese smile? Because they still have the
Wall.' It is dreadful, dreadful. We should be saying: 'Why are we Germans
smiling? Because we no longer have the Wall.' '
The disappointments of reunification have been aggravated by false
perceptions in both parts of Germany, he says. 'The politicians completedly
underestimated the situation.'
East Germans, too, were unprepared for the difficulties of adjustment
because they expected 'paradise' from the west. 'As a person from the east I
really believed that, when we had got rid of communism, all our problems
would be over.
'We East German citizens knew West Germany solely from television. We
thought what we saw in the advertisements was the normal lifestyle of
ordinary West Germans.' When he went to West Berlin in 1980 for the first
time to visit priests, he says, 'I was surprised at the modesty of their
lives. It did not tally with what I had seen in TV advertisements.'
As to the future, the archbishop says Germany must no longer measure its
success 'by the size of wage packets', but must pool its 'spiritual
potential'. His eyes glint. 'I sit here before you as a man of the gospel,
and I will deliver what I have into the hand of the Lord.'
How many will rally to his crusade? The archbishop's gaze is fixed beyond
earthly things. This is a man for whom the stringent pursuit of virtue
offers, on high, its own reward.
