FT  08 FEB 93 / Monday Interview: A change foreign to her nature - Cornelia
Schmalz-Jacobsen, head of Germany's foreigners' office, speaks to Judy
Dempsey
Somewhere among the many thousands of names at the Yad Vashem memorial in
Jerusalem, dedicated to both those who perished under, and who resisted, the
Nazis, are the parents of Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen.
'My parents did not belong to any resistance group as such. They simply knew
what was right. During the second world war, they kept their doors open all
the time in Berlin, where we lived. I will never forget it,' says
Schmalz-Jacobsen, former general secretary of the Free Democratic party, and
now head of Germany's awkwardly titled Federal Office for the Problems of
Foreigners.
'So many people from so many different backgrounds visited us in Berlin
during that time. It could have been dangerous. But my parents hid nothing
from me. They believed that a house with an open door was a sign of freedom.
My grandmother, a wonderful woman, who was Greek, thought the same. I
suppose I took our open door for granted.'
Now, more than 50 years later, Germany, which boasts the most liberal asylum
laws in Europe, is undergoing a fundamental rethink about restricting the
number of refugees who are flooding into the country following the collapse
of the Berlin wall in 1989.
Last year alone, more than 470,000 would-be asylum seekers sought refuge in
Germany. The influx of foreigners has fuelled calls from all sides of the
political spectrum - from the far right to Chancellor Helmut Kohl's ruling
Christian Democratic Union party - to reform the asylum laws by tightening
up article 16 of the constitution, which allows everybody entering Germany
the right to refuge.
The number of foreigners entering the country has rekindled a mood of
xenophobia and provoked racist attacks. Despite belated attempts by the
government to clamp down on extreme right-wing groups, the Federal Crime
Bureau last week reported that in December alone, extremists had carried out
more than 1,000 attacks, including one fire bomb, 50 acts of arson, and 95
violent assaults on individuals.
But what haunts intellectuals, and the opposition Social Democratic party,
in the debate about amending the constitution is the memory of the past.
They argue that had other countries given refuge to Jews fleeing Nazi
Germany, many more could have been saved. Germany's open-door policy to
refugees since 1949 has been largely a response to the Jewish experience
during the war.
Yet Schmalz-Jacobsen believes that the emotional, and at times bitter,
arguments over the constitution are a distraction from the real problems
facing Germany: the absence of an immigration law. Because the country has
no immigration policy, everybody is allowed to enter. But those who manage
to remain in Germany do so overwhelmingly as foreigners - they have no easy
access to citizenship. Making citizenship easier, particularly for the
second generation of asylum-seekers, is Schmalz-Jacobsen's goal.
'The statistics speak for themselves,' she says, speaking from her
14th-floor office in Bonn. 'We have about 6.2m foreigners living in Germany.
Of that number 1.5m, or about 25 per cent, are under the age of 18.
Two-thirds of these 'children of foreigners' have been born here. Yet most
of them do not have German passports. These are the second generation of
Turkish immigrants, and those with other parents and grandparents who were
actually invited here by the German government to help rebuild the country's
shattered economy after the second world war.
'These children should be given the choice, as in France. There, children
have the automatic right to French citizenship, and then are given the
choice at the age of 18 to choose their nationality. In Germany, no such
thing exists.'
Schmalz-Jacobsen is just as critical of the difficulties facing those
foreigners who marry German citizens, and those who, having lived in Germany
for several years, are still deprived of easy access to a German passport. A
foreigner married for two full years can apply for citizenship after another
five. But a single foreigner has to wait 10 years before applying for
citizenship, and another five years before he or she is fully naturalised.
'Throughout this time, these people cannot vote, even though they pay taxes.
They have no rights. This has got to change,' she says.
Schmaltz-Jacobsen explains how the German law on citizenship is bound up
with the old imperial decree of 1913. Article 5.7 of the Reichs-und
Staatangehorigkeitsgesetz, or Imperial and State Citizenship Law, states
quite unambiguously: 'Through birth, one can acquire (German) citizenship if
the legitimate child has a German parent; and if an illegitimate child has a
German mother . . .' She adds: 'This means that the 6.2m foreigners in
Germany have little chance of obtaining German citizenship.'
How does this former journalist, and prominent FDP party member, explain the
government's retention of a law in which the blood-line dictates
citizenship? Schmalz-Jacobsen recalls an incident when she moved to Bavaria
where, between 1972 to 1985, she was a senior member of Munich's city
council.
'You tend to forget this but until 1967, there were still divisions between
Catholic and Protestant classes in the schools. One of my sons came home at
midday and asked me if I believed he had black spots on his soul. I
immediately thought that he might be ill. Then I realised that the school
was talking about the differences between the two religions. You are one or
the other. Germany's citizenship law is a bit like that. You have German
blood or you have not.'
Resistance to amending the law - even by allowing dual citizenship, a move
which Schmalz-Jacobsen is spearheading - comes from the Bavarian-based
Christian Social Union, the sister party of the Christian Democratic Union,
even though, ironically, Bavaria has one of the most liberal constitutions
of all the German states. CSU officials fear easier access to citizenship
would somehow dilute the German identity.
'This obsession with what makes up a real German is difficult to explain,'
says Schmalz-Jacobsen. 'Take my case. Now that I have this job, I have
become the subject of hatred. I get many hate letters. In the eyes of some
people who hate foreigners, I am a foreigner too because I want to help
them.
'I get threats as well.' She holds up a sheaf of letters. 'But then, I get
lots of letters from Germans who want to support me in my attempts to change
the law, and who want to integrate the foreigners living in our country.'
Yet, however much there is a gradual consensus emerging, at least among the
FDP and the Social Democratic party, Schmalz-Jacobsen wonders if the
government is really committed to policies which foster integration and
assimilation. 'When I first took this job in 1991, there was much resistance
to even talking about changing the law. It was 'No, no', all the time.
'The mood is changing. You just have to see the enormous groundswell of
opposition to racism. But then, you look at the budget with which we have to
work. I have a total annual budget of DM250,000 (Pounds 104,600); DM100,000
to do campaigning, press releases, and a small staff of 15, of which seven
are part-time. Sometimes I think the government is killing a good idea with
kindness.' It wants the office to exist, she says, but it is chronically
under-funded.
But then the indefatigable Schmalz-Jacobsen believes there are reasons to be
optimistic. 'It is always easier to go on living when you don't have to face
up to something which exists. We have a problem here. Slowly, the younger
generation of Germans are facing up to the need to assimilate and integrate
foreigners. We can't give up now.'
PERSONAL FILE
1934 Born in Berlin.
1962 Worked as journalist in radio, television and newspapers.
1968 Joined Liberal Free Democratic party.
1972-85 Served as member of Munich's city council.
1985-89 Senator for youth and family affairs in Berlin.
1988-91 General secretary of the FDP.
1990 Elected member of the Bundestag.
1991 Named head of the federal department for the problems of
     foreigners.
