FT  23 DEC 93 / International Company News: Club Med losses prompt relaunch
Club Mediterranee, the French leisure group, plans a relaunch of its 'sun,
sea and sex' holiday villages after plunging into the red with a net loss of
FFr290m (Dollars 49.31m) for the year to October 31, against net profits of
FFr161m in the previous year.
Mr Serge Trigano, who in the autumn took over as chairman from his father,
Gilbert, the founder of the group, said Club Med had been badly affected by
the European economic recession and by the enforced closure of its holiday
villages in Egypt, Senegal, Turkey and the former Yugoslavia due to local
political pressure.
He is implementing a rationalisation drive, including cutting operating
costs by FFr150m a year and closing 'five or six' loss-making villages over
the next three years. Club Med will also try to raise between FFr600m and
FFr1.6bn by selling up to eight other villages while retaining management
rights.
Mr Trigano also plans to modernise Club Med by relaunching the group for the
mid-1990s.
This will involve revitalising its marketing strategy and cutting prices by
15 per cent at selected villages. It will press ahead with expansion in
Asia.
Club Med's shares yesterday fell by FFr14 to FFr321 in anticipation of the
announcement after the closure of the Paris stock market.
The group had warned that it would record a loss in the second half on
publication of its interim results in September which showed it just managed
to break even with a net profit of FFr2m in the first half.
However, the full extent of the loss, which has not yet been fully audited,
was worse than analysts expected.
Club Med saw sales fall by 1.9 per cent to FFr8.09bn in the year to October
31 from FFr8.25bn in the previous year. It suffered throughout the year by
the squeeze on consumer spending in its three main markets France, Germany
and Italy.
These operational difficulties were aggravated by the closure of 14 of its
110 holiday villages in political trouble spots.
The group made an exceptional charge of FFr60m (from total provisions of
FFr90m) for political and legal risks in its 1992/93 accounts.
