FT  15 MAY 93 / Heseltine tries to rally Tory rank and file
MR MICHAEL Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, yesterday assured
anxious Conservatives that they would weather the storms currently buffeting
the party.
He told Scottish Conservatives in Edinburgh: 'We are the party of
government, responsive to the public mood, not bowed by pressure . . . above
all a party man enough for the storms.
'We have weathered them before. We will come through to earn the reward. We
know there will be a better season.'
He urged Conservatives to display 'confidence without complacency'.
Mr Heseltine was speaking on the last day of the Scottish Tories'
conference, where the upbeat mood produced by last year's successes in the
general election north of the border contrasted with near panic among party
supporters further south after setbacks in local government elections and
the Newbury by-election.
Mr Heseltine attacked the party's Maastricht rebels, saying it was
'unthinkable that the party would let John Major down (over ratifying the
treaty) and deny him what we entrusted him to achieve'.
Mr Heseltine revealed that he had been asked by Mr Major to carry out an
assault on excessive regulation hampering British business. 'He said: swing
in there, lad, and act, before breakfast, before lunch, before tea and
before dinner. I didn't take much encouraging.'
Government departments had listed 7,000 regulations imposed on business,
though the number fell to 3,500 when the double counting of measures imposed
by two departments was eliminated.
Earlier Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, was warned that the proposed
privatisation of British Rail was a 'recipe for disaster.' Mr John Gall, a
retired train driver with 31 years' service, said: 'We don't require an
opposition. We've done their job for them.'
Mr Gall was the only speaker to express outright opposition to plans to
franchise some of British Rail's services to the private sector. Several
speakers voiced reservations, but others strongly backed the plan.
Mr MacGregor held out the prospect of a privatised ScotRail competing for
railway franchises in England after it had itself been franchised. ScotRail
is to be one of the first parts of British rail to be franchised. It is
widely believed the franchise will be won by its existing management through
a buy-out.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, rejected a call from the floor of
the conference to scrap Options for Change, the plan to scale down Britain's
defence forces after the collapse of the Warsaw Pact.
He argued that Options for Change had been drawn up before the Soviet Union
had collapsed and Russian troops moved 1,000 miles back from Europe. He had
to ensure that the British defence budget, which like other departments
faced public expenditure constraints, was adequate to ensure that British
forces had the best equipment.
He said no decision had been made on which of the two naval dockyards would
win the contract to refit Trident submarines, but that both Rosyth and
Devonport would remain in existence for many years.
