FT  01 MAY 93 / Markets: BTP lights a fire under MTM - The Bottom Line
THERE IS nothing like capping an industrial career by doubling your
company's net assets. Frank Buckley, the 64-year-old chairman of BTP,
presided over just such a deal this week when it bought MTM, a fellow
speciality chemical company, for Pounds 100m.
Whether this was in the interests of shareholders, or simply a last
impetuous fling, is another matter. When the company concerned has made
three calls on shareholders' cash within three years - this week's rights
issue at 185p was below the price of last year's call - the question is more
pertinent.
Happily for shareholders, BTP's latest acquisition looks well founded in
good, old-fashioned industrial logic. The Manchester-based company has
swooped to take advantage of the misfortunes at MTM's head office which have
led to a Serious Fraud Office investigation into the company's reported
profits.
BTP is buying under-utilised but modern plant which uses technology that
complements its own. And, in the profitable Hardwicke and the loss-making
Rock Hill plants in the US, it has gained a platform to manufacture
domestically for the recovering North American markets. Already selling 60
per cent of its product overseas, the underlying MTM businesses should
enhance significantly BTP's standing as a niche chemicals company.
BTP produces molecules for a multitude of industrial and consumer
applications. It provides a quarter of the world's preservatives for
cosmetics - the same chemical that is used in facsimile paper. It also makes
leather tanning chemicals, variants of which are used as additives in
concrete and in carpet stain resisters.
By juggling where it makes its product, BTP believes it can boost its sales
to the cosmetics business in the US, so gaining a price advantage by
avoiding the import tariff it now pays. And spare capacity at Teesport and
Kirkby might be used to meet the growing Far Eastern demand for tanning
chemicals.
The numbers would also seem to stack up. On Wednesday, BTP estimated pre-tax
profits of Pounds 20.4m for the year to end-March 1993 (up from Pounds
18.2m) but a fall in earnings from 14.8p to 14p. During the first year, the
company forecasts the MTM businesses will be of 'modest benefit' to
earnings, but that there will be 'significant benefits' thereafter. What is
more, the shares are still on a yield premium to the market: the company is
expecting to increase its final dividend to give a 9.3p total for the year,
up 5.1 per cent.
But can BTP's management handle the steep change in size, a question asked
when any company nearly doubles its size?
BTP says it thinks MTM's operating companies and their managements have been
held back only by the turmoil at head office. Extensive investigation into
the seven MTM companies showed that Richard Lines, MTM's former chairman,
invested heavily in modern, hi-tech plants. But management reporting systems
were woefully inadequate; in many cases, MTM simply did not know if the
product it was making was profitable. MTM's utilisation of capacity also was
very low: in Rock Hill's case, it was below 30 per cent when break-even
should have been above 65 per cent.
If BTP can improve this situation, MTM's three loss-makers would be
eliminated quickly. But Steve Hannam, who took over as chief executive last
year, emphasises that BTP will be dropping some of MTM's product lines. 'It
matters that what goes through BTP makes money,' he says, suggesting that
MTM's plants might become more sensitive to market demand.
The MTM businesses also should benefit immediately under a financially
strengthened parent. Inevitably, MTM's dire financial situation was
preventing some customers from placing orders and was restricting its access
to credit.
The change of ownership should light a fire under MTM's operational
management, which has worked under a cloud since the group's share price
collapsed last year. Certainly, Hannam finds it hard to hide his enthusiasm
for his new chemistry set. Introducing the deal, he said excitedly that BTP
had bought 'lots of sites, lots of assets, lots of kit.'
