FT  28 AUG 93 / Independent schools - FT 500: A premier league starts to
emerge - John Authers considers the latest A-level results and finds an
unmistakable trend
HEAD TEACHERS are always quick to assert that A-level league tables do not
tell the whole story about a school's performance, and they are, of course,
right.
However, the story they do tell is growing increasingly clear. For most
independent schools, the FT now has data for the last six years. The tables
on this page and the next show the rankings for each of 501 independent
schools both for this year, and, where the figures are available, the
average position for the previous five.
There is a marked and unmistakable trend at the top. Of this year's top ten,
all bar two were in the top ten averages for the previous five years. The
only newcomers were Withington Girls School in Manchester, ninth with a
previous a average of 18th, and King's College School, London, which came
tenth after a previous five-year average of 21st place.
The two to drop out of the top ten scarcely suffered serious falls from
grace, with Haberdashers' Aske's, Borehamwood, now 12th, and Wycombe Abbey
16th.
Close though the margins between different schools' results can often be,
the league tabling has revealed a hard core of consistent performers - a
'Carling Premiership' of schools as one educationalist has put it.
A closer look at the schools which made it into the premier league does
however cast some question over whether the exercise is measuring the
quality of a school's tuition, or just its success in attracting able
pupils.
The top ten this year include two internationally renowned and highly
prestigious boys' boarding schools, Eton and Winchester, for both of which
applications will always be high. The remaining eight are predominantly day
schools, based in large conurbations, and therefore have a catchment area
which enables them to select from a broad range of pupils.
Deciding between mixed and single-sex education involves more than academic
criteria. But these results also seem to provide an academic argument for
single-sex education - all bar one school in the top thirty are single-sex
up to the age of 16, using the FT's definition of single-sex schools (see
footnotes to our top thirty table). Leicester Grammar School is the
highest-placed fully coeducational school at 29th, although Westminster has
a mixed sixth form.
John Trevis, schools consultant with the Gabbitas, the London-based
educational consultancy, further points out that the few boarding schools
among the top academic performers are unusual in that they have special
houses for scholars, where the ablest pupils can feed off each other.
This calls into question the concept of 'value for money'. Schools such as
St Paul's in London, top of the tree this year, may have excellent results,
but it may not necessarily follow that they offer better value for money. It
could be argued that pupils bright enough to prosper at St Paul's would also
shine anywhere else. Further, the standards required by the academic elite
schools are so great that it could be argued that many parents should ignore
them in any case.
Stephen Baldock, highmaster of St Paul's, admits that his school is working
on 'good material'. However, he points out that this year's results included
good grades for some of the boys who were not naturally among the most
gifted.
Trevis suggests that parents with children who are lacking in academic
self-confidence might deliberately avoid the top schools because the pace of
lessons may be too much for them. Schools lower in the standings may be much
better equipped to cater for their needs.
He points, for example, to Stanbridge Earls School, in Hampshire, which
finished 501st. The school specialises in teaching dyslexics and children
with other learning difficulties, and, according to Trevis, ranks as highly
as St Paul's in the job it does for its pupils.
Another issue is the effect the league tables will themselves have on
schools' performance. The government's motive in publishing them is to
reveal under-achievement and give the schools a powerful incentive to
improve standards. The 2.2 per cent overall improvement in pass rates by the
independent schools surveys suggest that the tables may have had this
effect.
The objection to the league table concept that individual positions are too
strongly influenced by minor fluctuations in results seems unfair. Compare
this year's score with the average for the previous five, and you will find
a remarkable degree of consistency. While this is most evident at the top,
significant deviations are still rare lower down.
A few significant jumps were recorded - for example Croydon High School came
32nd, compared with a five-year rank of 103, and Francis Holland school, in
Clarence Gate, near Regent's Park, London, leapt to 50th following an
average placing of 229. Further down in the tables, Cobham Hall School, near
Gravesend, Kent, rose to 194th from a previous average of 409th.
Consistency in league tables has been helped by the rigorous approach taken
by the FT's statisticians, using data supplied by the Independent Schools
Information Service. These tables are based on total UCCA points, which
include both A-levels, and the new AS-levels ('Advanced Supplementary')
which were introduced to add breadth to sixth form curriculums, and are
intended to be as difficult as A-levels, but with syllabuses only half the
size.
By taking this approach, all grades achieved, not just As and Bs, are taken
into account, giving a full picture of a school's academic strength. Schools
which provide extra options such as AS levels will be credited.
General studies A-levels, offered by many schools as an extra option but
often without any devoted tuition, has been derided by employers'
organisations. It is usually ignored by university admissions tutors, and so
it has been excluded from all the FT's calculations.
Schools with less than ten candidates in total have also been excluded, as
these are likely to be highly specialist, while the grades achieved could
lead to statistical distortions - as was shown by last year's government
league tables for state schools which saw the tiny Scilly Isles in first
place.
The FT has also aimed to avoid over-simplification by ranking schools using
two separate scores - UCCA points per entry, and UCCA points per pupil.
The former gives the average grade in each exam taken, while the latter
gives the total grades each pupil has on average accumulated.
Either could be argued to be preferable. The former can be manipulated by
deliberately withdrawing pupils from A-levels where they do not seem likely
to do well, while the latter rewards schools where pupils commonly take on
more than the standard three subjects.
League tables compiled using the two measures would be different, as a
glance down the columns headed UCCA points per entry and UCCA points per
pupil show. Instead the two have been combined to give the ranking score.
As the bald ranking can unfairly accentuate what are often marginal
differences between schools' results, the figure in the second column gives
an 'FT score' which shows by how much a school has varied from the norm.
This is calculated so that an average school will score exactly 1.00. This
was achieved by the schools ranked from 263 to 269, and is equivalent to
roughly 18 UCCA points, or three Cs per pupil.
A more profound problem is whether A-level grades themselves are the true
'gold standard' of educational excellence which many teachers and university
admissions tutors assume.
Difficulties with university entrance this year, and wide discrepancies in
the grades awarded by different A-level examining boards, have brought
serious questioning of the A-level system for the first time.
In Scotland, most schools prefer to do the broader Scottish 'Highers' rather
than A-levels - which is why only two Scottish schools appear in the table.
Further education colleges in the state system have reported significant
increases in demand for new 'vocational A-levels', in which some exams will
be replaced by work experience and coursework. In the independent sector,
International Baccalaureate is also gaining in popularity.
Sevenoaks School, in Kent, has been in the forefront of introducing the IB,
which forces pupils to do a broader range of subjects, and has wider
international recognition.
Richard Barker, Sevenoaks' headmaster, believes that the IB allows greater
diversity, and the abler pupils are encouraged to take it. IB candidates
account for the majority of the school's Oxbridge entrants this year. The
school's figures in the table have been derived using a complicated formula
to convert IB results into an A-level UCCA points equivalent.
