FT  17 JUL 93 / Records: New generation of Lieder flourishes - Max Loppert
welcomes the renaissance in this art both with younger performers and
imaginative concerts
Brigitte Fassbaender: (1) Schubert: Schwanengesang &amp; 5 Lieder. Aribert
Reimann (piano). DG 429 766-2. (2) Liszt: 18 Lieder. Jean-Yves Thibaudet
(piano). Decca 430 512-2. (3) Wolf: Morike Lieder. Jean-Yves Thibaudet
(piano). Decca 440 208-2. (4) Schubert: Goethe Lieder. Cord Garben (piano).
Sony SK 53 104
Marjana Lipovsek: Brahms Lieder. Charles Spencer (piano), David Geringas
(cello). Sony SK 52 490
THE ARTS renew themselves, in sometimes surprising ways. The current vogue
for Lieder, most intimate and exposed of the musical media, affords a prime
example. In the principal cities of Europe the halls are filled whenever
such admired veterans as Peter Schreier and Brigitte Fassbaender are billed
there; and then there are the younger masters and mistresses of the art,
discovered and speedily taken into audience favour.
This vogue was not at all predictable. Fifteen years ago, indeed, Andrew
Porter could write, fearfully, in the New Yorker, 'I trust I am wrong, but
sometimes it seems to me that when Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, Elisabeth
Soderstrom, Peter Pears and Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau retire, Lieder singing
will become a lost art. There is no one in younger generations who commands
as they do the understanding and the technique that bring German songs to
life'.
All four have departed the scene, yet in the happiest way Porter's fears
have proved groundless. Through the influence of those named Lieder
grandees, and others as well, younger communicators have been found to carry
the torch. New ways of presenting the recitals themselves (such as those
devised by the now-defunct Songmakers' Almanac) have added interest; the
astute talent-promotion of such concert-hall managements as the Wigmore Hall
 -in many ways the 1990s Mecca of Lieder performance - has borne fruit.
As always, records mirror the situation. Reprints of distinguished 'old'
singers bulk large alongside the continuance of imaginative projects and the
regular introduction of fresh Lieder talent. The re-publication on 12 CDs of
Fischer-Dieskau's giant DG Schubert opus: the regular issues from the mighty
Schubert project on the Hyperion label, currently at about the halfway mark;
and the recognition on disc of such important younger artists as the
Austrian baritone Wolfgang Holzmair - these are just three tokens of the
renewed interest.
A fourth is the Lieder-recording career of Fassbaender, which in recent
times has developed remarkable impetus: four new Fassbaender Lieder CDs have
come out on three different labels in less than a year. The German mezzo
merits the attention, as each of the four shows. Across the span of a career
now more than 30 years long, she has developed unique insight into the
Lieder repertory and a uniquely involving, emotionally uninhibited way of
manifesting it.
She is an opera performer of renown able to focus all her considerable
powers of musical dramatisation on Lieder; but whereas too many opera
singers, in transferring their attentions to the song-recital format, prove
unable to make precise, vigorous points and effects without spilling out of
the frame of each song, Fassbaender's sense of scale seems almost always
immaculate, native-born.
She has the command of story-telling, of beautiful word-utterance free of
cosmetic application, of inflecting phrases with 'personal' touches that set
listeners' scalps and spines tingling. All four new records - the two
Schuberts, the Liszt German songs, the Wolf - provide choice examples of
those gifts. In the DG Schwanengesang I instance the spontaneity of rhythmic
and verbal emphasis that refreshes the sentiments of 'Standchen'; in the two
Decca discs, the grading of narrative intensity so that Wolf's tale of
storks and shepherds in 'Storchenbotschaft', or Liszt's of the 'Drei
Zigeuner', gains exhilarating dramatic urgency.
Parallels abound with Lotte Lehmann, another great German bete du theatre,
who in the latter part of a long career achieved special distinction in
Lieder, another risk-taker with the voice. Fassbaender often puts pressure
on a worn-sounding upper register. Plunges into passionate chest-tones can
occasionally seem melodramatic. Calm, spun-out lyricism is not a feature of
her performance. A new record of Brahms songs by a younger leading mezzo,
Marjana Lipovsek, affords a revealing point of comparison - entirely lacking
as it is in individuality of the Fassbaender sort, full of warm, amply
sustained mezzo sound.
As one might expect, Fassbaender's pianists make the crucial difference to
the overall impression of each record. (That suggests an order of preference
 -but I'd not be without all four.) Her partnership with the composer
Aribert Reimann is the longest-lived, and it tells: in this Schwanengesang
the pianistic personality, angular and sometimes abrupt though it may be,
responds arrestingly to the vocal.
The young Frenchman Thibaudet, a notable virtuoso soloist, achieves marvels
of Lisztian and Wolfian textural limpidity and clarification, supporting the
voice sympathetically but not always distilling the poetic or dramatic
essence of the piano-writing. Garben, a record-producer of some experience
as a Lieder pianist, is a bit ham-fisted, a bit of a banger, though not so
much as to drain the excitements of Fassbaender's Goethe selection.
