FT  24 JUL 93 / Gardening: Sow the seed of next year's triumph
I HAVE just bought a pale yellow Day Lily, pot-grown and over-priced at
Pounds 3.95. It is growing in a peat compost which bounces like a tennis
ball when you drop it. It mops up water and it is not going to like the
great outdoors.
Why buy it, then, in the first place?
I blame impulse and emotion. It looked good at the time, paler than my own
Day Lilies which turn out to be the same variety, the excellent Hyperion. It
aroused my sympathy for the nurseryman (until he turned out to have bought
in the plants from Holland); it satisfied my sudden paranoia that I would
have nothing left in flower by August. Above all, named Day Lilies cannot be
grown from seed. If they could, I would follow the advice in this week's
column and set about sowing them myself.
Beginners and occasional gardeners should not be frightened. The next two
weeks are a critical season for good sowers. For the cost of a single Day
Lily, you can sow three or four types of border plant, grow them on and
reckon to move them to a permanent home next spring.
Choose your varieties carefully; you need a seed box for sowing and time for
brief supervisions during three weeks. Two or three more boxes will suffice
for the first transplanting when you space out the first show of seedlings.
Then, you need a patch of bare ground where the soil can be broken down to
receive the transplants in late September. A watering can with a fine rose
is essential, but the weather is wonderfully in your favour this fortnight.
Unless you choose awkward starters, you will be amazed by your own successes
next year.
Where should you begin? In late July, I have to suggest that you start with
my most-noticed border plant in these weeks after the first roses. It is
listed as Salvia sclarea Turkestanica, but county ladies used to know it as
Hothousemaids, because of the bodily smell from its leaves. Like all the
seeds which I mention, it is offered by Chiltern Seeds in Ulverston,
Cumbria, which offers a service by post to credit card holders (tel:
0229-581137).
After a sowing in 1992, this Salvia has just peaked at 3ft or 4ft, but its
mauve and off-white flowers continue to look pretty in its dying months: I
even have a white one. Nurserymen seldom sell it and if they do, they ask up
to Pounds 3 for one plant. It is best grown as a biennial and is magnificent
in dry climates.
In this wet weather, seed can be sown into shallow drills, made by pressing
the back of a garden rake into lightly-broken soil to a depth of about a
quarter of an inch. Cover the seed and press the ground lightly with the
rake: within a fortnight, this Salvia will be showing above ground. If the
weather turns dry, water it daily. If you expect a dry August, sow it in a
box and keep it damp.
Next spring, you can transplant the fast-growing seedlings into borders and
reckon that they will flower in July. This year, I moved some big plants
which were in bud in late May, but they all defied the books and
transplanted wonderfully. The trick seems to work if you water heavily for
two days before moving it.
This salvia has an admirable cousin, the sky-blue Haematodes, which looks
exquisite at Sissinghurst in early July. Chiltern Seeds sell it too and, in
this case, the housemaid has cooled down. Like its cousin, it is almost
full-proof so you can try it and find out if you are a fool.
At the same time, try sowing the lovely Apricot Foxgloves, sold by Suttons
or Thompson and Morgan, and now in major garden centres. Foxgloves are
child's play from seed, and very good for morale. They, too, can be moved
around just before they show buds: the apricot forms do not always stay true
to their original colour after their first season.
All these plants allow the scattered informality which distinguishes a true
garden from a garden made by numbers and designed neatly in blocks on paper.
As the white roses fade, two of my other white protections against formality
have been at their best.
Both have flowers on long stems for which nurseries will charge you up to
Pounds 2.50 per plant. The taller is the white Verbascum Chaixii Album which
looks admirable for a fortnight in flower and then fades so badly that even
a lazy owner would dead-head it. Greater quality is the claim of the white
form of Campanula Persicifolia which grows extremely easily from seed and
has wonderful stems of open, cup-shaped flowers. I am also a devotee of its
near relations, the Balloon Flowers, or Platycodons. Gardeners seem to have
forgotten about these lovely plants.
For less than a single Day Lily, you already have the theme of a series of
summer flowerbeds. You do not yet have my favourite of the week. Gaura
lindheimeri is just starting to open, grown from seed and showing a mass of
pink-white flowers like a better sort of willow herb. It grows like cress
from seed and can either be sown now or under cover next February. It will
then flower in 1994, just when the garden needs some relaxed, informal
touches of off-white. Gaura is not always completely hardy in British
winters: it would be magnificent in warmer European gardens, but few seem to
know it: at Pounds 1 a packet for 50 or more seedlings, who cares if this
lovely touch of informality sometimes fails to make it to the following
summer?
