FT  21 JUN 93 / Survey of Nordic Banking and Finance (3): Return to growth
likely to be slow - How the banking sector is expected to recover its health
MANY DIFFERENT factors contributed to the slew of banking losses across the
Nordic region and prescriptions vary from country to country on the way to
get out of the mess. But at least one feature - a recovery from general
economic stagnation and recession - is regarded by all as a key condition
for a return to health in the banking sector.
Overall, the outlook is improving after three years in which the economies
of Finland and Sweden have shrunk and those of Denmark and Norway have done
little better than stand still. But the return to growth is likely to be
painfully slow, offering little more than a modest lift to the convalescent
financial institutions.
The brightest forecasts come from Copenhagen and Oslo. The Danish government
revised its estimates for GDP growth to 1 per cent this year and 3.1 per
cent in 1994 when it announced a package of tax reforms after the
electorate's approval of the European Community's Maastricht Treaty in a
second referendum last month. Latest OECD figures predict growth in Norway
this year of 1.3 per cent, rising to 3.8 per cent next year.
In Finland and Sweden, however, progress is set to be much slower. Finland,
where the economy contracted by almost 10 per cent over the course of 1991
and 1992, is expected to shrink by up to another 1 per cent this year before
limping back to marginal growth in 1994. For Sweden, the picture is not much
less depressing, given the country's long record as the industrial and
manufacturing powerhouse of the region. This year GDP is set to decline by
1.7 per cent for the third year in succession; next year, there should be a
return to growth, but only of between 1.5 and 2 per cent, according to most
predictions.
The most pressing political problem that the recession has produced for the
region's governments is unemployment, which has soared as high as 17 per
cent of the workforce in Finland. In Denmark it is around 12 per cent, as it
is in Sweden when those on government retraining schemes are counted in.
Even Norway, bolstered by its flow of oil revenues, has an official jobless
rate of 5.6 per cent, and a real rate several points higher when those on
retraining schemes are included. The acute rates of unemployment among young
people - which can be as high as 30 per cent - are particularly worrying.
The Social Democratic-led government in Denmark, with a current account
surplus and a low budget deficit, has opted for some expansionary policies
to 'break the curve of rising unemployment'. But the other countries have
less room to manoeuvre.
Norway, again with the relative luxury of oil revenues, has adopted an
expansive fiscal policy since 1989 to try to control unemployment. But the
minority Labour government in Oslo is under pressure from the Bank of Norway
to tighten spending as the non-oil budget deficit has approached 9 per cent
of GDP. The deficit in Finland is of similar proportions, while in Sweden it
is even higher, at 13 per cent of GDP.
The conservative-led coalition in Stockholm has announced a tough series of
spending cuts to strengthen the budget by SKr81bn over five years, but that
will bring the budget deficit only down to 4 per cent of GDP by 1998. From
the banks' perspective, however, there has been a very significant
improvement in conditions in recent months in the form of falling interest
rates, the effects of which should continue to be felt by them through this
year and into 1994.
The Nordic countries were all embroiled in the currency turbulence that
swept western Europe last autumn. Denmark, a core member of the Exchange
Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System, successfully defended the
Danish kroner's parity. Norway, Sweden and Finland, all aligned with the ERM
in anticipation of eventual EC membership, tried to do the same, but were
eventually forced by sheer weight of speculative movements to float their
currencies.
As a result, interest rates, which had been held at extraordinary heights in
the heat of the battle against devaluation, have tumbled in Sweden, Finland
and Norway. The key marginal rate in Sweden has dropped from 12.5 per cent
at the time of the flotation in November, to 8.75 per cent in early June. In
Denmark, too, interest rates have fallen back closer to German rates since
the May referendum following the removal of uncertainty over the country's
commitment to the EC.
With inflation well below 5 per cent in all four countries, the fall in
interest rates has significantly eased conditions for the banks in their
battle to contain loan losses and to build new, secure lending business.
For the longer term, the governments of Finland, Norway and Sweden have
applied to join the EC and aim to do so in 1995. The strategy is broadly
welcomed by the financial and business communities in the region. But
opinion polls show strong public opposition, especially in Norway. With
referendums due on the issue in each country over the next 18 months, any
sign that membership may be rejected will inject an unwelcome element of
uncertainty into their economies, just as they should be consolidating a
gradual recovery.
