FT  17 AUG 93 / Last post for the big books: The mail order business needs
to adapt and innovate to survive in a competitive climate
The decision by Great Universal Stores last month to end six decades of
family control by enfranchising its non-voting shares could open a new
chapter for the company. It could do the same for the UK business it still
dominates: mail order.
The move by the mail order, retailing and financial services group aroused
speculation in the City that it might shed its conservative image and use
its Pounds 1.3bn cash reserves to become the adventurous and acquisitive
company it was in the 1950s and 1960s. Some observers hoped it would invest
in technology and lead the UK mail order business in adopting systems for
communicating with customers via cable television, and eventually
interactive video transmissions.
Change may be needed because the outlook for traditional mail order in
Europe and the US is uncertain. The arrival of new technology and growing
competition from sophisticated high-street retailers are forcing mail order
operators to look at innovative ways of selling, and improve their service
to customers to hold on to market share.
A report last week by Verdict, the retail research group, says growth in the
UK mail order market outpaced the rest of the retail sector last year. But
in each of the six previous years, mail order's share of the retail market
had shrunk.
Only weeks before GUS's announcement, Sears Roebuck of the US finally closed
its catalogue division, ending an American tradition and raising questions
about the future of the industry in the US.
For much of the 20th century Sears's Big Book was a symbol of 'middle
America'. But though the catalogue still circulated to 14m households last
year, sales of Dollars 3.3bn (Pounds 2.2bn) were not enough to avoid a
Dollars 175m division loss. The Big Book could no longer hold its own
against younger, more carefully-targeted competitors in a market approaching
saturation, and being invaded by cable TV operators.
The Sears general merchandise catalogue had become a mainstay for isolated
farming communities in the midwestern US and, it was said, the most popular
home literature in America next to the Bible. But during the 1980s the Big
Book faced a growing number of rivals, as higher transport costs and road
congestion boosted home shopping. Delivery systems were improved, and niche
marketing developed. US sales from home shopping rose by 48.8 per cent in
1987-90, to Dollars 31.6bn.
The fortunes of mail order in the UK followed a similar path, after it
originated in the late 19th century in so-called 'turn' or credit clubs,
whose members paid a shilling a week and were able to buy Pounds 1 worth of
goods every 20 weeks.
After the first world war, clubs developed networks of agents, with an
average of 20 or more customers each. They found a ready market,
particularly among poorer socio-economic classes in northern England, who
were prepared to accept relatively slow delivery times in exchange for low
prices and - long before they were offered by the rest of the retail sector
 -credit facilities.
But, as in the US, the glossy catalogues no longer hold the allure they once
did. Traditional advantages - availability of credit, convenience, home
delivery and low prices - are constantly being eroded by developments in
high-street retailing. Between 1985 and 1991, home shopping's share of
retail sales fell from 3.54 per cent to 2.96 per cent, although it improved
again last year to 3.16 per cent.
In continental Europe, the picture is mixed. In France and Germany the mail
order business is well-established. The French market has grown steadily to
reach FFr44.9bn (Pounds 5.1bn) in 1992, according to Euromonitor, the UK
market research group. Germany has by far the strongest mail order market in
Europe, growing to DM47.3bn (Pounds 18.4bn) last year.
But in Italy, a less developed market, mail order grew by about 30 per cent
between 1987 and 1992, to L1,845bn (Pounds 770m). Over the same period,
Spain's equivalent sales almost tripled from an underdeveloped base to reach
Pta80bn (Pounds 385.5m).
In developed markets, home shopping accounts for between 3 and 6 per cent of
all retail sales. Some experts regard the latter figure as the ceiling and
forecast declines in the next few years. 'The long-term trend is definitely
down,' says Richard Hyman, director of Verdict.
Others in the retailing industry think mail order can hold or increase
market share, but only by taking advantage of new technology. 'Big book'
operators are expected to move increasingly towards using television to sell
their products. The merger proposed last month between the two largest
teleshopping operators in the US, Home Shopping Network and QVC, to form a
Dollars 2.2bn network, shows the developing strength of the medium.
Catalogue shopping is unlikely to die out, but is expected to focus
increasingly on niche markets. 'The shape of mail order in the '90s will be
direct, targeted catalogues rather than the big books,' says Jim Martin,
chief executive of N Brown, the UK mail order operator. N Brown publishes 11
catalogues, aimed mainly at women over 50 and those requiring non-standard
sizes.
The company provides a lesson in the power and sophistication of targeted
catalogues. It has profitably expanded its market to include women in their
40s and younger, but many products in its two catalogues aimed at this age
group are no different from those in the books for the 50-plus market. The
catalogues are presented differently, excluding some products and
rephotographing others on younger models.
US mail order companies are leading the way in this development. Spiegel,
which became the second-largest US mail order company with the withdrawal of
Sears, publishes 30 different catalogues.
Catalogues are also starting to target upmarket customers. In the UK, the
Next directory, the mail order operation of the high-street fashion chain,
has introduced a younger generation, with different lifestyles and higher
incomes than their parents at the same age, to home shopping. Such
catalogues are aimed at time-conscious more than price-conscious consumers,
and foster a specific style or fashion image. Several focus on men, who have
previously been less inclined to buy mail order than women.
But even for companies which do not move to selling by television,
technology will be important in making ordering easier and improving
delivery times. The nature of home shopping means it can be automated to a
high degree.
At Home Shopping Network in the US, half of all incoming calls are handled
by Tootie, a voice response network. Orders and credit inquiries are handled
by a computer and all information transmitted to a database which sends out
birthday cards to customers, and reminders to reorder products they buy
regularly.
Richard Pugh, deputy chairman of GUS, refused to be drawn last month about
whether GUS would move towards teleshopping. But he did outline his vision
of automated warehouses, where goods arrive, are stored, picked and
dispatched to customers without being touched by human hand.
Meanwhile, the reshaping of the mail order market is likely to accelerate.
Mail order operators gain even more than most retailers from economies of
scale, and larger companies are expected to continue to swallow up smaller
ones. Two of the UK's best-known catalogue retailers, Grattan and Empire,
have been purchased by continental European operators - Germany's Otto
Versand and France's La Redoute - in the past two years. There are
suggestions in the City that if GUS decides to expand across Europe it may,
in turn, bid for La Redoute.
Less developed markets provide opportunities for growth. Mail order could be
particularly important in east Europe, where the retailing and distribution
infrastructure is poor, and it provides a relatively low-cost way of
entering the market.
The emergence of GUS from decades of close control by the Wolfson family may
prove timely. As new technology such as cable television and interactive
communications spreads, and agency systems are replaced by direct marketing,
the mail order business may change more in the next decade than it has in
the 61 years since Isaac Wolfson first took command.
