FT  10 JUN 93 / India to seek fresh IMF loan facility
INDIA plans to begin negotiations next month with the International Monetary
Fund on a new loan to help fill its need for Dollars 2bn to Dollars 3bn
(Pounds 1.3bn to Pounds 1.98bn) of quickly disbursed official lending, Mr
Manmohan Singh, finance minister, said yesterday.
Mr Singh said during a visit to London that the loan, under the IMF's
extended fund facility providing medium-term finance to support economic
reform, was not needed at present because of India's healthy balance of
payments and reserves position.
However, it would be required partly to repay the two-year IMF standby
credit which expired last month. Mr Singh would not say how much of the
total financing need was expected to come from the Fund and how much from
other official lenders such as the World Bank.
The IMF, he said, had been 'very understanding' about a slippage in the
budget deficit for the financial year which ends this month, which he put at
5.6 per cent of gross domestic product compared with the 5 per cent target.
The target for the next year is 4.7 per cent.
Communal violence had cut government revenue from export and import duties
in January and February by about Dollars 2bn, and the stock market scandal
had caused delays in selling off stakes in public sector enterprises.
Meanwhile, inflation was down to 6 per cent with an underlying trend less
than 5 per cent, the economy was set for annual growth of 5 per cent or
more, and exports were expected to rise by between 10 and 15 per cent.
Mr Singh hoped that within three to four years, a new social safety net
would be sufficiently well established to enable the government to close
public sector entities which had no future. Meanwhile, subsidies had been
stopped and this had spurred some industries such as coal which was now
self-financing.
Asked about fund managers' concerns about capital gains tax on stock market
investments made by institutions, Mr Singh said he intended in the long term
to cut them for foreign and domestic investors - who pay higher rates than
foreigners - but cautioned on allowing free investment flows until its
economic fundamentals were secure.
