FT  30 APR 93 / Pakistan seeks to refute terror label: A thankless task for
the authorities in Peshawar
MR Gulzar Khan, the home secretary of Pakistan's North West Frontier
Province, which lies on the mountainous border with Afghanistan, is in the
front-line of his country's efforts to refute international charges that
Pakistan has become a hotbed of terrorism.
His province is home to thousands of veterans of the fighting in
Afghanistan, many of the men possessing no skills except the ability to fire
a gun.
The dusty provincial capital of Peshawar is an arms bazaar, where a pistol
costs PRs1,000 (Pounds 24), a Kalashnikov PRs10,000 and a Stinger missile
can be bought for about PRs50,000.
Mr Khan has the thankless job of trying to keep tabs on this flow of men and
munitions.
When intelligence officers from the US and other countries call on his
office and demand information about suspected terrorists, Mr Khan answers
that he has little to give. 'If only they could give us some specific
information. But they don't. Sometimes they will not even say who they are
looking for. Perhaps they don't know themselves.'
Nevertheless, Mr Khan and other Pakistani officials are hoping that they
have done enough to convince the US of their anti-terrorist credentials.
Today the US is due to publish its annual report on terrorism. Washington
has warned that it might brand Pakistan a terrorist nation and add its name
to a list of pariah states comprising Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan
and Syria.
A poor country in need of foreign aid and investment, Pakistan could ill
afford such a punishment. Pakistani officials are busy trying to improve
their country's anti-terrorist credentials. This weekend Mr Balakh Sher
Mazari, the newly-appointed prime minister, told a conference of foreign
ministers from Islamic countries: 'Pakistan is committed to combating
international terrorism whenever and wherever it occurs.'
However, Pakistan has enormous difficulties putting Mr Mazari's words into
practice. The country is still struggling with the aftermath of the
decade-long war in which Afghanistan's communist government backed by Soviet
troops battled against guerrillas funded and supplied principally by the US.
Washington then ignored the fact that arms were often diverted into the
wrong hands. So did Saudia Arabia and other Arab countries which, as well as
cash, send hundreds of young volunteers to join the war.
But following the Soviet withdrawal, the US abruptly changed tack. Suddenly
Pakistan was no longer a favoured ally in the global struggle against
communism, but an Islamic country with too many guns and armed men for its
own good, not to mention an active nuclear weapons programme. American
military aid was cut off, followed by a rapid reduction in economic aid.
Pakistani officials believe they have been treated unfairly. They argue that
they have been left to cope alone with the aftermath of the anti-communist
war and of the continuing fighting in Afghanistan between rival guerilla
groups. 'We have been left to clear up the flotsam and jetsam,' says Mr Gul
Haneef, a senior foreign ministry official.
US diplomats accept the war has imposed a huge burden on Pakistan. But they
argue Pakistan has done too little to prevent terrorists from exploiting the
general chaos and that some Pakistani organisations may also have aided and
abetted terrorism.
The US expressed particular concern about Arab militants who came to fight
in Afghanistan. Egypt and other conservative Arab states have accused
Pakistan of harbouring suspected terrorists from their countries. To show
good faith, Mr Khan in Peshawar has in the past month held about 160 Arabs
to check their documents. Pakistan will expel about 50 because their visas
have expired or are otherise invalid; others are being encouraged to leave.
But none has been identified as a terrorist suspect, says Mr Khan.
The most extensive charges levelled against Pakistan come from India, which
has much to gain from having the US label its arch-rival as a terrorist
state. India has alleged that Pakistan's Inter Services Intelligence agency
trains terrorists and supplies arms to insurgents in the troubled northern
Indian states of Kashmir and the Punjab. Some Indian politicians have also
accused Pakistan of having aided the terrorists who bombed Bombay last
month.
Pakistanis are mostly horrified at the possibility that these charges may
culminate in their country being labelled terrorist. They warn that such a
move could undermine pro-western opinion and and reinforce the cause of
Islamic militancy. As Mr Qaisar Butt, chief reporter on Peshawar's local
newspaper, says: 'If you want to call us terrorists, we'll start behaving
like terrorists.'
