FT  21 DEC 93 / Ulster peace hopes set back by amnesty demand: Sinn Fein
call for release of prisoners angers Unionists
Hopes of peace in Northern Ireland were jolted yesterday when Mr Gerry
Adams, the Sinn Fein president, called for all IRA prisoners to be released
from jail as part of a negotiated settlement.
His demand angered Protestant leaders. One Ulster Unionist MP immediately
warned that his party's 'tentative approval' of the Major-Reynolds peace
initiative could be withdrawn.
The row broke out after Downing Street again rejected an amnesty for IRA
prisoners. But officials acknowledged that all prisoners could have their
sentences reviewed under standard procedures which took account of their
likeliness to re-offend.
The dispute came as the IRA claimed responsibility for a bomb explosion
which injured a soldier and a civilian in west Belfast last night. It was
the first claim of responsibility since the Major-Reynolds declaration. The
IRA appears to be signalling there will be no extended Christmas ceasefire
before any decision to end violence. The attack followed the explosion of
two incendiary devices in London during the evening which police said bore
the hallmarks of the IRA.
However, Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, earlier said the fact
that the paramilitaries were considering the implications of the peace
process was 'very encouraging'. Speaking in Brussels, where EU foreign
ministers yesterday endorsed the Downing Street Declaration, Mr Spring
reiterated Dublin's view that 'the whole question of prisoners' would have
to be looked at if a permanent cessation of violence was achieved.
Seeking to exploit a suggestion by Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime
minister, on Sunday that London might be ready to consider the future of
hundreds of IRA prisoners, Mr Adams said a negotiated settlement would
'remove the symptoms as well as the causes of the conflict.
'As part of this it is obvious that all prisoners must be released,' he
said.
In a strongly worded statement, the Sinn Fein president also criticised Mr
Reynolds' weekend warning that the IRA faced a tough security clampdown if
it did not respond positively to the peace initiative.
'The issuing of ultimatums by London and Dublin while we are considering
their document is most unhelpful,' he said.
Mr Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist security spokesman, said he was 'not at
all impressed' by Mr Adams' statement and warned the two governments not to
'hand hostages to fortune' to the IRA.
He said: 'We thought the joint declaration . . . was a definitive statement
 -with all its shortcomings we accepted it on that basis. If we are going to
go beyond the joint declaration . . . then of course there will be a very
quick withdrawal of that tentative approval that has been given by the
majority of people in Northern Ireland.'
The government's response was welcomed by Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster
Unionist party leader, who said on BBC radio there could be no question of
an amnesty for convicted criminals. If the government reneged on that 'they
would be destroying the whole authority of the judicial system'.
The incendiary devices in central London were at a pub in Victoria, which
forced the evacuation of hundreds of passengers from the Victoria coach
station, and at the Royal Mail's Mount Pleasant sorting office, just north
of the City. Nobody was injured. A third device, found at a City sorting
office, was made safe.
