FT  16 DEC 93 / Call to scrap more EU steel aid: Firm political declaration
ending subsidies will be sought
European Union industry ministers will be asked to renounce further
government subsidies for their state-owned steelmakers at tomorrow's crucial
meeting on restructuring of the EU steel industry.
A firm political declaration putting an end to state aid will be the
condition for other member states to approve subsidy plans submitted by the
east German, Spanish, Italian and Portuguese governments.
'(It will say) that if this package doesn't work then there will be no
second helping for the companies concerned,' one British official said.
National and Commission officials believe such a declaration will not pose
problems, although it would not necessarily be legally binding. The main
difficulty will be forging unanimous agreement on the detail of
controversial restructuring plans, particularly for Ekostahl, the east
German producer, and Ilva, the Italian steelmaker.
Commission officials are concerned that if a deal is not struck tomorrow,
private steelmakers will not make the necessary production cuts to allow an
overall restructuring of the west European steel industry to take place. It
is now more than a year since the steel industry called for EU measures to
relieve overcapacity, a slump in demand and competition from cheap non-EU
imports.
The British, French and west German steel industries this week stepped up
the pressure on their governments to resist an unsatisfactory compromise on
state subsidies. Under the plans tabled for tomorrow's meeting, approval of
Ecu6.8bn (Pounds 5.18bn) of subsidies to publicly-owned steelmakers would be
offset by an overall reduction in capacity of 5.5m tonnes.
Mr Heinz Kriwet, chief executive of Thyssen, Germany's largest steel group,
said yesterday the German government would be paying 'an extremely high
price' if it agreed huge subsidies for other manufacturers, in order to win
approval for the Ekostahl plan.
Writing in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper, he warned that
Germany could not afford a private steel industry when 'politicians in the
German federal states, in Bonn and Brussels do not want it or are not able
to introduce fair competition'.
The British steel industry is particularly unhappy about the Ekostahl
restructuring, because it could involve both operating subsidies and
subsidies for new capacity. Britain is likely to insist in Friday's meeting
that guarantees are written into any accord strictly limiting the capacity
increase.
British industry sources have also criticised last Friday's deal between the
Commission and the Italian government on the privatisation of Ilva, which
they say is worse than earlier plans submitted by the Commission. But UK
officials said yesterday that the Ilva plan was 'on the right lines'.
