FT  09 FEB 93 / Leading Article: Classroom peace
SCHOOLS IN England and Wales are caught in a whirlwind. They have never
known a period of more rapid change. The cry is going up: 'enough, no more',
with teachers focusing their resentment on the first compulsory tests for
14-year-olds, to be sat this June.
Two of the teachers' unions are proposing to boycott the tests, arguing that
preparation has been inadequate and disruption will be too great. This is
deplorable. The only casualties of a boycott will be pupils. But the
government should listen to the well-founded concerns of teachers. It could
make the pace of change more manageable without sacrificing the laudable
object of its curriculum reforms: higher standards, particularly in basic
skills.
Three separate gusts are howling through the classroom. Curriculum reform,
accompanied by compulsory tests at seven, 11 and 14, is just the first.
Second is the government's campaign to persuade schools to opt out of local
authority control. Third is the new inspection regime, which will make all
schools subject to regular external monitoring.
Although the first is generating most noise at the moment, it cannot be seen
in isolation. Schools are also having to come to grips with devolved
budgeting; and many have either opted for grant-maintained status, or are
locked in internal debate about whether to do so. They will soon face visits
from the new inspectorate.
Curriculum reform comes on top of that. To take just secondary-level
English, the main cause of the present unrest, teachers have had to get the
national curriculum off the ground in the last three years; this year they
also have to cope both with the precipitate abolition of most GCSE
coursework and with the compulsory tests for 14-year-olds, materials for
which have only just reached them.
Overload alone should counsel restraint. One of the chief concerns among
English teachers is that publication of this year's test results will say
more about the relative success of schools in digesting mountains of
last-minute paper from the government's examinations council than anything
else.
It is important not to strengthen the more Luddite teachers' unions, who
want to undermine the current testing policy. But for education secretary
John Patten's reforms to succeed, he needs the wholehearted co-operation of
his workforce. Conceded with good grace, a year's delay in publishing the
English test results implies no weakening of his commitment to testing. If
it will secure teacher goodwill, it is a small price to pay for peace in the
classroom.
