FT  14 AUG 93 / FBI asks GM for all files in VW spying row
THE US Justice Department has stepped up its investigation of the industrial
espionage conflict between General Motors and Volkswagen with a demand to
see all GM documents relating to the case, officials representing the US
group said yesterday.
Federal Bureau of Investigation officers have sent a three-page list of
requests for documents, including all GM affidavits, files and telephone
records.
The move will come as a further blow to VW, which has been under the shadow
of possible legal action against its production director, Mr Jose Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, since German investigators started a similar formal
probe in May.
That investigation appears to be moving rapidly forward. Public prosecutors
in Darmstadt interrogated Mr Daniel Goeudevert, a former VW board director,
on Thursday. Although removed from the board early last month, he was likely
to have been well informed on Mr Lopez's abrupt switch from GM in mid-March.
His interrogation suggests that Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, and other
executives, may be called shortly.
Mr Lopez and three colleagues also under suspicion of espionage, theft and
fraud are most likely to be questioned last, lawyers say.
The US move suggests the FBI, which started examining the case in July, is
launching a full-scale inquiry. Employees of VW and GM could be called for
questioning in Washington.
The basis of the Justice Department probe is not known, but there have been
reports from the US that it wants to examine the VW/Opel issue as a possible
test case in a clampdown on international industrial espionage.
Lawyers familiar with US intellectual property law say the FBI's demands,
and evidence and allegations to emerge from a similar German investigation,
suggest suspected wire or mail fraud as the most likely line of inquiry.
A catch-all section of the US criminal code forbids the use of postal and
telecommunications networks - inside and outside the US - for illegal
purposes including 'violations of obligations of loyal and fruitful service'
to an employer.
Penalties include imprisonment and heavy fines, generally calculated as
multiples of the estimated damage to the aggrieved party or benefit to the
perpetrators. The fines can apply to companies as well as individuals.
VW yesterday called in a firm of accountants, KPMG Deutsche Treuhand, to
carry out an independent investigation of allegations that its recruits from
GM may have brought secret documents from their former employer.
