FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (7): Beautiful waters that have turned to
blood - Tourism and tension in the Vale of Kashmir
UNTIL recently, the legendary beauty of Kashmir in northern India attracted
tourists by the plane-load, writes SHIRAZ SIDHVA.
In 1989, Indian Airlines ran 13 flights a day into the state. Now there is
one flight a day.
It brings only a few tourists, mostly back-packers of the kind who used to
come by bus from Jammu, or trekkers heading for the Himalayan kingdom of
Ladakh.
Most of the tourists are aware of the conflict in Kashmir, where the Moslem
population has long chafed against Indian rule.
But they cannot resist the famed attractions of the area including the
gracious houseboats that can be rented for next to nothing on the placid
lakes near Srinagar.
'We wanted to see for ourselves whether Kashmir is the lost paradise the
newspapers say it is,' says Carlo, an Italian architect, during the flight
to Kashmir. 'I decided that if we didn't visit Kashmir now, we may never get
there. Is it really as bad as they say?'
If you are not put off by sporadic shooting, explosions, curfews, and the
presence of thousands of Kalashnikov-toting soldiers and militia-men, then
Kashmir is still a lovely destination for a holiday.
On all sides there is the awesome grandeur of the Himalayas. The people are
as friendly as ever, and room prices have remained steady for three years.
But as soon as you land, you know you are in a war zone, where there are
daily clashes fought armed separatists and units of the estimated quarter of
a million armed forces.
Four years of death and decay are symbolised by what has happened at the Dal
Lake.
Once a haven for tourists all the year round, its quiet waters are now
choked with weeds. In a phenomenon still unexplained by scientists, the
colour of the lake changed two years ago from a muddy green to red.
'The lake mirrors the rivers of blood that are flowing in the Valley,' says
Ahmed Jaan, a wizened old man who for 50 years has sailed his shikara on
these waters.
Today, his life is as desolate as the houseboats with their vacant
signboards.
The intricately carved facades of these floating homes bear quaint names,
like Queen of Sheba, Paris Beauty and Cherry Ripe.
But their timbers are rotting, and the rooms, with their chandeliers and
exquisite carpets, are musty from neglect.
At Mr Butt's Clairmont houseboat on the Nagin lake, the visitor's book tells
of good times that may never return. Beatle George Harrison has been here;
so have hundreds of other celebrities from around the world.
The crowds that thronged the Dal Lake boulevard have been replaced by
soldiers with sten guns, the golf course is overgrown and abandoned, and the
grand imperial Residence that became the Oberoi Hotel now houses officers of
the paramilitary forces.
Groups of women squat on the pavement outside the interrogation centre
waiting sometimes for hours to see their sons, brothers or fathers who have
been picked up, sometimes, without reason, for questioning. There have been
over 150 deaths in custody this year.
Stung by international complaints about human rights abuse earlier this
year, the government is trying to make its security forces more accountable.
But this is not easy. Most of the soldiers who are fighting a well armed
guerrilla enemy were trained for a conventional conflict rather than to face
10 year-old boys who lob hand-grenades before running into their mothers'
arms.
The Kashmiris have been alienated from the security forces after humiliating
and sometimes brutal house searches.
The troops have for decades been instilled with hatred of the enemy (read
Pakistan). For them, every Kashmiri in the Valley is anti-national, and
therefore, Pakistani.
Women and children have been killed or wounded in crossfire between Kashmiri
militants and the armed forces.
The citizenry of Srinagar retreat indoors long before nightfall, hoping that
the next day will dawn without a search operation.
Only stray dogs keep the soldiers company on their long night vigil.
There is no solution in sight.
'The Indian government has pushed us to the wall, and now, at the point of a
gun, they want us to swear loyalty to the nation,' says a well-to-do
Srinagar trader.
'I never thought that there would come a stage when I would support the
movement that some people have been advocating for over 40 years.
'But with the daily dose of humiliation and harassment from the Indian
forces, I cannot see how we can turn back on this road we have taken.'
