FT  16 AUG 93 / VW opts to keep silent in espionage dispute with GM
VOLKSWAGEN has withdrawn from the war of words over industrial espionage
with car market rival Adam Opel, owned by General Motors, amid fresh media
charges contradicting VW's claims that no Opel data ever came into its
possession.
The troubled German group, which last Friday commissioned auditors KPMG
Deutsche Treuhand to carry out an independent internal investigation, said
it wanted to return to its main job: making and selling cars.
'We have done everything possible. We have carried out our own investigation
and now set up an independent examination,' said Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs,
VW's executive director of public relations. 'We are no longer prepared to
discuss the matter and every new charge in public.'
VW's decision to remain silent coincided with detailed claims in Der
Spiegel, the weekly magazine, that 11 Volkswagen trainees had worked for
several days at the end of March typing Opel data into computers in a VW
property once used to house 'guest workers' from Italy.
The magazine also printed alleged excerpts from an affidavit by Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW production director, and focus of theft,
espionage and fraud investigations.
'Neither before my leaving, in connection with my leaving GM, nor afterwards
did I give secret GM/Opel information or data to Volkswagen,' the extracts
said. 'In particular I neither inserted nor asked for any secret data to be
inserted in VW computers . . .'
The reported contents of the affidavit suggested a further shift from his
earlier position that he and his colleagues - three of whom are also under
investigation - took no secrets from GM and Opel, the US group's German
subsidiary, when they left in March.
All VW's recent public relations efforts have been focused on dispelling the
suspicion - potentially more damaging to the group than the loss of its
production director or his helpers - that it has been involved in spying.
On August 6, the VW supervisory board said an internal investigation had
found nothing to warrant charges of industrial espionage.
That statement was accompanied by an admission that 'possibly' secret
documents had been destroyed in Wolfsburg at Mr Lopez's suggestion along
with personal effects from his former Opel office, and a declaration of
'unaltered trust' in him. Mr Wachs could not comment on reports that Mr
Klaus Liesen, chairman of the company's supervisory board, was to work
full-time with the executive management to help it through the current
crisis.
But he confirmed that non-executive supervisors were working closely with
management.
VW workers put their trust in Lopez, Page 2
Warriors in a war of words, Page 28
