FT  18 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Union restrictions extended by new
law - Latest employment reform legislation continues themes of previous Tory
measures
the government's eighth major piece of labour market legislation - which has
just completed its passage through parliament, is the child of a political
rather than a business agenda.
But it does continue the main themes of previous legislation - labour market
deregulation and restrictions on the behaviour of trade unions.
The most controversial piece of de-regulation is the abolition of wages
councils, which set minimum pay levels in certain sectors. The original
argument for abolition was that wages would fall and jobs would be created,
but cover for those under 21 was abolished in 1986 and neither occurred. The
argument thus switched to removing an institution which had little effect.
The bill, which will get royal assent in July and be implemented over the
following few weeks, departs from earlier legislation in two respects.
First, it contains highly detailed regulation of the daily running of
unions, which remain voluntary organisations.
Although previous legislation has required unions to change their behaviour
 -in relation to strike ballots for example - the new law includes a
requirement to notify the Certification Officer of the pay of top officials.
The justification for such interference in the financial field was provided
by the Lightman inquiry into the National Union of Mineworkers, while
further rulings on how to conduct elections arose from ballot-rigging in the
1990 TGWU executive elections.
The second main departure is found in the reversal of the long-standing
assumption that collective bargaining is to be encouraged. The requirement
of Acas, the conciliation service, to promote collective bargaining has been
dropped, and a late amendment has made it possible for employers to offer
inducements to employees to accept individual contracts.
The white paper, on which the law is based, hinted at the government's
interest in a broader framework of individual rights at work to supersede
collective bargaining. This is supported by groups such as the Institute of
Directors and Citizens Advice Bureaux. But apart from integrating EC law, it
is unlikely that any major legislation will emerge in this area for some
time.
