FT  19 OCT 93 / Arts: 'Zampa' woos Wexford - Opera
Under its intrepid artistic director Elaine Padmore, the Wexford Festival
Opera has had yet another unlikely success, in the form of Zampa, ou La
Fiancee de marbre. Again Miss Padmore has assembled just the right team for
a work that few companies would risk now; and getting it so well together,
for the third consecutive 'first night' of the Festival, was a triumph in
itself.
Normally, the composer Ferdinand Herold (1791-1833) is mentioned on this
page only when Clement Crisp reviews his ballet La Fille mal gardee. But he
wrote more than 20 operas too, mostly for the Paris Opera-Comique; not long
after the famous Fille came Zampa, and then - just before his early death
from tuberculosis - Le Pre aux clercs. Those two kept his name alive for
many decades; but no more.
Zampa is a sort of 'operetta semi-seria'. Wresting the lovely Camille
brutally from her poor fiance Alphonse, the fierce corsair Zampa forces her
to marry himself; but he is haunted by a statue of Alice, a girl he ruined
years before, and before he can deflower Camille - there is a lot of
intervening byplay - the statue drags him down to hell. Alphonse is pleased
(but less pleased to learn that Zampa was his elder brother). Meanwhile, a
similar triangle between Camille's maid, her new swain and Zampa's first
mate is played out as comedy.
Whereas the darker strand in this mock-Sicilian story was once thought too
sombre for the Opera-Comique, the modern worry would be that the farcical
sub-plot is too routine to buoy up the melodrama. The producer Tim Hopkins'
solution is to guy everything, without mercy. Passionate embraces teeter
off-balance. The piratical menace is ludicrously OTT, and for Zampa's
wedding his crew doll up in gold lame tops and leopardskin skirts.
The comics do their stuff with such dogged earnestness that it turns into a
higher-order joke; the chorus's routined reactions-and-gestures are drawn
out to the point where they become weird and mad. It is all a bit
end-of-term, and in a larger house with a less convivial audience it might
not work, but at Wexford it is cheerfully infectious. Hugely assisted by the
young conductor Yves Abel, fresh from promoting the cause of French opera in
New York: for verve and style (not over-conscious), he cannot be faulted.
The Festival Chorus and the National Symphony play up with a will, and the
dusty period charm of Herold's score - which really offers nothing much
more, expert though it is - brightens into momentary life. As Camille the
American Mary Mills is delicious, with her bell-bright soprano. Her
compatriots John Daniecki (Zampa) and Bradley Williams (Alphonse) wield
nicely contrasted high tenors Jutta Winkler is a fine, lugubrious mezzo, and
her excellent would-be and ex-husbands are Antoine Normand and the chunky
Valentin Jar. A very good time is had by all.
