FT  18 NOV 93 / UN seeks to end convoy attacks
THE United Nations will today seek firm guarantees from the three warring
factions in Bosnia that its humanitarian convoys will be given safe passage
over the coming winter to save the lives of hundreds of thousands of people
in desperate need of food and shelter.
Ms Sylvana Foa, spokeswoman of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
described the meeting in Geneva today between the High Commissioner, Mrs
Sadako Ogata, and Bosnian political and military leaders as 'a last-ditch
effort' to ensure aid would get through.
The lives of as many as 3m people who were beneficiaries of UNHCR aid were
at risk as the bitter Bosnian winter has begun to bite with snowfalls and
temperatures well below freezing point.
'Very soon it's going to be 18 degrees centigrade below zero,' Ms Sylvana
told diplomatic correspondents in London yesterday. 'The average adult in
the enclaves has already lost 12 kilos. We are talking about people in a
very bad state indeed.'
They needed not only food, but building materials to provide adequate
shelter where many houses and apartments had been destroyed. One of the
biggest needs was for plastic sheeting, nails and plywood to give the
minimum protection against the elements, as well as coal for heating.
The aid crisis has been compounded by the continuing attacks by the warring
factions against UN relief workers and soldiers, in one of which a Danish
driver was killed last month. That incident led to the suspension of UN aid
supplies for the past three weeks by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general.
The UNHCR requires firm guarantees that all such attacks cease before
resuming its relief convoys.
A Yugoslav war crimes tribunal was yesterday officially inaugurated, to
attempt to prosecute perpetrators of murder, rape and enforced expulsions in
Europe's bloodiest conflict since the second world war, writes Ron Van de
Krol in The Hague.
The 11 judges of the international tribunal were sworn in at the
International Court of Justice for an initial period of four years.
Doubts have already been raised about the effectiveness of the UN-sponsored
tribunal because it will not try suspects in absentia. A further problem is
that UN troops have no power to make arrests.
