FT  22 OCT 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Poised to take
the 'tidal wave' / Low returns on cash helped propel world stock markets to
record highs. Now come signs of a sharp increase in foreign investment by US
fund managers
IT WAS another good quarter for well-placed fund managers, especially those
who went underweight in the three big markets of Wall Street, Tokyo and
London. For sterling investors in those markets the total return was,
respectively, 2.4, 3.9 and 6 per cent. The big action was elsewhere.
All but one (Canada) of the 24 national constituents of the FT Actuaries
World index ended the third quarter in positive territory, with continental
Europe doing particularly well. France reversed the negative outcome of the
second quarter, producing a total return of more than 10 per cent, as did
the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The German market,
also negative in the April-June period, produced a gain of more than 17 per
cent.
These strong performances gave Europe, excluding the UK, a return of 11.5
per cent  - roughly in line with the Nordic countries, where Finland showed
an impressive 18.7 per cent return.
Elsewhere there were big advances in: New Zealand (20.5), Malaysia (28.4)
and Singapore (19.7). The overall world index, with its heavy weightings in
the US, Japan and Britain (more than half of the global 2,166 share
constituents), produced a modest total return of 4.8 per cent.
Japan, having powered ahead in the second quarter, returned just under 4 per
cent in the third, but on September 1 the Nikkei average had closed above
the 21,000 mark for the first time since early June. (But, for perspective,
it is as well to recall that the Nikkei stood at 38,915.87 on the last
trading day of 1989, a continuing burden for many fund managers.)
One seven-day trading period, at the end of August, produced record
headlines, with the Dow Jones industrial average, the London Footsie index
and the Paris CAC-40 hitting all-time closing highs. In Hong Kong, the Hang
Seng reached its record high on September 30, a rise of more than 40 per
cent on the year since January, and evidence that, for the moment at least,
political factors and the 1997 Chinese takeover of the colony are not
unnerving investors.
Much of the explanation for these records, and for the general advance
across most markets, lies in the weight-of-money argument. Lower interest
rates in the main economies meant lower returns on cash, and prompted savers
to switch into equities. Lower rates, at least in theory, should act as a
stimulus to economic growth, and stock markets are supposed to be adept at
anticipating better times ahead. Hence, the established investment adage to
buy on the rumour and sell on the fact.
Certainly, the news of economic recovery is patchy. Things are looking up in
Britain, while the US has been throwing up mixed signals, though generally
positive ones. Continental Europe is still looking rather bleak,
particularly in Germany and France, while the new Japanese government's
pump-priming of the economy (and an official discount rate cut to a mere
1.75 per cent in late September) is not expected to show any real results
until next year. The Tokyo stock market greeted both moves with little more
than a yawn.
Immediately more positive for the markets are signs of a sharp increase in
foreign investment by US fund managers  - a 'minor tidal wave', according to
the Connecticut consultancy, InterSec Research Corporation. American funds
have traditionally been very conservative about investing outside North
America, but many US analysts see a change in this strategy.
Yet bullish markets can often cloud reality, which is why the small punter
is usually investing when the big boys have taken profits.
Fundamentally, it is improving corporate profitability that underpins share
prices, and without rising profits there can be few increased dividends to
justify higher equity prices. The company reporting period has so far not
been encouraging in most markets.
