FT  03 DEC 93 / Council taxes may rise 7% after cuts in spending
The government announced one of the toughest crackdowns ever on
local-authority spending in England yesterday.
Under new plans to fund local authorities unveiled by Mr John Gummer,
environment secretary, many council tax bills will increase by at least 7
per cent next year.
However, the Institute of Fiscal Studies said Mr Gummer's assumptions about
local authority spending were too modest and council tax bills might rise by
as much as 15 per cent.
'Councils are already spending more this year than the government wants them
to spend next year,' the institute said.
The proposals, announced in the government's annual finance settlement for
local authorities, will radically reduce Whitehall's grant to England's 403
local councils as a proportion of their overall spending.
The shortfall will have to be raised by increases in council tax that may be
four times the present level of inflation. It might further undermine the
Conservatives' performance in next year's local-council elections.
Ministers said councils would be able to increase their overall spending
programmes next year to ensure that local services, including education and
housing provision, stay at current levels.
But local-authority chairmen and Labour politicians said the measures would
undermine local services and were a result of the spending cuts imposed on
the Department of the Environment in this week's Budget.
Councils that spend more than the amount projected for them by central
government will be limited to an increase in total spending of at most 1.75
per cent.
That 'capping' measure, designed to limit council tax bills, will cut even
more tightly the more councils exceed their projections. Seven authorities
are certain to have to make cuts, with 26 certain of a freeze.
Several groups of public-sector workers, including teachers and the police,
are paid out of local-authority budgets, so any increase in their pay would
require cuts in other services.
Mr Gummer said he was expecting local authorities to spend a total of Pounds
42.66bn in 1994-95, an increase of 2.3 per cent on the current year.
However, local-authority associations said that amounted to a 1.2 per cent
cash cut, as councils are spending more than their government assessments.
The total central government grant to local councils will be Pounds 34.32bn,
an increase of 1.7 per cent on current spending.
Mr Gummer expected that the council tax for band C, one of the most widely
applicable charge bands, would be Pounds 468 a year, a Pounds 30 increase on
its current level.
Biggest grant loser, Page 7
