FT  17 DEC 93 / Opel presses case against VW 'poaching': Frankfurt court to
hear GM unit's claim of unfair competition
A German court will next month hear an action by the General Motors
subsidiary, Adam Opel, which claims that seven senior staff who left to join
Volkswagen should be suspended from work.
Opel is expected to produce evidence and statements to back its claim that
VW's hiring of the seven constituted unfair competition. The seven are close
associates of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, a former GM director, and
joined him within days of his move to VW last March.
Allegations of theft and industrial espionage against Mr Lopez and three of
these followers are under investigation by the German criminal authorities.
The US justice department is running a similar probe.
A Frankfurt civil court yesterday turned down on technical grounds an appeal
against an earlier rejection of Opel's request for a temporary injunction
barring the seven from working at VW for a year.
The court ruled that Opel should have laid its suit against VW itself, and
not Mr Lopez and Mr Ferdinand Piech, the group chairman.
Mr Horst Borghs, an Opel director, said he was confident of 'a different
result' at the full hearing, in which the complaint was directed at VW.
The US-owned company took up the suit after winning an injunction barring VW
from attempting to poach further staff. Statements supporting this case,
which includes allegations that Mr Lopez offered to double the salaries of
Opel managers if they switched to VW, are expected to be offered as evidence
at the January hearing. VW officials appeared concerned at the prospects of
a long legal process, consuming senior management's time which would be
better spent at work.
This was why the company had been prepared to settle out of court, a
spokesman said. VW had initially been prepared to suspend four of the seven
for nine months, but withdrew its agreement after Opel demanded further
concessions. Despite yesterday's apparent setback, Opel seems determined to
maintain the pressure on VW and Mr Lopez and keep the case in the public eye
until the results of the criminal investigation are known.
The civil court hearing, scheduled for January 5, could offer an opportunity
for Opel's lawyers to question Mr Lopez in public for the first time.
