FT  31 MAR 93 / Survey of Guernsey (23): Post Office put Guernsey on the map
 -Stamps and coins
NOT many businesses find their products automatically snapped up by the
public and then posted on to friends and acquaintances. Yet with stamps this
is the very nature of the game - and one which Guernsey plays very well.
The Guernsey Post Office is a small administration with rather more than
61,000 potential letter-posters in its Bailiwick fold. But it has
established an international reputation as one of the stamp world's most
progressive contributors.
Until 1969, the postal affairs of the Bailiwick of Guernsey, Alderney, Sark
and Herm were administered by its British counterpart. Then rationalisation
of the system offered the opportunity of postal independence.
On October 1 that year, the Guernsey Post Office took responsibility for all
postal services; everything from painting the pillar boxes to producing the
stamps. And the newly-elected Post Office Board took the opportunity to put
the island on the map, as far as stamp collectors were concerned.
'Success was instant,' says Mr Paul Veron, Director of Post. 'Queues around
the block at the main St Peter Port post office that first day indicated the
degree of local interest and it wasn't long before the world at large wanted
to collect Guernsey stamps.'
Philatelic sales from October 1 until the end of the first full year of
trading totalled Pounds 348,000; equivalent to nearly Pounds 3m today.
'The short time-span since 1969 makes Guernsey very attractive from a
collector's point of view, since it offers the chance to acquire the
complete collection quite easily and serious collectors do love
completeness,' says Mr Veron.
Last year the Philatelic Bureau alone achieved sales of more than Pounds 1m,
he says. 'Add to that the business done through agents and the figure
approaches Pounds 2m.'
Dealers also have confidence in local stamp issues. Mr Ian Wood, managing
director of the Channel Island Stamp Company, a mail-order business which is
one of Britain's top 10 philatelic companies, says: 'There have been some
complaints that Guernsey makes too many issues but compared with some other
Commonwealth administrations the Post Office is very restrained. Quality is
always high and they always sell.'
The island receives a double benefit from operating its own postal
administration. Profits from the philatelic operation, which totalled Pounds
450,000 last year, are given to the island's exchequer while the compact
size of the administration means that the postal operation only offers a
first-class, same-day delivery priced at 16p. The equivalent rate to the UK
is 23p.
The Guernsey Post Office employs 228 staff and revenue from the postal side
is estimated to reach Pounds 5.2m this year, with a surplus of nearly Pounds
100,000.
Guernsey also issues its own currency - and makes a profit on that, too.
States of Guernsey notes were first issued in 1817 as a way of paying for
coastal defence work, building a monument and repairing a parish church
without having to borrow.
Some Pounds 4,000 was issued, subject to redemption in three stages over the
following two years.
What was later to become known as the Guernsey Experiment was successful and
further issues were made, including a Pounds 5 note in 1826.
The value of the currency was not underwritten by the island's economy -
which at that time was poor following the Napoleonic wars - but by a special
tax approved by the Privy Council of a shilling a gallon on all spirits
imported into Guernsey.
In 1921 the currency was changed to sterling and it continued to be printed
locally, even while Guernsey was under German occupation from 1940 until
1945.
Today, Guernsey has about Pounds 15m worth of its own money in circulation
alongside sterling.
Mr Mike Brown, States Supervisor (chief of the island's civil service) and
until last year former States Treasurer, says that local currency, produced
by the Royal Mint to Guernsey designs, is kept to the same dimensions as the
UK's 'for practical reasons'. The most significant difference is the
island's insistence on retaining its own Pounds 1 note in preference to the
Pounds 1 coin.
'We did issue about Pounds 250,000 worth of coins but you do not see them
now. We will continue printing pound notes while people want them,' says Mr
Brown.
He says that issuing local currency is equivalent to receiving an
interest-free loan of the same amount. The net interest on it is about
Pounds 1m a year.
'That accrues to general revenue each year and saves us having to raise
additional tax. To raise the same amount would mean an additional 17p on a
packet of cigarettes,' he says.
