FT  07 AUG 93 / How to Spend It: Renaissance of a material age - Big
designers grab the headlines but sometimes the smaller workshops and
ateliers give greater pleasure. Those heading for Italy might like to know
that there are some little-known craftsmen and designers whose wares are
well worth tracking down
ACROSS THE Arno, at via Bartolini 4, the Marchese Alessandro Pucci, elder
brother of Laudomia Pucci (see story, left) by 1 1/2 years, is preserving
one of Florence's oldest crafts in almost surreal medieval mode.
He runs Antico Setifico Fiorentino, which employs 13 people, including Pucci
himself, to produce fine silk and linen cloths for interior decoration on
antique machines - the oldest of which were designed by Leonardo da Vinci.
Even the most modern are dated from 1860 to 1907.
It is not a question of nostalgia, insists Pucci, who is a former investment
banker. 'These machines can handle very fine raw materials and turn out the
finest of cloths in a time honoured way.'
The silk threads used for some fabrics are as fine as baby's hair and come
from Brazil or China, where the quality is better and the cost less than in
Italy. Dusty pinks, smoky blues and shades of jade in shot taffetas are used
in couture gowns and recall the iridescent pastels of Renaissance
masterpieces.
The most expensive fabric is Dollars 1,000 (Pounds 671) a metre - a delicate
floral print. Silk and linen mixed upholstery weight cloths are around
Dollars 50 a metre.
Emilio Pucci saved the building works in the 1950s - a hotel was to go up on
the spot - by putting together a syndicate of old Florentine families to buy
it. Pucci now has the majority shareholding and the workers themselves all
have a small stake.
Turnover, at some Dollars 1m a year, is 'less than that of a good ice cream
stand,' shrugs Pucci. But he has twice doubled sales in the last six years,
and is now making a small profit. If he can double up again, his profit will
leave ice cream vendors standing.
Antico Setifico Fiorentino's sublime little garden is heavily scented with
roses, lavender and hung with vines. There is even a banana tree. For those
who cannot call in, the fax number is 055-218 174. Pucci is happy to deal
with clients directly at factory prices rather than exclusively through
decorators.
A bachelor, he has inherited his late father's legendary charm: 'For a
minimum order of 30 metres, I will dye any fabric any shade - even match it
to the colour of your eyes,' he says.
