FT  03 SEP 93 / Cellnet cuts rates to hold off rivals
CELLNET, the mobile phone operator, will slash its tariffs in the London
area from next month in a bid to contain competition from Vodafone and
One-2-One, the new cellular network about to be launched by Mercury
Communications and US West.
Cellnet intends to cut the price of calls made in the London area by up to
39 per cent for cellular users who sign up for a new tariff package called
'Citytime'. This will offer cheaper calls in the M25 area in return for a
large premium on calls made outside the zone.
One-2-One's service will initially be available only within the M25 area.
Although Cellnet's 'Citytime' call tariff, even after the reductions, will
still be higher than One-2-One's (20p a minute against 16p a minute), the
far lower cost of handsets for the Cellnet system (about Pounds 100 against
Pounds 250-Pounds 300) will make it an attractive option.
Vodafone's 'MetroDigital' service, to be launched in most conurbations next
month, also offers a 20p a minute peak-rate tariff, but handsets will
initially cost about Pounds 400.
The connection charge for 'Citytime' will be Pounds 50 and the monthly
subscription Pounds 20, a reduction of Pounds 5 on the standard tariff.
Calls made by 'Citytime' users outside the M25 area will be charged at 50p a
minute.
Cellnet's standard 'Primetime' tariff will continue, mainly for non-London
users. But the London premium on 'Primetime' will be abolished, making a
national peak-rate tariff of 25p. Vodafone has already discarded the London
premium on its analogue business network.
Cellnet is also cutting tariffs on its low-usage 'Lifetime' service. Monthly
subscriptions will fall from Pounds 15 to Pounds 12.77 and the peak-rate
tariff from 50p a minute to 42.5p.
The new tariffs will give further impetus to an industry that is booming.
Last month Vodafone and Cellnet, a BT and Securicor joint venture, gained
four times as many new subscribers to their networks as in July of last
year, taking the number of UK cellular subscribers to more than 1.6m.
Analysts forecast that the number will rise to about 5m by the year 2000. By
then cellular phones will have made a significant impact on the largely
untapped consumer market.
Vodafone and One-2-One said they would study Cellnet's tariffs before
deciding whether to respond with further cuts.
Mr Stafford Taylor, Cellnet's managing director, said: 'Our research shows
that many London-based customers make the majority of their calls within the
M25 but that they regularly travel outside the area and do not want the
constraint of a purely regional service.'
