FT  20 FEB 93 / Labour's union ties win support
THE long-awaited interim report on the future of the Labour party's links
with the unions suggests they are 'a cause for celebration rather than
concern'. It argues strongly that Labour's relationship with the unions
'continues to be immensely valuable to the party'.
However, the document proposes an end to the union block vote at party
conference and the eventual introduction of one member one vote for the
selection of parliamentary candidates and election of the party leader.
But the 15-strong group of senior union officials and Labour MPs was unable
to agree on firm recommendations. Instead, their report - which is to be
presented to the party's national executive committee - sets out a series of
options.
A questionnaire will be sent to unions and constituency parties. They will
have until June 10 to respond. The NEC will then decide on precise proposals
and present them for approval at the party conference in the autumn. But Mr
John Smith, the party leader, is expected to comment on the union-party
links at next Wednesday's NEC meeting.
The only member of the review group to oppose the party's present links with
the unions was Mr Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary. The report is firm
in its proposal to end the union block vote at party conference and replace
it with a system under which the voting entitlement of each union is divided
up among its delegates and cast separately.
It also agrees on the gradual move to a 50-50 voting parity between the
unions and constituency parties in the annual conference, although it
suggests the introduction in the autumn of a 70-30 split between union-party
voting strengths should be retained for the time being.
The report suggests a possible 'trigger' for a cut in the union proportion
at conference with a 1 per cent drop for every 10,000 additional individual
members over the present 300,000.
The group argues strongly for maintaining union links with Labour. It argues
that the unions are 'a realistic and stabilising force in the party without
whom on many occasions in the past few decades the Labour party would have
torn itself apart'.
