FT  20 AUG 93 / Aids saps the vitality of Uganda's economy: The many family
tragedies making a national disaster
NAKABUBI'S village was in mourning last month. Nobody grieved for the death
of yet another Aids victim more than this 31-year-old widow. Her husband had
already died of Aids, and this latest victim was godfather to her youngest
son. He had promised to help with school fees. Now he is dead, Nakabubi must
struggle alone.
Most of the widows in villages across western Uganda have lost their
husbands to Aids. And in a country were women are regarded as chattels,
widows often lose more than just their husbands.
Another widow, Mabel, was evicted from the family home by her in-laws when
her husband died in 1990. They also sold her cows, 'to pay for my husband's
hospital bills'. When she clung to a small banana plot, her brother-in-law
stole the harvest. When she, too, fell sick, the same man took her four
children away. 'If I could only earn a little money,' she says, 'I could get
my children back. Give them love while I live.'
The southern districts of Masaka and Rakai, once known as the granary of
Uganda, bear the heaviest burden of the Aids epidemic outside Kampala, the
capital. Out of the 38,552 Aids cases reported in Uganda by the end of last
year, almost 8,500 were in these two districts.
Every family knows of a relative or a friend afflicted by the condition.
Production of the two main cash crops, coffee and bananas, is dwindling
because Aids is attacking adults in the prime of life. Often, the surviving
partner also has the virus and chooses to expend his or her dwindling
energies producing food crops for the family's subsistence.
Health workers in Masaka say the disease is killing what was a thriving
market town. 'With fewer farmers coming to market, the town merchants are
going out of business or cutting their losses by moving to Kampala,' says Mr
Elias Mugisha, an Aids counsellor who works for TASO, a Ugandan
non-government organisation which cares for Aids and HIV sufferers.
The World Bank, which plans to finance a study on the impact of Aids on the
Ugandan economy, estimates Aids-related deaths will reduce Uganda's
population growth rate from 3.7 to 3.1 per cent from 1995 to the turn of the
century. The crude death rate, which at 20 per 1,000 is already twice the
average among low-income countries, is likely to rise to 26 per 1,000 during
this period.
The deaths are sapping the strength of Uganda's predominantly rural economy.
'Agriculture is suffering,' says Mr Keith Muhakanizi, an economist at the
Finance Ministry. 'As yet, I don't have macro-economic data to sustain this
assertion, but a trip to any village will bear this out. Cash crops are
being abandoned in favour of essential food crops as labour loses
productivity.'
Exports of coffee, Uganda's main cash crop, have fallen from a recent peak
of 176,453 tonnes in 1989 to 123,883 tonnes last year. But low commodity
prices and bad weather have also contributed to the decline.
Beyond issues of output and productivity, Mr Muhakanizi says the cost of
caring for Aids patients is eating up people's savings, leaving less to
invest in economic development.
Government and non-government organisations report that families resent
spending their meagre resources on medication for patients they know will
die. Where charities try to provide bed sheets and other basic comforts for
Aids sufferers, they often find that relatives sell the donated goods to
recoup the cost of caring for the patient.
Aids is also putting an intolerable strain on the extended family network,
which is the only form of social insurance most Africans have. In Uganda,
where annual per capita income is a mere Dollars 167, one of the lowest in
sub-Saharan Africa, the responsibility for housing, feeding, clothing and
educating Aids orphans is often beyond the means of most rural households.
The problem is not confined to rural areas. 'One of our best-trained
economists died of Aids last month,' Mr Muhakanizi regrets. He says
companies are likewise losing skilled workers and can no longer afford to
provide medical care schemes. 'Even our surplus labour will not alleviate
the problem in the long run,' he says.
Mr Manuel Pinto, the director of Uganda's Aids Control Programme, has
resigned himself to the fact that the disease will continue to be the main
killer in Uganda for the foreseeable future. 'Aids takes a long time to
manifest itself, so we are a long way away from seeing the reversal of the
epidemic, or the fruits of our prevention efforts,' he says. The rate of HIV
infection varies from 5 per cent in some rural areas to 30 per cent in urban
areas, and according to government data it is still rising.
'Children are our window of hope,' Mr Pinto says. 'We are trying to educate
those between the ages of five and 15 so that they are kept free from Aids.'
The problem is compounded by the practice of polygamy and the low status of
women in Ugandan society. But slowly, Mr Pinto believes, the government is
getting its educational message across. Agencies such as TASO report that
polygamy in the countryside is on the wane, and that more people are using
condoms.
