FT  01 SEP 93 / Economists warm to a late arrival as early-warning indicator
THE Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), published yesterday by the Chartered
Institute of Purchasing and Supply, caused barely a ripple in financial
markets.
The index indicates that manufacturing output is continuing to expand,
although at a slower rate than in previous months.
The good news is that the index remains above 50 per cent, indicating
expansion in manufacturing for the seventh consecutive month. But the August
reading of 51.8 per cent was the lowest since February, possibly indicating
a slowdown in the pace of expansion.
While it is valuable as an early indicator - the PMI shows trends several
weeks before official data - it is only two years old. This means that the
institute has not been able to develop a system of seasonal adjustment and
this lowers the value of the index in the eyes of some economists.
The PMI survey is modelled on one of the most closely tracked economic
indicators in the US, the National Association of Purchasing Managers (NAPM)
index.
Economists believe the NAPM index, based on a survey of purchasing managers
who control the spending of hundreds of billions of dollars of corporate
cash each year, gives an early indication of the health of manufacturing.
The theory is that purchasing managers anticipate the needs of a growing
business and also cut spending when business slows. Their responses on
output, orders, purchases, delivery times, stocks and employment - which
make up the index - are a valuable early indicator of manufacturing output
trends.
The methodology of the survey, used in the US since 1931, has been pursued
by the UK institute since July 1991. It gathers the responses of 250
purchasing managers every month.
Mr Neil Williams, UK economist at County NatWest Investment Management,
said: 'We often refer to the PMI, but the major problem is that it does not
have much of a track record and is not seasonally adjusted. It is not as
accurate as the monthly Confederation of British Industry survey which has a
high correlation with manufacturing output.'
Nonetheless, the PMI is gaining fans. The survey results are watched by the
Treasury.
An article on business survey indicators in the latest Treasury bulletin
says the PMI is not forward-looking, but acts as an early-warning indicator.
The fit with month-on-month growth rates in manufacturing output is not
particularly close, it says, but 'this is perhaps not surprising given that
the PMI includes activity indicators other than output'.
However, the institute also constructs indices for individual components and
the Treasury concludes that the fit is somewhat better for the output
balance, 'though it lags actual output growth by a month or two over most of
the period'.
So far this year the index has proved fairly accurate in signalling robust
rises in manufacturing output. Given time, it may acquire the hallowed
status of the NAPM.
