FT  05 JUN 93 / Unlikely alliances bring aviation success: Paul Betts on the
success of Shorts under Catholic ownership in a Protestant bunker
IN THE industrial sprawl of east Belfast's docklands, the world's oldest
mass producer of aircraft faces a double test.
Short Brothers is trying to rejuvenate a business that was all but given up
for dead four years ago. Its new Roman Catholic ownership, operating out of
a traditional Protestant bunker, is striving to encourage harmony and
co-operation in a split community.
Since its privatisation in 1989 and its sale to the French-Canadian
Bombardier transport equipment group, Shorts, Northern Ireland's largest
employer outside the public sector, has become the largest private-sector
employer of Roman Catholics in Belfast.
Mr Roy McNulty, president of Shorts, says the proportion of Catholics
employed by the company has risen to about 13 per cent from only 5 per cent
a few years ago.
The unlikely alliance between Bombardier, which is relatively new to the
aerospace industry, and one of the most historic names of aviation, rooted
in Protestant Belfast, has produced one of the few recent success stories in
the aerospace industry.
'Four years ago we had no money, no modern equipment,' says Mr McNulty. 'We
were doomed.' Since privatisation, sales have doubled. From a loss of Pounds
46.9m in 1988, Shorts made Pounds 26.5m in 1991 and Pounds 28.5m in 1992. Mr
McNulty predicts a 'another good solid profit' this year.
As part of its recovery strategy, Shorts has worked to develop harmonious
working relations inside its plants in order to remove religious animosity
from the factory floor.
Encouraged by Bombardier, the company has invested in internal training, in
education programmes for Protestant and Roman Catholic schools throughout
Northern Ireland - including programmes on aerospace and other advanced
technologies for primary schools - and the endowment of a new university
chair of aeronautical engineering.
Mr McNulty says the company is spending 2 per cent to 3 per cent of its
annual Pounds 392m turnover on training.
While maintaining tight control on costs and overall strategy, the
French-Canadian conglomerate has traditionally left subsidiaries to manage
their own affairs.
'They don't buy companies to change them but let the management in place get
on with it,' says Mr McNulty. He says Bombardier has adopted a sympathetic
approach to the problems of manufacturing in Northern Ireland. 'They are as
confused as most people about the political situation here, but they also
have tensions in Quebec that are not so different.'
The fact that Bombardier was prepared to take over and maintain Shorts as a
corporate entity was one of the main reasons why the government agreed to
sell it to the French Canadians.
An alternative joint bid by the UK General Electric Company and Fokker, the
Dutch aircraft manufacturer, was rejected because of fears that Shorts might
be split.
'The crucial thing to remember,' said a UK aerospace industry analyst, 'is
that should anything happen to Shorts, it would have a huge economic and
political impact on Northern Ireland. Shorts has been a pillar of stability
for the Northern Ireland economy, and if the pillar started crumbling it
would have shattering repercussions.'
Although Shorts has not escaped the recession, its workforce has increased
by nearly 10 per cent during the past four years from 7,700 at the end of
1988 to around 8,300 today after reaching a peak of 8,982 last year. This
has been at a time when the UK aerospace industry as a whole has suffered a
25 per cent decline in employment.
'Privatisation was the essential catalyst for the transformation of Shorts,'
says Mr McNulty, admitting it was an expensive exercise, costing the
government about Pounds 800m to write off debts and recapitalise the company
before selling it for Pounds 30m.
'For a decade our government owners put nothing in the business,' Mr McNulty
says. 'Capital investment per employee was the lowest in the industry; we
were getting an average of Pounds 3m a year from the government, which had
to approve any investment over Pounds 100,000; our plants were still
operating with second world war machines and technology.'
Bombardier's strategy was 'to fix what we've got' rather than start afresh.
'We've been living in a continuous building site since privatisation,
upgrading and investing in new machinery,' says Mr Ken Brundle, head of
Shorts' aircraft division.
In the past, the company had to sub-contract much high-value-added machining
and other work outside Northern Ireland because of lack of adequate
equipment. Investment has enabled it to reverse that process.
'We used to have as many as 110 machinery sub-contractors all over the
world: we now have only 12 of which eight are in Northern Ireland employing
a total of about 4,000 people,' says Mr Brundle.
Improved motivation and work practices as well as new equipment have brought
a big boost to productivity.
In 1989 it took Shorts 40,000 man-hours to complete a wing set for the
Fokker 100 regional jet. Last year, according to Mr Brundle, it took just
under 17,000 man-hours to complete the same wing set.
Next week, Shorts is expected to try to capitalise on its new relations with
the French-Canadian company at the world's biggest air show in Paris and win
new business. In so doing, it hopes to continue restoring Northern Ireland's
reputation as a centre of aerospace manufacturing activity.
