FT  14 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Alexon expects to break-even and pass
dividend
ALEXON Group, the women's wear retailer, confirmed yesterday that because of
poor trading it only expected to break-even in the current financial year
and to pass its final dividend.
Alexon's shares, already battered by a profits warning six weeks' ago, fell
a further 9p to close at 68p, marking a new low since its demerger in July
1991 from Claremont Garments (Holdings), the Marks and Spencer supplier.
At its peak the stock touched 444p, but has dropped steadily because of
concern about the effects of the recession and management mistakes on stock.
The group said yesterday, in a statement that had been expected, that
trading up to Christmas had been 'disappointing.' In particular, sales of
its Dash brand leisure wear were 'well below the levels of last year.'
The directors warned that 'on the basis of current overall trading,' pre-tax
profit before exceptional items for the financial year ending this month
'will be around the break-even level.' This compares to pre-tax profits of
Pounds 11.3m in 1991-92 when a final dividend of 7.6p was paid.
In the first half of this year Alexon posted a 46 per cent fall in pre-tax
profits to Pounds 2.08m on reduced turnover of Pounds 48.7m.
Yesterday the company said total exceptional costs for the year, including
reorganisation costs, were likely to be about Pounds 1m.
Steps have been taken to cut costs and streamline the organisational
structure, including a 20 per cent reduction in head office personnel. These
steps should result in ongoing savings of at least Pounds 1m a year.
Analysts had awaited the Alexon statement with concern that further stock
write-downs might be necessary. However the group emphasised yesterday that
despite the poor sales performance in the second half, stock levels of
autumn/winter ranges were similar to last year and no material writedown of
this stock was expected.
As highlighted at the interim stage, the sales shortfall in in the first
half resulted in higher than normal spring stock levels, which will
contribute to somewhat higher year-end levels.
There has also been criticism that Alexon has been slow to change its
classic women's wear formula. However the company said yesterday that its
relaunched Eastex range for older women had performed well, with sales ahead
of last year, and that post Christmas sales of all brands had been 'slightly
more encouraging.'
It added that over the past 12 months extensive trials and market research
had been undertaken in preparation for the relaunch of the Dash Brand this
year.
In the wake of yesterday's statement analysts expressed the hope that all
the bad news was out of the way. However, some concerns remain about
trading, the balance sheet and the quality of management.
