FT  06 JAN 93 / Management: Women take stock of Wall Street - Female
executives have made great strides within the New York financial community
but they are still not reaching the top
When Muriel Siebert became the first woman member of the New York Stock
Exchange 25 years ago, a NYSE governor greeted her with the question: 'How
many more are there behind you?'
At the time it was an understandable, if somewhat hostile, query. In 1967
women were rare on Wall Street and most men wanted it kept that way.
Two-and-a-half decades later, there are far more women working on Wall
Street but they remain very much a minority, especially at the top executive
levels.
In this respect, women in the securities and investment banking business
face the same hurdles that women encounter in all the professions: they can
easily enter the workforce, but it remains a struggle to earn promotion to
upper-management levels. A 'glass ceiling' appears to exist that keeps women
from progressing further up the career ladder.
On Wall Street, the glass ceiling is particularly pronounced. While many
women occupy lower and mid-level executive positions in sales, research,
marketing and back office operations - and, to a lesser extent, in trading
and investment banking - their numbers dwindle dramatically higher up the
management hierarchy
Salomon Brothers, for example, has 159 managing directors, of which only
five are women. Of the nearly 400 senior officers listed at the back of
Morgan Stanley's 1991 annual report, about 8 per cent are women. At Kidder
Peabody, five of its 115 managing directors are women, at Merrill Lynch the
ratio is 29 out of 306, and Goldman Sachs has six women among its 165
partners.
At the very top of Wall Street - the chief executive level - women are
notable only by their complete absence. Except, of course, at the discount
broking house Muriel Siebert &amp; Co. Siebert remembers the hurdles she faced
in her earliest days when, as an industry analyst, she could not attend
crucial company briefings because they were held in men-only private clubs.
She also remembers looking for a job in 1958 and not receiving any offers
when she sent out her resume under the name of Muriel Siebert. But she
received plenty when the New York Securities Analysts Association sent out
the same resume under the name of M. Siebert.
While she says attitudes have changed considerably for the better during her
career, Siebert maintains: 'You have to dig in. l'm still a token in a
number of places and I know it.'
Ultimately, Siebert, an active member of professional women's groups,
believes real equality will be achieved when women who gain power use it on
behalf of other women.
Mina Baker Knoll, a tax partner at Deloitte &amp; Touche in Manhattan and
president of the Financial Women's Association of New York, takes a
different tack from Siebert.
Knoll believes the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that women get an
equal crack at promotion lies with managements and would like to see
companies expending as much energy on 'development and retention' of women
executives as they do on encouraging women at the entry level.
She says that nobody can make it to the top on their own. 'You need a
mentor, you need role models, and companies need to focus on developing
women in senior positions over the long term.'
Her point is echoed by Joan Zimmerman of New York recruiting firm GZ
Stephens: 'There is no doubt that many firms, especially the bulge bracket
firms (large integrated investment banking and broking houses) are
concentrating hard on bringing in minorities and women at the entry level.
What they need to deal with, however, is the promotability of these people.'
The traditional arguments against promoting women were that they were too
easily distracted by family commitments, or were ill-suited to the
aggressive, deal-making world of high finance.
Although such arguments are rarely heard today - at least not publicly  -
some women who have prospered on Wall Street accept that it is especially
difficult for a woman to run a firm. The head of fixed-income research at a
big securities house says: 'The sacrifices involved in running a firm are so
enormous. Women are certainly capable enough to do it - but are they willing
to put their life on hold? I don't think they are.'
Women have been entering Wall Street in large numbers only in the last 10-20
years. Given that senior executives at most firms are in their late 40s and
50s, there are still not enough women nearing the managerial summit to be
promoted to the top.
Many women, however, see this as just an excuse. To them, the explanation
for their lack of progress is that the Wall Street executives who make the
decisions about promotion are men. Having spent their entire career in a
business created by, shaped by, and dominated by men, these executives are
simply not comfortable with the idea of working alongside, or for, women.
There are signs, however, that this attitude is changing. A growing number
of Wall Street firms run programmes aimed especially at helping women (and
minorities) to advance within their organisations. Knoll says: 'Companies
are talking a lot more about women's issues and lifestyle issues, and are
looking for ways to respond.'
Firms, however, are generally shy about publicising the existence of
policies aimed at helping women, fearful perhaps that the publicity will
draw attention to the lack of equality at senior management levels. Merrill
Lynch is one of the few that admits it sets targets for its managers to
reach in terms of how many women and minorities work in their departments.
There is no doubt that in some areas, such as the research departments of
broking houses, women have a better chance of advancement. A few, such as
Elaine Garzarelli of Shearson Lehman and Abby Joseph Cohen of Goldman Sachs,
have gone on to become high-profile market strategists.
Women have advanced further in public finance, where the clients - states,
municipalities, public pension funds - have increasingly demanded greater
representation of women and minorities from their investment banking
advisers. 'When you represent state and local governments you're subject to
more quotas and requirements,' says one municipal bond market veteran.
Trading, however, remains a difficult nut to crack, (too 'rough and tumble'
says one woman analyst, sarcastically), as does corporate finance,
especially mergers and acquisitions.
'It is true that some senior managers think women are poor negotiators,'
admits an experienced female investment banker.
But some insiders still cannot recognise that women remain under-represented
among Wall Street's elite. When the investment bank First Boston appointed a
large number of new managing directors recently, a respected Wall Street
weekly magazine noted that there were 'many women' among the promotions. How
many exactly? Of the 41 new appointments, six are women.
