FT  13 AUG 93 / UBS leaps ahead by 89% in first half
UNION Bank of Switzerland, one of the world's strongest commercial banks,
has reported an 89 per cent jump in first-half net income to SFr1.29bn
(Pounds 575.4m).
UBS said the result demonstrated its 'exceptional earning power', as buoyant
securities and volatile foreign exchange markets combined with favourable
interest rate trends.
It also expected a good second-half result, although it would be 'hazardous'
to predict that it would match the first.
The interim profit enabled UBS comfortably to surpass its mid-1990s target
of achieving a 10 per cent return on equity. With a return of about 13 per
cent, it is one of the world's most profitable big banking groups as well as
the soundest.
Its tier one capital ratio of nearly 8 per cent at the end of last year was
significantly higher than that of other large commercial banks.
The profit surge was powered by income from trading, which soared 144 per
cent to SFr1.55bn. Net interest income gained only 10.9 per cent to SFr1.9bn
and commission income was up 18.7 per cent, also to SFr1.9bn.
The contribution of foreign outlets, active only in wholesale banking and
trading, jumped to 40 per cent of total net income from just over 20 per
cent.
The group said its European region, dominated by offices in London, produced
60 per cent of the foreign contribution, with 20 per cent coming from both
North America and Asia.
Thanks to its top credit rating, UBS has become one of the main players in
the world's futures and options markets. Its volume of derivative products
amounted to SFr2,076bn at the end of June, 25 per cent higher than in
December. The average risk on this volume was equivalent to about 30 per
cent of the group's balance sheet risks.
The group's total assets stood at SFr290.7bn, only 9 per cent above the
year-end figure.
Customer loans grew only 3 per cent to SFr155.6bn, and most of the growth
came from outside recessive Switzerland.
Provisions for bad loans were raised by a third to SFr1.07bn. But UBS's
reference to 'our conservative policy' and to 'generous' provisions
signalled that it was, as usual, stuffing away as much as possible.
Observer, Page 13
