FT  02 JUN 93 / Yeltsin attacked on constitution
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin's two most implacable opponents yesterday attacked
his plans to push through a new constitution, with Vice-President Alexander
Rutskoi calling him a liar intent on destroying the country with western
support.
Addressing a meeting of local councils, Vice-President Rutskoi called for
parliament to remove the government within a couple of months and for
individual ministers to be tried for committing 'an economic crime against
the people'.
'The president allows himself to lie. Consequently the government allows
itself to lie,' he said in the latest of a series of increasingly bitter
attacks on his former ally.
He also suggested that western support for Mr Yeltsin as a 'great democrat'
was part of a plot which had begun with western support for Soviet President
Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika. 'Where did that end? The annihilation of a
great state which was reckoned with by the whole world.'
Last month, Mr Rutskoi claimed that corrupt officials were going to
misappropriate western aid for Russian reforms.
Meanwhile, Mr Sergei Filatov, the president's chief of staff, hinted that
the unruly vice-president might soon be evicted from his office in the
Kremlin.
Yesterday's meeting was convened by Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary
speaker, to co-ordinate resistance to Mr Yeltsin's Constitutional
Convention, which opens on Saturday with the aim of bypassing parliament to
produce a final draft constitution.
Mr Khasbulatov said he would take action to 'cure' the members of the
parliament's ruling praesidium who tried to remove him from office on
Monday. The rebels included Mr Alexei Pochinok, chairman of the budget
committee, who claimed that 'the whole country is moving towards capitalism
and one man - Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov - is trying to brake this process'.
But with local council representatives hedging their bets now that Mr
Yeltsin has the upper hand in Russian political life, they concluded their
meeting with just a warning that the Constitutional Convention could take no
binding decisions.
They also expressed their opposition to Mr Yeltsin's offer of specially
tailored deals for individual republics within the Russian Federation.
