FT  14 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Accountants argue for wider access to
global business - An accord is being sought as part of a broader services
deal under Uruguay Round
OFFICIALS representing more than a million accountants in 80 countries were
in Geneva last week to persuade trade negotiators to make it easier for
accountants to practise abroad.
Big accountancy firms such as Arthur Andersen or Coopers &amp; Lybrand operate
on a worldwide basis, earn gross fees of billions of dollars a year and
employ tens of thousands of staff. Yet they still face significant barriers
in overseas operations.
The officials representing the profession argue that an accord, which would
form part of a broader services agreement in the Uruguay Round of trade
liberalising talks, is needed to enable accountancy to catch up with the
globalisation of business.
Barriers to foreign accountants include bans on the use of foreign
professional titles and on forming partnerships with local firms,
limitations on the number of partners in a firm, 'scope of practice'
limitations, difficulty in obtaining 'audit firm' status, bans on the use of
international firm names and other marketing restrictions, and the refusal
to grant foreign accountants local professional certification.
National differences in accounting standards and practices also impair free
movement of capital and make the job of accountants - and national
regulators supervising multinational companies - more difficult and costly.
A draft framework General Agreement on Trade in Services (Gats) encourages
the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and the adoption of
harmonised standards for all types of services. But the accountancy
organisations, which include the Federation des Experts Comptables
Europeens, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the
International Accounting Standards Committee and the International
Federation of Accountants, want to give the general rules more bite by
committing governments to apply them in the accountancy field.
They are pressing for an agreement on accountancy which would aim to promote
the mutual recognition and harmonisation of professional qualifications
across borders, stimulate development and use of international accounting
standards, and require governments to begin opening their accountancy
sectors to foreign competition.
'We believe the services agreement can go beyond its present limited
objectives to achieve a real breakthrough in our profession - one that will
have widespread benefits well beyond accountancy,' says Mr John Hegarty,
secretary general of the Brussels-based FEE, the umbrella body for European
accountants.
The FEE and others argue that widespread use of international accounting
standards would make it easier for regulators and accountants to follow
complicated financial statements and transactions by international
businesses.
Their draft accord would commit all countries to include accounting and
related services in their liberalisation schedules for services, and to
remove restrictions that insist on citizenship or continuous prior
residence, limit a firm's name, or require certified professionals to study
at specified institutions.
The proposed agreement would also lay down specific procedures for granting
non-nationals certification to practise, based on mutual recognition of
professional qualifications and competence supplemented by tailored
examinations to plug the gaps. This is the system already adopted by the EC
for free movement of accountants within the single market.
Last, the draft accord would commit governments to review formally and
consider the adoption of international accounting standards as the basis of
their financial disclosure and reporting requirements, though it would leave
the final decision to national authorities.
'We recognise that international accounting standards are not yet at a stage
where wholesale adoption by governments is feasible,' says Mr David Cairns,
secretary general of the London-based IASC. 'But the services agreement
could stimulate greater international co-operation . . . by recognising the
role of the IASC and encouraging regulators to work with us.'
Its proponents argue that a sectoral agreement would speed worldwide
liberalisation of the accountancy profession without the need for
time-consuming bilateral negotiations, and would offer a model for other
professions and services.
It seems clear, however, that they will have to settle for something less
than the formal annex to the framework Gats at first proposed. At the
meeting in Geneva on May 5, trade negotiators from 18 nations (including the
EC and US) showed themselves sympathetic to the basic ideas but were
generally doubtful on the virtues of an annex.
Officials said countries did not want to set in concrete specific
commitments to liberalise accountancy, which is just one of more than 100
commercial services identified by the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade.
Instead, they favoured a more flexible solution, perhaps by way of a
ministerial declaration alongside the Uruguay Round package of accords.
Mr Charles Heeter, a principal with Arthur Andersen and chairman of the
AICPA's taskforce on international trade agreements, says the accountancy
organisations are prepared to be flexible on procedures but want a mechanism
for more rapid liberalisation than the Gats alone would provide.
