FT  10 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Backbench Tories distinctly
underwhelmed
and the near absence of the usual Order Paper waving - as Mr John Major
finished his speech was as telling as any snap appraisals or television
soundbite from Tory MPs afterwards.
Mr Norman Lamont's resignation speech was deeply damaging to Mr Major, even
in the eyes of loyalist MPs. The prime minister had failed to respond by
renewing a sense of purpose into backbench troops; questions about his
leadership were only confirmed.
Labour MPs's yelps of 'more, more,' added to the sense of disappointment.
'We have got to think about it, we can't make a considered view,' said a
usually loyal member of the government, asked about Mr Major's speech. 'He
hasn't shored up his position certainly.' One Euro-sceptic Tory said: 'Let's
say it wasn't a blockbuster.'
As Mr Major spoke, as many Tory MPs were sucking fingers in contemplation as
indulging in more traditional attempts to goad the Labour party. No one
expected the prime minister to make a great speech, it is not his strength,
but there was a sense among Conservatives that he could have done better.
To some Tories, however, the fall-out from Mr Lamont's address was less
damaging than might have been expected. The prevailing view was that the
party had to rally around the government, rather than create yet more
divisions - and there were many public expressions of loyalty and support.
The former Chancellor's intervention was not on the same scale as the
resignation speech of Sir Geoffrey (now Lord) Howe, almost all Tory MPs
agreed.
'Lamont is not popular out there. Geoffrey was respected,' said one junior
minister. 'Norman Lamont wanted to wound rather than to kill - though I
suppose to want to wound the government these days is bad enough,' said one
moderate Tory MP.
A more careful assesment will proceed tonight's meeting of the executive of
the Conservative's 1922 backbench committee, the infamous 'men in grey
suits' that tell prime ministers - frequently bluntly - what the infantry at
Westminster are thinking.
Usually ruled by conventions of absolute secrecy, details of the message
that will be sent to Mr Major was unclear last night but at least a few of
the 18 executive members were deeply worried at the Tory party's plummeting
morale. 'We are prepared to give him time, but not indefinitely,' said one.
'Morale is definitely low and there is a great deal of anxiety about but
that hasn't manifested itself in a feeling that the government is about to
collapse, a general election is brewing or even that the prime minister
should go,' said another.
But the 1922 executive is also split - with many privately furious at what
they regard as disloyal and injudicious remarks made by colleagues to
newspapers. There is disagreement too over tax rises. Right-wing executive
members want none, the centre right members want any public spending cuts
balanced by tax increases.
Sir Terence Higgins, Conservative MP for Worthing and 1922 executive member,
said that the government needed to do more to protect those on incomes just
above benefit levels. He blamed much of the government's policy on the
media.
'The constant tendency of the press to take as hard news what is either
speculation or a leaked document saying such and such is being considered
when no decisions have been reached has given a wholly misleading impression
of what is going on,' Sir Terence said.
