FT  30 JUN 93 / French Privatisation: Sell-off generates FFr360bn in shares
 -The question is whether market can absorb them
OVER the next few weeks the bureaucrats at the Economy Ministry in Bercy, to
the east of Paris, will put the finishing touches to legislation that will
enable the French government to launch one of the most ambitious
privatisation programmes seen in Europe.
The arrival of as many as 21 new companies will in the long term be
beneficial to the Paris stock market which, like other continental European
markets, has long suffered from a shortage of equity. But in the short term
the critical question for the Bercy bureaucrats is whether the French market
can absorb up to FFr360bn (Pounds 43bn) of new shares.
At first glance the market's condition is scarcely encouraging. It was
virtually static in 1992 and the CAC 40 Index has risen by a meagre 6.4 per
cent to 1,977 since the beginning of the year. The French economy is
technically in recession.
Almost all the market's growth has come in the few weeks since Mr Edmond
Alphandery, economy minister, unveiled his privatisation plans. The Paris
market is traditionally strongest in the final quarter of the year, which
means it should start its seasonal rally with the first new issues in
September.
French companies should by then be benefiting from the recent falls in
interest rates. James Capel expects the average net income of the CAC 40
companies to fall by 6 per cent in 1993 but to rise by 20 per cent in 1994.
It also expects the CAC 40 Index to reach a record 2,150 by the end of this
year.
However, the scale of the proposed sales means the government will have to
attract new money to the French market. The state's dominance of pensions
and savings means that France, unlike the UK, does not have a battalion of
domestic institutions to support privatisations. The success of the issues
rests on the government's ability to attract investment from foreign
institutions and French individuals, as it did in the last privatisation
drive in the mid-1980s.
This time it might be more difficult to mobilise foreign investment. The
French issues are part of a Dollars 100bn privatisation programme across
Europe and face stiff competition from share sales in Spain, Italy and the
UK. Moreover international investors already have substantial holdings in
France, which accounts for 23 per cent of the value of continental European
equities but represents 26 per cent of a typical continental portfolio,
according to Warburg Securities. They might be reluctant to increase them at
a time when the franc is so strong.
'Foreign investors will certainly be interested in French privatisations,'
said Mr David Harrington, French market analyst at James Capel in Paris.
'But it remains to be seen whether they will bring additional funds into
France, or simply switch money from existing French holdings.'
This suggests that the government will have to make special efforts to
attract individual investors. Fewer than 11 per cent of the French own
shares. The number of individual investors doubled during privatisations in
the 1980s, but the 1987 stock market crash curbed the Gallic appetite for
equities.
A quarter of French individual investors only own shares in one company and
more than half of all portfolios are worth less than FFr50,000. The number
of individual investors has fallen from 5.5m to 4.5m in the past 18 months.
A recent opinion poll suggested that the French are still ambivalent about
equities, with 78 per cent saying they had no interest in subscribing to the
forthcoming privatisations.
However, recent reductions in French interest rates should make equities
more appealing, encouraging savers to switch cash out of their
once-lucrative SICAV money market funds. Investors have already transfered
part of the FFr1,300bn placed in SICAVs to bonds. Analysts expect them soon
to turn from bonds to shares.
The government is doing its best to accelerate this trend. Mr Alphandery's
team has devised a series of tax breaks and incentives to persuade savers to
move money out of SICAVs into the FFr40bn Balladur bond launched last week
as a precursor to buying privatisation shares. Another round of incentives
will accompany the privatisation programme.
'There is so much money tied up in SICAVs that only a tiny proportion needs
to be withdrawn for the privatisations to succeed,' said Mr Joe Hall, head
of European equities at Warburg Securities. 'There is absolutely no reason
why it should not be able to absorb the new issues  - providing the price is
right.'
