FT  09 MAR 93 / Government loses Maastricht vote: Major humiliated by
22-vote defeat - Opposition amendment delays ratification
THE GOVERNMENT last night suffered a humiliating 22-vote defeat in its bid
to speed up the Maastricht ratification process, just two days after the
prime minister had appealed to Conservative rebels to fall into line.
The vote by 314 to 292 in favour of an opposition amendment - the
government's first defeat for three years - means the Maastricht bill must
now go to the report stage, a procedure which could add as much as a month
or more to the ratification process.
While the defeat centres on a minor amendment on the European Committee of
the Regions that will not prevent UK ratification of the treaty, it
represents a serious rebuff for Mr John Major and senior cabinet ministers
in their efforts to strong-arm and cajole the rebels back into the loyalist
fold.
Some 26 Tories defied party whips and voted with the opposition while 22 did
not vote - a much larger rebellion than had been expected. The outcome
provoked a roar of delight and victory salutes from Labour MPs who greeted
the result as a critical blow to the authority of the government.
Party officials claimed it would give the opposition a further opportunity
later this spring to press home its demand for British inclusion in the
treaty's social chapter, although this will depend on the ruling of the
deputy speaker.
Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, tried to put a brave face on the
outcome, commenting: 'A treaty delayed is better than a treaty lost.' He
said that the prime minister remained determined to have the treaty ratified
by the end of the parliamentary session, adding: 'It does not change the
treaty or our policy to ratify the treaty.'
Nonetheless, it represents a serious setback for the government after a day
in which business managers were locked in talks on tactics in Downing Street
before launching a last-minute charm offensive in the Commons.
Talks with Liberal Democrats came to nothing, though efforts by whips to
persuade seven Scottish and Welsh nationalists to back the government were
successful following a series of political trade-offs.
Only minutes before the vote, Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, the European minister,
attempted to buy time by asking the deputy speaker, Mr Michael Morris, if
further debate could be had on the Committee of the Regions. But his request
was given an abrupt refusal.
In practical terms, the impact of the amendment is to force the government
to choose only elected local government councillors as British delegates for
the European Committee of the Regions which is due to be formed as soon as
the treaty is ratified.
The government had argued that it wanted the freedom to select UK committee
members from outside the political field, thereby making businessmen or
other prominent local individuals eligible for appointment.
Downing Street made clear last night that those opposing the government's
view were 'voting for delay', while Sir Norman Fowler, the Tory chairman,
charged Mr John Smith and Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Labour and Liberal Democrat
leaders, of 'hypocrisy' after their publicly proclaimed calls for speedy
ratification of the Maastricht accord.
The passing of the amendment means that the bill must go to the report stage
for further debate - a procedure that could have been avoided if the bill
passed through its current committee stage unamended.
Opinion is divided as to how much extra time will now be added before the
bill completes its progress through parliament. Technically, the report
stage could be completed in a day or less and the ultimate decision on what
may be called for further discussion rests with Mr Morris.
But seasoned observers believe anti-Maastricht MPs will be able to employ an
armoury of delaying devices, including points of order, that could mean the
delay is measured in weeks not days.
If that is the case, the government faces deepening humiliation in the eyes
of its European partners, continuing challenges to its authority and
mounting frustration among its own pro-Maastricht MPs.
Sir Teddy Taylor, a leading Tory Euro-sceptic, said backbenchers had wanted
to support the government, but intense pressure on them had hardened their
positions. 'There is a solution here - have a referendum and the rebellion
ends tomorrow,' he said.
PM ponders defeat, Page 10
Three men in a vote, Page 10
Joe Rogaly, Page 16
Spanish delay to EEA, Page 18
