FT  19 FEB 93 / SE Banken wins rescue pledge on 'substantial' losses warning
THE SWEDISH government yesterday promised state support to rescue
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, the country's leading commercial bank, after
it announced a SKr5.3bn (Pounds 489.4m) preliminary operating loss for 1992
and said it was facing two more years of heavy credit losses.
The bank warned that the value of its shares 'must be regarded as uncertain'
in the light of its prospects and the current depressed state of the Swedish
economy. Its shares fell SKr3 to SKr10.50.
The bank also warned of 'substantial' losses on loans for the next two
years. Doubtful loans tripled to SKr28.8bn, or 8 per cent of total
outstanding loans, from SKr9.6bn. The bank will not pay a dividend.
Soaring lending losses and erosion of its capital base have forced SE Banken
to seek state support. Its 1992 year-end 8.4 per cent capital adequacy ratio
was almost certain to fall below the 8 per cent legal minimum during 1993,
it stated.
The government pledged assistance 'if capital cannot be attracted to the
bank in any other way'.
Mr Bo Lundgren, taxation minister, said: 'The commitments of SE Banken will
be fulfilled on a timely basis. Thus the activities of the bank can continue
in the same way as today in relation to households, companies and other
creditors.'
SE Banken first revealed last December that it had approached the state
about possible financial support and last month it announced a sweeping
overhaul of its operations.
It is widely believed that the state will end up carrying a heavy portion of
SE Banken's bad debts while efforts are made to attract private capital. In
the last resort, the state could take over the bank as it did with
Nordbanken and Gota Bank.
Mr Bjorn Svedberg, SE Banken chief executive, said: 'I sincerely hope that
it will be possible to get government support in combination with new
private capital in forms which permit SE Banken to remain a privately owned
bank.'
The 1992 result is a sharp turnround from the previous year's SKr2.3bn
profit and follows a big jump in lending losses to SKr10.9bn from SKr4.8bn.
Slide to disaster, Page 20
