FT  06 SEP 93 / Arts: Brian McMaster's Edinburgh festival - Alastair
Macaulay reflects on the highs and lows of this summer's three-week event
This was the first Edinburgh festival that I 'did' from first to last - from
opening concert (August 15) to final performance (September 4) - and kept up
an average of 3 shows or more per day. It had an unusual stream of
accidents, starting with the mysterious fire at the Playhouse, which
continued right through to the last week, during which two sopranos and one
mezzo carried on despite announced throat complaints. It also had its no-nos
(the most lacklustre opening concert anyone can recall) and its lulus (the
theme of James MacMillan's music 'in focus').
Yet Edinburgh's remains a uniquely beloved festival, not least because of
Edinburgh itself. Some of the critics who complained loudest about
individually disappointing events in 1993 nonetheless spoke of their great
happiness in being here again. One reason for that was this year's glorious
weather, which made the architectural and natural beauties of the city stand
out with exceptional definition. Even at night-time, the moon hung low in
the sky above the castle - most memorably on the evening of the great
fireworks concert.
The Edinburgh festival is also held dear for three other reasons: its
success in combining multiple arts, its function as a meeting-point of all
manner of people interested in the arts, and the lively co-existence of
official and fringe events. So what if Aeschylus was mauled by a charlatan?
So what if Julius Caesar kept being drowned by airplanes, tractors and a
grain-dryer? So what if the three Lenz plays showed very well why we have
seen so little Lenz before now? You had only to go to Holbein, or the
Lindsay Quartet, or The Broken Jug, and you fell in love with the arts all
over again.
But this has been true of Edinburgh for donkeys' years. What of the festival
under Brian McMaster? Well, you could tell that he had an audacious penchant
for the unorthodox last year, when he launched his regime with Schoenberg's
Moses und Aron. (Nobody dared make the old crack 'Are you sitting
comfortably? Then I'll play you some Schoenberg.') He has suffused his
festival with a mentality both international and fringe - as I realised last
Friday, after a day that had included a morning lieder recital by a German
thalidomide basso, a matinee play-reading of Jakob Lenz's The Soldiers, an
evening concert of minor Janacek and minor Schubert, and a late-night
concert by a Catalan protest singer.
For many of us, the main fun of the Edinburgh festival lies in what it
teaches us that we never knew before. These days, the festival has specific
themes, and this appeals to the eternal student in me; I arrive looking
forward to a three-week course in subjects about which I know too little.
But 1993's themes were an odd bunch. The Schubert/Janacek theme was designed
less to cover either composer properly than for compare-and-contrast
purposes, not often to stimulating effect. The Verdi 'from first to last'
theme omitted so much of Verdi 'in between' that it proved a wish sandwich.
And the MacMillan theme has put scores of us off his music for good. Next
year's themes, it is said, will include Goethe and Beethoven: which
Edinburgh should be able to serve judiciously.
The most successful 1993 theme was the bringing together of the work of four
of today's most celebrated foreign theatre directors - Peter Sellars, Robert
Wilson, Robert Lepage, Peter Stein (though it is revealing that the
festival's most perfect - and most beautifully acted - production of all was
Thomas Langhoff's account of Kleist's The Broken Jug). Here is a theme I
would love to see taken further. Imagine, for example, a festival where we
saw four or more international directors' contrasting treatments of
Shakespeare or Ibsen plays; or Greek tragedies. Imagine a festival that gave
us every Chekhov play, each one staged by a different master.
For some of us, there is another, more specific, reason why we cherish the
Edinburgh festival: namely, the 11am concerts at the Queen's Hall. Six
mornings per week you can start the day with chamber music or a recital,
and, even when the music is not to your taste, the act of sitting and
attending in quiet to music is the best possible daily therapy - perhaps
especially to those of us who spend much of the rest of each day focusing
more upon the other arts. It is strange but true that, since much of the
Queen's Hall music is of highest standard, you really can feel that your
life has been enlarged a little, several days a week, before lunch.
Let me not sound too lyrical about this year's assortment. Apart from
MacMillan (oy vey), the Gould Trio and Steven Osborne simply were not of
international standards. OK, Osborne - like MacMillan - is a good Scots boy;
but this was the second year in which we watched his tense and
unauthoritative way with piano classics. As for the Gould Trio, their
phrasing lacks firmness, and their violinist is slipshod. But the recitals
by Anne Sofie von Otter, the Lindsay Quartet, Yuri Bashmet, Dawn Upshaw,
Andras Schiff, Thomas Quasthoff, Sylvia McNair - each of these was a special
event, memorable and moving.
This year (and last, and next), there has been one ideal Edinburgh artist,
the choreographer Mark Morris - who is both international and fringe,
theatrical and musical, alternative and classical, and who is plainly one of
the superlative artists of our day. His theatrical visions - just see Grand
Duo and Home - are equal to those of the above theatre-directors. There is
enough dissidence and modernity in Morris to suit him to McMaster's spirit;
and McMaster has responded by making sure that Morris's dances are
accompanied by world-class musicians. Sight and sound are thrillingly, and
festively, conjoined.
