FT  05 FEB 93 / Judge demands end to obstruction of Iraq probe
LORD Justice Scott, who is heading an investigation into British
defence-related exports to Iraq, is increasing pressure on government
departments he believes are obstructing his inquiry, threatening to name
those that do not provide documents.
It emerged last night that some Whitehall officials were withholding
information Lord Justice Scott has requested since beginning his inquiry two
months ago.
The inquiry team has received 170 volumes of original documents containing
more than 30,000 pages, mostly from government departments and including
intelligence agencies.
Officials close to Lord Justice Scott would not identify the departments
that have yet to provide documents considered relevant. But the judge is
understood to be determined to secure all relevant documentation even if it
means forcing the issue in public.
In a statement yesterday, Mr Christopher Muttukumaru, the secretary to the
inquiry team, confirmed that Lord Justice Scott still intended that hearings
'should as far as possible be held in public'.
Lord Justice Scott plans to announce details of the arrangements within five
weeks, although he is believed to have set himself the end of the year as
the date by which he is likely to conclude his inquiry.
In a statement yesterday, Mr Muttukumaru said: 'Lord Justice Scott has
called for original documents from a number of departments and from the
intelligence agencies. Further material has been sought from Whitehall
departments and we expect to receive it over the next few weeks.'
The Scott inquiry was set up by the government in response to claims -
arising during the aborted trial of executives of machine-tool makers Matrix
Churchill - that government departments had colluded in trade with Iraq in
breach of official guidelines.
Lord Justice Scott has made clear his determination to draw up a thorough
and detailed report that would not be open to accusations of a political
whitewash.
Officials said last night that witnesses called to give evidence in public
could include former or present ministers, although no list has been drawn
up yet.
Mr Tam Dalyell, Labour MP for Linlithgow, in a Commons clash with the prime
minister, questioned the inclusion of the public-interest immunity issue in
the terms of reference of the Scott inquiry, Ivor Owen writes.
Four ministers signed public-interest immunity certificates to prevent
confidential government documents being used as evidence in the Matrix
Churchill trial.
Mr Dalyell said the Commons should not have to await the outcome of the
Scott inquiry to discover why it had been necessary to protect the
ministers.
