FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: International alliance plans Pounds 200m
Yorkshire cable network
GENERALE des Eaux, the French diversified services group, is combining with
Singapore Telecom and Yorkshire Water to invest about Pounds 200m in a cable
system for Yorkshire.
The move is further evidence of the growing appeal to overseas investors of
UK cable TV and telephone franchises as operators building cable networks in
conurbations report high take-up rates for the new services. The two
overseas companies already have UK cable interests - Singapore Telecom with
an interest in two cable franchises and Generale des Eaux in nine, including
six in Yorkshire, operated as Yorkshire Cable by its General Cable
subsidiary.
Yorkshire Water, which is to put up about 10 per cent of the equity, is the
first of the privatised water companies to take a cable stake.
Its involvement marks a further advance by the privatised utilities into the
telecommunications market. National Grid is financing the construction of a
new national long-distance fibre-optic network using its pylons.
The Pounds 200m will be invested in Yorkshire Cable, which holds six
franchises in the county - Bradford, Barnsley, Doncaster &amp; Rotherham,
Halifax, Sheffield and Wakefield.
As yet, large-scale construction has taken place only in Bradford, where the
company reports a 30 per cent take-up of cable telephony in areas covered.
Between them, the franchises extend to more than 800,000 homes.
Singapore Telecom and Generale des Eaux will each take a 45 per cent stake
in the project, making an initial investment of about Pounds 80m. ST, due to
be partially privatised before the end of the year, is one of Singapore's
biggest and most profitable state run enterprises. In recent months it has
made significant investments overseas, with 14 ventures in 11 countries.
Mr Joe Delahunty, a director of General Cable, said Generale des Eaux was
anxious to form an alliance with an established telecommunications operator.
'We see Singapore Telecom as innovative and aggressive, and this was a
suitable opportunity,' he said. The three companies said they were attracted
by the 'unique British regulatory freedom' which allows operators to offer
both cable TV and telephone services over the same network.
Most of the investors in the UK cable industry are US telecommunications
companies forbidden by US regulatory constraints from offering entertainment
services in the US.
In the UK, BT is forbidden by the government from offering entertainment
services on the public telephone network.
