FT  06 APR 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar softens against D-Mark
THE DOLLAR drifted down against the D-Mark yesterday as dealers continued to
digest the poorer than expected US employment report released on Friday,
writes James Blitz.
In very quiet trading in London, the dollar opened at about DM1.5980, after
having enjoyed a sharp rebound against the German currency last Friday
afternoon. It finished in London at DM1.5955, down almost a pfennig from
Friday's close. In New York trading, the US currency finally stood at
DM1.5945.
Friday's non-farm payroll figure, showing a net drop in the March month of
22,000, continued to leave dealers uncertain about the direction of the US
economic recovery.
Mr Jeremy Hawkins, senior economic adviser at Bank of America, said that
when the US employment data for the last three months were looked at as a
whole, there were clear signs of an economic upturn in the US.
'In the first quarter of 1993, jobs were being created at the rate of
150,000 per month, compared with 100,000 per month in the fourth quarter of
1992,' he noted.
However, Mr Mark Austin of Midland Global Markets took a more pessimistic
view of the dollar's prospects. In his weekly report, he said that the
payroll data were disappointing and would set the tone for all the March
economic data coming out this month.
He also believed that the dollar's rebound on Friday afternoon was options
related, and probably squeezed out short dollar positions from the market.
'The weaker tone shown by the dollar this morning seems likely to continue,'
he said yesterday.
An additional reason for uncertainty on the dollar was continuing
disappointment about the speed of German interest rate cuts.
Some dealers appeared to expect that the Bundesbank would ease the rate at
which it offers wholesale funds to German commercial banks - the repo rate -
this week. But, with German call money yesterday trading at around 8.23 per
cent, it would be hard for the Bundesbank to bring the repo rate much below
the current lowest accepted rate of 8.17 per cent, for fear of trigg-ering
'round tripping' by the banks.
This factor continued to keep the D-Mark strong in Europe. The lira, in
particular, weakened sharply against the German currency at the start of
trading, on news that police investigations into Mr Giulio Andreotti, the
former Italian prime minister, were broadening. However, after touching the
L999 level to the D-Mark at the beginning of the European morning, the lira
later rallied to end unchanged on the day at L993.8.
The French franc, on the other hand, appreciated to a close of FFr3.391 per
D-Mark from Friday's finish of FFr3.398. The Bank of France's decision not
to lower its intervention rate, contrary to some dealers' expectations,
supported the franc.
