FT  26 MAR 93 / Survey of Bangladesh (7): Survival on the seashore - Shiraz
Sidhva finds faith and fatalism in the wake of disaster
TWO years after the great cyclone, Ahmed Kabir is still picking up the
pieces.
The cyclone hit Bangladesh on April 29 and 30, 1991. Ahmed's little mud hut,
four miles from the sea, was one of nearly 50,000 homes in this region alone
which were washed away.
Across the country, 140,000 people were killed and millions made homeless.
Ahmed lost more than a dozen close relatives. Apart from losing its home,
his family lost all its livestock including four goats and six buffalos.
The sea, from where the lethal typhoons swept ashore, is also the source of
Ahmed's livelihood - he works on the salt pans and cultivates shrimps.
Ahmed and his wife Nafisa Khatun spent the first days after the cyclone at a
relief centre 25 miles away in Cox's Bazar. They then went back to their
village and rebuilt their home in three months.
Ahmed is one of about 10,000 fishermen who catch shrimp larvae, which they
sell for Taka10 per 100. Since the fishermen have almost no assets, they
cannot borrow from the banks and the cyclone left them in even deeper
poverty than before.
Sayyat Noor, one of Ahmed's neighbours, says 'the aid agencies helped by
giving us money to rebuild our houses and buy fishing nets, but only 10
farmers in 100 were lucky enough to benefit'.
Knee-deep in salt in the blazing heat, Sayyat says his family lived for days
on the rice, salt and chilli powder that they had kept buried in earthen
containers outside their home. These are the 'iron rations' which people in
this part of Bangladesh store away in case of natural disasters.
'If we got saved that day, and if we are able to feed ourselves today, it is
only because of Allah,' says Noor.
About 30,000 families depend on salt reclaiming in Bangladesh and the
cyclone destroyed more than 30 per cent of the salt pans and washed away
more than 200,000 tons of uncrushed black salt. Two ruined salt works still
bear witness to the devastation, although another, less than a mile from the
worst hit area, has been rebuilt and is thriving.
Large fishing boats are used to transport the salt to Chittagong. The
plant's owner, Hafeez, says 1992 was a very good year, thanks to the good
weather which enabled the salt panning season to last from November to May
instead of the usual mid-December to early April.
Abdul Karem, like two thirds of those who work the salt pans, is landless,
and has to lease the land on which the salt is deposited. Borrowing from the
moneylender who also owns the salt pans, many farmers end up as bonded
labourers and their families go ever deeper into debt from one generation to
the next.
The money lender-landlord also buys back the harvested salt at prices as low
as his interest rates are high. 'The cyclone has only increased our debt to
the landlords,' says Kasem. 'For those who did not survive, at least the
misery of surviving each day has ended.'
In summer, the flooded salt flats are used for harvesting shrimps. The
methods used to trap shrimp fry are primitive and uneconomical. According to
an expert, even semi-intensive methods would yield 1,130kg of shrimps per
acre compared with the present 60 kgs. The greater salinity caused by the
cyclone and by last year's long dry summer further reduced the shrimp
harvest.
But nature has not been not entirely cruel to the people of Chakoria. The
emerald-green paddy fields that fringe the salt and shrimp flats benefited
from the wrath of the cyclone. Nearly 80 per cent of all agricultural crops
were destroyed, and the watermelons and tomatos for which the area is
renowned were damaged by the increased salinity.
But the rice crop was 50 per cent bigger than usual thanks to the rich
layers of alluvial soil which the cyclone deposited in the paddy fields.
Aid organisations are slowly helping people to rebuild their homes, even
though this will seriously deplete the amount of bamboo in the nearby
forests.
More than 90 per cent of all livestock (1.4m animals in Chakoria alone) were
killed, together with all the poultry. Only a few buffalos survived. Thanks
to the diligent husbandry of the women, the poultry stock is now back at
more than 30 per cent of its original numbers.
'It killed me to save the eggs for hatching when my children were starving,'
says Farida Khatun. After the disaster she bought a single hen from the
market with money she had saved without telling her husband. She now has 300
birds.
'We have to think ahead, and I knew that a few days more of hunger would
afford us comparative comfort later.'
For Ahmed Kabir, however, recovery is only relative. 'We were poor to begin
with; the cyclone has only made us poorer,' he says. His children had
attended one of the 33,000 primary schools destroyed by the cyclone. Today,
classes are still held out of doors.
Roads have been largely rebuilt and the government is constructing
multi-purpose cyclone shelters with financial help from Saudi Arabia.
Standing on a rebuilt anti-flood embankment (52 per cent of these structures
were destroyed), Ahmed voices the local fatalism. 'No embankment or shelter
can save us, if Allah wishes otherwise,' he says. 'Sometimes, when I work to
rebuild all I have lost, I can't help wondering how soon it will all be
washed away again.'
