FT  09 DEC 93 / Uncertainty surrounds who will be liable for compensation
The SIB review of personal pensions is expected to lead to several hundred
million pounds in compensation for those who transferred out of occupational
pension schemes into less good personal plans.
The only consolation for the life insurers, perhaps, is the fact that their
leading competitors, the banks, were no better and will also be liable for
compensation claims.
Already there are signs of a big row breaking out between the insurance
companies and the independent financial advisers who account for roughly 20
per cent of all insurance and pensions sales. These IFAs are either
self-employed or employees of a larger chain and act only as an agent for
the life company, not as an employee.
Mr Nick Dumbreck, partner in the insurance practice at consulting actuaries
R. Watson and Son, said: 'The law of agency is operating here. It is on the
life company's side. It is the IFA's job to decide which policy to sell.'
Other life insurers heavily dependent on the IFA market were more
circumspect, saying they would have to study the matter. Privately, they
concede that because they are dependent on the IFAs to sell their products
in the future, they may have to contribute to the costs of IFAs past
mistakes.
Mr Dumbreck notes that IFAs are required to have professional indemnity
insurance which may cover compensation costs. However, if the indemnity
cover was not enough, the IFA would have to declare itself insolvent and all
claims would then become claims on the Investors' Compensation Scheme.
Regulators are circumspect about how they can force life insurers to make
good on improperly sold policies. Yet they privately emphasise the right of
the self-regulatory bodies to withdraw authorisation to sell pensions from
companies and individual sales agents.
Meanwhile, questions remain about whether the government will be asked to
pay some of the compensation. After all, it touted personal pensions with
great enthusiasm, saying they offered the twin virtues of flexibility and a
sense of individual ownership. 'The life companies were handed the personal
pensions bonanza on a plate by the government,' said Mr Dumbreck.
But even if every insurance company and bank agreed to pay compensation
where appropriate, it remains to be decided whether shareholders or
policyholders would foot the bill.
Mr Stewart Ritchie, pensions director at Scottish Equitable, said: 'In a
mutual life insurance company, by definition all funds are policyholders'
funds.' Thus, mutual companies are certain to have to dip into reserves in
order to pay any claims necessary.
Mr Dumbreck said that the reserves of most mutuals are sufficient to cushion
any likely claim without forcing the curtailment of bonuses paid to other
policyholders.
But where a life insurance company is owned by shareholders the question is
more problematic.
Mr Philip Scott, general manager of Norwich Union, said: 'When you are
talking about a salesforce owned by the company where that sales force is
there to earn profits for shareholders, it seems to me that shareholders
should pay the costs.'
The question of whether policyholders or shareholders bear the cost is not
an issue for so-called unit-linked companies which sell 'units' in a pooled
fund and extract charges based on each unit plus specified general charges.
In unit-linked companies, which include all four of the UK clearing banks,
the costs can only be borne by shareholders.
The extent to which the banks will be liable is unclear.
