FT  27 AUG 93 / Growth may outstrip forecast
BRITAIN'S economic growth this year is likely to be a 'little stronger' than
the 1.25 per cent forecast at the time of the March Budget. In addition,
underlying inflation might be a little lower than the 3.75 per cent
originally expected for the fourth quarter of this year, the Treasury
reported yesterday.
Delivering a cautiously upbeat assessment of the economy, the Treasury said
that developments in the first half of this year - with renewed growth in
activity, an improving labour market, low inflation and a sound trade
performance - were 'encouraging for the prospect of a period of sustained
economic growth in the years ahead'.
The Treasury's latest bulletin marked a further small step in the direction
of greater openness. It provided a rudimentary update of the government's
economic forecast ahead of publication of the next official forecast with
the November 30 Budget. But it did not provide the figures that make up the
government's forward look of economic prospects and failed to draw any
policy conclusions.
The Treasury cautioned that the recovery was in its early days and that it
was too soon to be sure how it will develop. Latest figures suggested that
gross domestic product rose  3/4 per cent between the second half of last
year and the first half of 1993 and therefore 'significantly faster' than
the Budget forecast of  1/4 per cent growth.
This could have been due to temporary factors such as heavy price
discounting. Downside risks existed such as the high level of personal
sector debt and the weak state of the continental European economies. 'We
cannot yet conclude that the faster than expected pace of growth will
necessarily continue,' the Treasury said.
The bulletin took a similarly cautious view of the 80,000 fall in
unemployment so far this year, pointing out that it might represent a once
and for all compensation for excess sackings last autumn when business
confidence slumped after sterling's exit from the European exchange rate
mechanism.
The Treasury said it was still premature to state unequivocally that the
peak of unemployment had passed.
Although it said inflationary pressures were 'very subdued', there might be
some nasty surprises ahead. Following sterling's devaluation, further
increases in input prices may still have to feed through into retail price
inflation. The Treasury therefore still expects some pick-up in underlying
inflation from July's 2.9 per cent annual rate.
However, the Treasury took a bullish view of the UK's competitive position.
Although information on trade was patchy, 'it seems more likely than not
that net trade made a positive contribution to GDP growth in the first half
of the year', it said.
Industrial surveys are generally more up to date than official data, the
Treasury said yesterday in another paper. Anecdotal surveys such as those
published by the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of
Directors and Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the business information group, provided
useful information on the current state and trends in the economy and made
an important contribution to the forecasting process.
