FT  22 OCT 93 / Monetary stability helps Bundesbank act
IF there was one central factor behind yesterday's surprise cut in the
German discount rate to 5.75 per cent, it was last July's loosening of the
shackles of the European exchange rate mechanism.
The widening of the fluctuation bands has reduced virtually to nil the need
for intervention buying of troubled member currencies.
This means first that the Bundesbank's leading indicator, the M3 measure of
money supply growth, will no longer be driven upwards by the backwash of
currencies which has characteristically followed massive interventions in
successive ERM crises. Second, it has promoted an unwelcome, though not
excessive revaluation of the D-Mark. Since the band-widening at the end of
July, and despite a half-point cut in the discount rate on September 10, the
German currency has been effectively revalued by 2 per cent against its
European exchange rate mechanism relations, according to Mr Hans Tietmeyer,
the new central bank president. Against a basket of 20 other important
currencies it is up 3.6 per cent, and 5.5 per cent against the US dollar.
This is not helpful to an export-based economy trying to escape the clutches
of recession.
If, as Mr Tietmeyer said yesterday, the horizon is looking brighter, the
outlook is better at least in part because the view is no longer fogged by
the uncertainties inherent in the management of the ERM. Applying the
instruments of what he called the bank's 'forward-looking policy', he
detected improved prospects for greater monetary stability.
Provisional figures published earlier this week showed M3 growth continuing
to move slowly down towards the 6.5 per cent top limit of the bank's target
range. A surge in private sector credit growth, which helped keep the
September growth rate at 7 per cent was 'only temporary', according to Mr
Tietmeyer.
Inflation was also clearly easing, he said. The latest headline figure was
still 'too high' at 4 per cent, but the consumer prices index had been
rising at an annualised 2.4 per cent over the past six months.
Inflation in the construction sector, which is belatedly feeling the effects
of recession, had also slowed significantly.
The trick now is for all to continue to play their part in providing the
conditions in which the economy can start moving again.
The Bundesbank, as always, hopes for moderation from the coming pay round
and determination from the government on budget consolidation.
As Mr Tietmeyer pointed out, economic growth in the third quarter was
expected to stagnate at second quarter levels, and there were no clear signs
of speedy growth. Incoming orders were a little higher, but exports were not
increasing noticeably.
Industrial capacity utilisation had fallen in September after earlier signs
of improvement.
Showing enthusiasm for cutting rates runs counter to the Bundesbank's
culture, but its pointed efforts of yesterday to improve German
competitiveness with moves apparently calculated to lessen the exchange rate
burden on industry, suggest there is more to come, and like yesterday's
move, cuts could come rather sooner than expected.
