FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Thailand (9): Bangkok in miniature - Chiang Mai,
Thailand's northern capital / Chiang Mai has already begun to duplicate in
miniature the problems which have afflicted Bangkok, traffic jams and
pollution, compounded by a lack of urban planning
Chiang Mai, Thailand's northern capital, has come a long way since Ralph
Fitch, a London merchant visiting in 1587, admired the sturdiness of its men
and the beauty of its women and described the city as a 'very faire and
great town with faire houses of stone.'
Some of its residents would even say that Chiang Mai has gone too far.
Instead of building 'faire houses,' property developers have been furiously
throwing up concrete shop-houses, condominiums and petrol stations. The air
is filled with the dust and noise of road construction.
For the past five years, Chiang Mai has been a boomtown. Foreign tourists
and nouveaux riches Thai businessmen, escaping the heat and traffic
congestion of Bangkok, have flocked to the relatively cool climate of
northern Thailand for their holidays and weekends. Speculation on land
prices has enriched many of the locals.
The central government has contributed to the rapid development of Chiang
Mai by redirecting manufacturing investment away from the overcrowded and
polluted industrial zones around Bangkok and the eastern seaboard towards
remoter areas such as the north. Earlier this year, the duration of tax
breaks for investments in these areas was extended to eight years from six.
'This new move by the Board of Investment was a big step by the government,'
says Mr Pravit Arkarachinores, president of the Upper Northern Chamber of
Commerce and managing director of a Chiang Mai private hospital.
More than 80 companies are operating or have already reserved space in the
eight-year-old industrial estate in Lamphun, 30km from Chiang Mai.
They include Murata Electronics and Hoya lenses of Japan. Among the more
recent arrivals are Thailand's Hana Microelectronics, which is building a
factory and dormitory for 1,000 workers, and Driessen Aircraft Interior
Systems, the Dutch catering equipment manufacturer which was finding it
difficult to expand in Bangkok and wanted to avoid the high costs and
traffic congestion of the capital.
Although it is Thailand's second city, Chiang Mai has long been a fraction
of the size of Bangkok, with an official population of about 200,000
compared to capital's 6m.
Yet it has already begun to duplicate in miniature the problems which have
afflicted Bangkok - traffic jams and pollution compounded by a lack of urban
planning - thus undermining the very basis of its original allure for
tourists and industrialists from the south.
A report on environmental problems by the municipal authorities this year
contained a catalogue of woes, from inadequate rubbish collection to
encroachment by builders on to public land. The filthy main canals in the
city are described as a 'disgrace.'
Even in the new Lamphun industrial estate, waste disposal is a haphazard
affair, with electronics companies burying toxic waste in drums or burning
it inside in their yards on Saturday nights because of the complexity of the
paperwork required to send waste material out of the export processing zone.
'Fifteen years ago I left Bangkok and thought I'd made the right decision,'
says Mr Chayant Pholpoke, a travel agent better known for his environmental
activism as part of the 'For Chiang Mai' group which opposed the building of
a cable car up Doi Suthep, the mountain overlooking the town.
'Now I'm not so sure,' he adds. 'It's another Bangkok I'm afraid, partly
because people like myself (from Bangkok) are here.'
There is no sign of an end to the growth of Chiang Mai, and the construction
business has been boosted by plans to host the South East Asian Games in
1995. The town's 700th anniversary the following year may, however, give the
inhabitants a chance to reflect on what they are doing to a city once
renowned for its quiet Buddhist temples and clean air.
Mr Tanet Charoenmuang, director of the local government studies project at
Chiang Mai University, is scathing about the way the authorities have
planned - or rather not planned - economic growth in northern Thailand and
failed to spread development to outlying areas.
'Instead of learning from past mistakes - that people have made Bangkok the
centre of everything - they are now making Chiang Mai the centre of
everything,' he says.
Asked whether the focus on Chiang Mai, instead of just on Bangkok, is not at
least a start, he replies: 'They are both hells. Chiang Mai is following
Bangkok very closely.
'We will celebrate hell in three years from now when Chiang Mai celebrates
its 700 years,' he says. 'We live in a very 'special' era because of cheap
vehicles and very poor management.'
Unlike academics, most entrepreneurs in northern Thailand show little
concern for the environment, although they care about problems which could
affect their businesses - including infrastructure difficulties such as a
lack of telephones, a shortage of skilled workers and the spread of the
human immunodeficiency virus that causes the disease Aids.
Far from worrying about the 'Bangkokisation' of Chiang Mai, local Thai
businessmen fear that the rapid growth of the rival town of Chiang Rai -
further north, as a centre for tourism and trade with China, Burma and Laos
 -will turn Chiang Mai itself into something of a backwater: a distant
prospect perhaps, but one that might please those who emigrated from Bangkok
in search of peace and quiet.
