FT  09 DEC 93 / Letters to the Editor: Japan's nuclear recycling programme
nears goal
Sir, I would like to express my comments on your collection of letters
entitled 'Thorp: surplus in dispute' (November 23).
Consumption of fossil energy is causing worldwide environmental problems and
drying up energy resources. Petroleum is expected to run out around the
middle of the 21st century. Nuclear energy is one of the most promising
alternatives. However, uranium is also limited.
At this moment reasonably assured resources of uranium are only about 2.32m
tonnes, which will be consumed in between 30 and 40 years under current
demand, with the direct disposal of spent fuel. Uranium with direct disposal
cannot be a major energy resource for the 21st century.
Utilisation rates of uranium can be considerably increased by using
plutonium in light water reactors as MOX fuel. Furthermore, about 60 times
the utilisation rate of uranium can be achieved by recycling it in
fast-breeder reactors.
Plutonium utilisation systems, mainly in fast-breeder reactors, require high
standard technologies and a long development period. We have been doing our
best to realise plutonium utilisation since it became the basis of our
nuclear energy policy in the early 1960s. In this process, we executed
reprocessing contracts with British Nuclear Fuels prior to our construction
of a commercial reprocessing facility in Japan.
A forecast of supply and demand for plutonium in Japan issued by the
advisory committee of the Atomic Energy Commission in August 1991 foresees
that by around 2010, overseas and domestic (under construction) reprocessing
facilities will extract from Japanese spent fuels approximately 85 tonnes of
plutonium, all of which will be consumed as fuels for fast-breeder reactors,
advanced thermal reactors and light water reactors. Although there are some
minor changes in programmes, they will never affect Japan's plutonium
utilisation policy.
Furthermore, we have enough capacity to consume plutonium in Japan. For
example, the above forecast indicates that we will consume about 50 tonnes
of plutonium in our light water reactors, which is only 10 per cent of the
fuel consumed at the 44 operating reactors (about 37GW in capacity) at the
moment. Seven more light water reactors (about 7.9GW in capacity) are now
under construction.
Our reprocessing contracts with BNFL provide for the return of the waste
arising from reprocessing of our fuels and we shall honour the contracts. A
repository for domestic low-level waste has already begun operation and a
storage facility for returned high-level waste is now being constructed. We
see no difficulty in preparing storage places for intermediate and low-level
wastes once the quantity of those wastes is known.
Japanese electric power companies have been endeavouring to establish
nuclear fuel recycled with the fast-breeder reactors as a core technology.
We are approaching our goal step by step.
T Matsunaga,
secretary general,
Overseas Reprocessing
Committee (ORC),
6F NTB-M Bldg,
2-9 Shimbashi 2-chrome,
Minato-ku,
Tokyo 105
