FT  16 JAN 93 / Dutch act to promote use of electric vehicles: Toyota and
Nissan join forces to develop an electric model
THE Dutch government is to give companies tax incentives to encourage them
to buy electric vehicles.
Dutch businesses which invest in electric-powered company cars are to be
allowed accelerated depreciation of the vehicles under a new scheme designed
to promote the use of electric cars.
The pressures on the car industry to accelerate the development of electric
vehicles are intensifying. Toyota and Nissan, the two leading Japanese car
makers are joining forces to develop an electric car, according to Japanese
newspaper reports yesterday.
The newspaper Mainichi Shimbun said that Toyota and Nissan had begun talks
on the development of common electric vehicle components. Japan's ministry
of international trade and industry has set a target of having about 200,000
domestic electric cars in use by the year 2000.
Last month the big three US car makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler,
announced that they planned to co-operate more closely in the development of
electric vehicles.
The three companies have signed an agreement to investigate co-operation in
the design, development, testing and possible manufacturing of electric
vehicle components which would ultimately be used in each company's own
vehicles.
Two years ago the US car makers also formed a consortium to carry out
research and development on advanced batteries that would be capable of
providing electric vehicles with significantly increased range and
performance.
The state of California has been at the forefront of seeking to encourage
the use of electric vehicles through regulation - by 1998, 2 per cent of
cars sold in California are to be so-called zero emissions vehicles.
Yesterday's move by the Dutch government is one of the first inititaives in
Europe to encourage the purchase of electric vehicles through the use of tax
incentives.
The Dutch environment ministry said that electric cars have been placed on a
list of 400 environmentally-friendly products that provide tax breaks to
companies which purchase them. Thanks to the move, companies will be able to
set off against tax the full price of an electric-powered vehicle in the
first year of purchase. Petrol-powered company cars, by contrast, are
normally written off over five years in the Netherlands.
