FT  19 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Measuring up for a water fight - The
argument over Ofwat's price review
'FUNDAMENTALLY arbitrary and flawed' was one of the accusations hurled
yesterday by the water industry at proposals from Ofwat, its regulator.
The latest skirmish is part of the build-up to the crucial Periodic Review
in 1994, when Ofwat will reassess the basis for water bills for the first
time since the 1989 water privatisation, and set future price rises. It
reveals the extent of the differences yet to be resolved between the two
sides over the basis for setting water prices.
The attack is contained in the industry's 50-page response to a consultation
paper from Ofwat in November on the correct definition of the companies'
capital value, a notoriously slippery figure.
Their assets include miles of Victorian sewers and pre-war water mains,
whose value is highly debatable, as well as state-of-the-art treatment
plants, part of a huge industry-wide spending programme which could cost
some Pounds 45bn by the year 2000.
A dry and highly-technical issue, the definition is nevertheless central to
the review: unlike the regulators of the other privatised utilities, Ofwat
is legally obliged to allow companies to earn a 'reasonable' rate of return
on their capital when setting price rises.
The approach favoured by Mr Byatt, Ofwat's director general, in his November
paper is to take the stock market value at flotation in December 1989 as the
value of assets at that point - Pounds 6.1bn at the end of the first day's
trading.
To bring it up to date, he proposes adding on the capital spending since
then. This hybrid system - market value for the old assets, and current
value for the ones bought after 1989 - gives a capital figure of some Pounds
12bn to Pounds 13bn.
Given the pre-tax profits of Pounds 1.5bn made by the industry in the year
to March 1992, it suggests - in rough terms - a pre-tax return on capital of
some 11 per cent.
Ofwat has argued that the attraction of this approach is its simplicity. It
also gives a relatively high figure for return on capital, for which the
water customer should be grateful, as it would allow Ofwat to be tough at
the periodic review.
Mr Byatt has pointed out - in a good illustration of the difficulty of the
definition - that if, instead, he took the cost of building the assets at
today's prices, which several companies suggested, that could lead to a
capital figure as high as Pounds 100bn. If he allowed the companies to earn
the same return on old assets as on new ones, the industry would make 'too
much profit' and the customer would suffer through higher prices.
The water companies have attacked Mr Byatt's arguments on two main points.
Their paper 'questions Ofwat's preference for (stock) market-based
valuations'. Instead, it wants Ofwat to use the government's own 'Indicative
Values', calculated in 1989 on the basis of projected cashflows.
The water industry argues that this is the only measure of value which
treats the 10 large water and sewerage companies which are floated on the
stock market on the same basis as the 33 water-only companies which remain
in private hands.
Its paper argues too that Ofwat's version is guilty of 'circularity': it
defines the value of the assets by the stock market value, but the value
that the market puts on the companies is partly based on its view of how
much profit Mr Byatt will let the assets earn.
City analysts said yesterday that they thought Ofwat would have to consider
the arguments seriously. However, they pointed out that as some of the
indicative values were higher than the stock market values at flotation,
this could help the water companies' arguments for a higher capital figure.
The water companies also attacked Ofwat's proposal to give back to customers
some of the price rises permitted during years of heavy spending to allow
companies to keep interest charges comfortably covered by profits - a
necessary 'cushion' if banks are to agree to lend them money. Ofwat's
argument is that this is an 'advancement' of revenue and should be returned
to the customer once the spending programme has diminished.
The companies have called this 'neither rational nor fair', arguing that it
'could not be implemented in a way which is clear and comprehensible either
to customers or the capital markets'.
Their complaint is that there is no obvious 'benchmark' level of prices by
which to measure the 'advancement' of revenue. The proposal could be
'self-defeating', they warn, because immediately Ofwat selected a benchmark,
bankers would use it to calculate the 'cushion' for their interest payments
instead of using the actual revenue.
This will not be the last tussle between the two sides. Within a few weeks
Ofwat will publish its final consultation paper before the review  - on how
the UK's supply of water can be increased and who should pay for it.
Water companies' finance directors believe an answer to these and other
buried conflicts - including a long-standing disagreement on the cost of
capital - will eventually be hammered out in horse trading during the
review.
But yesterday's report shows that differences between the companies and
their regulator are still considerable and that resolution of the
differences is unlikely to be easy or quick.
See Lex
