FT  23 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Profit warning cuts Holliday share price
Holliday Chemical Holdings, maker of industrial dyes and speciality
chemicals, which came to the stock market in March, yesterday issued a
profits warning that triggered a 23 per cent drop in its share price.
The price closed 51p down at 174p which is below the 195p flotation price.
Strong price competition meant Holliday Chemical's Spanish subsidiary would
make only a marginal contribution to profits after financing charges in
1993.
On a pro-forma basis, the group would only make a similar profit to that
achieved in 1992, directors said.
Mr Michael Peagram, the founder, chairman and largest shareholder with a 20
per cent stake in the company after the float, was named in September as
Venturer of the Year, an award sponsored by Cartier, The British Venture
Capital Association and the Financial Times.
Analysts immediately cut forecasts of full year profits from Pounds 14.5m to
Pounds 12.5m, and for 1994 from Pounds 18m to Pounds 15.5m. Earnings per
share estimates fell respectively to 11.2p and 13.6p, putting the shares on
a 10 per cent prospective discount to the market.
Mr Peagram said the problem was clearly identifiable and contained within
the Spanish subsidiary, which is responsible for 25 per cent of group sales.
Holliday would have been able to handle small reductions in prices through
cost saving measures.
But average dollar selling prices in the third quarter for generic
pharmaceutical and veterinary products had fallen by 10 per cent because of
competition from India and China.
While Holliday had noted at the time of interim statement in August that the
Spanish subsidiary's performance was disappointing, the extent of the
problems had not been visible at the time, Mr Peagram said.
Some analysts said the market reaction was overdone. 'It is still a well
managed company,' said Mr Lucas Herrmann of James Capel. 'The reaction is
harsh but not surprising; Holliday does not have a track record (as a quoted
company) to fall back on.'
Mr Peagram defended the company's award. 'We got the Venturer of the Year
award for our past record of which there is no doubt,' he said. 'There is
now a tough business climate out there.'
Holliday was still looking at growing with the help of some acquisitions Mr
Peagram said. 'We have got to re-establish the credibility bit first and
make people happy to be along with us.'
