FT  19 MAY 93 / Mitterrand mocks UK as new TGV link opens
PRESIDENT Francois Mitterrand yesterday inaugurated the extension of the TGV
(train a grande vitesse) high-speed link from Paris to Lille, the first leg
of the high-speed rail network that is to extend to London and Brussels by
the mid-1990s.
In a mocking reference to the British for not yet deciding on a high-speed
link on its side of the channel, Mr Mitterrand said: 'They will race at
great pace across the plains of northern France, race through the tunnel on
a fast track and then be able to daydream at very low speed, admiring the
(English) landscape and the countryside . . . until the day when someone
over there in London decides to harmonise the way of doing things between
the continent and the island,' he said.
The British government only recently decided to build a fast track from
London to the tunnel and it has yet to approve the route because of likely
protests from people living in southeast England.
On the French side, Lille is expecting the TGV to turn it from a decaying
industrial backwater into an important European regional centre. It is
integrating its TGV station into a huge new FFr5.2bn (Pounds 620m) business
centre, and even touting itself as a rival to Lyons for the French site of
the mooted European central bank.
According to Mr Bruno Bonduelle, a leading Lille businessman, the city has
within a radius of 250km, stretching to southeast England, Belgium, the
Netherlands and the Paris area, '80m of the richest people on the planet'.
Amiens to the west, and Valenciennes to the east, complain, however, that
the shortest routes to Calais and Brussels lie through their cities, not
through Lille whose mayor, Mr Pierre Mauroy, they claim, used the political
pull as a former socialist prime minister to win the route.
The opening took place, however, against a background of complaints by rail
users about the higher fares (ranging from FFr207 to FFr481 for a round
trip) they will have to pay to help recoup the FFr18.5bn cost.
