FT  24 SEP 93 / Minister on defensive in Iraq probe
THE MINISTER with cabinet responsibility for open government yesterday
justified withholding information from parliament on defence policy towards
Iraq because it served the 'overriding public interest'.
However, Mr William Waldegrave also admitted to the Scott arms-for-Iraq
inquiry that information was held back from the media because it was
embarrassing and difficult to deal with.
The minister said that if it had been publicly announced that the government
had agreed to relax the strict export guidelines to Iraq it would have been
interpreted by Iran as 'a huge shift'. This would have endangered the lives
of British hostages.
While accepting that the 'correct impression had not been given to
parliament' about government decisions, he insisted on justifying the
official attitude taken while he served as Foreign Office minister between
July 1988 and November 1990.
'This was the cost one had to set against the other dangers I have talked
about . . . the overriding public interest was that you might be putting
British lives at risk,' Mr Waldegrave said.
Mr Waldegrave's dogged defence of the government's record came under
challenge from Lord Justice Scott and Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, the
inquiry's counsel, for the second consecutive day.
'Isn't it a healthy factor of a democratic society that this kind of subject
should be debated?' Lord Justice Scott asked.
Miss Baxendale put it to the minister that he was involved in a 'post-hoc
rationalisation' of policy that was not fully supported by the evidence.
Mr Waldegrave conceded that one of the reasons for withholding the changed
wording of the original guidelines was fear among ministers and officials of
generating domestic opposition to its policies.
The minister said he had approved a briefing note for officials talking to
the BBC which excluded any mention of the relaxed guidelines. The note was
issued prior to a Panorama programme on Britain's arms trade with Iraq which
was broadcast in September 1990, after the Iraq invasion of Kuwait.
'Was it because it was difficult, inconvenient, and embarrassing to deal
with (the revision to the guidelines)?' Miss Baxendale asked.
'Yes,' answered Mr Waldegrave. He added that to expand on government policy
on Iraq during the inquiry now was proving just 'as embarrassing' given what
he said was the negative attitude of the media.
He insisted that greater flexibility in exports to Iraq had arisen from a
change of wording, not a change of policy.
Mr Waldegrave said the government expected Mr John Goulden, the British
ambassador in Turkey, who had told the Commons trade and industry committee
that the guidelines had been changed, to 'correct' his evidence.
The minister was due to be questioned about his involvement in approving the
export of machine tools to Iraq by Matrix-Churchill but his evidence was
adjourned until mid-October because he is flying to Japan today on
government business.
The inquiry resumes its public hearings on October 4.
