FT  09 MAR 93 / City welcomes net rise in consumer lending
CONSUMER appetite for buying on credit is being rediscovered, according to
statistics reported yesterday by the Central Statistical Office.
The office said yesterday that net lending to consumers by finance houses,
other specialist credit companies, building societies (excluding mortgage
lending), and on bank credit cards under the Visa and Mastercard systems
increased to a seasonally adjusted Pounds 151m in January from a revised
Pounds 105m in December. This was well above expectations.
The monthly net lending, which excludes write-offs for bad debt and is
regarded by the government as the best guide to borrowing trends for
consumer purchases, was the highest since July 1991 and compared with the
City's consensus forecast of a Pounds 50m increase.
The gain in credit granted was welcomed by City economists and the
government. Mr Keith Skeoch, chief economist of brokers James Capel, said
the increase marked a 'strengthening of a gentle upwards trend' in the
economy. The Treasury described it as a 'modest pick up' and 'consistent
with other signs of a return of consumer confidence'.
Official figures for the three months to January reinforced the impression
of a steady revival in consumer credit demand. Net lending to consumers of
Pounds 273m in the period compared with a net debt repayment of Pounds 22m
in the three months to October last year.
The latest figures showed that consumers were again using credit cards to
make purchases. Net lending through bank credit cards totalled Pounds 40m in
January after five months in which borrowings had been repaid.
The figures showed a appreciable growth in finance houses' business with net
lending of Pounds 285m in the three months to January against Pounds 92m in
the preceding three months.
The amount of new credit advanced to consumers in January fell, however, to
a seasonally adjusted Pounds 3.93bn from December's relatively high Pounds
4.63bn. The office said that the apparent sharp fall in borrowing may have
reflected problems with seasonal adjustment procedures over the Christmas
trading period in December, when many more shops were open on Sundays.
The government's cyclical indicators, published yesterday, hint at recovery
in the months ahead.
The coincident index, which is meant to track the business cycle, declined
slightly in January to 95.8 from 95.9 in December and has been broadly flat
since September.
Both the CSO's leading indicators advanced. The longer leading index, which
is supposed to pinpoint turning points in the economy about 11 months in
advance, rose 1.3 percentage points to 109.9 and has been rising strongly
since August. The shorter leading index, which indicates turning points
about four months in advance, jumped to 102 from 100.4 and has risen
strongly since October.
