FT  18 MAR 93 / When hacking turns into an obsession: John Mason and Alan
Cane report on the consequences of a teenager's acquittal
an awkward and withdrawn adolescent, unable to form normal friendships,
retreats almost totally into the world of the personal computer.
Instead of carrying on as teenagers usually do, he spends all night in his
bedroom poring over his computer screen, running up enormous telephone bills
 -and hacking into computers run by institutions throughout Europe.
The trial of Paul Bedworth, 19, which ended yesterday with his acquittal on
three charges under the 1990 Computer Misuse Act, attracted considerable
public attention for two reasons - the apparent ease with which he bypassed
the security walls built into computer systems containing confidential
material, and because it was the first prosecution under the act.
Using his Pounds 200 BBC computer he set up random dialling programmes to
search out weak spots in computer security systems. Once inside a computer
he used its telephone account to repeat the operation and attempt to breach
another computer system.
The challenge was an intellectual one, confined to the satisfaction of
testing and beating the system. Although he caused problems by overloading
the systems he entered, Paul Bedworth did little actual damage beyond
running up large telephone bills at other people's expense.
He will have embarrassed those institutions whose computers proved fallible,
however. In breaching the security of the Financial Times he obtained entry
to the computer containing all statistical data and share price indices.
Other institutions whose computers he hacked into included the headquarters
of the European Community and the Brussels-based European Organisation for
the Research and Treatment of Cancer.
His prosecution was regarded as a test of the new legislation, brought in
specifically to outlaw hacking. Before the act, prosecutions in hacking
cases meant bringing charges of criminal damage or the theft of electricity.
But the nature of his defence means that questions about the effectiveness
of the new law remain unanswered.
The law requires proof of an intent to modify the system being entered. Mr
Bedworth's defence, supported by expert psychiatric evidence, was that he
had become so obsessed by hacking that it would be impossible to reach any
judgment about his intentions.
In the view of one lawyer the case did not expose any serious hole in the
law. But it did raise questions about how widely such a defence based upon
an obsession could be used successfully against a wide range of other
criminal charges.
Suggestions that Mr Bedworth's acquittal was akin to a 'hackers' charter'
were dismissed by his barristers, Mr Ian Macdonald and Mr Alistair Kelman.
Speaking after the case, Mr Kelman, one of the UK's few barristers with a
profound understanding of computers, said the circumstances were unusual.
Mr Bedworth was a 'second-generation hacker', he said, someone who had grown
up with computers and been damaged by them. 'When a kid's best friend
becomes a computer rather than a member of their family then you are
courting trouble,' he said.
'This law should never be invoked against the most vulnerable members of
society. Mr Bedworth had no option but to follow the dictates of his
illness.'
Computer industry and business leaders were yesterday divided over whether
the Computer Misuse Act was in need of reform.
Mr Gavin Kirkpatrick, chief executive of the British Computer Society, the
organisation for professional computer specialists, said there was a case
for the operation of the Act to be reviewed.
Ms Judith Vincent, head of commercial law at the Confederation of British
Industry, said there was no immediate need to change the law.
The amount of hacking fell each time a case came to court. The act had
raised awareness that hacking was against the law and that hackers could be
prosecuted.
Mr Alan Stanley of the European Security Forum, which includes some of
Europe's largest companies among its members, said it would serve to remind
managers what harm could be done by someone using an inexpensive computer
system.
'I hope this does not become a green light for hacking,' he said. 'It is
possible to do great damage inside a computer system without meaning to.'
