FT  26 JUL 93 / VW jigsaw begins to clatter into place
SOME of the links necessary to support General Motors' charges that its
former global purchasing chief and a group of his associates took industrial
secrets with them when they departed for Volkswagen clattered into place
last week.
After revealing that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, now VW's production
director, had a personal hand in the collection of some of the GM documents
found in the former German home of two of his fellow defectors, public
prosecutors made plain the next stage.
'The investigations will continue, with special attention to the examination
of witnesses from the Volkswagen group,' they said last Thursday.
The aim now is to try to seal the links, and extend the chain of evidence
and circumstances. Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman and scion of the rich
and influential Porsche family, has consistently denied all allegations of
espionage, conspiracy or any other suspicions.
Mr Gerhard Schroder, representing VW's biggest shareholder by virtue of his
post as prime minister of Lower Saxony, which owns 20 per cent of the group,
has repeatedly claimed it is all a commercial 'campaign'. He argues that GM,
a 'foreign' company, is peeved at the loss of Mr Lopez, an inspired and
inspiring manager, and is out for retribution.
Mr Schroder, who met Mr Piech at a crisis meeting last Friday, is likely to
keep his counsel in future. After last week's legal setbacks, and evidence
of a popular swing of opinion in favour of GM's standpoint, VW needs a
rather more professional approach to its public statements. According to a
poll from the re-spected Forsa institute in Dortmund, 65 per cent of Germans
believe there is 'something in' the US group's charges.
This view has been encouraged by apparently ambivalent press statements from
VW. There was no reason for Mr Lopez to resign 'at this point", a spokesman
said last week. The group's official response to the state prosecutors'
revelations about the papers found in Wiesbaden also appeared to lack
conviction.
The tide of opinion and prima facie evidence appears to have turned against
VW. The prosecutors are now believed to be working their way through
interviews with VW employees. Starting with established members of staff,
they are searching for evidence that GM data, whether on paper, computer
disks or via electronic transmissions was filtered into VW's Wolfsburg
headquarters.
At the end of the list of interviewees stand the four former GM men, all of
whom have already signed statements or affidavits that they neither took
secrets from their old employer nor delivered them to their new one. They
are on annual leave at present and not due back until early August, although
all the signs at the weekend were that they were likely to be called back
early.
