FT  26 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tin hopes boosted as China
comes into fold
CHINA, THE world's biggest tin producer, is joining the Association of Tin
Producing Countries and analysts suggested yesterday that this should
improve the ATPC's chances of curbing supply and raising prices.
'This must be good for those who want tin prices to go up. China coming into
the fold will help the ATPC exert more restraint on supply,' said Mr Neil
Buxton, analyst at Metal Bulletin Research.
He suggested that China was mainly responsible for this year's rise in world
tin stocks to about 40,000 tonnes, 13 or 14 weeks supply. Available
statistics suggest that China lifted annual exports from about 10,000 tonnes
at the begining of the 1990s to between 30,000 and 35,000 tonnes - roughly
20 per cent of the 175,000 tonnes consumed each year in the western world.
Western tin producers had cut output much more than other base metals
companies, by about 30 per cent over the past two years, Mr Buxton pointed
out. 'These cuts were completely offset by exports from China and, to a
lesser extent, from other, smaller, far east Asian countries such as Vietnam
and Laos.'
Although China had informally agreed export restrictions with the ATPC, this
obviously had not worked well, Mr Buxton pointed out. China's full
membership of the ATPC would put more pressure on it to keep its promises.
The news about China from a two-day ATPC meeting this week in Kuala Lumpur
did not stop tin prices falling sharply again yesterday, a reaction to the
recent, equally sharp, rise. The spectre of increasing stocks drove down the
tin price to a 20-year low of Dollars 4,350 a tonne early in September but
it then bounced back to touch Dollars 5,053 last Thursday amid suggestions
that it was being manipulated upwards in the Kuala Lumpur market by
merchants and producers.
Tin for delivery in three months fell another Dollars 207.50 to close at
Dollars 4,797,50 last night. Ms Karen Norton, analyst at Billiton-Enthoven
Metals, part of the Royal Dutch/Shell group, said recent higher tin prices
were not fundamentally justified. 'And our technical analyst says tin was
overbought and due for a sharp (downward) correction.' Ms Norton believed
China's decision to join the ATPC was 'a positive move in the longer term'.
China set conditions before it agreed to join. It wanted to be exempted from
providing monthly tin market statistics on the grounds that there are no
sources from which it could obtain the data. It also insisted that its
membership payment be based on exports, not production as is the case for
other countries, as its domestic market consumed a great deal of its output.
Other members of the ATPC are Australia, Bolivia, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Nigeria, Thailand and Zaire. Brazil, the second-largest producer, has
indicated it may join next year.
The ATPC wanted 1993 exports restricted to 89,400 tonnes compared with
87,091 in 1992 in the belief that this would cut world stocks from about
39,000 tonnes to 20,000 tonnes by the end of this year. Failure to meet
these targets has split opinion within the ATPC about whether the so-called
supply rationalisation scheme should be continued and even whether the
organisation should be disbanded.
