FT  05 FEB 93 / Ulcer treatment market may face big shake-up
A STUDY published in yester-day's New England Journal of Medicine suggests
that a combination of drugs could prevent duodenal ulcers recurring in 92
per cent of sufferers.
The results, which confirm previous studies, threaten to alter profoundly
the structure of the ulcer treatment market, which is worth Dollars 7bn
(Pounds 4.6bn) a year.
About a third of the drugs prescribed for ulcers are to prevent them
recurring. If the new combination of drugs is widely adopted by specialists
and general practitioners, it could severely reduce sales of maintenance
therapies.
The leading ulcer treatment is Glaxo's Zantac, which generated Pounds 1.8bn
of sales in the past year and is the world's best-selling drug. SmithKline
Beecham's Tagamet had sales of more than Dollars 1bn.
The Austrian one-year study of 104 patients compared results on patients
given a placebo with those on Zantac combined with antibiotics. In patients
followed for a year, ulcers recurred in 8 per cent of those given
antibiotics but 86 per cent on placebo - a treatment without any medicinal
effect.
The antibiotics kill a bacterium called Helicobacter Pylori, which is
associated with recurring ulcers. In those patients in which the antibiotics
successfully killed the bacteria, only 2 per cent suffered a recurrence
compared with 85 per cent on placebo.
A comment accompanying the study, by Professor David Graham of the Veterans'
Affairs Medical Centre in Houston, Texas, recommended that an attempt should
be made to eradicate the bacteriological infection in all patients with
Helicobacter Pylori and peptic ulcers. He concluded that if recurrence was
precluded, maintenance therapy would not be needed.
Glaxo said the study was a small one, but provided further evidence that the
bacteria played a role in the recurrence of duodenal ulcers. It also
confirmed that Zantac in combination with other drugs had the ability to
eliminate Helicobacter Pylori.
However, Glaxo said there had not yet been a large well controlled trial to
validate the effectiveness or safety of the combination therapy, and nor had
there been regulatory approval for such a regime. The group also noted there
had been a high incidence of side effects during the trials.
Some specialists have also been worried about widespread use of antibiotics
to prevent recurrence of ulcers, because it might allow organisms to build
up resistance to the drugs.
