FT  12 JUL 93 / Arts: Rope ensures a reputation - Theatre
Few plays now can afford an actor the chance to say 'You swine, you filthy
swine' without causing a ripple of mirth in the theatre. But those closing
lines of Patrick Hamilton's taut psychological thriller, Rope, ring like a
tocsin round the Minerva Theatre, Chichester, where Keith Baxter has
successfully revived the 1929 classic.
Rope shows how two Oxford undergraduates, Brandon and Granillo, murder their
friend Ronald. They conceal the body in a chest, and invite Ronald's father,
aunt and assorted friends to dine off the same chest. But one of the guests,
a louche poet called Rupert Cadell, discovers their perfect and motiveless
crime.
Stage time and theatre time are identical. After two hours, the dinner
service is cleared, and the questions from Rupert become more probing.
Before Brandon and Granillo can make off with the body, Rupert returns,
confronts them, and wrings a confession.
Hamilton's writing is everywhere detailed, the stage directions punctilious:
'He responds vaguely, as one who has only half understood'. Yet it is also
powerful, making psychological sense of the 'foul, lewd and infamous jest',
fashioning a drama of Jacobean scope and Jonsonian bravado. The play moves
the thriller genre into drama, but does so by avoiding the whodunnit
formula.
The direction (Keith Baxter) serves the purpose exactly. Each time new
information arrives, the situation and the characters change. The opening,
completely dark except for the two actors' glowing cigarettes which identify
them, is all tension and uncertainty: 'Do you think we'll get away with it?'
The dinner-party performance which follows manages to maintain the sense
that Brandon and Granillo are both acting and reacting as circumstances
change. The action sprawls over the false-perspective set, a thunder storm
worrying at the murderers throughout.
The acting of the three principals keeps pace with the subtleties of
Hamilton's plot. Brandon (John Barrowman) differentiates himself neatly from
the less expansive and much surlier Granillo (Alexis Denisof). Throughout
the party, both indulge the thrill of a healthy crime and the sprezzatura of
its execution. Both characters drink heavily, and at times stagger round the
stage like bleary bachelors at a stag party. But their interchanges have an
excitement and breathlessness born naturally out of their situation.
Rupert (Anthony Head) is all fastidiousness and frolic, a cultured creature
already world-weary and bored, but witty enough to know it: 'Of course I
honour my parents. I send them a telegram of congratulations each year on my
birthday.' Whether the killers will hang depends on his attitude, a kind of
late nineteenth-century decadence which finds its own moral standards when
pressed. Head has the character down, fiddling at a cigarette, twitching at
his cloak.
Elsewhere Simon Chadwick and Debra Beaumont are perfect as the hooray
guests, while Richard Warwick adds commendatorial weight as the victim's
father, Sir Johnstone Kentley.
Hitchcock adapted Hamilton's play in 1948, and it has remained a classic for
exactly the reasons which mark its success here: it is, like Hamilton's
other plays, tense, uneasy and psychologically acute. Hamilton died at 58 in
1962. His neglected fame should hang on more than just Rope.
Minerva Theatre, Chichester, until 7 August
