FT  04 FEB 93 / Not in the best of health: The WHO faces recurring internal
divisions and doubts about its effectiveness
When Dr Hiroshi Nakajima set himself the goal last year of being re-elected
director-general of the World Health Organisation, following a Japanese
custom he painted one eye on to a huge red-and-gold papier-mache head.
Twelve days ago he painted on the second eye to mark his victory: a second
five-year term at the head of one of the largest and oldest United Nations
institutions, despite being dubbed by critics the least popular
director-general in its history.
'There have been many attacks on my style but I am pleased with the
(election) outcome,' he says, in a deadpan comment on one of the most bitter
campaigns fought in the WHO. When the Japanese ornamental carp at its Geneva
headquarters were found gutted on the grass one morning last summer, many
assumed it was the work of his opponents. In more explicit statements, he
has been accused of poor communication, autocratic tendencies and lack of
leadership.
He kept his job by a decisive 18-13 margin because of support from
developing countries, who make up most of the 31-strong board. They appear
to believe he will be better than his rival candidate, Algeria's Mohammed
Abdelmoumene  - who was backed by the US and Europe  - at safeguarding their
health programmes. Although Japan has not yet played a prominent part in
international aid projects, his re-election may represent a judgment by
developing countries that they can no longer rely so heavily on the European
and US economies.
But just days into his new term Dr Nakajima has ordered an independent audit
into alleged financial irregularities in awarding contracts to research
institutes. He is also confronted by a series of difficult strategic issues
now facing the organisation and by doubts that he is the right person to
resolve them.
Founded in 1948, in the flush of post-war humanitarian ideals, the WHO is
dedicated to tackling some of the world's most intractable problems - the
growth of population and the spread of disease. Its greatest triumph came
with the eradication of smallpox in 1977. Its influence is considerable: its
pronouncements can force governments to clean up drinking water or persuade
mothers that 'breast is best' for their babies.
Yet the organisation lacks the high public profile of some of the smaller UN
agencies which have been fighting emergencies in Bosnia and Somalia, such as
Unicef, the children's fund, or the UNHCR refugee schemes. 'We could fly in
like them, with good-looking doctors and TV crews, but it's not our style,'
says one WHO official.
Primarily a research and advisory body, many of whose 4,500 staff hold
degrees from top western medical colleges, the WHO adopts a low-key
approach. Its doctors point out that together with its long-term outlook,
this makes success hard to define. Smallpox is the only disease it has
eradicated, and future triumphs are unlikely to be as clear-cut. It had
intended malaria to be the second 'wipe-out' but it realised more than 20
years ago that it would have to limit its goals. It was typically taking
pharmaceutical companies 10 years and Dollars 75m to develop drugs to combat
the disease, but the malaria parasite was mutating into drug-resistant forms
at a much faster rate.
The WHO's latest targets are still formidable, and its doctors are cautious
about whether they are achievable. It hopes by the year 2000 to have
eliminated leprosy and polio and to have immunised more than 90 per cent of
the world's children against measles, whooping cough, tuberculosis, tetanus,
polio, and diphtheria. It has already reached more than 80 per cent of
children, but the rest live in the poorest countries where disease is most
prevalent. Universal immunisation 'may be almost impossible', says one
official.
The spread of Aids, perhaps the biggest challenge the WHO faces and the one
with which it is most closely identified in the public mind, presents even
greater difficulties. With no vaccine in sight, the WHO says it is trying
simply to curb the spread of the disease. Its doctors say they judge success
by small steps  - persuading health ministers to take Aids seriously or
setting up the distribution of condoms to Nigerian brothels.
But now that recession is making developed countries look more closely at
their aid budgets, the low public awareness of much of the WHO's work and
the difficulty of measuring progress leaves it vulnerable in the fierce
international competition for humanitarian funds.
Its core or 'regular' budget covering 1992 and 1993 was Dollars 734m, a
quarter contributed by the US and 12 per cent by Japan. For several years,
like many UN bodies, its contributions have risen in line with inflation.
However, the WHO collected only 76 per cent of its core budget last year;
several poor countries defaulted on commitments, and the collapse of the
former Soviet Union wiped Dollars 70m off its income.
Some programmes, notably Aids, have managed to continue to grow, because of
the increase in funds given by donor countries for specific projects. For
1992 and 1993 together, 'extra' contributions amounted to Dollars 999m, a
third more than the core budget; 20 years ago such contributions were only a
quarter of its size.
While the new funds are welcome, the trend has led to accusations from some
of the 182 member countries that donor countries are 'hijacking' the WHO by
giving money only where they are assured of control, and that its priorities
are increasingly selected by lobby groups in developed countries.
The Aids prevention and testing programme attracts much of the criticism as
it is now the largest single programme and one of the largest in the UN,
with an annual budget of about Dollars 80m and a worldwide staff of 450. The
US, which has shown vigorous support, finds about a quarter of the funds.
Dr Michael Merson, director of the Aids programme, is adamant that its size
is justified. 'I don't know of any other disease that affects young and
middle-aged adults, is 100 per cent fatal, and can penetrate 30 per cent of
some populations  - I think it's a wise investment to put in this kind of
money.'
In contrast, the WHO's research into 'human reproduction', which includes
some of its work on contraception, gets only about a quarter of the amount
provided for Aids. That is partly because in the past the US has not
contributed to work involving abortion, even though the projected doubling
of the world's population to 10bn in the next 50 years will jeopardise
standards of health in many countries.
However, Dr Paul van Look, head of the reproduction programme, says that
lack of money has not been a problem. He says he is pleased with
achievements such as persuading the Chinese government to distribute more
efficient copper intra-uterine devices instead of steel ones to reduce the
number of unwanted pregnancies.
In light of the increasing strains and problems of defining the WHO's role,
the anxiety among member countries and staff about who runs the organisation
is understandable. Some of the antagonism over the election arose simply
from a clash of styles; Mr Nakajima's cautious bureaucratic approach clearly
jars with the WHO's rangy, shirt-sleeved doctors who itch to leave Geneva
for the villages of Africa and Asia. But he also lacks vision at a time when
many WHO staff feel they need a charismatic leader to articulate the
organisation's ideals to the outside world. That sort of role appears to
make him uncomfortable. He says: 'Of course I could talk about leprosy or
polio, but my priorities for the next five years are streamlining the budget
and improving internal co-ordination.'
There seems some justification. too, for his critics' accusations of poor
communication. Although he speaks English, the meaning behind phrases such
as 'the priority of structure' or 'paradigms of healthcare' can be elusive.
The countries which voted for him may be right in calculating that the
Japanese financial contributions to the WHO will grow. But Dr Nakajima's
re-election may nonetheless prove to be a source of recurring friction
within the WHO at a time when it faces its greatest external challenges.
 ----------------------------------------------
    PROPOSED ALLOCATION OF DOLLARS 1.8BN
           BUDGET FOR 1994 AND 1995
 ----------------------------------------------
Aids                               10 percent
Other disease
prevention and control             23 percent
Health services                    23 percent
Healthcare
(family planning, childcare)       20 percent
Publications                       16 percent
Administration                      8 percent
 ----------------------------------------------
Source: WHO
 ----------------------------------------------
