FT  08 JAN 93 / TSB plans unit to manage its bad debt portfolio
TSB Group, the bank whose employees are today striking nationally for the
first time since 1968, is planning to establish a separate business unit to
manage its portfolio of bad debts, bankers said yesterday.
The group, which like all big UK banks has been suffering from unprecedented
losses on lending, could give details of the new corporate structure next
week, when it announces its results for the year to October 31.
The reasons for the reorganisation are twofold:
To try to demonstrate to shareholders and depositors that its main banking
businesses are sound and profitable, if they are viewed separately from the
bad lending of the 1980s;
To help recover some of the money outstanding in poor quality loans, which
may total more than Pounds 3bn, by giving this task to a team in the new
business unit.
Sir Nicholas Goodison, TSB chairman, warned earlier this week that the
second half of the financial year had been unexpectedly bad. Losses on the
bank's property loans are thought to have been particularly severe. It has
an exposure to Lilley, the construction group which went into receivership
on Wednesday.
At the end of last April, TSB was carrying provisions in its balance sheet
of Pounds 1bn to cover the risk of loan losses. The charge for loan losses
in the past year, including additions to provisions and write-offs, may have
been as much as Pounds 430m, according to Mr Rod Barrett, of brokers Goldman
Sachs. TSB refused to comment on the forecast. Mr Barrett also estimated
that TSB's pre-tax profits last year were Pounds 80m, compared with a Pounds
47m loss in 1991 and a 1990 profit of Pounds 312m.
TSB also considered spinning off its poor quality loans into a separate 'bad
bank'. Shares in this bad bank would have been issued to TSB shareholders
but such a demerger would have resulted in excessive costs, so is unlikely.
TSB has been hurt by poor loans made by two subsidiaries - Hill Samuel, its
corporate lending bank, and Mortgage Express, which sold mortgages through
brokers rather than through TSB branches.
The share price of TSB surged yesterday from 152p to 158p, as 11m shares
were traded. Brokers speculated that TSB would be the target of a takeover
bid.
Those TSB employees which are members of the banking union Bifu are striking
because of plans to cut staff numbers.
Market, Page 30
