FT  12 FEB 93 / US muscle for the mediators: American backing is a shot in
the arm for the Vance-Owen peace process
THE US endorsement of a negotiated rather than a military solution in Bosnia
might be seen by some as too timid an approach, but it has been greeted with
relief in the United Nations and by the international mediators.
Some of President Bill Clinton's election campaign ideas on the Bosnian
crisis, such as air strikes and the lifting of the arms embargo to help the
Moslems, have always been considered by the international mediators, Mr
Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, as likely to exacerbate the conflict rather than
end it.
The emphasis placed by Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, on
co-operation with Washington's traditional allies and Russia in the search
for a peace settlement, is seen as putting new life into the stalled
international negotiations. The US may continue to have doubts about the
mediators' plan for dividing Bosnia into 10 semi-autonomous provinces, but
it has clearly expressed its support for the Vance-Owen 'peace process'.
Full US participation in the process - through a competent and respected
envoy such as Mr Reginald Bartholomew and, not least, Mr Clinton's promise
that the US would join international measures to implement and enforce an
agreement endorsed by all the parties - provides the negotiators with the
kind of muscle they had conspicuously lacked.
Before an agreement can be enforced, however, it has to be reached. The US
administration, which has emphasised that it will not impose an agreement on
the warring parties, may have to shed more illusions when it comes face to
face with their slippery representatives.
The reason why Mr Vance and Lord Owen wanted the UN security council to
'impose' a solution was because all their immense efforts to reach a
diplomatic settlement in Geneva had run into the sand. They felt that only a
united security council, with the full backing of the US and Russia in
particular, would have sufficient clout to force the warring parties to sign
on the dotted line.
Such a procedure would not necessarily have entailed the use of force, but
it would probably have involved the threat of force.
Mr Bartholomew will find that the US will have to indulge in the kind of
arm-twisting undertaken by the mediators when they invited Mr Slobodan
Milosevic, the Serbian president, to Geneva in January. The strong-arm
tactics employed then by Mr Milosevic, to 'persuade' Mr Radovan Karadzic,
the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, to accept the mediators' constitutional
principles for Bosnia, may well have to be resorted to again.
If Mr Bartholomew's first stop since his appointment is Moscow, that is
precisely because the US administration is fully aware that Russian,
combined with Serbian, pressure could again shift Mr Karadzic from his
entrenched positions.
What is less clear is how much pressure the US is prepared to put on the
Bosnian Moslems, singled out by Mr Vance and Lord Owen as the chief obstacle
to progress during the New York round of negotiations, but whose interests
the US has vowed to defend.
That special concern for the Bosnian Moslems is understandable, given the
suffering they have endured at the hands of the Bosnian Serbs. But, from a
negotiating point of view, the lack of the same degree of impartiality as Mr
Vance and Lord Owen have shown throughout the long weeks of haggling between
the warring parties, may put the US representative at a disadvantage as a
mediator and could even undermine the whole process.
The US administration has also made much of the fact that it is not
producing its own map for the future ethnic division of Bosnia, mainly
because it considers the Vance-Owen map as partially 'rewarding' the Bosnian
Serbs for their policy of ethnic cleansing and because it does not believe
that it can be effectively implemented.
Since, however, the main dispute in the negotiations is about territory, the
US, too, will have to think in terms of maps sooner or later. The assumption
at the moment is that it will take the Vance-Owen map, which has already
been amended to take into account some of the Moslem demands, as the basis
for further negotiations.
Any attempt to abandon entirely the concept of a state divided into
semi-autonomous regions would be unacceptable to the Serbs, who have been
demanding an even greater degree of decentralisation, which would give them
virtual independence.
For a Bosnia peace settlement now to be reached, the three mediators will
have to maintain a united front and avoid giving the impression that they
favour one or the other party.
