FT  17 MAY 93 / Economics Notebook: Shifting private sector funds to more
countries
FINANCIAL markets tend to give to those who already have.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the relationship between providers of
capital and developing nations. One of the challenges facing economic policy
makers is to increase the flow of private investment capital to many
promising developing countries that are currently attracting too little.
The problem is of more than academic interest. Italy or Spain are only a few
hours fast boat ride from the southern shore of the Mediterranean while the
collapse of communism has made a western standard of living seem
tantalisingly close to many in former Iron Curtain countries. If countries
like Egypt, Morocco or some of the former communist countries of eastern
Europe are not helped to grow faster, the pressures of immigration into
economically mature western countries will exceed manageable bounds.
In fact, the revival of private sector flows to the developing world so far
this decade is one of the economic success stories of the 1990s.
World Bank studies estimate that net foreign direct investment in developing
countries rose to about Dollars 37bn (Pounds 24bn) in 1992, a 75 per cent
increase compared with 1990. Joint research by the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank suggests the flow of portfolio investments into
developing countries through bond issues in international markets or
international equity placements by developing country companies was Dollars
30bn in 1992 compared with less than Dollars 6bn a year between 1982 and
1988.
However, these funds have been very unevenly distributed. Four Latin
American countries - Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela - accounted for
more than half the recorded portfolio flows in 1991-92 with China, Hungary,
South Korea and Turkey accounting for much of the rest. A similar group of
countries, plus the Czech republic, Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand has
attracted most of the foreign direct investment recently. In 1991 just 10
developing nations received more than 70 per cent of total foreign direct
investment.
Private investment is steering clear of sub-Saharan Africa, the poorer
countries of south Asia and many former communist countries in eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union.
It is no surprise that some countries find it difficult to attract foreign
investment. But there is a 'second tier' of countries, mainly in the middle
income category, that should offer good opportunities for private
investment. Some, like India, have made big efforts to strengthen their
overall economic performance and received scant private sector capital from
abroad.
It was with these countries in mind that the joint IMF-World Bank
Development Committee met in Washington earlier this month to see what, if
anything, could be done to spread private sector investment to more
countries.
The committee's regular half-yearly meetings, which bring together finance
and development ministers from the industrialised, developing and former
communist countries with IMF and World Bank officials, rarely attract much
notice. But this time, there was a attempt to stimulate debate by Mr Ricardo
Hausmann of Venezuela, the committee's new chairman. He had asked
governments and outside consultants to put forward ideas on action to
encourage private capital flows.
The result was a flood of detailed, mainly micro-economic suggestions,
highlighting many complex difficulties. There were 21 proposals for action
to be undertaken by developing countries, 23 suggestions directed at
industrialised countries and 18 addressed to international financial
institutions.
Many papers covered familiar ground, underlining, for example, that host
countries should provide political and macro-economic stability. Some
reflected a recognition that developing countries which remove barriers to
the outflow of capital stand a better chance of luring back flight capital
and attracting new private sector flows.
Detailed taxation issues emerged as a big problem, with investors worried
about future tax liabilities in developing countries. Regulatory systems in
the industrial countries were cited as placing barriers to private
investment in some countries. The World Bank was called upon to work with
developing countries to make their projects more understandable to rating
agencies such as Moody's.
The World Bank said it must give more thought to so-called 'second
generation' development measures to improve the environment in which
companies operate. These would build on 'first generation' policies aimed at
creating a stable macroeconomic framework and realistic prices.
Unfortunately, the discussion was summed up in a bland and unmemorable
communique. The committee concluded that the responsibility for improving
investment prospects mainly lies with the host country. But industrial
countries have much to do, not least through the lowering of trade barriers.
Indeed the gap in quality between the papers put before the Development
Committee and the published account of its deliberations raises the question
as to whether it should continue in its present form. The IMF's policy
making Interim Committee gives directions to the Fund and, through its
communiques, sometimes provides the IMF's member countries with an important
checklist of macroeconomic goals.
There is a good argument for the ministers using the Development Committee
to give more pointed guidance to the World Bank and its member countries.
International financial institutions (IFIs) such as the World Bank are
coming under increased scrutiny to determine whether they are providing a
useful service and value for money.
The Development Committee could play a bigger role in making the World
Bank's work more accountable and transparent for its members and the
taxpayers who fund the bank. But accountability must be part of a two-way
process in which the countries that own the IFIs give them clear directions.
