FT  27 MAR 93 / Blue Circle plans Pounds 500m Channel rail link station
BLUE CIRCLE Industries proposes to build a privately financed international
railway station for the planned Channel tunnel link near Dartford in
north-west Kent.
The station, which could cost up to Pounds 500m, would occupy about 250
acres of chalk quarries and waste ground, part of a 2,500-acre site owned by
Blue Circle, Britain's biggest cement producer.
The land is on the route of the Pounds 2.5bn rail link, to be financed
jointly by the private and public sectors, which was announced by the
government earlier this week.
Blue Circle's plans include hotels, a conference centre, offices and shops
as well as international and domestic passenger terminals.
The station could include an interchange with British Rail lines eastward to
the Medway towns and westward through south-east London to the centre of the
capital.
The proposals are to be submitted shortly to ministers and Union Railways,
the BR subsidiary responsible for developing the high-speed link, according
to Mr Mark Pennington, Kent development manager for Blue Circle Properties.
He will also seek meetings with banks and potential investment partners.
Blue Circle said the cost of the station would be met out of proceeds from
the commercial development. The company would provide the land as its
contribution to the investment. It believes the project could be completed
without any public finance.
Blue Circle said it would begin local consultation shortly. The proposals
were supported by Dartford District Council and by Mr Bob Dunn, MP for
Dartford and chairman of the Conservative backbench transport committee, it
said.
Mr Pennington said the construction of a station providing a direct link to
continental Europe could act as a catalyst for a much bigger development of
the entire 2,500 acres owned by Blue Circle. This includes the Eastern
Quarry which currently supplies the group's Northfleet cement works.
Plans could eventually involve the construction of a new town with up to
12,500 homes, offices, shops, a conference centre, business and industrial
parks, recreational and social amenities, creating some 34,000 jobs.
The site is just east of the Dartford bridge and tunnel which carry the M25
across the River Thames. The development would be in line with plans to
stimulate investment along the Thames.
Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, this week established a 'task
force' of civil servants to consider plans for redeveloping the corridor. He
has not so far offered any contribution from the public sector.
Channel tunnel claim, Page 5
