FT  07 SEP 93 / The Renault-Volvo Merger: Gyllenhammar set to play the role
of a champion
FOR Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, who has led Volvo for 22 years, yesterday's merger
with Renault was something of a paradox.
On one side, the deal is the consummation of an alliance that reflects Mr
Gyllenhammar's long-cultivated role of industrial statesman and vociferous
advocate of Sweden's need to move closer to the rest of Europe. Already
decorated with the Legion d'Honneur and a fluent French speaker, he will
revel in his position as the figurehead of a European automotive giant.
But there is also the less glorious side: for the merger amounts to an
admission by a man committed to preserving Sweden's industrial strength that
Volvo, the country's best known manufacturing company, can no longer compete
on its own. Words he penned in 1986, when Volvo was in its heyday, now look
painfully outdated.
'My hope is that Volvo will remain a strong enterprise - that it will never
have to seek help from outside. It is the most important thing,' he wrote in
a book about the company.
PG, as he is universally known in Sweden, will doubtless shrug off such
awkward echoes from the past. Since he took over from his father-in-law, Mr
Gunnar Engellau, as Volvo managing director in 1971 at the age of 36, he has
rarely been out of the public eye in Sweden, evoking both admiration and
irritation among his reticent compatriots for his outspoken and ambitious
stewardship of the group.
A former chief of the insurance company Skandia, Mr Gyllenhammar has
presided over two decades of growth at Volvo in which its cars have achieved
an international reputation for safety and utility - and lately even
performance. But his restless search for new horizons has over the years
also led Volvo in strange directions.
In the late 1970s, successive attempts to merge with Saab-Scania, Volvo's
great domestic rival owned by the Wallenberg family, to sell a 40 per cent
shareholding in the group to the Norwegian government in return for North
Sea oil rights and to persuade the Swedish government to invest SKr1bn in
the company flared and then died.
A decade later, Volvo was riding high as one of the world's most profitable
carmakers. Mr Gyllenhammar, who in 1990 moved from the position of chief
executive to the role of executive chairman, won plaudits for his pioneering
of new 'humane' production techniques that sought to replace the traditional
assembly line with team-based assembly systems.
Recession in the 1990s, however, exposed how far Volvo had slipped in
international competitiveness and the new plants were closed, with thousands
of Swedish workers laid off as losses mounted.
Mr Gyllenhammar's advocacy of international partnerships as the way forward
for Swedish companies was vindicated, but in Volvo's case with more of a
defensive character than he surely originally intended.
Now, the automotive heart of Volvo will take its place as a junior partner
in the new company, with 'PG' no doubt playing a high-profile role as a
champion of the Swedish contribution to the alliance.
But many in Sweden believe the deal will also presage the effective
departure from the Swedish industrial scene of one of its most remarkable
sons. 'This will be his crowning glory - and then he will abdicate,'
predicted one businessman who knows him well.
