FT  09 JAN 93 / Walker accused of Pounds 12.5m theft
MR GEORGE WALKER, former head of the Brent Walker leisure and property
group, was arrested yesterday and charged with the theft of Pounds 12.5m
from his old company.
His arrest marks another step in the former boxer's fall from grace. In May
1991, he was ousted as chief executive of Brent Walker, which he had built
up through a series of deals but had overburdened with debt.
However, last September he fought off his creditors' petition for personal
bankruptcy. Since then he has been building a new business importing
cigarettes and cosmetics into Russia.
The two counts of theft allege he stole Pounds 7.5m from Brent Walker in May
1989 and a further Pounds 5m in August that year.
Mr Walker was also charged, along with Mr Wilfred Aquilina, the group's
former finance director, with two counts of false accounting relating to the
thefts.
The arrests follow an investigation by the Serious Fraud Office into the
affairs of Brent Walker. The investigation was started in August 1991 at the
request of the company's then new management.
Both Mr Walker and Mr Aquilina, accompanied by their solicitors, walked into
London's Holborn police station at 9am yesterday, to be arrested and charged
by Metropolitan Fraud Squad officers. They appeared later at Bow Street
magistrates court and were released on bail until April 2.
Mr Walker left the court without making any comment. His solicitor, Mr
Michael Coleman, said the former Brent Walker chief executive denied any
dishonesty.
'Mr Walker has been charged with a number of very serious offences at the
conclusion of a lengthy and detailed investigation by the Serious Fraud
Office,' Mr Coleman said. 'Throughout the inquiry Mr Walker has co-operated
completely with the SFO and has throughout denied his involvement in any
dishonesty. He and his family are disappointed that these charges have been
made.'
Mr Walker was released on bail of Pounds 500,000. However, his passport was
not taken away, allowing him to continue with his business activities
abroad.
Mr Aquilina was released on bail of Pounds 100,000 and ordered to surrender
his passport. He left court without making any comment.
Down but not out, Page 11
