FT  27 AUG 93 / On the bandwagon: Privatisation need not mean price rises
To the cynical consumer, the pattern looks familiar. With the government
intent on privatising British Rail, leaked BR documents suggest passengers
on the south-east lines face fare rises of up to 16 per cent.
The move is seen as the inevitable fattening up process before BR is
auctioned off. The expectation is of further, stinging fare increases.
But the widely held perception that, whatever happens to the quality of
service, privatisation spells bigger bills, can be wide of the mark.
The debate rages over excessive profits and executive rewards in privatised
utilities, the first of which, BT, has been free of the state for nearly 10
years. But the evidence suggests consumers have few grounds to complain on
prices.
Whether or not privatisation is responsible, businesses like BT, British Gas
and, for some customers, the regional electricity companies can boast large
real price reductions. Low inflation, rising competition and tough
regulatory controls have played a part.
The price performances of some privatised businesses may look unduly
flattering, since they are being compared with large price rises in the
run-up to flotation.
It is impossible to say with certainty what prices would have been if
suppliers had remained in state ownership, though some observers believe
they would have offered a better deal to customers.
The post-privatisation picture is not all wine and roses for the consumer.
The most obvious bad tidings have come from the water industry, where
demands for improved quality have imposed high cost burdens, likely to total
Pounds 45bn, which are being passed to consumers.
Many electricity users, too, have faced significant price rises, although
domestic bills this year have been reduced. But UK householders' bills still
compare well with others' in Europe.
Of the privatised utilities, British Gas seems best at trumpet-blowing, some
claim unjustifiably. It claims prices to its 18m domestic consumers have
fallen by 20 per cent in real terms since privatisation in 1986, making them
the cheapest in Europe. Even with the planned 17.5 per cent value-added tax
rate applied, they will be at the lower end of European prices.
For industrial gas users in general, the record is even better - with real
reductions averaging 25 per cent since 1986.
Not everyone, however, is prepared to hand a bouquet to British Gas. Mr
George Yarrow, of the Regulatory Policy Research Centre, says the real fall
in domestic gas prices is almost entirely due to lower prices on arrival on
the beach-head.
He stresses electricity prices, which rose sharply prior to privatisation in
1990, have not fallen in real terms since the sell-off. He suggests that
average electricity prices were up to 25 per cent higher for domestic
customers by 1992 and 19 per cent higher for industrial consumers than they
would have been if earlier price trends had continued.
But Prof Stephen Littlechild, electricity industry regulator, says the
arrival of competition in 1990 led to big price falls for industrial users;
despite rises since then, many prices remain lower in real terms than before
privatisation.
Big customers on interruptible gas contracts - they pay less and run the
risk of having supplies temporarily cut off - benefit from some of the
lowest comparable prices in Europe. Yet some, like ICI, British Steel and
Blue Circle Industries are fighting to scale down price rises. Since
privatisation, they have had to buy supplies daily on the spot market,
whereas before they could strike their own deals with the old Central
Electricity Generating Board.
For BT, which in 1984 led the privatisation bandwagon, criticism of some
high call charges has obscured the overall real fall in bills.
But then the Post Office, too, has done well since it split away from BT in
1984. Postal tariffs will rise in November after a two-year freeze, but
average letter prices have fallen by 10 per cent in real terms in the past
decade.
BT rates for local calls - covering a wider range than in many other
countries - remain among the most costly in Europe and North America. But
international call charges - subject to increasing competition from Mercury
 -are among the cheapest. Transatlantic call costs are down more than 40 per
cent since the BT sale.
Oftel, the industry watchdog which regulates BT by monitoring a basket of
its services, says overall prices have fallen in real terms by at least 25
per cent since privatisation.
Domestic subscribers with 'medium-sized' bills - an average Pounds 44 a
quarter - have seen a 5 per cent average reduction since 1989.
Significantly, higher line rental charges - up by about 40 per cent since
1988 - have partially offset lower call charges.
The water and sewerage industry has had no good news on prices since
privatisation in 1989. But it claims to have to correct decades of
under-investment. Average household water bills have risen by almost 37 per
cent more than the RPI in the past five years.
Consumer surveys by Anglian Water and Welsh Water have found that consumers
will accept still higher bills to help pay for water improvement programmes.
If the privatised businesses have a mixed record on prices, their future
performance seems as likely to depend on the disciplines imposed by their
respective regulators as on the varying degrees of marketplace competition
they face.
As for passengers of a privatised railway system, the expectation is that to
help revive a loss-making industry in long-term decline, prices will have to
rise before and after privatisation.
The government says privatisation will offer more and better trains at
attractive fares. In the grand tradition of railway passengers, they will
have to wait to find out.
