FT  17 SEP 93 / Survey of International Mergers &amp; Acquisitions (9): Racing
to catch up with the west - Post-communist Europe's developing private
sector
BAD NEWS from Yugoslavia, similar violence along the borderlands of southern
Russia, continuing economic decline and rampant inflation in Russia, and
even more so in Ukraine, are conditioning the attitudes of many investors
towards the post-communist world as a whole.
But a deeper, more discriminating investigation reveals a profound economic
and social transformation under way in many parts of this huge region,
especially in those countries not engulfed by ethnic and other resurgent
historical struggles.
As expected, the fastest and deepest changes are taking place in central
Europe, although even here the full scale has been masked by official
statistics pointing to steep and continuing declines in industrial
production and GDP. But statistics which show that the economies of Poland,
Hungary and the Czech and Slovak Republics are running at production levels
20-30 per cent below 1988, the last full year of communist control, distort
reality.
What such figures do show is the extent to which the old economy of
polluting heavy industry, arms factories and shoddy consumer goods has been
scrapped or down-sized. They do not fully reflect the rocketing output from
the local private sector, the rapid increase in the size and sophistication
of service industries - from retailing and advertising to banking and
property management - or the degree of re-integration into the global
economy as foreign investors introduce new technology, buy and restructure
privatised state enterprises or step up production from new,
state-of-the-art, carmaking, detergent, glass, chemical and other new plants
on green field sites.
Central Europe - the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia
 -accounts for just over 70m of the 400m people in the former Soviet Empire.
Another 8m live in the three Baltic states - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania -
which are likely to achieve similar levels of income and economic
performance by the early years of the 21st century.
All are determined to achieve west European standards of living, and to
integrate as fully as possible, and as soon as possible, into a suitably
enlarged EC and Nato. By any standards this represents an enormous business
opportunity which multinational consumer and capital goods corporations have
been among the first to spot.
To date the inflow of equity capital into the region since 1989, probably
running at about Dollars 10-12bn, is small compared to that which poured
into Spain or even Portugal as Iberia entered the EC. It is dwarfed by the
capital flows into a re-invigorated Latin America and South East Asia where
capitalist institutions and attitudes already exist to build on, and returns
on capital are often both faster and higher.
But the strong possibility that Poland, which with 39m people, is the
largest of the non-Soviet post-communist states, will this year achieve the
highest economic growth in a generally depressed Europe has highlighted the
potential for rapid and sustainable growth once the re-structured economies
recover from the painful surgery of the last three years.
ABB, the Swiss-Swedish power generating and engineering group, was one of
the first strategic investors to target Poland and has gone on to acquire a
string of power generating and related plants throughout central Europe.
Injecting management know-how and focusing on staff and worker retraining
rather than capital, ABB has developed both a new low-cost source for an
increasing range of components and staked out a strategic position as
supplier, from a domestic base, of much needed power generating,
anti-pollution and other equipment, for which demand in the region is bound
to rise sharply as economic growth gathers pace.
Ikea, the Swedish-based furniture company, is another Nordic investor
well-apprised of the cost advantages involved in sourcing product from
central European factories. It too has been attracted by the potential for
steady and protracted growth in new markets of long-starved consumers with
western tastes and a huge pent-up demand for relatively cheap and stylish
consumer durables.
In August, Ikea opened the biggest furniture store in central and eastern
Europe just outside Warsaw and plans to invest Dollars 55m in building other
new stores by 1996. In the meantime its three Polish factories, using cheap
local wood and chipboard and low cost labour, are already accounting for 20
per cent of the group's total world production and will double this over the
next three years.
It is a similar story in the automobile sector where Volkswagen's takeover
and DM7bn investment plans for Skoda Automobilova in the Czech republic, and
Fiat's Dollars 2bn commitment to Poland, have transformed prospects for the
central European car industry alongside smaller investments by General
Motors, Ford and Suzuki of Japan and smaller assembly operations by Peugeot
and Citroen.
Hungary remains the main recipient of foreign investment with over Dollars
700m flowing into the country over the first half of this year. But Poland
and the Czech republic seem poised to attract the bulk of merger and
acquisition interest over the next few years, as privatisation releases more
former state assets to the private sector and Poland finally reaches
agreement with the commercial banks on the reduction and re-scheduling of
its Dollars 12bn commercial bank debt.
German and Austrian companies are particularly interested in acquiring
assets in the Czech republic, which juts into German-speaking Europe like a
wedge; and to a lesser extent in Slovakia where Bratislava, the Slovak
capital, is almost a suburb of Vienna.
For Germany, the collapse of communism has meant not only re-unification,
and the unexpectedly difficult process of re-absorbing the eastern
provinces, but also the opening up for trade and investment of its
traditional east European backyard. German companies are particularly aware
of the strategic importance of acquiring enterprises in central Europe whose
management have long standing personal links with enterprises throughout the
former Soviet bloc.
Their eyes are on the longer term future, when Russia and Ukraine will
re-emerge from the current prostration, urgently needing buses, trains,
trams, power stations, motorways - everything, indeed, as cheaply and as
ruggedly made as possible.
That is why two of the most interesting deals in recent months have been the
link-up between AEG-Westinghouse of Germany and CKD of Prague, to build
trams for both eastern and western markets; and the Skoda Pilsens tie-up
with Siemens, also to make steam turbines and other equipment for the wider
pan-European market now emerging.
