FT  15 JUN 93 / UK Company News: BET pins hopes on final phase of three-year
turnround plan
'TURNING business service companies around is like pushing peas up hill with
your nose,' said one analyst yesterday after BET reported further
provisions, a reduced final dividend and more pre-tax losses for the year to
end-March. 'It is going to be slow.'
Mr John Clark, chief executive, appears to agree. He is banking on the third
year of his three-year turnround programme to generate greater profitability
from a business that he says will shrink further to about Pounds 1.5bn of
sales.
According to Mr Clark there is nothing wrong with the markets. The UK
business services market is currently worth Pounds 40bn and will grow to
Pounds 80bn by the end of the century. Comparable figures for the US are
Dollars 800bn and Dollars 1,200bn.
The problem is that BET is getting no help from the UK economy, which if no
longer deteriorating is not improving at any great rate. 'We are seeing much
higher utilisation and higher rates (in plant hire),' says Mr Clark. That is
the most optimistic he can be about any of his business areas.
The question Mr Clark will have to answer for the markets over the next year
is whether there are enough businesses left to allow BET to resume growth.
Last year's divisional figures make sober reading.
The textiles division contributed 24 per cent of trading profits from
continuing operations. But sales fell 25 per cent, partly because of
deconsolidation of the French business, but also because of lower margins in
the UK. There was also a Pounds 15m restructuring cost.
As a result textiles - which employs 55,000 of the 100,000 people in the
group - accounted for Pounds 25m, or 47 per cent of the reduction in trading
profit.
The UK accounted for nearly two thirds of textile services. BET described
this market as facing 'particularly challenging conditions . . . in the
leisure, retail, hotel and heavy industrial sectors'.
Cleaning services produced 15 per cent of profits from continuing
operations, but this was sharply lower after 'severe pressure' on margins,
particularly in new business.
Security services made almost unchanged trading profits - about 14 per cent
of group profits - but the division suffered from a decline in military
spending. In the UK, where three quarters of the division's sales were
generated, the electronic security businesses continued to make good
progress, BET said.
Plant services saw sales fall slightly, but pressure on margins again hit
trading profits, which fell 18 per cent and were responsible for 11 per cent
of the total decrease in group trading profit. Distribution and plant
services were also down.
Catering and facilities management, both start-up businesses, showed rapid
growth in sales and profits and may hold one of the keys to future growth,
according to analysts.
