FT  15 APR 93 / Four die in Soweto as police fire on marchers: Patti
Waldmeir witnesses the bloody end to a peaceful protest over the death of
Chris Hani
IT WAS the largest and most peaceful demonstration I had ever seen in Soweto
 -until the shooting started.
Without warning and without apparent provocation, police guarding the main
gate of the police station opened fire on demonstrators protesting at the
assassination of prominent black activist Chris Hani.
Four people were killed and 250 injured by police firing birdshot, buckshot
and rubber bullets. At least six people died across the country during a day
which saw one of the largest political protests in South African history,
marked by rioting in Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Pietermaritzburg and Durban.
In Soweto, the black township where violence had erupted in 1976, a huge
crowd of angry but disciplined blacks surrounded the heavily fortified
station.
The mostly young, black and white policemen besieged inside appeared to lose
their nerve; shooting spread down the line guarding the station's barbed
wire perimeter fence. The crowd fled in terror. Thousands of people, scores
of them covered with blood, surged forward.
I took refuge in a car as rocks and teargas canisters flew in the confusion.
Colleagues and I helped to lift a young man, his shirt front soaked with
blood, into the car. Another injured man fought his way inside; many more
people tried to crowd in too. We could not help them.
We raced through the streets to deliver our injured to Baragwanath Hospital
where 250 people lay on stretchers in the car park outside the crowded
examination rooms. The young man moaned in pain, clutching a blood-soaked
rag to his head.
Sixteen years ago Sowetan youths took to the streets in an uprising that, in
many respects, marked the start of the South African rebellion. The fearsome
prospect of impatient angry youngsters going on the rampage, out of control
of the African national Congress marshals, seemed to carry the danger of
South Africa slipping into ungovernability.
It raised the prospect of confrontation with police, unable to contain their
own fear, or to allow the demonstrators to disperse peacefully, which they
had already begun to do when the shooting started.
Earlier a young 'comrade' from the South African Communist party had
celebrated the order and discipline shown by the huge crowd milling outside
the station. 'This is marvellous, fantastic, unbelievable,' he said, clearly
delighted that ANC leaders had managed, against the odds, to control the
angry crowd. Then the shooting started.
The truce which reigns in South Africa at the moment is fragile. 'We wanted
peace, but we can see that they want war,' said an angry young African
National Congress marshal, Rose Malawu, who said two BBC journalists
standing next to her were shot - though she is sure police were aiming at
her. 'Now we are prepared to fight,' she said.
Weston Shabangu, a senior official of the Soweto Civic Association, said he
could see the hatred in police eyes before the shooting started: 'The way
that meeting was so disciplined - I could see that their (the police) hearts
were bleeding.
'They think they are sending a signal that we must think twice before
burying Chris (Hani) in Boksburg white cemetery,' Weston said, shaking his
head.
Earlier, in the day, as we approached the police station in our car, picking
a careful path through thousands of walking demonstrators, scores of
marchers greeted us with smiles, cries of 'Dumela' (a greeting in the Sotho
language); one man called me 'my sister'. Seeing my frightened face, an ANC
marshal stopped to smile and say: 'This is Africa. It's our land. You don't
worry.'
One group of very young men called out the radical slogan 'one settler, one
bullet'; but others nearby shook their heads in disapproval, and smiled at
our car full of white journalists. Everywhere there was anger  - but not at
us, even though we were the only white targets in sight. The demonstrators
made clear they hated the government and the police - not whites for the
simple fact of being whites.
That positive mood was dissipated by the police attack. Chris Hani, who has
already become black South Africa's greatest martyr, is no longer there to
contain the anger.
Six dead in riots, Page 4
