FT  28 OCT 93 / Survey of International Capital Markets (5): Market regains
momentum - Banks have created more sophisticated forms of swaps
TURMOIL within the European exchange rate mechanism has been good news for
financial markets throughout the world. It has been especially beneficial to
derivatives markets which allow investors to shift large amounts of money
easily. The increased volatility, particularly in the currency markets, has
encouraged greater use of swaps and options for hedging exposure.
In addition, banks are creating ever more sophisticated types of swaps. The
most commonly used swaps are currency swaps and interest rate swaps, which
consist of an exchange of liabilities between two counterparties.
Just over a year ago, when the UK and Italy suspended their currencies from
the European Monetary System and slashed rates to regenerate their
economies, investors and speculators were already looking at the next weak
links in the chain. Interest rates in Europe were far higher than in the US
but a Europe-wide recession meant that rates in most countries had to come
down thus weakening the currency. In the past 12 months, US hedge funds - of
which Mr George Soros's Quantum Fund is best known - have been the most
active sellers of devaluation-prone currencies, such as sterling, the peseta
and the punt. One motive behind hedge fund activity has been to prompt
devaluation of a currency and then buy it back at the cheaper rate.
Devaluations are not everyday events, however, and more significant is the
interplay between nominal interest rates, reflected by government bond
prices and foreign exchange values.
This is where swaps come in. For example, a German company might be able to
raise funds easily in D-Marks at a floating rate linked to Fibor, the
Frankfurt Interbank Offered Rate, but it can get money at a much lower rate
in dollars. Meanwhile, US investors are convinced that German rates are
coming down and US rates are likely to rise. If interest rates are 9 per
cent in Germany and 3 per cent in the US the spread is six percentage
points. Three years out the consensus might be that the spread will narrow
to two points. The US side offers to take on the German loan over three
years at the cost of the two-point spread. If the spread narrows to nothing
the US investor will pocket the two-point spread. If the spread widens the
German borrower will have saved.
The value is in the spread and the value to the investor who arranges the
deal is the disparity of views on what that spread will be. In earlier
years, companies could issue fixed-rate bonds and swap the proceeds into
floating-rate funds at a level below interbank offered rates. However,
increasing participation by sophisticated institutional investors led to a
narrowing of swap spreads. In addition, the growing sophistication of swap
dealers meant that opportunities were swiftly arbitraged.
Nevertheless, the changes in Europe have sent volumes up by almost 20 per
cent according to the most recent data. A survey by Arthur Andersen for the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) found that the
notional principal value of foreign currency and interest rate swaps
outstanding at the end of 1992 reached Dollars 4,600bn, an increase of 19
per cent over the previous year. Most of that rise was in the second half of
last year and dealers say the trend has continued.
Shifts in the ERM have led to increased volatility which has prompted more
sophisticated forms of swaps. In classic marketing tradition, the
redefinition of a product from commodity to specialised gives it a new lease
of life.
In the case of swaps, an investor taking a view that French interest rates
are about to fall will buy French bonds because bond prices will rise.
However, the bonds will have to be bought in French francs and if bond
prices gain that will reflect a weaker economy which will in turn result in
a weaker currency. What is gained in the bond market could be lost on the
currency.
Many investors would hedge their currency risks separately but some banks
are offering correlation hedging which removes the currency risk. This
applies not only to straightforward interest rate swaps but also to equity
swaps. Chase Manhattan suggests the example of a UK pension fund which has
seen the FT-SE 100 Index reach an historic high while the French CAC-40
index continues to languish around 2,100, creating a spread of 900 points.
If a UK investor believes the spread should be around 600 points he can sell
a one-year Footsie contract and buy a one year CAC contract plus a 900-point
spread. If the 'correlation' is zero after a year the profit will be 900
points. The French contract would normally be paid for in francs thus giving
the UK investor an exposure to the French franc. However, with a correlated
hedge the CAC contract could be paid for in the client's home currency. This
would remove the implicit foreign exchange exposure.
Such is the sophistication that Chase says brokers are trying to trade the
correlation or spread on a separate index. Implicit in the contract price is
an estimation of some correlation level and if issuers are seen to have that
wrong there is an arbitrage possibility. Second, there is a need for book
balancing between banks involved principally with issuers and those which
are skewed towards investment.
Growing sophistication increases the appeal for dealers and issuers and
offers greater variety for corporate borrowers who need to adjust their
debts. But for some institutions it is perhaps a disadvantage. Many pension
funds are already constrained from making derivative-based deals unless they
can provide underlying stock.
