FT  09 NOV 93 / Arts: Toytown comes to the Hayward - Reviewing Julian Opie
and Richard Wentworth, William Packer challenges the 'It is Art if I say so'
syndrome
We expect a retrospective exhibition at a major public gallery to be
something of an honour, an accolade, a celebration of a life's work. And
when the happy artist is but ten years into his career, still in his early
thirties, by how much more should his distinction match our astonishment and
applause. What new Raphael, after all, what Van Gogh, what Modigliani has
swum into our ken? The reality is rather different.
Julian Opie is 35, a product of the Goldsmiths' College, was picked up by
the Lisson Gallery upon his graduation in 1982. Within a year he had enjoyed
his first one-man show in London and taken part in group exhibitions at the
Tate, Riverside and the Serpentine in London, and in Rotterdam. Only a year
later he had exhibited in London again, and Cologne, Quebec, Basel, Paris
and Tokyo, the next year Sydney, Paris, Ravenna, Jerusalem, and so on ever
since. This year it has been Oslo, Copenhagen, Milan, 'Machines for Peace'
at the Venice Biennale, and now this.
His luck was to be in the right place, at the right time, with the right
people, at just the moment when the great self-fulfilling curatorial
imperative of modern British art was again, well, self-fulfilling. The world
is so interested in our young sculptors, we tell ourselves as we offer it
nothing else. Moore and Hepworth, Paolozzi and Turnbull, Caro and King,
Flanagan and Long, each generation has had its turn. The British Council has
shown no young painter in its pavilion at Venice for more than 20 years.
Asked why the Turner Prize should have favoured sculpture so heavily in
recent years, Nicholas Serota, of the Tate, said with disarming
ingenuousness: 'Oh, but we are so strong in sculpture at the moment.' It has
become a reflex.
Opie's work has always been idea-led, founded in conceits and double-takes,
which has accorded well with the spirit of the times, for all that the wit
was ever somewhat heavy-handed. He began by folding metal sheet into various
illustrative configurations, painting them in a jokily perfunctory manner. A
pile of books totters and falls - 'Incident in a Library': a row of bags and
cases sits on the floor - 'Project for Heathrow': a stack of outsize
pencils, protractors and rulers leans wonkily together - 'Broken Rules'.
His interest then turned to more abstracted exercises in which simple steel
elements, painted with all the subtle invention of the Smartie tube, were
combined in ambiguous shelf or bench-like relation, as of ultra-modern
furniture. The work then indeed became ultra-modern furniture, that of the
office and factory - ventilator grills, cabinets, shelves, light-boxes. Here
indeed was the conceptual double-take with a vengeance; Duchamp, with his
'Urinal', had got there years ago. 'It is Art if I say it is Art: a
ventilator grill if you say it is a ventilator grill. Heads I win, tails you
lose.'
Latterly Opie has turned to making model houses, churches, farms and
castles, all realistic in the sense that a doll's house is realistic, with
anonymous cream walls and grey roofs. Or he disposes outsize sets of
children's building blocks as though they were office blocks in city
centres. Latest of all come the outsize toy motorway sets with their loops
and arches in solid grey concrete. We are to 'Imagine we can order these',
'Imagine it is raining' or 'Imagine we are driving'. A computer graphic
display takes us round the bend and on for ever through a wide, featureless,
mindless landscape, signifying nothing.
Richard Wentworth, ten years older, is from the same conceptual stable,
though a long-time teacher at Goldsmiths' rather than its product. His work
too is that of the visual pun and the test of the object in its everyday
self. He produces no image or reproduction, no suggestion that the plate or
broom or redundant desk of his tableau is anything but what it is. It is
only in its redisposition, its imaginative displacement, that it becomes a
thing anew. The aesthetic is one of elegant playfulness, often mannered and
self-indulgent to a fault, yet redeemed by the sharpness of the wit and the
fastidious rigour of its formal presentation. His has been art on a knife's
edge, teetering now to the trivial, now to the banal or obvious, but keeping
its balance, just.
But just how long can Wentworth go on playing the same old tricks? Elegant
variation is quite as much a visual as a literary fault and there are few,
as Fowler tells us, so widely prevalent. 'It is the second-rate writers,
those intent rather on expressing themselves prettily than on conveying
their meaning clearly . . . that are chiefly open to (its) allurements'. It
would be unkind, yet, to condemn Wentworth as second-rate, but is a certain
desperation setting in? This is not a full retrospective, but the ideas
already repeat themselves and only the scale develops.
The pun gets no funnier in endless repetition, least of all in being shouted
louder. Bigger is not better. Wentworth's 'Cumulus', a clutch of china
plates on a glass shelf held precarious and high by an upturned ladder, had
its proper and persuasive sculptural presence, the more so for being so
delicately put. Now at the Serpentine, another high shelf slopes down the
length of the gallery with its fragile burden: 'Lips and Fingertips'. So
what? Large and twisted sheets of corrugated metal lie together on the
gallery floor, punctured only by house-like boxes on their underside. His
'Toy' sardine-tin, of 1983, let into its solid steel bath, was somewhat more
succinct a statement of the same device. A proper retrospective would have
told him so.
Julian Opie: Hayward Gallery, South Bank Centre, SE1, until February 6, then
to the Kuntsverein, Hannover.
Richard Wentworth: Serpentine Gallery, Kensington Gardens, W2, until January
3, then to Bristol, 's-Hertogenbosch and Calais; sponsored by Principles and
the Expanded Metal Company.
