FT  15 DEC 93 / Leading Article: Gatt and the media
It is tempting to conclude that the decision to exclude audio-visual trade
from the Uruguay Round is the inevitable result of divergent perceptions.
The US negotiating position has been based on the outright pursuit of
economic advantage. But according to the European Union, and particularly
France, the central issue is the preservation of cultural identity.
However, the distinction is largely false. Though some of the EU's arguments
have merit, many look like a smokescreen for efforts to perpetuate cosy
broadcasting practices which serve the interests of politicians and media
monopolists more than those of viewers. On these grounds, Europe has as much
to lose as Hollywood from the failure to agree a liberalisation deal.
The EU's case is strongest, and Washington's weakest, on the question of
subsidies. The US wanted curbs on public funding of film and entertainment
production. Yet it also insisted American artists should share the proceeds
from European levies on recording tapes. As well as being inconsistent, this
latter demand was an unacceptable attempt to intervene in the fiscal
policies of sovereign states.
However, the biggest stumbling block has been the EU's attempts to limit the
proportion of programming from outside its frontiers which may be shown on
television. Such restrictions already apply, in principle at least, to
national broadcast networks. Now Brussels plans, against strenuous US
objections, to impose similar quotas on cable, satellite and
video-on-request channels.
Tidal wave
The pretext is that Europe's viewers and entertainment industries will
otherwise be swamped by a tidal wave of Hollywood programmes, sold at
knockdown prices because their costs have already been covered by sales on
their large home market. Both the measures proposed to support this policy
and the motivations behind them are indefensible. That Europe's
entertainment industries cannot match Hollywood's scale economies is not due
to some unfair US advantage. It is because European film makers and
broadcasters have been so much less successful than their American
competitors in producing and marketing programmes which appeal to audiences
outside their home countries.
In any case, there is something profoundly impractical about applying 'local
content' rules to a business as international as media entertainment, in
which capital, talent and production resources regularly flow freely across
borders. More preposterous still is the idea that quotas can be enforced on
rapidly proliferating cable and satellite channels, some of which originate
outside the EU's borders.
Sheer power
What is disturbing is that European governments believe the game is worth
playing. The charitable explanation is that they have yet fully to
comprehend the sheer power, scope and diversity of the new media
technologies. Another view is that many of them are motivated less by
high-minded defence of cultural integrity than by a concern with preserving
the capacity for influencing public opinion afforded by control of the
audio-visual media.
If that seems fanciful, note that the French government this week has named
as head of the two state-controlled television stations an interviewer known
for his close links with conservative politicians. And Mr Silvio Berlusconi,
who has skilfully used political connections to help him dominate Italy's
privately owned broadcasting media, has allied himself publicly with Mr
Umberto Bossi, head of the Northern League.
It may be argued that the importance of political control over the media
will gradually diminish, as the choice of alternative delivery channels
expands. The danger is that the more immediate that prospect becomes, the
more extreme will become the measures taken by governments to thwart it.
They may not stem the tide, but they risk handicapping European efforts to
compete effectively on the new media markets. Though it would have benn
unthinkable for the issue to have torpedoed the Uruguay Round, the EU's
stubborn refusal to be nudged towards liberalisation is a reason for sorrow,
not rejoicing.
