FT  30 DEC 93 / World Stock Markets: Mobile phones leave Kuala Lumpur
walking on air - The broadly based share buying frenzy that is gripping the
Malaysian market
A hairdressing salon in central Kuala Lumpur. A mobile phone rings. It
belongs to the girl with the scissors. 'Buy 1,000 at MDollars 3.50 (Dollars
1.40), sell at MDollars 5.'
It is hard to escape the share frenzy which is gripping Malaysia. The Kuala
Lumpur composite index, up 8.81 at a record 1,231.86 yesterday, has risen by
91.7 per cent this year. The retail market, rather than local or foreign
institutional buyers, are leading the headlong stock market charge.
Mr Michael Greenall, an investment analyst with Barings in Kuala Lumpur,
estimates that the retail sector has accounted for as much as 70 per cent of
recent activity.
'Just look at the crowd in the broking offices. Mostly housewives or
shopowners,' says Mr Greenall. 'They are the people who have been giving a
real buzz to the market.
'Such is the dealing going on that some brokers are giving mobile phones to
their bigger clients. There's a great deal of purely speculative trading
happening but on the plus side there's still plenty of liquidity in the
market.'
Turnover figures back up that argument. A year ago average daily turnover
was about MDollars 200m. In recent weeks it has been around the MDollars 3bn
mark.
While there seems to be a consensus among analysts that, with market p/e
ratios up to around 30 most shares are looking expensive, opinions differ
about the likelihood of a sharp correction.
The head of a local securities house says that he is very uncomfortable with
the present situation. 'Until October the market was behaving reasonably
rationally and showing some signs of sophistication. But since then it's
gone back to the bad old days where speculation becomes confused with
fundamentals. It's defied the natural order of things.'
The fundamentals of the overall economy are looking good. Malaysia has one
of the world's fastest growing economies. Latest economic indicators suggest
that GDP will expand by about 8.5 per cent this year  - the sixth successive
year of more than 8 per cent growth.
The 1994 budget, delivered in late October, was seen to be generally good
for business, with a cut in the corporate tax rate and promises of big
increases in state spending, particularly on infrastructure.
In November, Malaysia's political future seemed to be settled with the
election of Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the finance minister, to the post of deputy
leader of the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), the dominant
party.
Mr Anwar, 46, is now being seen as the heir apparent to Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
68, who has been the country's prime minister for the last 12 years.
Market optimists point to other positive factors. Malaysians, buoyed by
economic success, have been bringing back large amounts of money previously
parked overseas. With low interest rates people have been investing in the
stock market or buying property.
The government is committed to continuing its wide ranging privatisation
programme. Hicom, the government's heavy industry investment company, is due
to be floated early in 1994. Privatisation of the country's water system is
also on the cards.
Many companies have taken advantage of the buoyant market to restructure and
expand operations. Modern management techniques have taken the place of
old-style family-orientated business methods.
Companies like Sime Darby, Hong Leong and Genting are now considered to be
equal to the best in the region, and, sitting on considerable hoards of
cash, ready to take advantage of opportunities both at home and abroad.
But rapid market growth has caused problems. Many feel that much still needs
to be done to tighten up the regulatory aspects of the market.
The government has warned broking houses that they must strengthen their
back office operations. There has also been evidence of a more concerted
effort by the authorities to rid the market of insider trading and other
abuses.
A handful of companies, including Tenaga Nasional, the electricity utility,
and Telekom, the telecommunications company, account for about 50 per cent
of total market capitalisation.
Foreign activity has been concentrated mainly on these stocks and there are
fears that if institutions decide to sell their blue chips at the present
high prices, no one will be willing to buy. A quick slide in the market
could result.
Retail activity has been centred on the smaller stocks, some of which have
recorded spectacular gains. Companies rumoured to have strong links to
prominent politicians have been popular. Those which combine such
connections with expertise in fast growing sectors like infrastructure have
seen their stock market values treble or quadruple in recent months.
