FT  04 NOV 93 / Confusion on Thatcher Iraq arms role
BARONESS THATCHER'S role in the arms-for-Iraq affair was thrown into
confusion yesterday when a witness in the Scott inquiry was unable to
produce documents backing his claims that she had supported exporting lathes
to Iraq when she was prime minister.
According to a memorandum written in December 1988 by Mr Alan Barrett, an
official responsible for vetting defence exports to Iraq, Lady Thatcher had
authorised the exports which intelligence had indicated could be used for
making shells and missiles.
Mr Barrett told the inquiry yesterday that not only had he been unable to
find the documents, but that he might have been mistaken to believe that
such documents existed.
However, questioned by Lord Justice Scott, he agreed that the name of the
former prime minister is not something that would have been inserted
'casually'. He insisted that he had 'certainly not made it up'.
Mr Barrett said he had been told about Lady Thatcher's involvement in
approving the machine tools 'around' October 1988. However, his memory
failed him over the precise details. 'I cannot remember who told me. I
suspect somebody in the Foreign Office . . . it would have been somebody at
assistant head or lower level.'
Mr Barrett said he had sent the memorandum to Lord Trefgarne, then defence
minister, who had not queried the reference to Lady Thatcher.
The judge intends to question Lady Thatcher and Lord Trefgarne before
Christmas about the extent of their knowledge of defence exports to Iraq
which may have breached government guidelines.
Further evidence emerged yesterday that officials and ministers justified
the export of machine tools made by Matrix Churchill on the grounds that
trade with Iraq allowed the secret services MI6 and MI5 to gather
information about its nuclear ambitions.
A senior MI6 official advised a secret Whitehall committee in December 1988
that the exports should proceed even if they breached the government's
guidelines. The hearing continues.
Mr David Clark, shadow defence secretary, yesterday criticised officials for
apparently withholding documents from the inquiry. He alleged that the
government was involved in a 'cover-up'.
