FT  10 JUN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Shares advance as rate hopes revive
LONDON joined with other European bourses yesterday in turning higher as
currency developments lent some support to hopes for a cut in German
interest rates. Trading volume in equities remained moderate but the FT-SE
100 Index advanced a further 22.5 points into its current trading range and
the FT-SE Mid 250 Index jumped 15 points to another all-time peak.
At least two sizeable trading programmes were identified early in the day
and dealers reported that US buyers were active. The UK market received a
final boost from a firm opening to the new Wall Street session, where the
Dow Average was 16 points ahead in UK trading hours.
In particular, confidence benefited from a rally in the Zeneca share price
as sizeable bear positions were closed; fund managers seemed to be taking
the view that the Zeneca price of around 610p was the acceptable low point.
The strength of the US dollar, accompanied by predictions by Mr George
Soros, the international investor, that the German currency will fall,
helped the blue chip inter-nationals.
On the domestic front, the stock market welcomed assurances from Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the new UK chancellor of the exchequer, that he would remain 'a hawk
on public spending'; encouragement for such policies also came from Mr
Norman Lamont in his formal resignation speech to the UK parliament. This
offset recent suggestions that the UK government might favour increasing
domestic taxes, perceived as a negative fac-tor for the stock market.
Stock index futures helped the equity market brush off a dull opening and
the Footsie was ahead by 15 points as it waited for Wall Street to open. The
Dow's early strength gave further encouragement and the final reading showed
the FT-SE Index at 2,866.9 for a net gain of 22.5 points. Another strong
performance in second line stocks took the FT-SE Mid 250 Index up by 15.3 to
3,213.4.
Seaq volume increased to 691.2m shares, with non-Footsie business making up
around 60 per cent of the total. 'There was a good deal of switching by fund
managers yesterday,' said Mr Nigel Little at Panmure Gordon, the UK broking
house. Investors appeared to be shying away from some of the higher price
multiples now showing in a UK stock market trading on 21 times earnings on
the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index.
The London market was led forward in early trading from an overflow of
demand from Amsterdam for Shell and BP and edged higher when New York
opened. But although US selling of the pharmaceutical stocks died away, the
newfound support for Zeneca was not translated into active buying across the
drugs sector.
The recent upswing in the property sector continued to benefit the UK
clearing bank stocks, where loan books are still heavily charged with bad
debts to the commercial property sector. Consumer issues also performed
well, on relief that increases in UK personal taxation appear less likely.
The following companies will be added to the FT-SE 100 Index on Monday June
21 1993: Wolseley, SG Warburg, British Aerospace and RMC Group. The
following will be excluded: Fisons, Kwik Save, Lasmo and Southern Electric.
For details, see fuller story on UK companies page 23.
