FT  01 APR 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): The advertisers
strike back
Armed with high-technology advertisement 'zappers' such as mute buttons,
remote control channel switchers and fast-forward options, television
viewers are waging a successful battle to blot out the sight and sound of
television commercials these days.
'We no longer have a captive audience,' said Helen Johnston, a director of
media analysis at Grey Advertising in New York. 'People mute out the sound
when the commercials come on, leave the room, fast-forward through the
commercials on their VCR recording, or just switch to another channel when
an advertisement comes on the air.'
But advertisers have begun to fight back. One rule of thumb is to make sure
the commercial tells a comprehensible story, even if the viewer has turned
on the mute button or left the room. 'A person has to leave on either the
visual or the audio; otherwise how will they know when their programme comes
back on?' said Robert Warrens, a media research director at J Walter
Thompson.
Because of the mute button, written texts are becoming increasingly popular.
'We watch our commercials with the sound turned off to make sure the message
can get across that way,' said Andrew Bohjalian, a creative at Grey, whose
commercial on Dannon yoghurt features slogans such as 'Nutrient Dense'
floating in large print on the screen.
Although advertisers may find ways around the mute buttons, viewers who
shift aimlessly from channel to channel and those who record their
programmes only to fast-forward through the commercials present a bigger
problem. About 90 per cent of US viewers have remote controls, according to
research by J Walter Thompson, and VCR recordings account for up to 10 per
cent of the audience of some shows. 'There's very little we can do about
reaching those viewers,' admits Johnston.
These problems may soon be compounded by new devices which cause VCRs to
skip automatically over commercials while recording. Also, digital
technology is expected shortly which will allow certain areas of the US to
receive up to 500 channels at a time. With choices increasing, viewers will
have more opportunities to avoid commercials.
'With the new technology coming out, we have to change the whole format of
commercials,' said Martin Nisenholtz of Ogilvy and Mather's direct marketing
division. 'We have to make them either extremely informative, or an integral
part of the viewing experience.'
Nisenholtz is working with a new area of advertising, called interactive
marketing. One successful example of interactive marketing, he says, is a
video basketball game that came out last year. When game players win enough
points to get new shoes, their video counterparts get to jump higher. The
game's tennis shoes bear the Nike brand name.
'That's a painless way to get the message across,' Nisenholtz says.
Infomercials will also be increasingly popular, predicts Nisenholtz, and new
technology will give them an added twist. 'In the future,' he explains, 'you
may be able to choose a commercial about a fund manager, for example. When
you get the advertisement on the air, you could have a two-way conversation
with the television image, explaining your particular investment needs and
listening to what they have to offer.'
For ardent advertisement 'zappers', the idea of an enjoyable television
commercial may seem a contradiction in terms. But advertisers insist that if
they are to beat the 'zappers', television commercials will have to become
either more fun or more educational.
