FT  02 NOV 93 / Technology: The world's data at your fingertips - A new a
software system which will aid analysts
In 1990, China spent Dollars 2m (Pounds 1.4m) on US motor vehicles. The
figure for this year totals as much as Dollars 230m for the first six months
alone.
US vehicle sales have been rising throughout Asia. Between January and June,
sales increased in Japan by 4 per cent over the same period of 1992. In
Taiwan, they jumped by 11.4 per cent, but in Hong Kong they soared by 543.7
per cent.
These trends were gleaned from US Commerce Department data. Normally, they
would take weeks to spot, but a new computer software system called World
Trade Atlas now brings the figures to trade analysts and exporters in
seconds.
Donald Brasher, president of Global Trade Information Services (GTI) of
Columbia, South Carolina, wrote the program.
As a trade consultant to Thailand and Bangladesh, he saw the need for
increased access to international trade data through computer technology and
improved data for policy decision-making.
One of his clients recently requested information about the US wood trade in
the wake of the spotted owl controversy, which froze logging on many federal
lands. A few seconds of key pushing revealed a 53 per cent increase in the
value of rough wood exports to Japan and one of 56 per cent to China in the
first half of this year, while the volume of exports remained flat. The
conclusion was that price rises, averaging more than 50 per cent, had failed
to depress demand.
The development of CD-Rom technology and subsequent price reductions which
make it available to small entrepreneurs are driving the information
revolution, says Brasher. The World Trade Atlas is a prime example.
'Anyone can publish a CD-Rom,' he says, noting that CD-Rom players are
rapidly becoming standard personal computer peripherals. After six months on
the market, Brasher predicts sales of between Dollars 200,000 and Dollars
300,000 this year.
He has only 15 subscribers, but they are important ones.
They include the US Chamber of Commerce, the American Association of
Exporters and Importers, the International Footwear Association and the
Retail Industry Trade Action Coalition. Their numbers are growing. Brasher
expects to have between 40 and 50 clients by the end of this year and at
least 100-200 by the end of 1994.
GTI is signing leading international distributors to market the program
globally. Next year, he expects to add EC and Japanese trade data to the
program and he may include numbers from Chile and Canada.
Each month, Brasher updates the software from data acquired from US
government computer tapes. It is reorganised and sent to subscribers by
express mail on a CD-Rom disc.
The World Trade Atlas provides information for a three-year time comparison.
By hitting a key, subscribers can: display product and country information;
sort data by market share or percentage change; switch from country to
product sequencing; compare quantity and average unit price data among
countries; shift between export and import data; and check the balance of
trade data for the world and individual countries.
The service is particularly helpful for exporters, Brasher says.
Brasher learned the ways of Commerce Department data production when, as a
young analyst there, he helped to reconcile the differences between US
import statistics and Hong Kong's export figures. Now, the Commerce
Department is his chief competitor. It sells a system which transmits
information electronically. Although it cannot produce trends in seconds
like the World Trade Atlas, it has become more accurate since the
introduction of an automated interface that reduces data entry errors.
The atlas is sold by GTI on a subscription basis for Dollars 4,920 a year
(Dollars 2,880 for educational institutions).
