FT  03 JUN 93 / Personal View: Quality control is here to stay
It is sometimes the fate of education secretaries and general secretaries of
teacher associations and unions to have to shout to make themselves heard
above the din. All very different from the quiet discussions I have had in
many classrooms and staff rooms during visits to schools. Parents will be
first to applaud if we now enter a phase of quiet and constructive dialogue
after the great educational debate of this spring. I hope we never again see
industrial action in our classrooms.
As I have always said, my overriding objective is to raise standards. So is
ours, say Peter Smith and David Hart in their interesting article in the FT
('The ABCs of a sensible testing policy', May 13). The purpose of testing
is, they write, principally to provide 'confident information about how
children are performing . . .'
I agree. I am all the more sad, therefore, that some now seem to want to
conceal information. The performances of the health service, the police and
local government are all carefully measured. It cannot be right that
education should be left - uniquely - as the public service for which there
is no freely available information on performance. Taxpayers, who contribute
billions of pounds every year to education, have a right to know if that
money is producing good results, and about which schools are performing
well. Tests and the publication of results are an important part of the
process of ratcheting up standards.
The premise for any dialogue must be the success of the national curriculum.
We cannot raise standards unless we first raise our expectations of what
children can, and should, achieve. The national curriculum does that by
setting challenging national targets for all pupils across a broad and
balanced curriculum. I long ago concluded that the need for such information
is greatest in the basics of English, mathematics and science.
This is an ambitious reform. Unlike our main competitors, we have never set
ourselves clear national standards. That is one of the reasons - perhaps the
most important - why the achievements of our pupils, particularly in the
middle and lower ability ranges, lag behind those in France, Germany and
Japan. The government is determined that we should catch up.
The counterpart of setting demanding standards is measuring whether you
reach them; in other words, good educational quality control. Only those who
are indifferent to success eschew the opportunity to gauge how close or how
far we are from achieving it. That is where tests come in. National tests
are here to stay. They are integral to the national curriculum. Without
tests, the standards set out in the national curriculum have no real meaning
or force.
Some of the critics of the testing arrangements often forget this umbilical
link with the national curriculum. Tests are designed both to provide
diagnostic information for teachers and a measure of children's progress for
parents. They do this because they are anchored by the standards prescribed
in the national curriculum.
The tests enable teachers to diagnose where pupils are falling short of
expected standards and to remedy shortcomings. Of course the quality of
education is as high in some of our schools as anywhere in the world, but
the urgent need for diagnosis is manifest in the large numbers of young
people who leave school without the literacy and numeracy skills needed to
make the best of further education or employment. The cost to business of
poor skills in literacy and numeracy is now put at Pounds 5bn a year.
The published test results also show how pupils, individually and
collectively, are measuring up to national standards and how those standards
are moving over time. Disengage the tests from the curriculum targets and
they will cease to act as an effective measure. Parents and others would be
denied an important opportunity to gauge whether or not a school was
improving on past performance.
Last year's tests for 14-year-olds in mathematics and science went well. In
fact a great deal of time and effort - three years of trials in the case of
this summer's tests for 14-year-olds - has gone into writing tests which are
a fair reflection of what pupils have been taught.
The government and Sir Ron Dearing (chairman of the new School Curriculum
and Assessment Authority) both take the view that the tests should go ahead
in order to learn lessons for the future as well; one year's tests are
always a staging post on the way to the next. Meanwhile I have asked Sir Ron
to review the curriculum and assessment framework to see how its overall
manageability for teachers can be improved. Teachers have worked hard since
the national curriculum was introduced to put it into place.
The review will consider whether the current curriculum can be focused more
sharply so that teachers are clearer about their objectives. It will
consider how the arrangements for assessing children's progress against
those targets can be streamlined without loss of rigour, but to the benefit
of manageability. What is the best balance between tests and teachers' own
assessments of school work? How can we minimise the administration of the
tests? Will external marking provide a solution? Our aim is to create a
broad and effective evolutionary framework within which teachers, governors
and parents can act in the best interests of their schools.
That brings me back to the need for a continuing national dialogue and
debate. Higher standards in our schools are vital to our national well-being
 -education is one of Britain's most important enterprises.
The author is UK secretary of state for education
