FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (10): Energy and the
ayatollahs - Iran: Post-war build-up needs more power
Since 1988, at the end of the war with Iraq, Iran's industrial activity has
ballooned from 30 per cent of capacity to nearly 100 per cent as it
struggles to repair past damage and meet the demands of the present for a
population of some 55m people.
The government recognises that an adequate level of electrification, both in
generation and transmission/distribution capacity, is crucial to the success
of its economic reforms.
In the industrial sector, where power remains heavily subsidised, the
emergence of heavy industries such as steel, aluminium, and petrochemical
refining have helped to boost demand to an unprecedented 20 per cent
annually. Overall, most observers see total demand continuing to grow at 10
per cent or more a year for the rest of the decade.
The two Five Year Plans published in 1988 and covering the period to 1998
show that Iran has allocated some Dollars 12bn of its future foreign
currency earnings to the electricity sector, Dollars 6.8bn during the first
Plan and Dollars 5.5bn during the second. There is also a significant sum
representing goods and services purchased with local currency or through
supplier credits.
The exact value of the country's power generation equipment market (which
forms the bulk of its electricity sector spending but excludes downstream
industries such as transmission and distribution equipment) over the same
period is less easy to determine. But it can be estimated by costing the
ministry of energy's proposals for broadening the base and peak load
generating capacity from around 13,200MW in early 1992 to an extremely
ambitious 34,000MW by end-1998.
Averaging the expense of a mix of thermal, gas-fired and hydroelectric
plants at a conservative Dollars 1,000 per installed kilowatt produces a
future gross figure of about Dollars 3bn a year of which local contracting
and supply might account for 30-40 per cent.
Although the present tight budgetary conditions, introduced to cushion the
blow of the government's decision to devalue the rial, mean that such
figures are probably slightly ambitious, western suppliers are under no
illusions that Iran is by far the most significant market in the Middle East
region.
According to the ministry's power planning bureau, the total capacity of
plants under construction at any given moment totals 80 per cent or more of
the capacity currently in operation.
The government has little option but to press on, as power failures and
brownouts are already a reality. It is a telling reminder of the scale of
the challenge that even if all the 30-odd power plants involved in the
programme are commissioned on schedule, the ministry does not expect to
enjoy any surplus capacity until 1997 at the earliest.
The ministry of energy has mapped out a programme to meet both the urgent
short-term undercapacity that threatened to strangle any hope of economic
revival and provide cost-effective generation in the medium term and beyond.
The last five years saw the widespread installation of simple cycle gas
turbine sets of 90-125MW units which can be easily incorporated into older
(pre-1980) thermal plants for immediate connection to the transmission grid.
Many will subsequently be converted to combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) use
by adding waste heat recovery boilers and steam turbines.
By contrast the next five years will see the emergence of a mixed bag of
thermal, combined cycle, and hydroelectric projects, the latter comprising
four major projects on the Karun river in the south-west, and a 1,000MW
pumped storage plant at Siabisheh on the Caspian sea in the north.
However, large hydroelectric schemes cost around Dollars 1,500 per kilowatt.
The completion of the Karun-3 (3,000MW) and Karun-4 (2,000MW) stations
depends on Ab-Niroo, the ministry's hydro wing, securing sufficient foreign
loans and supplier credits.
The government already has permission from the majlis (parliament) to raise
up to Dollars 3bn in loans and credits to help provide for both Karun
plants, Siabisheh, and a 1,000MW extension to Karun-1.
While a consortium comprising ABB Kraftwerke, Voest and Sulzer has secured
the contract for the primary equipment orders for the Karun-3 hydro-electric
plant, Japanese companies are tipped to win the primary contracts for the
Karun-4 plant on the back of Japan's propensity to offer finance when others
are increasingly reluctant to do so. Japan is expected to confirm shortly
its decision to provide a Dollars 325m loan for Karun-4 through its official
development assistance (ODA) programme.
However, there is evidence that Iran may have trouble raising the necessary
funds for several of these megaprojects - possibly deferring commissioning
by years. US opposition to any further World Bank power sector loans is
compounded by Tehran's view that many of the Bank's conditions, such as
institutional reform and higher electricity tariffs, are unacceptable.
Nonetheless, a Dollars 165m loan to the Tehran Regional Electricity Company
(TREC) was approved by the Bank at the end of April to cover a range of
electrification projects including part of the upgrade of the Qom power
plant from open-cycle to combined-cycle.
Any significant borrowing difficulties could impact seriously on the
ministry's plans. 'Karun-3 is undoubtedly our top priority at this time',
says Mousa Refan, chairman and managing director of state-controlled
Ab-Niroo - also known as the Iran Water and Power Resources Development
Company (IPWC).
Large thermal plants will also play a significant role. Work has now started
on a Dollars 450m turnkey oil and gas-fired plant at Arak in the west of the
country. An international consortium comprising Canadian companies Babcock &amp;
Wilcox and Howden Group Canada, and Nuova Ciminmontubi (Italy) and GEC
Alsthom (UK-France) will be supplying the 2 x 550MW plant for commissioning
in 1996.
In the short term, however, orders will continue to be for simple gas
turbine and CCGT type stations such as Gilan (1,350MW) in the north, and
Shahid Montazer Ghaem (1,080MW) and Shahid Rajaei (1,080MW) near Karaj, west
of Tehran.
In March, Tavanir, the state utility responsible for all power generation
outside Tehran, took delivery of the last of 14 PG9001/E gas turbines
supplied under a Dollars 350m deal with John Brown Engineering of Scotland.
Rated 124MW each, the turbines are to be installed at the Shahid Rajaei,
Shiraz, and Shariati plants, where they will later be converted to combined
cycle operation.
Anglo-French power group GEC Alsthom also completed delivery of a similar
size order for the 14 complementary 125MW generators.
Siemens KWU of Germany has also thrived in Iran, securing contracts or
letters of intent for the Gilan and Tehran South (proposed 2,400MW)
stations, although past controversy may yet return to haunt the company in
the form of Iranian litigation over the incomplete 1,300MW nuclear station
at Bushehr, abandoned by KWU at the start of the Gulf war.
Through its Atomic Energy Organisation (AEO), the Iranian government has
already spent an estimated Dollars 3.6bn on the plant, now blocked by the
German government's refusal to grant export licences for crucial equipment.
This impasse was sorely tested towards the end of last year when the Qeshm
island Free Trade Authority, flagship of Iran's free market experiment,
signed a letter of agreement with Siemens for the finance and construction
of the first of four 250MW CCGT units. Under the terms of the agreement,
Siemens will invest some Dollars 340m into the project, which it will
continue to operate on a build-operate-transfer (BOT) basis.
If the government bows to AEO pressure to penalise Siemens, either through
trade sanctions or by intervening to block the Qeshm deal, it stands to lose
much of its credibility with potential foreign investors. Observers see the
most likely outcome to be some form of compensation whereby Iran recovers
some of its lost capital to reinvest in other programmes, while Germany
protects its position as Iran's premier trade nation.
Jim Millard is deputy editor of Middle East Electricity
