FT  09 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Mr Clinton's taxing deal
A PRESIDENT who fought primary campaigns on the slogan 'America can't wait'
would doubtless have wanted it to have arrived sooner. But last Friday,
after six months' hard wrangling, a version of Mr Clinton's deficit
reduction package finally scraped its way out of the US Congress and into
law. The deal, for all its flaws, should prove something of a landmark in
recent American political history. But Mr Clinton must deliver a great deal
more over the next three years if the same is to be said of his presidency.
Judged by its deficit-reducing credentials, the deal is not so different
from the plan which Mr Clinton unveiled early in the year. It aims to reduce
the US federal budget deficit by Dollars 496bn over the next five years by
means of public spending cuts which net Dollars 255bn and tax increases of
Dollars 241bn. Total tax revenues will rise by an estimated 0.8 per cent of
gross domestic product in the 1993 fiscal year.
But much of the package's earlier novelty has been lost. First, the US
administration has been forced, in effect, to drop its broad-based energy
tax in the face of interest group pressure. The energy tax would have raised
Dollars 71bn over five years and, in so doing, would have begun the
necessary process of bringing US energy prices into line with those in other
industrial countries. In its place, the Senate has sanctioned a rather
paltry 4.3 cents rise in the tax on most transport fuels which will bring in
a mere Dollars 24.2bn in extra revenue.
Earlier casualty
An earlier casualty was the new administration's plans for increased
infrastructure spending. Mr Clinton had planned to boost spending on all
forms of public capital. But US economists now estimate that US public
investment will fall by 6.6 per cent this year. There is now nothing in the
agreed package to reverse America's long-standing inability, by the
standards of other industrialised countries, to maintain a large and healthy
stock of public capital.
Missing, too, from the package is evidence that President Clinton knows how
to translate his pre-election commitment to 'putting people first' into
post-election actions that enhance capital of the human variety. Instead,
just when Europe's leaders are concluding that high labour taxes are bad for
employment, Mr Clinton has fallen back on taxes on labour income to get his
deficit proposals through - and looks set to do the same in his plans for
reforming the US health system. The long-term solution to America's fiscal
difficulties must involve some form of value-added consumption tax, not
further taxes on employment.
Bigger cut
For all its deficiencies, Mr Clinton's bill should mean a bigger cut in the
federal budget deficit than any of his predecessors have delivered. For all
its ostensible similarities with President Bush's 1990 Budget Enforcement
Act, the Clinton plan should do better, if only because it catches the
economy on the way out of a recession as opposed to on the way in.
Nor is the strength of recovery likely to be seriously undermined by last
week's bill - at least not once most consumers discover that their tax bills
are little changed. If anything, Mr Clinton's legislative success should
make the recovery more sustainable by keeping long-term bond yields at the
historically low levels to which they fell in February when the package was
first unveiled.
Yet, in the medium term, America's budget difficulties, and the political
chasm they reflect, are not solved by the events of last week. However
impressed the markets appear to be today, by 1998 the US structural budget
deficit is projected to return to nearly 3 per cent of GDP and keep on
rising thereafter.
Whether Mr Clinton is in the White House to see this will depend, in large
part, on the strength of the recovery. But whether he will be judged a great
president will depend on his ability not only to begin tracing solutions to
America's looming structural problems - its bloated and ineffective social
security and healthcare systems - but to persuade both Congress and the
American people that his solutions make sense. Last week's victory marked a
beginning. That so much political energy was expended for so little does not
bode well.
