FT  21 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Canadian group plans Andean
mine venture
MUSTO EXPLORATIONS, the Canadian-owned mining group, is in talks with 18
international mining companies on the development of a USDollars
450m-Dollars 500m project in western Argentina.
The company has a one year option to develop what it claims is a world-class
gold and copper deposit in the Andean foothills and is looking for partners
to share development costs.
It is close to completing an 18-month, Dollars 7m feasibility study of the
Bajo de la Alumbrera property for YMAD, a mining company owned by the local
provincial government of Catamarca. Musto intends to take up a one-year
option to develop the project in association with YMAD and international
investors.
If all goes well, the Catamarca mine would be the first major mining
investment in Argentina in decades. Argentina's xenophobic mining laws once
discouraged investment, but in June it introduced new legislation
eliminating investment barriers.
Musto says Bajo de la Alumbrera is 'one of the largest proven unexploited
porphyry copper/gold deposits in South America' and could produce 250m lb of
copper concentrate and 360,000 troy ounces of gold a year for 20 years.
Construction work would take two to three years before the mine could begin
production.
Among companies in talks with Musto are Cyprus, American Barrick Resources,
Placer Dome and RTZ. Musto is also negotiating financial packages with First
Boston and Chase Manhattan banks.
Progress is being held up, however, by negotiations in the Catamarca
legislature over the royalties it will levy on the mine.
The federal government says that 20 local and foreign mining companies are
operating nine mines in Argentina and are considering 64 possible new
projects in which they have already invested Dollars 103m. Officials say
that two of the largest projects should attract investments of Dollars 500m.
Brazil may cut its tin output by 10 per cent next year because of low prices
in the world market, but is in no hurry to join the Association of Tin
Producing Countries, which is co-ordinating producer efforts to reduce world
supply, Mr Samuel Hanan, president of Brazil's mining and construction
company Paranapanema, said yesterday, reports Reuter from Kuala Lumpur.
Mr Hanan, who was attending an ATPC meeting here, said Brazilian exports
could also fall by 10 per cent in 1994 from 18,500 tonnes in 1993, well
below an export limit of 24,000 agreed with the ATPC.
