FT  15 DEC 93 / Ulster move sparks hope and dismay
Early reaction to yesterday's breakthrough in efforts by Mr John Major and
Mr Albert Reynolds, the British and Irish prime ministers, to agree a joint
declaration on Northern Ireland was mixed.
There was anger and bewilderment in the Ulster Unionist party. Mr Chris
McGimpsey, the UUP honorary secretary, said: 'We will not prejudge the
declaration, but it will be quite outrageous if a secret deal has been done
behind the backs of the people of Northern Ireland.
'We are the largest political party in Northern Ireland and we have been
kept in the dark. We are at a complete loss and don't know what is going
on.'
Mr David Trimble, UUP home affairs spokesman, said the 'only' question was
whether Mr Major had stood by the democratic rights of the people of
Northern Ireland. Anything that undermined these rights would be 'badly
received'.
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, said last night that it would
consider any agreement between the British and Irish governments. Mr Tom
Hartley, the party's national chairman, said: 'Both Mr Major and Mr Reynolds
know what is required to bring about a lasting peace.'
Mr Peter Robinson of the hardline Democratic Unionist party said: 'There is
nothing in the agreement capable of stopping loyalist paramilitary activity
nor is there anything to the advantage of the unionist community - it cannot
therefore bring peace.'
Mr Mark Durkan, chairman of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party, said he welcomed the indications that the two governments had
made progress.
'We have always recognised that the two governments have a range of
responsibilities and opportunities which don't obtain for other parties such
as ourselves. The more the two governments can seize such opportunities and
discharge such responsibilities together, then the better for everyone.'
Mr Kevin McNamara, shadow Northern Ireland secretary, said he wanted to know
if what the two governments had agreed would bring an end to 'warfare' and
'be acceptable to both communities'.
Mr Ken Maginnis, the UUP's security spokesman, said: 'If the two governments
could with one voice underpin the principle of consent for the people of
Northern Ireland then the terrorists would be left with no claim to
justification. I don't think it would be worth making a statement if they
couldn't do that.'
Mr Dick Spring, Irish foreign minister, was upbeat on prospects for peace.
He said: 'It will be a balanced declaration, threatening no one's interests,
and there is no hidden agenda by either government.'
