FT  24 AUG 93 / Brussels asked to rule on Britain's equal pay laws:
Ministers will see watchdog's move as provocative
BRITAIN'S equal pay laws are to be legally challenged through the European
Commission in separate actions by the government-appointed Equal
Opportunities Commission and the TUC.
In an unprecedented move the EOC, a statutory body accountable to the
government, will next month ask the Commission to decide if Britain's equal
pay legislation complies with EC regulations.
The EOC could find itself on a collision course with the government over
what ministers will regard as a provocative move.
The organisation's decision to refer the issue to the Commission reflects
its increasing exasperation at what it regards as the government's failure
to comply with Community legal obligations on equal pay.
The main reason for the EOC's appeal to Brussels is the negative response it
received last month from Mr David Hunt, the employment secretary, over the
issue.
In a letter dated July 19, he rejected out of hand the EOC's proposals to
strengthen existing equal pay legislation.
These called for: a speed-up in the slow and complex procedure in equal pay
inquiries; an extension in equal pay award entitlements, beyond the
individual claimant, to all workers in the same employment doing the same or
similar work to entitle them to the same award; and a move to allow
discriminatory terms in a collective agreement to be challenged by an
interested party or modified by a trade union.
In his letter Mr Hunt also turned down the legal advice given to the EOC by
leading counsel that the government had failed to fulfil its obligations
under the Treaty of Rome and the equal pay directive which Britain signed in
1975.
The employment secretary told the EOC the government needed to strike a
balance between improving the law and ensuring employers could avoid burdens
that would threaten job opportunities.
Mr Hunt also said he was firmly opposed to any proposals that sought to
award equal pay to others in similar jobs or to allow trade unions or the
EOC to challenge discriminatory pay systems.
The EOC pointed out that it had been trying unsuccessfully for over three
years to convince the government that it should improve existing equal value
legislation. 'We have decided enough is enough,' the EOC said. The EOC's
detailed reference to Brussels is now being finalised.
Yesterday the EOC also welcomed the TUC's decision to make a formal
complaint to the Commission over the abolition of wages councils, which
comes into force on August 30.
It said it shared the TUC's concern that the abolition 'will worsen the pay
gap between women and men and dismantle one of the most practically
effective ways of maintaining equal pay for women'.
But the Department of Employment said last night that UK legislation fully
complied with the government's EC obligations and it did not accept that
abolishing the wages councils breached either the equal pay directive or the
Treaty of Rome.
