FT  27 OCT 93 / Delors sets agenda for reducing jobless
MR Jacques Delors, European Commission president, said in Luxembourg
yesterday he was convinced the EC could reduce mass unemployment, which is
'paralysing European societies'.
This would be achieved through a mix of job-sharing, part-time work and wage
flexibility, according to the latest draft of the commission's white paper
on competitiveness, growth and employment.
The Commission has set a target of creating 20m new jobs by the end of this
decade in its blueprint for tackling mass unemployment in Europe.
The white paper, which is being co-ordinated by Mr Delors, will get its
first real airing at this Friday's special EC summit in Brussels. The final
version will be the centrepiece of December's meeting of EC leaders.
The creation of 20m jobs, to reduce current EC unemployment rates of 10.4
per cent to 5 per cent by the year 2000, would match the performance of the
US economy in the 1980s. It implies annual growth rates between 3 and 3.5
per cent, levels which are not likely to start until 1995.
Mr Delors said in Luxembourg yesterday that he was convinced the EC could
reduce mass unemployment.
'I have a lot of ideas in my head and I hope I can convince the heads of
government,' the Commission president said, a day after being rebuffed by EC
finance ministers on his ideas for boosting economic growth.
The Commission draft calls for an overhaul of EC labour markets, and an
increase in investment from 19 per cent to 23-24 per cent of Community GDP,
a figure last seen in 1964-74.
'The slower expansion of private consumption would be the price to pay for
increasing competitiveness, job creation, and therefore future prosperity,'
the draft says.
The Commission makes clear that it is not advocating EC-wide legislation.
Reforms should be tailored to the specific needs of member states, but
carried out within a mutually reinforcing framework. Among the chief
recommendations of the draft white paper are:
New incentives for part-time work. This would reduce the average hours
worked and allow the number of jobs to increase.
Greater wage flexibility, including possible dilution of minimum wage
legislation.
Employment costs. The paper says labour should not be taxed more heavily
than capital, and calls for a progressive reduction in non-wage costs for
lower-skilled jobs.
Taxes on pollution and energy to compensate for revenue losses as a result
of the reduction in employment costs.
Growth figure rejected; Some Nordic and Alpine fresh air Page 2
