FT  17 JUL 93 / The Victorian fraud legacy: Andrew St George on the morality
handed down to the City of London's brokers, insurers and bankers
ON FEBRUARY 17 1856, a Sunday, a suicide was discovered on Hampstead Heath
in London. With the body was this note:
I can not live - I have ruined too many - I could not live and see their
agony - I have committed diabolical crimes unknown to any human being. They
will now appear, bringing my family and others to distress - causing to all
shame and grief that they should ever have known me.
I blame no one, but attribute all to my own infamous villainy . . . I could
go through any torture as a punishment for my crimes . . . but I can not
live to see the tortures I inflict . . .
The note, written the previous evening, belonged to John Sadleir MP, junior
Lord of the Treasury, chairman of the Royal Swedish Railway Company and of
the London &amp; County Joint-Stock Banking Company. His crime? Fraud. He dared
not name it. Nor had he, at his death, been convicted.
Sadleir issued Pounds 150,000 in false shares from the Royal Swedish, and
defrauded the Tipperary Joint Stock Bank of Pounds 200,000. He was a smart
Dublin solicitor with a modest lifestyle thought incompatible with vast
fraudulence. The Times described him as a 'national calamity.'
His offence was to break the rules which, then as now, governed our
confidence in each other and confidence in the future. Today's frauds tend
to be more technical, less easily discovered, and almost impossible to
sentence. The Victorians had no equivalent of the Serious Fraud Office, let
alone any institution with wide powers to search outside the ambit of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
The present-day Serious Fraud Office of Barbara Mills and George Staple has
a 65 per cent success rate in convicting serious frauds, but this should be
balanced by its failures in the Guinness and Blue Arrow trials and by its
lack of control over the Pounds 40m legal costs in the latter. Defendants in
the Bank of Commerce &amp; Credit International (BCCI), Brent Walker and Maxwell
cases still have no trial date. Only the lawyers will benefit.
The Victorians, facing organised and thoroughgoing fraud for the first time,
were slow to bless and quick to chide. They deployed a high moral tone when
dealing with the miscreants. Here, from 1857, is a judge addressing the
accused:
'You are a person who has forged on a large scale; you have played for heavy
stakes, and you must have been aware all the time that if your iniquities
were discovered, you would be called to a heavy account. That account it is
my duty to close by pronouncing upon you the sentence of the court, which
is, that you be transported beyond the seas for the term of your natural
life.'
In Victorian times the City of London was policed not by self-regulation but
by rules of behaviour. Fraud and over-speculation were bad behaviour in a
market which, ideally at least, ran on probity. Speculation was the supreme
sin and charity the supreme virtue, although buying cheap and selling dear
was felt by many to be part of God's grandeur.
Moreover, when frauds were discovered, the Victorian system put fraudster
and victim in close proximity. One of the greatest cases of fraud was that
of Sir John Dean Paul, of the bank Straham, Paul &amp; Bates, which lost money
in the 1850s in mining and railway drainage. By June 11 1855 the bank's
liabilities were Pounds 750,000. One creditor, the Rev Dr Griffiths,
prebendary of Rochester (who was owed Pounds 22,000) had the partners
arraigned under the Fraudulent Trustees Act. The scene at the Central
Criminal court was pure moral drama. Sir John and his two partners were
sentenced to 14 years' transportation. The Times obituary described Sir John
in 1868 as 'a once notorious character.'
That Victorian moral legacy survives. The shame of the current Lloyd's
insurance losses is the breach of trust between individuals. The Lloyd's
crash is a social affair, played out in Home County drawing-rooms. While
bright particular stars such as Swaleh Naqvi of the corrupt BCCI or Octav
Botnar of Nissan illuminate the firmament, fraud remains the most social of
crimes: it depends on others' trust and it is maintained by social position.
Fraudsters in the 1850s were every bit as colourful as our own. Leopold
Redpath was the most anomalous of all. An insurance broker from the
Peninsula and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, he perpetrated the Great
Northern Railway frauds, in which non-existent stock was issued. He combined
successful swindling with high moral reputation and a benevolent career.
A city commentator wrote: 'Never was money obtained with more wicked
subtlety; never was it spent more charitably. The thief and the desperate
criminal were intertwined with the philanthropist.'
Redpath became a governor of the St Anne's Society for impoverished
gentlefolk, and of Christ's Hospital. His philanthropy was a mockery of the
benevolence shown by, say, George Peabody in the 1860s; it was a form of
social insider dealing within Victorian middle-class society. Redpath had
lied to his wife, waiting at their Weybridge house as he was arrested. A
detective appeared and she fainted at the news that her husband was a forger
and a thief. He was caught by accident in 1856 when a messenger was
intercepted with incriminating papers, and deported in 1857. His financial
expertise would prove useful in Australia.
The Redpath revelations followed the frauds of Sadleir and William Robson,
the great Crystal Palace forger. While Redpath took the philanthropic route
to acceptability, Robson took the thespian way. The acute and creative
Robson made the ideal fraudster: he had the sense to know what to do and the
wit to carry it out.
In 1854, he joined the Crystal Palace Company as chief of the transfer
department, reporting to the company registrar, who noted Robson's aptness
and 'his engaging and agreeable manners.' Robson sold shares in the name of
Johnson (his brother-in-law), 'witnessing' the signature himself. His fraud
netted Pounds 27,000. When arrested, he was writing a play called Love and
Loyalty.
Amid much partying and sailing with friends, he bought and lavishly
furnished Kilburn Priory. He fled to Scandinavia, but was found in
Copenhagen, the first fraudster to be captured by means of the telegraph. In
November 1856 he was sentenced to 20 years' transportation.
Robson, in turn, had modelled himself on the brilliant Walter Watts, a clerk
at the Globe Assurance Company. Watts emerged from obscurity in 1844 to buy
and manage the Marylebone Theatre and the New Olympic in London in the late
1840s. City opinion later supposed that Watts' theatrical speculations were
the cause rather than the result of his crimes.
Watts used an antiquated share-dealing system which based the company's
accounts on its banker's pass-book, a form of out-dated company etiquette.
It cost Globe Insurance Pounds 700,000 (laundered through Watts' bankers)
between 1844 and 1850. Watts was tried on May 10 1850 at the Old Bailey for
stealing a Pounds 1,400 cheque, but technical objections clogged the case.
He was finally convicted of stealing 'a piece of paper of the value of 1d'
and sentenced to 10 years' transportation. He never left. He killed himself
at Newgate.
Throughout the Victorian period the City of London was as skittish as the
fraudsters who flourished in it. Market crises in 1837, 1847, 1857 and 1866
saw railways, banks and insurance companies fail, a process exacerbated by
limited liability legislation in 1855 and 1862, and by the Bank Indemnity
Bill of 1857. The descent of manners in the City was a social phenomenon
riding on changes in attitudes to money, making and spending it.
The City remained essentially Victorian until the 1960s - still run by
brokers, jobbers, insurers and bankers. Insider dealing was how money was
made. Everyone did it, because information was a social commodity exchanged
on the grouse moor and not via the modem.
One merchant bank chairman from the 1960s said: 'The whole object was to
know something nobody else did. Inside information was what one expected;
one needed a good story from the stockbroker, whereupon the stock was duly
bought. Sometime it worked, sometimes not.'
Throughout the 1960s, new and more technical investment tools developed. The
Eurodollar bonds pioneered by Warburgs or the unit life insurance pioneered
by Hambros began to shift investment away from traditional means. The City's
Victorian legacy reached down the century as far as the great City battle
over British Aluminium in 1958-59. From then on, however, the gentlemen
retired and the players took over.
Yet a permitted amount of insider dealing and advance information was
allowed. This seemed to prevent out-and-out fraudulence, since a decent
amount of money could be made. But with the arrival of wider, more direct
and more public share ownership, and with increasingly complex
communications and investment vehicles, this world was bound to change.
The basis of trust between individuals and the money society which
controlled money manners changed rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s, so that the
scope for fraud became international. In many cases white-collar crime
operated offshore, in foreign markets.
There is still scope for fraud, conducted more circumspectly than by the
great Victorians. In the first four months of 1993, Pounds 571m in fraud was
reported (the total for 1992 was Pounds 671m). Simone Weill, the French
philosopher, thought fraud the most heinous of crimes, because it affected
large numbers of people who had never harmed you and whom you would never
see. It was a breach of trust magnified many times over.
Andrew St George's book, The Descent of Manners, Chatto &amp; Windus, Pounds 20,
will be published on July 19.
