FT  16 JAN 93 / Fashion: Or is it just a silly fashion? - Fake fur is a bad
answer to the wrong questions
LIKE ALL politically correct notions, the idea of fake fur flies in the face
of reality.
It is neither warm nor soft, it is not lasting, and it looks no more like
fur than the Maastricht Treaty looks like a victory for Britain. As with all
such notions, no one really believed in it even when it was at its most
fashionable.
A decade of anti-fur campaigning has transformed the ostentatious wearing of
fur - but not leather, which is just skins with the fur removed - into a
political issue. In the early 1980s, fur shops were sporadically fire-bombed
and vandalised. Fur farming came under attack. Harrods closed its legendary
fur salon in 1989 because insurance costs became prohibitive, and scores of
other furriers shut down in a climate of fear.
Sensational anti-fur advertising campaigns, featuring outrageously
misogynist images equating women with bloodied quarry 'Rich Bitch, Poor
Bitch', have encouraged verbal abuse - 'it took 13 dumb animals to make this
coat and only one to wear it' - and even physical attacks on women wearing
fur. Terrorist methods apparently failed to alienate public opinion which
was exposed to absurd allegations which still abound. They range from
rumours of subsidies to farms where animals are allegedly gassed, so that
clean pelts can be obtained, to ridiculous reports that fur traders prowl
the streets to capture cats.
Just as there was no concerted resistance to the terrorist tactics, there
has been no effective defence of freedom of choice in the wearing of furs.
In spite of its similarity to quests to abolish, for example, smoking, fox
hunting or all-male clubs, the anti-fur campaign never aroused moral
indignation in the press, nor a disgruntled murmur at the Tory Party
Conference.
Fur was finished off but by women's magazines and fashion writers who
pronounced it to be 'out of fashion'.
They did what the anti-fur campaigners had not been able to achieve on their
own. Some decided to boycott fur altogether; others decided against
coverage.
In 1991, the suggestion of writing about fur was greeted at a Tatler
editorial conference with gasps: 'Real fur?' and a firm reproach that 'our
readers don't like fur and they don't wear it'. But in September last year
that editorial policy was reversed. By December, even Vogue and The Daily
Telegraph had caught up with the latest consensus.
If all this seems like some inexplicable conspiracy theory, then the
question to ask is Cui bono? The answer is, of course, the women's magazines
and fashion pundits themselves. Their gripe against fur is more than
skin-deep.
Their social discontent arises from tantalising proximity to the truly rich,
while they themselves are merely well-heeled; from following fashion they
can rarely afford.
Their attack on fur is a test of their ability to manipulate trends: for
fashion is only a powerful weapon so long as it can be defined as more the
possession of intangible knowledge than of tangible things.
So it was that we have had the trend for all things fake - fake pearls, less
than genuine bosoms, and, of course, synthetic furs. The object? To devalue,
if not to expropriate, what is real.
It is not the rich who lose out. Those who can afford it can wear what they
want, and if they no longer want fur they can indulge some other whim
without the least hardship. For the rich, anyway, fashion is an amusement,
and the more drastically it changes the more amusing it is. The poor are
also immune - unless they happen to work in the fur industry.
The ones who lose out are somewhere in between. For such people, fur is a
well-considered investment: rather like a Savile Row suit. It transcends
fashion and it is a symbol of independence. And it is this which the
arbiters of style cannot abide.
Yet this year we are told that fur is back in fashion. Fur trims and
accessories are in the collections, and it is all right to wear fur as a
transient, authorised adornment. The debate has less to do with being
sympathetic to animals than pursuing novelty and pleasing editors.
