FT  30 NOV 93 / FT Review of Business Books (9): The way to a journalist's
heart - Charles Batchelor assesses some self-help PR guides for growing
businesses
How should businesses handle their PR? Most people spend at least an hour a
day reading the newspapers, listening to the radio and watching television.
Yet to judge by their attempts to get a story about themselves or their
business into the media, many have not the faintest idea what makes 'a good
story.' when it comes to self-promotion.
Fortunately for the amateur in this area, there is no shortage of recent
books offering advice, some of it good.
Linda Fairbrother's Your Message and the Media (Nicholas Brealey Publishing,
Pounds 19.95, 306 pages) is the most expensive, but probably the best value,
from the latest clutch of books on the subject. It addresses in a clear and
entertaining style the questions raised by the person attempting to gain
publicity for himself or his organisation. The clear lay-out, helpful
section headings and extensive use of examples almost compensate for the
lack of an index.
One of the commonest questions about media relations is, 'How do I retain
control over what they print or say?' The straightforward answer is that you
can't, writes Linda Fairbrother, who runs courses on media relations for the
Industrial Society.
Journalists will follow the angle they think is interesting but you can
nudge them in the direction you want if you plan ahead, she says. Suggest a
newsworthy angle of your own; target the right medium for your type of
story; practice before an interview. These simple techniques will give you
greater control of the message.
Recognise that the media will often come at you whether you like it or not,
she warns. If something does go wrong you will at least have a good chance
of your version getting a good hearing if you have already established good
contacts with the press.
The Small Business Publicity Manual, by Barry Ashby and Mike Park (Copydesk,
tel: 081-851 440, Pounds 9.75, 58 pages), could probably justify its lack of
an index by its claim to be a no-frills guide to promoting sales. It
provides a sensible if somewhat brief guide, together with handy checklists,
for people seeking to win publicity for their business.
Decide what is special about your business, so you know what you want to
say; then define your target market so you know who you want to say it to,
the authors suggest. They provide helpful hints on writing a press release
and preparing for meetings with journalists.
Many of the suggestions they make appear obvious but they are often
overlooked. Make sure that your occasion does not clash with another media
event on the same day. Unless your premises are really unsuitable, use them
for meetings. Keep presentations short but allow plenty of time for
questions.
For all its brevity this book could not be accused of lacking ambition. It
takes in advertising, sponsorship and exhibitions as well as press
relations. For the owner manager or executive with very little time to
spare, this makes a handy, if somewhat overpriced, introduction.
Hiding inside 101 Ways to Get Great Publicity, by Timothy Foster (Kogan
Page, Pounds 7.99, 114 pages) are some sensible suggestions but they
struggle to overcome the author's format. Any handbook with a number in its
title prompts suspicion that the subject matter is being stretched (or more
rarely compressed) to fit. The suspicion is amply justified in this case.
Scrappy writing and the frequent resort to the dictionary for a handy
definition to carry the narrative forward suggest a book written in haste.
Nonetheless, 101 Ways contains worthwhile advice on producing press
releases, compiling a press kit, handling bad publicity and correcting
errors. Deliberate lies or distortions also have a knack of being found it,
the author warns. The big advantage of telling the truth is you don't have
to remember what you have said.
Manage the Message, by Bryan Thresher and Jim Biggin (Century Business,
Pounds 9.99, 258 pages), is not really about dealing with the press at all,
despite its title. Its theme is the use of writing to achieve your aims  -
written communication as a means of persuading and motivating people.
Much of the subject matter is the sort which would be covered by any
competent English master in the second or third form, though the daily
mangling suffered by the English language in much business communication
shows the need for a reminder at least.
This book compares the use of a formal writing style with a more chatty
approach and the different effects which can be achieved. It considers the
active and passive voice, the use of Latin words and the importance of
constructing an argument logically and without emotion or exaggeration.
