FT  20 DEC 93 / Stick to shake at workplace: German cost-saving labour deals
The Robert Bosch group started it. A year ago, when most of German industry
barely suspected how deep a recessionary hole it was in, the publicity-shy
electronics concern was already digging its way out.
It had decided to build a new semiconductor facility. Its preferred site was
Reutlingen, home since 1971 to most of its sophisticated electronics
capacity. The snag was that for technical reasons, the plant had to be run
round-the- clock, seven days a week, and the trade unions would have none of
it.
Negotiations started and planning went ahead - for two sites, one in Germany
and one in Scotland. By February this year the package was complete. The
German unions had overcome their ingrained opposition to weekend working.
With little fanfare, the DM200m investment was approved for Reutlingen, 300
jobs were secured, and the Scots were out in the cold.
A month later, the company told its German workforce that despite a
cost-cutting programme, some of its products were still 30 per cent more
expensive than those of foreign competitors. As a result, the
previously-agreed 3 per cent pay rise, due on April 1, would apply only to
basic pay. All the 'traditional' perks and bonuses would be excluded from
the calculation, saving the group DM250m a year. White collar workers
received letters telling them their salaries would be reduced by 3 per cent.
Bosch, with more than 150,000 workers worldwide, had successfully set about
undermining two of Germany's notorious structural defects - a seemingly
unbreakable upward pay spiral and inflexible working practices - which
hitherto appeared to have condemned all the country's manufacturing to a
future of fading international competitiveness.
Since then, there have been several variations on the Bosch stick-and-carrot
theme, with, unusually for Germany, rather more emphasis on the stick than
the vegetable.
By threatening to build a new factory outside Germany for its projected
A-Class mini car, Mercedes last week wrung concessions on operating
economies from unions worth a claimed DM200m.
General Motors had previously struck a similar deal for a 475-job diesel
engine line to be installed in Kaiserslautern in preference to any of the
nine other options under consideration outside Germany. Volkswagen, by
threatening 30,000 job losses, recently won agreement to reduce working
times which will mean real reductions in net income of up to 12 per cent for
100,000 employees.
So far these signs of a new order have been confined mainly to the
automotive industry (Bosch is a leading vehicle components maker) which has
been worst hit by recession. But the results, achieved with little or no
serious industrial unrest, suggest that if the process can be kept up and
extended into the deeper reaches of the industrial base, German
manufacturing may soon be back on the road to international competitiveness.
Whether or not, as some union leaders and politicians claim, employers are
gaining the upper hand through the use of coercion or blackmail, the
acceptance of change is spreading rapidly through the industrial workforce,
and the beginnings of a snowball effect are already apparent.
GM's engine plant deal, for example, set the tone for a parsimonious
four-year agreement, signed last month, covering all 50,000 employees of
Adam Opel, the US group's vehicle-making subsidiary in Germany. This
includes workers accepting only two-thirds of any nationally-agreed pay
increases for the duration of the deal. All of Mercedes' German employees
agreed to less generous pay and conditions arrangements to safeguard 3,000
jobs at the Rastatt plant.
The most obvious assumption prompted by the events at Bosch, GM and
Mercedes, in particular, is that the companies believe they will now be able
to make semiconductors, diesel engines, volume cars and high-class minis and
sell them at competitive prices anywhere in the world market. It may not yet
be wholly true, but the signs are that progress is being made, and that the
premium-earning 'Made in Germany' label has more of a future than many would
have believed 12 months ago.
