FT  11 FEB 93 / UK Company News: Airtours resumes attack in Owners bid
AIRTOURS yesterday returned to the attack in its bid to take over Owners
Abroad, arguing that shareholders in the rival holiday group have been given
inadequate explanations as to why their company has performed relatively so
badly.
In a letter to shareholders, Mr David Crossland, Airtours chairman, said
that contrary to Owners Abroad's claim that his company was 'running out of
steam', Airtours' increases in bookings were gathering momentum.
Mr Howard Klein, Owners Abroad chairman, replied that in neither of
Airtours' two offer documents had it supplied a convincing explanation of
the strategy for the enlarged group. Airtours had also failed to quantify
the benefits which it claimed would come from the merger.
Mr Crossland said that he was particularly upset by the claim that Airtours
had chosen the wrong aircraft in the MD83. This older, but commercially
proven, aircraft had been chosen because at the time the A320 had not been
in operation for more than 4,000 flying hours a year.
Airtours had decided not to risk starting a new charter airline with a new
aircraft.
Mr Crossland refuted Owners Abroad's claim that Airtours' 30 per cent
expansion in capacity in 1991 had been 'risky'. Airtours had moved very
rapidly - but according to a plan - in snapping up hotel beds and airline
seats when ILG went bust.
As a result Airtours had been able to double its market share, adding five
percentage points to take it up to about 12 per cent of the air inclusive
tour market that year. Owners Abroad had only increased its market share by
one percentage point in summer 1991.
Mr Crossland said that while his company had increased its market
capitalisation by Pounds 186m in the five years to last September, Owners
Abroad's worth had shrunk.
Twenty four MPs have signed an early day motion, calling on Mr Michael
Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, to refer Airtours' proposed
takeover of Owners Abroad to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. Already,
Thomas Cook, the travel agency and financial services group, the Consumers'
Association and the Association of Independent Tour Operators have called
for a referral.
