FT  01 MAR 93 / Just what the doctor ordered: The merits of managed markets
in the provision of healthcare services
As Mrs Hillary Clinton examines strategies for reforming the US's costly and
incomplete healthcare system, she could learn much from the experience of
European countries in reforming their health services.
A recent Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report* on
healthcare reforms in seven European countries (see table) concludes that,
despite starting with very different health systems, they are converging on
the same solution to the problem of escalating costs.
That solution is what the OECD calls a 'managed market' in healthcare. The
details vary from country to country but, in each case, some sort of market
mechanism is created, in which doctors and hospitals compete to provide
health services paid for or underwritten by the government.
Some countries are further down the road towards managed markets than others
 -Germany, the Netherlands and the UK are the most advanced. And none of
them has all the elements of the model in place, with many still
experimenting with or in the middle of implementing their reforms.
However, all the important components of the model have been successfully
tested in one or other of the seven countries, allowing the OECD to describe
the managed market approach as 'not a high-risk strategy'.
All the countries provide healthcare universally or almost universally -
those with limited public provision have widened its scope in the past
decade. Methods of funding vary, however, with some paying for it out of
taxation, others through compulsory insurance contributions paid either to
private insurers, public bodies or a mixture of both.
All had experienced 'unacceptably high' growth rates in healthcare costs in
the 1970s, according to the OECD, with the share of GDP swallowed by health
rising during the decade by between 29 per cent in the UK and 71 per cent in
Ireland. The desire of politicians to contain these costs was the main
motive behind healthcare reforms.
Universal funding has proved to be the key to containing costs, says the
OECD. By setting overall budgets, governments can take the lead in
controlling expenditure by bearing down on producer interests such as
surgeons, hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry. Where health costs are
demand-led and open-ended - as in privately insured systems - there is no
such force for economy and efficiency.
Universal cover is also the key to improving the standard of health since it
allows basic medical care to be allocated according to need rather than
ability to pay. Without universal cover, insurers select healthier groups,
leaving the less healthy people - often on low incomes or ageing - with
little or no protection.
An additional argument in favour of universal funding is that it can help
reduce the financial burden on middle-income groups. With voluntary insured
systems such as in the US, they pay twice: their own insurance premiums, and
higher taxes to pay for public health services for the low-income groups who
are not covered by insurance.
But capping the budget is only the first step. The seven countries have all
experimented with market-type mechanisms for spending the budget more
efficiently. The common elements of these mechanisms are:
Decentralised purchasing agencies to buy health services for customers in
the light of local needs. In the UK, these are the district health
authorities, which purchase health services on behalf of most people living
in their areas.
Competition among 'providers', such as doctors, hospitals and other
community health services. Payments systems have been restructured to reward
those that are more efficient, so that money follows the patient.
A mixture of private-sector and public-sector providers to inject market
forces. In the UK, the entrepreneurial spirit is provided by the National
Health Service trusts, which are independent and self-governing.
Self-regulation on quality assurance - leaving it to professionals and
purchasing agencies to regulate the market, rather than heavy-handed
interference from above.
Within the managed market, paying for health services through a contract for
services is more cost-effective than reimbursement of fees for each service.
In France, for example, where healthcare was mostly paid for by
reimbursement of fees during the 1980s, the share of GDP consumed by
healthcare rose from 7.6 per cent of GDP in 1980 to 8.8 per cent in 1990.
The share was static in Germany and the Netherlands, which used the contract
method throughout this period.
There is evidence that countries that pay doctors fees for services have
higher consultation rates, longer consultation times and higher prescribing
rates. When Ireland switched from fee-for-service to a fixed annual contract
for each patient on the doctor's register, doctors' consultation rates fell
by a fifth. Fixed payments per head remove the incentive to over-treat to
earn fees - a big problem in the US.
The good news for US reformers - where 'socialised medicine' has
traditionally been viewed with suspicion - is that none of the seven is
moving towards a centralised, command economy-type health service.
The best example of the latter is in the UK. Until the recent reforms, the
NHS was largely organised on what the OECD describes as a 'public integrated
system': hospital and community health services were paid for and provided
by a centralised, vertically integrated, monolithic organisation.
Now the British health service is held up by the OECD report as one of the
two most advanced in its reforms. In addition to introducing managed markets
for healthcare providers, the UK has begun to introduce competition in
purchasing of health services. It is doing this by giving some family
doctors, called fund-holders, direct control of the budgets for hospital
treatment of their patients.
While most patients are treated under block contracts negotiated by district
health authorities, fund-holders can shop around for the best deals for
their patients. The OECD says that this has improved the responsiveness of
hospital services, though it concedes that it remains to be seen whether the
benefits can be extended to all patients.
Similar attempts to introduce competition in purchasing are being
implemented in the Netherlands, which will allow consumers to choose between
competing insurers and sickness funds. Membership of a scheme is to be
compulsory, and requires a flat-rate premium which is expected to cover 15
per cent of health costs.
The balance of health finance comes from a central healthcare fund which
collects income-related premiums from every consumer. This money is
distributed to purchasers according to the profile of their customers, so
that healthcare is allocated according to need. Selection and cream-skimming
are avoided by a requirement on schemes to accept all applicants.
The OECD accepts it is too early to make a final assessment of either the UK
or Dutch reforms. But the creation of managed markets in healthcare in each
of the seven European countries appears to have extended healthcare to most
or all the population at costs much lower than those in the US.
* The Reform of Healthcare, OECD, Pounds 30.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
EUROPE'S HEALTH
 ---------------------------------------------------------
                    Health          Change in
               expenditure           share of
               as % of GDP          GDP spent
                                   in 1990 on
                             health 1980-90 %
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Belgium                7.6                 15
France                 8.8                 16
Germany                8.1                 -4
Ireland                7.5                -22
Netherlands            8.0                  0
Spain                  6.5                 18
UK                     6.2                  7
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD Health Systems: Facts and Trends, 1993.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
