FT  02 SEP 93 / Fowler bolsters rightwing hostility totax rises
RIGHTWING hopes of heading off tax increases in the November budget were
boosted yesterday by a declaration of support from Sir Norman Fowler, the
Conservative party chairman, and comments by Mr Eddie George, governor of
the Bank of England.
Mr George said that economic growth would help reduce the Pounds 50bn public
sector deficit. His comments will give comfort to those within the
Conservative party who oppose significant tax rises in the November budget.
'The impact of economic activity on the deficit can be larger than people
allow,' he said, adding that the problem did not need to be resolved 'in one
go'.
Mr George told Securities and Investment Review magazine he could see no
reason why the UK could not enjoy a prolonged upswing in growth if inflation
remained low.
Meanwhile, Sir Norman, in his first public comment on the party's
increasingly divisive internal debate, called for public spending cuts - the
alternative being promoted by Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the
Treasury.
Speaking on the eve of a tour of Conservative constituency associations
aimed at boosting morale, Sir Norman said the party would want Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, to take 'whatever action was necessary' to reduce
the government's budget deficit.
But he said grass roots members would expect public spending to be 'the
first area which is looked at and which is reduced'. Public spending 'must
be the first port of call before one goes to taxation. We have been and are
committed to being a low taxation party', he told BBC radio.
Sir Norman's intervention adds weight to a campaign against the prospect of
tax increases being run by prominent rightwing backbenchers, with the
apparent backing of rightwing cabinet ministers such as Mr Peter Lilley,
social security secretary, and Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary.
The right's case will also be strengthened by the launch of a Labour
campaign against government economic policy by Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow
chancellor, who moved to exploit the government's difficulties by claiming
the Conservatives were the party of high taxation.
Deliberately echoing the Conservatives' general election attacks on Labour,
he said taxpayers faced a 'tax bombshell' which would raise average taxes by
Pounds 1,000 a year by 1995.
Mr John Townend, rightwing chairman of the Tory finance committee, claimed
there was 'a growing view among all our ministers that if we did go into the
next election as a high spending, high taxation party, our chances would be
pretty slim'.
The right's objective is to revive proposals put forward by Mr Portillo
earlier this year for cuts of between 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent in the
budgets of the main spending departments.
Fowler to quit as Group 4 director, Page 7
Labour attacks tax plans, Page 7
