FT  15 DEC 93 / Matrix Churchill trial was 'ludicrous': Former trade
minister tells Iraq arms probe of 'surrealistic' government operations
Last year's abortive prosecution of three British businessmen for illegally
selling machine tools to Iraqi weapons factories should not have happened,
Mr Alan Clark, former trade minister, told the Scott inquiry yesterday.
Mr Clark said the trial of the executives of Matrix Churchill, the
machine-tool manufacturer, was 'ludicrous' and served no public interest.
On his second day of evidence Mr Clark said: 'It (the trial) was long after
the event. I didn't see what damage had actually been done. I didn't see any
deterrent effect this was going to have on others. I didn't really see any
justification for it.'
Mr Clark described how officials and ministers had approved the export of
machine tools knowing they were defence-related because they hoped to gain
further intelligence information.
He referred to the 'surrealistic' atmosphere in which the government and
intelligence services operated under guidelines that were supposed to
restrict defence sales.
'Intelligence was telling you what the machine tools were going to be used
for but the machine tools had to be provided to protect the source that was
telling you about the machine tools. There was a total circularity that was
absurd,' Mr Clark said.
He told the public hearing: 'One would have thought that (Customs) were
under an obligation to acquaint themselves with the facts,' before going
ahead with the prosecution.
Mr Clark said that 'to some extent' he himself had been 'negligent' by
giving an inaccurate witness statement prior to the trial. The statement had
denied outright that he had given machine-tool manufacturers approval to go
ahead with exports to Iraq knowing they had a military use.
It was his admission at last year's Old Bailey trial that he was 'economical
. . . with the actualite' which prompted the prosecution's collapse.
Earlier yesterday Mr Clark suggested that the Foreign Office had
deliberately ignored the diversion of illegal arms exports to Iraq via
Jordan for foreign policy reasons.
After describing Jordan's 'notorious role' in breaking sanctions Mr Clark
said: 'I never understood the level of trust which was reposed in Jordan. I
assume that wider diplomatic considerations came into it.'
He told the inquiry that he was 'so angry' with Jordan that, following the
invasion of Kuwait, he prevented King Hussein from officiating at a parade
at the British military academy of Sandhurst.
A British military engineering company has been charged in the US with
secretly selling to Iraq an assembly line used to make artillery fuses.
Four executives of Ordtec in Reading, Berkshire, have been convicted in this
country of similar offences. Ministers stopped documents, which indicated
that the government knew what the company was doing, from going before the
court.
After the collapse of the Matrix Churchill case the four Ordtec executives,
who received suspended sentences or were fined, said they would appeal
against their convictions.
Mr Michael Chertoff, US attorney for New Jersey, said Ordtec and Rexon
Technology Corporation of Wayne, New Jersey, were accused of violating the
US Arms Export Control Act by attempting to ship the equipment through
Jordan.
