FT  27 JUL 93 / Survey of Ghana (2): A blot on the copybook - Edward Balls
explains last year's economic turbulence
NO ONE was surprised when 1992 turned out to be both a turbulent and a
disappointing year for Ghana's economy.
On top of severe budgetary pressures linked to last year's transition to
civilian rule, Ghana also suffered a 21 per cent fall in cocoa earnings, its
main export commodity.
The result was a year which blotted the last page of the military
government's copybook on the 10th anniversary of Ghana's structural
adjustment programme.
1992 began with the government's finances in apparently good shape. A
three-year extended structural facility with the International Monetary Fund
ended in 1991 with the budget in surplus to the tune of 1.5 per cent of
gross domestic product.
Inflation had fallen to 10 per cent, from a peak of 142 per cent in 1983
when the government's Economic Recovery Programme began. And a succession of
balance of payments surpluses since 1987 had enabled the government to build
up a healthy pile of foreign exchange reserves, covering more than four
months' worth of imports. By the time last November's presidential election
finally took place, all these indicators had moved sharply in the wrong
direction.
A projected budget surplus of 1.8 per cent of gross domestic product became
a deficit of 4.8 per cent; the government was forced to borrow from the
banking system, the broad money supply grew by 51 per cent and inflation
accelerated to 13.3 per cent by year-end.
The outside world can take only part of the blame. The decline in cocoa
prices - and thus the sharp drop in Ghana's terms of trade - was the main
reason for the deceleration in economic growth. Agricultural output declined
by 0.6 per cent and total output growth slipped, as a result, to 3.9 per
cent in 1992 from 5.3 per cent in 1991, the first year since 1983 in which
Ghana has underperformed the developing country average.
A combination of the shortfall in net foreign transfers and the fall in the
terms of trade produced a net outflow of resources last year, as the chart
above shows.
Yet the main reason for last year's inflationary overshoot and balance of
payments problems was profligate budgetary management in the run-up to last
autumn's elections as the government succumbed to political pressures, much
to the anger of President Rawlings' defeated opponents.
Government tax revenues were markedly lower than forecast, the reason being
half-hearted tax collection and lax enforcement of customs duties. But the
bulk of the slippage occurred on the expenditure side of the budget as the
government bowed to pressure from civil servants in the weeks before the
election and grant what amounted to an across-the-board salary adjustment
averaging 80 per cent.
Poor fiscal management is not uncommon in election years in the developed
world. That the government resorted, to some extent, to pork-barrel politics
might conceivably have been interpreted as an early sign that the transition
to civilian rule and western-style democracy was on track.
But the donors did not see things that way. As imports accelerated and
export growth slumped, aid flows from the World Bank were suspended, the
civil service reforms stalled and the government was unable to finance its
rising current account deficit. The result was a sharp loss of reserves and
a steep fall in the value of the cedi exchange rate.
The highest priority for the newly elected government this year has been to
get the macro-economy back into balance in order to ensure a favourable
spring report from the International Monetary Fund, and a warm embrace from
the aid donors at the recent Paris conference.
Ghana, while far from being the largest recipient of aid among African
countries, remains heavily dependent on gross aid flow totalling 8 per cent
of GDP a year.
Fiscal policy has already been tightened sharply to bring the budget back
into surplus, primarily through a 60 per cent rise in petrol prices. The
government is projecting a recovery in revenue collection and an
acceleration in the pace of the politically sensitive privatisation
programme. But success will depend on the willingness of the civil service
unions to accept a nominal pay freeze this year, although last year's
excesses and the January petrol increase pushed the annual rate of inflation
to 23 per cent in March. Inflation is not expected to fall below 20 per cent
this year.
Monetary policy has been tightened aggressively to drain excess liquidity
from the banking system - broad money in 1993 should barely grow. The Bank
of Ghana, having shifted last year from credit ceilings to open market
operations and weekly debt issues, increased its rediscount rate in March.
But credit creation in the first quarter was still excessive and in April
the Bank imposed a supplementary reserve requirement of 15 per cent of
assets on top of the usual 42 per cent.
Bankers in Accra say they are impressed by the effectiveness of the Bank's
domestic operations and monetary conditions are now, reportedly, painfully
tight. Less impressive has been the operation of the foreign exchange
market. Shortages of foreign exchange mean that the proposed interbank
market is not working. Banks are forced to hand out the foreign exchange
they receive as deposits, sharpening the incentive to engage in
export-oriented business.
Thus, domestic conditions provide, at least for now, an inauspicious base
from which to launch the government's campaign to accelerate economic growth
to 8 per cent a year by the end of the decade. Indeed, the target of 4.4 per
cent GDP growth this year looks highly optimistic.
The medium-term challenge is to achieve a sufficiently rapid rate of
economic growth to reduce the incidence of poverty and wean itself from aid
flows. The focus of reform has shifted to initiatives designed to raise
standards of primary health and infrastructure, improve the efficiency of
the civil service and streamlined state sector and make Ghana a more
attractive and profitable location for domestic and foreign private
investment in order to encourage the growth of non-traditional export
industries (see Page 4).
The government plans to press ahead with privatisation this year. This
year's budget announced, for the first time, that profitable state
enterprises will be sold off, and senior Ministry of Finance officials
confirm that they intend to privatise the state-owned banking sector.
Meanwhile the Ghana Investment Centre is being restructured as an investment
promotion centre (rather than the distributor of operating licences and thus
one of the economy's most inefficient bottlenecks). The proposed Ghana
Investments Promotion Centre will have the job of publicising the
government's new investment code, drawn up with the Private Sector Advisory
Group.
The code is designed to reduce the minimum foreign participation in joint
ventures to Dollars 10,000, and Dollars 50,000 if the operation is wholly
foreign-owned, unless the enterprise is a trading venture only.
Moreover, the code streamlines registration procedures for foreign joint
ventures; guarantees repatriation of profits, dividends and fees in respect
of loans and technology transfer agreements; guarantees a right to legal
redress and fair compensation in the event of compulsory acquisition; and
raises the quota limitation on expatriate staff.
But the short-term test is whether the government can restore macroeconomic
stability and maintain it while the civilian democratic political system
takes root.
Last year, Ghana failed that test and tried its donors' patience. Only if
the government is able to fight another election campaign in four years
without resorting to economic populism will the reforms begin to look
secure.
