FT  17 NOV 93 / Management: Are you a vine, an egg or a train? - Lucy
Kellaway meets an aspiring management guru with a 'creative' way of
challenging accepted theories
Is your boss a hammer, an owl, a loaf of bread, a knife, a sheep or a power
drill? Are you an iceberg, a vine, a train or an egg? Let your mind
free-associate and come up with some images. Invite your friends and
colleagues to do the same for you - maybe they see you as a kitchen blender,
as Robin Hood or as an ant.
Welcome to 'imaginization' as conceived by Gareth Morgan, an up-and-coming
management guru. Morgan is the hippy of the management world. He is for
creativity and against strategic planning and bureaucracy of any sort. He
has coined this six-syllable word to describe a process which he believes is
the future of all management thinking, and the key to changing the behaviour
of both the individual and the organisation.
Morgan has just come to Britain from Canada to promote his new book,
Imaginization*, and to explain to the British Academy of Management how it
works. According to the book's jacket, imaginization is a new way of
thinking. It is a new way of organising. It is a key managerial skill. It
provides a way of helping people understand and develop their creative
potential. It offers a means of finding innovative solutions to difficult
problems.
But what actually is it? 'Imaginization is about challenging mental models
and creating dialogue,' he tells me. I start to look sceptical, but get put
in my place. 'Cynicism,' he says, 'is dismissive and locks in. If you tap
into the negative side too early, you don't get a chance to see the positive
in it.' I try to tap in to some imaginization and play with the image of a
hedgehog. Yet if by hedgehog, all I mean is prickly, then why not say
prickly directly? Surely the image just confuses matters?
On the contrary, he says, images allow us to look at things in a creative
way. He suggests that whereas it would not be possible to tell your boss he
is prickly, in the context of 'this crazy game' you might be able to get the
same message across by describing him as a hedgehog.
In any case, most images are more complicated and therefore more telling
than that of a hedgehog. For instance, if your colleagues think you are a
kitchen blender, they may regard you as powerful, but with a tendency to
turn everything into a single ingredient. It could jolt you into changing
your ways, if you know that that is how they see you.
Most management ideas are hard to get a firm hold on, but Morgan's are more
than most because they are not prescriptive - they contain no solutions.
Instead, they are about a new way of looking at things. 'We are sold the
notion that management is a set of rules, we get locked in,' he says.
Is his new approach a bit like lateral thinking? He shakes his head:
'Lateral thinking is connected to a technique. My approach is less
structured. I don't ever describe the technique, but illustrate it.'
He gives an example of a manager whose problems at work were resolved simply
by changing the way she looked at her job. When Morgan first met this
manager, she felt that despite the superhuman efforts she was making at
work, she was getting nowhere. He showed her a cartoon of a jockey in the
Grand National standing in front of a fence and trying to pull the horse
over it by the reins. He showed her another of a termite, eating away at
something, and building something large, bit by bit.
'This manager overnight was able to develop a new way of doing things. She
realised she was blocking herself. She was able to see that she had been
trying to pull horses over the fence, when what she should have been doing
was putting her energy where she could make a difference.'
Morgan's ideas are equally applicable to whole organisations dealing with
change. Managers and workers need only to sit down together and start trying
to look at themselves, their relationships and their tasks in a fresh way.
'You've got to find a way of creating new space. The idea is to create the
opportunity to decouple from where you are now.'
Morgan is critical of most attempts at bringing about change within
organisations, which have replaced one set of rigidities with another. He
argues that companies may have abandoned layers of managers, but they have
not managed to get rid of their bureaucratic structure. 'Re-engineering]' -
he pronounces the name of the latest management panacea dismissively. 'It is
locking the world into a new era. In two or three years those very companies
will need to break free again.'
One helpful image for a new shape of organisation is that of the spider
plant. This has a parent plant and a lot of babies joined to it by umbilical
cords. Morgan says he is using this model with the education authorities in
Canada, which are looking at ways of passing more autonomy to the schools.
'The spider plant creates organic growth in a local environment,' he says.
'It is a crazy image, but is powerful. We started with the plant, and then
as we talked and explored the image, we introduced the idea of electronic
umbilical cords, and of bumble bees who would be managers roving from school
to school identifying common problems.
Morgan talks constantly about the need to 'flip into a new frame'. He is not
talking about the slow grind of changing habits. Indeed, he talks of what
sounds like miracle conversions to a new mind set, with the result that work
patterns are changed overnight.
In Morgan's permissive world, everything goes except inflexible ways of
doing things. Morgan knows something about those, having spent his formative
youth as an accountant. He then went to the opposite extreme and became
obsessed with behavioural science. He left accountancy and now, as an
academic, a writer and a consultant, has embarked on 'a quest to explain why
traditional systems run into problems'. Perhaps that makes him a homeopathic
doctor, an impressionist artist, or a gardener sowing seeds of
imaginization.
*Available from Sage Publications, 6 Bonhill Street, London EC2A 4PU. Pounds
19.95. Tel. 071 374 0645.
Previous articles in the creativity series have appeared on October 4 and
15.
