FT  11 MAR 93 / City may scrap trading scheme: Stock Exchange board asked to
cancel Taurus computer project
THE BOARD of the London Stock Exchange will today be asked to abandon a
computer project which has already cost the City as much as Pounds 400m and
which is widely seen as central to the future competitiveness of London's
financial markets.
Mr Peter Rawlins, the exchange's chief executive, will tell the board that
the paperless settlement system, Taurus, is technically too complex to
complete without further heavy spending and should be abandoned.
The system, first proposed in the early 1980s, was intended to automate the
transfer of share ownership, replacing the current paper-based system which
is centred around share certificates and transfer forms.
A decision to scrap Taurus would put the London market further behind other
financial centres, most of which have been investing heavily to develop
their own settlement arrangements in recent years.
It would also cause a severe trauma throughout the London securities
industry, which has invested heavily in the project.
The exchange has already spent Pounds 75m itself on the project, with
estimates of spending by others in the securities industry put at up to
Pounds 350m - though much of this may relate to technical developments that
would have taken place even without Taurus.
The proposal to end the project also provoked questions over the future of
the Mr Rawlins, who has been chief executive since 1990. Although the Taurus
project was begun before his appointment, its viability has been reviewed on
several occasions since.
The decision now to call for its abandonment comes two months after some
parts of the system entered full-scale testing.
Mr Rawlins's decision to call for the abandonment of the project has been
prompted by the scale of the technical difficulties which have dogged the
system.
There were early problems experienced in developing parts of the exchange's
own central system which have been followed by fresh difficulties
experienced in testing.
Just two months ago the exchange put back the planned launch of the project
from this autumn until next spring at the earliest.
The exchange refused to confirm the plan to aban-don the project yesterday.
It would only say: 'We have had an urgent review of the project to date, and
the results will be discussed at the board meeting tomorrow.'
News that the exchange may scrap the project provoked anger and concern in
some parts of the City yesterday. 'I don't think they should scrap it,' said
Mr Scott Dobie, a senior executive at NatWest Markets. 'We as an industry
just can't afford to take that step. The credibility loss would be
enormous.'
Mr John Lamb, assistant general manager at National Westminster in charge of
share registration and custody, said: 'If Taurus as we know it is to be
cancelled, there well be a hell of a credibility problem in developing a
replacement.'
But others said the exchange had little choice but to abandon the project or
face further costs which could equal those already incurred.
The head of operations at one large London securities house, who refused to
be named, said: 'What we've done to date is binnable. If you make a mistake,
you have to be prepared to pull the plug.'
A number of board members met chairman Mr Andrew Hugh Smith individually
yesterday to be told of the exchange's plan, and are to decide today whether
to approve it.
Problems that have dogged the project include the legal uncertainty that
surrounded the status of electronic registration; the complexity of linking
a number of independent databases into an effective network; and the
difficulties of ensuring security for a system that controls the ownership
of shares.
Most of the difficulties experienced up to this stage have been overcome.
However, further problems are believed to have emerged since full-scale
testing began.
Page 25
Stock exchange takes a matador to Taurus
Lex Page 24
