FT  30 JUL 93 / International Company News: Matif, DTB to extend
co-operation
THE MATIF, the French futures and options exchange, plans to accelerate its
co-operation with Deutsche Terminborse, its German counterpart, by studying
the feasibility of closer operational and strategic links between the two
markets.
The exchanges, two of Europe's largest futures markets, late last year
agreed to link their operations so that traders in each market would have
direct access to the other. This will involve the Matif installing the DTB's
computerised trading system.
This agreement was seen as the most ambitious collaborative venture between
exchanges. However, the Matif and DTB have decided to try to extend their
co-operation to trading and clearing. This could involve pooling their
software in those areas.
Mr Jorg Franke, chief executive of the DTB, said the partnership was
intended to 'address the needs of investors who want to trade cheaply
without borderlines'. The Matif and DTB hope their collaboration will
improve liquidity in their market and cut costs to investors thereby
enabling them to counter growing competition from banks' over-the-counter
products.
The French and Germans are considering opening up their partnership to other
international exchanges. The Matif said a number of markets had expressed
interest, although the London International Financial Futures and Options
Exchange (Liffe) was not believed to be among them. The Franco-German
partnership could pose a threat to Liffe, which is the biggest futures
exchange in Europe.
The first phase of the Franco-German agreement will come into force next
year when screens will be installed in France so that Matif members can
trade directly in DTB interest rate products, including German government
bonds.
In the second phase, the French will buy a licence to use DTB software which
will enable some Matif products to be traded electronically. This system
will then be opened up to DTB members. The Matif said it had assessed
different forms of software but had decided that the DTB system was best
suited to its needs.
Matif members will choose two products - from among the Paris-based
exchange's Ecu bond futures and option, three-month Pibor futures and
option, French medium-term futures and CAC-40 stock index futures - which
will be listed on the system, and these two products will then cease to be
traded on an open outcry system.
