FT  16 NOV 93 / FT Traveller, Barcelona (4): A well crafted financial
strategy - City finances / In spite of its massive debt burden, Barcelona's
city hall has managed to achieve an admirable credit rating
THE WAY that Barcelona says it is going about lowering its staggeringly high
debt should prompt deficit-burdened European governments to call on the city
hall's treasury team in the hope of picking up a few tips.
The city hall's debt stands at Pta241.9bn (Dollars 1.8bn), represents
Pta107,400 per inhabitant and is by far the highest of any municipality in
Spain. Madrid, which has population of nearly 3m against the 1.6m in
metropolitan Barcelona, has a city debt of Pta107.4bn or Pta37,000 per
inhabitant.
There does not, however, appear to be the slightest sign of nervousness in
the city hall. 'The debt is not my problem, I can finance it,' says Joan
Clos, Barcelona's assistant deputy mayor and its chief financial officer.
Mr Clos and his team have embarked on a finely tuned strategy that has, for
the time being, earned the approval of rating agencies such as Moody's which
has awarded the city A-2 for the its short-term debt.
Income, through city taxes, is high but fiscal impact is softened by special
policies aimed at making Barcelona affordable. Expenditure, including
running costs, is meanwhile being reduced.
Barcelona's residents are the highest taxed city dwellers in Spain and pay
Pta53,000 per capita in annual taxes. Inhabitants of Bilbao, the second
highest municipal tax payers, pay Pta46,000. The upside is a network of
services, especially public transport, that most cities in Europe, let alone
Spain, might well envy.
The city hall says that it has invested, providing soft credit lines in
sectors such as hotels and car parks with the aim of creating a
price-depressing oversupply. 'We've spent money to make the city cheaper,'
says Mr Clos. 'We're breaking down monopolies and making Barcelona
competitive.'
Either through the effect of Mr Clos' deregulation crusade or through the
blunt truth of economic recession, the fact is that Barcelona is less dear
than it was. A recent restaurant survey found that overall prices were down
by 30 per cent while printed hotel charges are merely notional and open to
souk-type bargaining.
The city council's investment budget has meanwhile been drastically reduced
from a Pta30bn high in the run-up to the Olympics to a present Pta15bn and,
in order to further reduce the debt burden, the leases on municipal car
parks are being sold off to the private sector.
The most eye-catching example of Barcelona's financial probity has been its
savings on running costs. In the course of this year the city council has
shed just over 1,000 jobs, mostly through voluntary retirement, and reduced
its labour force by 10 per cent.
Set against the norm of the highly-regulated and labour-intensive Spanish
bureaucracy, such staff reductions represent a remarkable achievement.
Barcelona's massive debt is excusable in the wake of an Olympic games and
its approach to the burden is commendable.
The question is whether the reduced spending will be enough. Independent
economists, among them Barcelona University's respected Professor Joaquin
Muns, say that the city's debt is in reality twice as high as is officially
admitted because a consolidated profit and loss account should include
numerous loss-making semi-privatised companies that are controlled by the
municipality.
Revenue is meanwhile receiving a double punch: it is being reduced by the
general recession and it is being lowered further by a flight to the
suburbs. Increasingly, Barcelona residents are moving out to dormitory
towns, where the rates and municipal taxes are far lower, but they continue
to commute into the city where basic services have to be maintained.
Barcelona is by no means the only debt-burdened Spanish town and its
authorities are right to point out that while Barcelona's deficit may be
higher than elsewhere, the city is in a better position to service the debt.
Malaga, the main population centre on the Costa del Sol resort area, has,
for example, recently suffered the indignity of having municipal telephone
lines cut because Telefonica, the state-controlled telecommunications
company, lost patience over the the city's unpaid telephone bills.
The chief concern among Barcelona's financial officers is that the
municipality's admirable rating status could be affected by the knock-on
effect of the doubtful creditworthiness of other cities which have also
borrowed strongly on the domestic and international markets.
Because of this, mayor Pasqual Maragall has joined the leaders of other main
Spanish cities such as Madrid, Valencia and Seville to pressure the central
Madrid government into helping the municipalities keep their creditors at
bay. The Spanish treasury's response has so far been lukewarm because the
central administration's finances are as hamstrung by deficits, as are those
of the big urban centres.
Mr Maragall and Mr Clos deny that joining forces with other cities means
that they are worried about Barcelona's debt.
Bu in common with the other major municipalities, Barcelona does want to
have greater fiscal autonomy. This demand is not likely to cut much ice
among Madrid's central government authorities who believe that big cities,
Barcelona included, are incorrigible big spenders.
Profile: Pasqual Maragall, mayor of Barcelona; page 7
