FT  16 JAN 93 / Cookery: For financiers who are serious about eating .  .
ONCE IN a while, it is a challenge to cook a seriously luxurious recipe, if
only to keep one's hand in. Hence Riz a la Financiere, my simplified version
of a classic.
The original is a very grand dish of sweetbreads blanched then larded with
strips of bacon and studded with pieces of truffle, tongue and ham  - a
little slice of a lot of good things. The prepared sweetbreads are then
braised, garnished with quenelles of veal fillet or chicken, cockscombs,
kidneys, mushrooms and truffles, cloaked in a Madeira sauce with truffles
and cream, and served in a puff pastry vol-au-vent. Phew.
However, the classic dish is not really fit for modern consumption, even by
financiers. Veal sweetbreads are scarce and cost nearly Pounds 10 per lb, so
I have changed the principal ingredient from sweetbreads to rice, an
economical move from ris to riz.
I have also excluded cockscombs - even Harrods does not stock them. The
humble lamb's tongue, the texture of which is said to be similar, can be
used instead.
Fillet of pork can replace fillet of veal, and lamb kidneys can stand in for
calves' kidneys. As for fungi, truffles, porcini or ordinary cultivated
mushrooms can be used, or a mixture of all three. Not all these ingredients
are necessary, but beware too many exclusions or you will end up with only a
bowl of rice.
The rice could be all white, virginal pure, or wild rice with shavings of
truffle, as black as sin, depending on how far into the red you are prepared
to take your bank balance. And the sauce must be rich.
RIZ A LA FINANCIERE OR BANKER'S RICE (serves 8)
The ingredients and workload which follow look daunting but the good news is
that all the cooking can be done ahead. Rather to my surprise, I found that
even the meats reheat well - providing they are reheated gently in some of
the sauce in a tightly covered dish in a hot water bath in a moderate oven.
At least 2lb of meats are needed, ideally 10 oz of each of four different
sorts, as listed below. If one type of meat is unobtainable, use just three
varieties, increasing the weight accordingly, or replace the missing item
with chicken livers.
For the meats and fungi: 8-10 oz veal or lamb sweetbreads; 8-10 oz lamb's
tongues; 8-10 oz veal fillet (or pork fillet or chicken breast); 8-10 oz
veal or lamb kidneys;  1/2 oz dried porcini (optional); 8oz cap mushrooms,
preferably so-called chestnut mushrooms; unsalted or clarified butter for
frying; shavings of truffle or sprigs of watercress to garnish.
For the sauce: 12 fl oz Madeira; 2 shallots, finely chopped; a nut of
butter; 2-3 sprigs of thyme;  3/4 pt good veal or chicken stock (or 1/2 pt
veal or chicken stock plus  1/4 pt of the liquid saved from soaking dried
porcini); the finely chopped stalks of the fresh mushrooms; 1-2 tablespoons
chopped celery leaves; beurre manie made by mashing together 1 1/2
tablespoons each softened butter and plain flour;  1/2 -1 teaspoon La
Truffata (a blend of truffle and porcini puree available from delicatessens,
Waitrose and selected branches of Sainsbury); a little lemon juice; 4-6
tablespoons double cream.
For the rice: 12 oz long grain white rice plus 4 oz wild rice (or whatever
ratio of wild to white your bank balance suggests); minced black truffle or
a splash of truffle juice (optional); 1-2 tablespoons lightly toasted sesame
seeds; butter.
First prepare the meats. Soak the sweetbreads in cold salt water for a
couple of hours. Cover with fresh salt water, bring to the boil and simmer
for two minutes. Plunge in cold water for five minutes then peel away
membrane and connective tissue so the sweetbreads can be separated into
smaller sections.
Soak the tongue for one hour in cold water with a squeeze of lemon juice.
Bring to the boil in fresh cold salt water or stock and simmer gently for 50
minutes or until tender. Plunge in cold water, remove skin, gristle and
excess fat from the base of the tongue. When cold, slice thinly.
Cut the veal fillet (or pork fillet or chicken breast meat) into quills.
Core the kidneys and cut into bite size pieces. (Lamb kidneys are best
soaked in milk for an hour before coring and slicing - save the milk for an
appreciative cat.) If using chicken livers, clean them and cut into lobes.
Put each sort of meat as soon as prepared into a separate bowl, cover and
keep cool until ready to cook.
If using dried porcini, soak them in about 7 fl oz warm water. When softened
and swollen, drain them and reserve. Strain their flavoursome liquid
carefully and save it for making the sauce. Trim the stalks from the fresh
mushrooms, chop finely and save for the sauce.
To make the sauce, first put the Madeira into a pan with the butter,
shallots and thyme, and boil down to about 5 tablespoons. Add the mushroom
stalks, celery leaves, some pepper and the stock. Cover and simmer for 20
minutes or so. Then strain, pressing the solids to extract every drop of
their flavour.
Reheat and thicken the sauce lightly by stirring in gradually small nuggets
of the beurre manie. Blend in the Truffata puree mixed with the cream and
season with lemon, salt and pepper to taste.
For the rice, first cook the white and wild rices in fast boiling salted
water until just cooked. Give the wild rice 15-20 minutes head start as it
takes longer than white rice to become tender. Drain, add knobs of butter,
season well and stir in the minced truffle or truffle juice if using it.
Spread the rice out to cool it.
Then spoon it into a large ring mould tin that has been thickly buttered and
lined with a sprinkling of sesame seeds. Pack the rice well down into the
tin, pressing it firmly with the back of the spoon. The more neatly it
follows the curve of the tin, the easier it will be to unmould.
Cover the rice with a foil lid and reheat in the oven when required,
allowing 20 minutes at 400'F (200'C) gas mark 6. (Or if reheating the meats
as well, use a lower oven temperature and bake for longer, placing both the
rice mould and the dish of meats in a hot water bath to protect against
drying out.)
When ready to cook the meats, first saute the fresh mushrooms in a little
very hot butter, remove and keep hot. Add more butter to the pan and saute
the meats: first the veal fillet, next the kidneys, then the chicken livers
if using them. Finally, add the sweetbreads, tongue and porcini and cook for
a few minutes more, stirring and turning the ingredients frequently.
Deglaze the pan with a few spoonfuls of water. Stir the meaty syrup into the
Madeira sauce and add any juices from the mushrooms. Then spoon enough sauce
over the meat mixture to coat it lightly.
To serve, unmould the rice onto a large flat dish, pile the meats into the
centre of the barricade and arrange the mushrooms in a ring round the edge.
Grate fresh truffle over them if your budget permits. Bring to the table
with sauceboats of hot Madeira sauce.
