FT  17 JUN 93 / Survey of Ticino (6): Aiming at worldwide markets / Profile
of SMB
FEW Ticino companies are known beyond the borders of the canton, let alone
the borders of Switzerland.
But mention the name Schmiedemeccanica and suddenly the lights go on in
chancelleries throughout the world.
Schmiedemeccanica, a small, high-precision forging shop tucked away in
Biasca where Val Blenio joins the Leventine valley, achieved wide notoriety
in August 1990 when it was one of the first companies accused of supplying
goods for Iraq's nuclear programme.
The family-controlled company, which has since changed its name to SMB, is
still trying to recover from the catastrophe.
As Mr Gianni Martinelli, president, explains, the company received an order
in early 1990 from a Middle East trading company with which it had done
business before for four batches of 250 rough gear forgings worth some
SFr42,000.
Mr Martinelli says that the company had always been very careful about
orders for sensitive components and sought guidance from the Swiss
government if it was in doubt about a foreign purchaser.
'But this was just a rough stamping. Any shop in the world could do it,' he
says. 'You would never have thought they were for a uranium enrichment
plant, especially in that volume.'
However, the parts were intercepted at Frankfurt airport and the company was
charged, along with others, with illegal exports to Iraq.
Swiss investigators descended on Biasca the next day, but within minutes
they realised there was no case. 'They saw immediately that we were
innocent, but we had to wait 11 months for every other case to be
investigated before they officially announced the results,' Mr Martinelli
recalls.
The publicity surrounding the case caused SMB considerable damage. Since
peaking in 1989 at roughly SFr30m, the company's turnover has halved and he
attributes more of the fall to the bad publicity surrounding the Iraq sale
than to the recession in manufacturing industry.
SMB - the name change was in the works before the Iraq incident, Mr
Martinelli says, in an attempt to distance the company from its rough
forging image - is one of the few outstanding exceptions to the general
truth that Ticino has no industrial history.
The company was formed more than 100 years ago at Faido in the upper
Leventine valley to provide metal parts and tools for the great Gotthard
railway tunnel project. For a long time, its main business was
railway-related, and it still makes components for Swiss locomotives. But Mr
Martinelli doubts that it will be competitive for supplying items for the
new rail tunnels that are to be drilled through the Gotthard in the next few
years.
Because of high Swiss labour costs and the strong Swiss franc, the company
has had to move into ever-higher precision and higher-value products to
survive.
Mr Martinelli, who holds a PhD in engineering from the UK's Aston
University, observed at close hand the shake-out in the UK forgings sector
in the late 1970s. He then went to the US to do metallurgical research, but
before long he could see the shake-out also hitting the family company. He
returned reluctantly from the US in 1980 and rescued the company with a
combination of better management, new investment and a search for new
markets.
SMB's main products today are artificial human joints, precision-forged from
titanium-based super-alloys. The company only got into this business five
years ago, and sales of joints now account for about one third of the total.
The rest comes from highly-stressed steel forgings for textile machines,
trucks, aircraft and oil rigs.
Mr Martinelli, who was named Switzerland's entrepreneur of the year in 1985,
suspects he must now engineer another revolution to preserve the company.
Recent currency devaluations have hurt SMB's competitiveness in Italy, the
UK, Sweden and Norway. Low-cost suppliers from eastern Europe are making
significant inroads in all European markets, especially in Germany, and Mr
Martinelli makes clear that there is no quality gap; many east European
forging shops were formerly suppliers to the Soviet military and space
programmes, he points out.
He is confident that the medical prosthesis business will continue to
prosper. Precision forgings have proven superior to machined castings in
avoiding stimulating the body's rejection processes, and SMB is one of only
a very few companies in the world capable of making these forgings.
He also believes the company should take on more development projects, that
is, working with a manufacturer to develop a sophisticated component, then
passing the production technology on to another company to make it in
volume.
He has thought of shifting the company elsewhere, but dismissed it. 'There
is no point, there is overcapacity all over the world,' he says. SMB, with
it 100-strong workforce, is also the biggest employer in Biasca, which
imposes a responsibility.
SMB is the kind of manufacturing company that Ticino authorities want to see
develop in the canton. They share Mr Martinelli's unease that the cantonal
economy moved from its rural base to sophisticated services - banking and
tourism - without establishing a large manufacturing base.
SMB, and other companies like it, even though small, are building businesses
from a higher technology base and aiming at markets all over the world.
Their success is vital if the canton is to maintain any industrial base.
