FT  01 SEP 93 / EBRD risks criticism for Slovak loan
THE EUROPEAN Bank for Reconstruction and Development is considering a
Dollars 125m (Pounds 84.4m) investment in a new aluminium smelter at Ziar
nad Hronom in Slovakia to replace the present high-pollution plant.
The investment, involving the first big loan since the resignation of Mr
Jacques Attali as head of the bank, is bound to create some controversy.
There is substantial over-capacity in the aluminium industry at present and
the republic has no bauxite - raw material for aluminium - and no source of
cheap energy for what is an energy-intensive process.
However, the bank suggests there would be only a marginal increase in
Europe's primary aluminium production capacity because two existing lines,
producing 70,000 tonnes a year, would be shut down to make way for the new
smelter, which would produce 108,500-132,000 tonnes annually. It also claims
the operating costs of the new smelter would be 'well within the lowest
third of all smelters' because of the technology employed and because of low
labour costs - about Dollars 120-Dollars 150 a tonne lower than the average
for the industry worldwide.
Aluminium prices are currently near their lowest levels but the bank says
that even if they drop further the smelter company would remain competitive.
If, as expected, prices recovered in the medium term, the company would be
highly profitable, enabling it to clean up past pollution and enabling ZSNP,
the state company which owns the existing metallurgical complex, to be
privatised.
If the bank's board approves, it would lend up to Dollars 110m and take an
equity investment of Dollars 15m in Slovalco, a new company established
specifically for the project, and which would employ 500 people. This would
give the bank 10 per cent of the issued capital but 20 per cent of the
votes.
Hydro Aluminium, a subsidiary of Norway's Norsk Hydro, which is supplying
key smelter technology, would also invest Dollars 15m for a 10 per cent
stake.
ZSNP, which would own the rest of Slovalco, has been producing alumina, an
intermediate material, aluminium and some aluminium products such as door
and window frames since 1953 and currently employs 6,000 people.
The plant started to replace its old smelters in 1986. However, it ran out
of money when the project was 65 per cent complete. The bank points out that
not completing the new smelter would probably result in a write-off of the
Dollars 185m already spent, with no possibility for local banks or the
National Property Fund to recover their investments in the project.
ZSNP would never be in a position to repay its existing debt and 'it would
result in the cessation of an industrial activity in which the Slovaks have
built over 40 years significant expertise and for which all the necessary
infrastructure is in place'.
