FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Texas (4): Living in much reduced circumstances -
Energy sector
TEXANS have always had a simple way of taking the pulse of their oil and gas
industry: count the number of drilling rigs scattered across the horizon.
When the numbers go up - usually in response to higher energy prices -
Texans tend to smile more broadly.
Based on this rough-and-ready test, the state's energy sector is living in
much reduced circumstances.
At the end of October, there were 860 rigs at work in the US - a far cry
from the oil boom that drove the state's economy for nearly a decade, until
1982. In that year, more than 4,000 oil rigs pierced the sky, most of them
thrown up by speculators trying to get in on the action. Texas is reckoned
to account for nearly half of all rigs in use.
The number of workers in the Texan energy industry has echoed the decline in
the rig count. In the mid-1980s, Texas lost 144,400 jobs in oil and gas
industry, nearly half of the total.
These bald figures, though, tell only part of the story. For a start, the
boom times represent a poor point of comparison: such feverish speculation
is unlikely to return. Also, the energy industry has moved forward. Advances
in the technologies used to find and drill for new reserves, and better
control of costs, make direct comparisons tenuous.
Compared with five years ago, drilling activities cost half as much and are
twice as likely to result in a find, says Mr Richard Kinder, president of
Enron, the fast-growing natural gas company.
'We don't need to get back to 4,000 because we're so much more efficient -
1,200 is now the optimum count to sustain production (at its current rate.)'
Also, drilling activity is at its highest level for the past two years,
despite the slump in the oil price. A one-year-old spike in natural gas
prices has provided the incentive to keep many of the wildcatters going. Two
years ago, about 40 per cent of rigs were searching for gas rather than oil;
now the figure is 50 per cent.
Texas also stands to benefit from having what could be the US's last big
undeveloped oilfield on its doorstep. Undiscovered reserves in deep-water
areas in the Gulf of Mexico are put by the US government at the equivalent
of 14bn barrels of oil.
Deep-water drilling in the Gulf is still in its infancy. Since 1978, when
the first well at a depth of more than 1,000 feet was drilled, only five
other projects have gone as deep. Part of the risk is that the Gulf has yet
to develop a network of pipelines to carry the oil produced. As yet only the
largest discoveries, which justify the construction of their own pipelines,
are worth developing.
The oil companies say that, given the higher risks, they need the taxpayers'
support for deep-water exploration and production. Deep-water production
already attracts a lower royalty charge than that in shallow-water areas:
the oil companies are now asking Washington for tax relief of Dollars 5 a
barrel for all oil produced in the deep-water Gulf. This would undoubtedly
provide a spur to the local energy sector - the oil companies say it would
create 100,000 new jobs in Texas and Lousiana. So far, though, the call has
fallen on deaf ears.
Big projects in the Gulf - like that announced by Shell Oil and BP
Exploration last month, to produce oil from one the deepest sites in the
world, known as Mars - are helping to make Houston a leader in the
development of deep-water drilling technology. Big investments in
exploration and production made by US companies abroad are also keeping
Houston busy: the biggest energy groups, in search of giant discoveries to
boost their reserves, are directing more of their exploration and production
budget overseas, to countries such as Russia and China.
The many companies that support the energy industry - whether drilling for
oil or building refineries and chemicals plants - have had to adapt to
become more international as a result. With the passing of the last oil
boom, the myriad small oil service companies in Texas went through a phase
of consolidation, merging to create bigger entities that could withstand the
downturn as well as afford the investment in new drilling technology.
Now, another wave of consolidation is under way, leading to the creation of
fewer, bigger companies able to take on the bigger risks
Dallas-based Dresser Industries, for example, is in the process of absorbing
Baroid to make itself the US's fourth-largest oil services group. Energy
groups now look to oil service companies to manage all aspects of an
exploration project, says Mr John Murphy, Dresser's chairman.
Dresser has also followed its biggest customers internationally in the past
decade. 'It wasn't some grand plan to shift our business internationally -
hell, that's where the market went,' says Mr Murphy.
While much exploration and production has shifted off-shore or overseas, the
downstream business of refining has also kept Houston busy - along with a
rash of construction in the petrochemical industry along the Gulf coast of
Texas and Lousiana.
The second half of the 1980s witnessed significant capital investment in new
plants, and the upgrade of existing refineries to comply with new petroleum
standards. The largest project under way in Houston at present, a Dollars
1bn joint venture between Shell and Pemex, the Mexican state oil group,
involves an upgrade of a Shell refinery.
According to Texas Commerce Bank, about Dollars 1bn a year was spent during
the 1980s to comply with the compulsory phase-out of leaded petrol or to
meet the increasing demand for higher-octane fuel.
By 1985, Texas had more capacity for making ethylene, one of the basic
feedstocks of the petrochemicals industry, than any other country in the
world, including the rest of the US, according to Mr Bernard Weinstein, an
economics professor at the University of North Texas. Much of that capacity
sat idle through the US, and then the global, economic slowdown arrived.
When conditions improve in the cyclical petrochemicals industry, the state
should benefit accordingly.
