FT  15 FEB 93 / Ground rules for the firing squad: FT writers explain how
recent large-scale redundancies have highlighted variations in the ways
European countries protect workers
The French government's reaction to the decision by Hoover to shift some of
its production from France to Scotland was to proclaim a further tightening
of the rules governing redundancies and plant closures.
This was an understandable response from a government facing a national
election, but it is not necessarily in the long-term interests of French
workers and appears to be running against the European tide.
David Rees, investment location expert at Ernst &amp; Young, says that
multinational companies, especially American ones, are starting to add ease
of 'exit', or at least rationalisation, to the list of priorities when
making investment location decisions.
Within the European Community that should favour the UK, Ireland and
Denmark, the three most laissez-faire countries when it comes to closures
and sackings. It will count against the southern European economies -
Portugal, Spain, Italy and Greece -  which are restrictive and costly,
probably one reason why the EC's poorer outer rim has not attracted more
investment.
There are many other factors in an investment location decision besides ease
of exit, and Rees says it is still only an influence 'at the margin'.
Nevertheless, with the barrier-free single market encouraging companies to
concentrate production on one site, as opposed to scattering it around the
EC's national markets, such advantages could become increasingly important.
There is, currently, little new multinational investment into the EC, so the
extent to which the UK's devalued currency, relatively low wage costs, and
'hire and fire' industrial culture will suck in a disproportionate amount of
investment should not be overstated.
Nevertheless, the debate about whether the UK is winning a legitimate
competitive advantage or is undercutting workers' rights across the EC
through 'social dumping' looks likely to intensify.
Opponents of the UK can take heart from the fact that its advantages are
likely to be limited to certain sectors.
Most analysts believe the UK will have a competitive advantage in
semi-skilled manufacturing, if it is not undercut by eastern Europe, but the
continuing weakness of its education system will cause it to lose out in
higher skill or R&amp;D-based investment.
In the longer run the current restructuring of the welfare state is likely
to shift more cost on to employers and thus undermine the UK's advantage of
low non-wage labour costs.
In the short-term, the UK is likely to lose more jobs than it gains from
multinational re-structuring within Europe precisely because of the ease
with which workers can be dismissed.
Hoover decided to move to Scotland despite the fact that shedding jobs in
France is considerably more costly and complex, a measure of the cost
advantage from much lower UK non-wage labour costs.
The French government seems convinced that, at least at this stage in the
economic cycle, 'locking in' jobs through raising the cost of closure is the
most suitable response to multinational restructuring. The new French
redundancy law returns the situation to something close to the time prior to
1986 when official approval was still required for large-scale redundancies.
The new law requires official approval of the 'social plan' for the workers
who are losing their jobs. France thus rejoins that large group of EC
countries -  including Spain, Portugal, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands and
Germany -  which give government or workers an effective veto over
redundancies. A veto which can only be circumvented with time and money.
There are, however, indications that several countries, most notably Italy
and Spain, are starting to recognise that the sky-high cost of dismissal is
both a disincentive to international capital and to domestic restructuring.
This trend is still weak but will gather momentum when EC growth picks up.
The trend might be strengthened by the introduction of common EC rules on
large redundancies which could provide political cover for countries like
Spain.
A spate of Hoover-type, beggar-my-neighbour, rows over jobs and investment
is just what EC officials have for years been fearing. The Social Charter
and its latest manifestation, the Social Chapter, were, in part, meant to
soften the process of industrial restructuring within the EC. But as they,
quite properly, do not address the question of relative labour costs, they
have had no impact on companies like Hoover.
The one EC-wide redundancy rule already in operation requires worker
representatives to be given 90 days' notice and proper consultation over
larger redundancies. After Hoover there is also a move to breathe life back
into the idea of European works councils -  forums for companies operating
in more than one EC country where employee representatives must be informed
of major corporate plans.
European union leaders say that such councils would have prevented Hoover
playing off the workers in two different countries against each other.
It is debateable whether a works council would have made much difference in
the Hoover case. But it is certain that if compulsory works councils are
introduced under the Social Chapter -  from which the UK has opted-out -
many US multinationals will be horrified and will be even more likely to
concentrate their EC investment in the UK.
BELGIUM
ALTHOUGH more difficult than the UK, Ireland and Denmark, the procedures in
Belgium covering large redundancies or closures are surprisingly light.
Employers must discuss dismissals with works councils and the Labour Office
has the power to suspend dismissals, although rarely does so. Notice periods
are at least three months and can rise to six months. Statutory severance
pay is relatively high - usually about two-thirds of salary for four months.
DENMARK
DANISH legislation on dismissals and redundancy pay is liberal, largely
because of the need for small firms to be flexible.
Hourly paid workers can be dismissed from one day -  indeed, one hour - to
the next, and the worker can pick up unemployment benefit immediately as
well.
Where collective dismissals are concerned, the firm must inform the
employees and negotiate with them to minimise dismissals and alleviate the
consequences. The firm must inform the Labour Market Board (Job Centres) a
minimum of 30 days before the dismissals take effect.
If these procedures are not followed, the firm must pay a fine and one
month's wages to the employees. If procedures are followed, the law does not
oblige employers to pay redundancy pay; in practice employers rarely do so.
Salaried employees come under separate legislation. They must be given up to
six months' notice, depending on length of service, and receive a minimum of
one month's redundancy pay after 12 years' service, rising to three months'
pay after 18 years. Terms are also regulated through collective wage and
work condition agreements.
FRANCE
THE Loi Aubry, voted by the Parliament in December and in effect since
January 31 1993, aims to get employers to make their best efforts to find
alternative work for those they are laying off.
The new law applies to all companies which have 50 or more employees and
which are planning to make 10 or more of them redundant.
It sets out what a social plan should contain in terms of trying to redeploy
workers, to training schemes, to new jobs. There is no obligation to find
alternative jobs, because 'in certain depressed industrial areas that is
simply not possible', admits an Aubry aide.
As at present, the management has to put its social plan before the Comite
Central d'Entreprise. The new law gives the public authorities the right -
within eight days of the social plan going to the works council -  to tell
the management that its plan is not good enough. In that case, the company
has to redo its plan and, until it does so, any redundancies are legally
invalid.
The legal minimum pay-off is one-tenth of a month's salary for every year
worked. For those who worked at a company for more than 10 years, there is
an additional payment of one-fifteenth of a month's salary for every year
worked beyond 10 years.
GERMANY
GERMANY is one of the countries where employees in larger workplaces have
quasi-veto power over closures and redundancies. The works council, as well
as the local Labour Office, must be informed of large redundancies. The
council has the right to be consulted over whether the redundancy is
necessary and who should go.
If the council and the employer cannot reach agreement the case goes before
the local labour court which is quite likely to back the council. There is
no statutory redundancy pay in Germany but redundancy costs -  agreed as
part of the social plan -  are usually quite high.
GREECE
GREECE does not permit large-scale redundancies. In any case, most Greek
companies are small in comparison with other EC countries; more than
three-quarters of them employ fewer than 50 workers.
Under a 1983 law, no more than 3 per cent of a company's workforce, or 30
employees (whichever is fewer), can be laid off in any month. It is possible
for employers to get special permission from the Labour Ministry to raise
the ceiling on dismissals, but in practice this rarely happens.
Workers made redundant are entitled to one month's salary for every year
worked.
IRELAND
IRELAND is another relatively liberal country when it comes to dismissals.
The 1977 Protection of Employment Act stipulates that employers must give a
minimum 30 days' notice to their workforce of planned redundancies, and must
notify the Minister for Labour if more than 10 per cent of the workforce is
to be laid off.
This allows for an obligatory consultation period with the relevant trade
unions, which must be given the specific information and reasons for the
redundancies, and which may then offer their own proposals.
If the redundancies go ahead, employees with more then two years' employment
with the company, and working a minimum eight hours per week, are entitled
to minimum severance payments of one week's pay plus a half week's pay for
every year of employment.
For employees over 41 years of age this is increased to one week's pay for
every year worked above that age. This is capped at a maximum income level
of IPounds 250 (Pounds 255) per week. Employers can reclaim 60 per cent of
these from a social welfare fund which is financed out of employers'
national insurance contributions.
ITALY
LABYRINTHINE job security and redundancy rights have been clarified by a
1991 law replacing the wide-ranging, but informal, accord between unions and
employers on job security at big private-sector companies.
Although matters are now being simplified further, there are still sharp
differences on rights for public-sector workers -  who in effect had jobs
for life -  and employees in companies with less than 15 staff, formerly not
covered by any job protection rules.
Employees being laid off have a minimum of 15 days' notice, often longer
depending on the individual contract. Once given notice, there follows an
obligatory 75-day consultation period, during which unions and management
discuss ways to avoid, or at least alleviate, redundancies. Failing a
solution within the first 30 days, the talks are widened to include the
Employment Ministry representatives.
Sacked employees go into a special regional 'mobility' list, guaranteeing a
sliding scale of benefits, starting at 80 per cent of salary in the first
year. The proportion of salary received, and the period covered -  which
stretches up to four years for redundancies in the economically-depressed
south -  depends on age and location. Workers on the list also get priority
in finding new jobs, thanks to social security breaks for companies hiring
them.
Meanwhile, the employer has to make a one-off redundancy payment equivalent
to 80 per cent of six months' salary.
Early retirement schemes have been introduced in certain cases, although the
numbers covered are limited. Similar incentives have been used for big,
overstaffed state employers such as the railways.
NETHERLANDS
THE Dutch labour market is rigid and costly, but peaceful as well. Layoffs,
whether collective or individual, are subject to local government approval,
a time-consuming and not always successful procedure.
Notice periods of between one and six months at full pay are required
(depending on length of service). Additionally, redundancy pay, which is
negotiated between the unions and employers, can vary between three months
and three years, at up to 100 per cent pay. More common is a graduated
scale, with the pay percentage declining over time. The average monthly
industrial wage in the Netherlands is roughly Fl 3,000 (Pounds 1,120).
PORTUGAL
PORTUGAL'S strongly pro-worker labour laws, passed in the wake of the 1974
left-wing revolution, make it almost impossible to dismiss workers except
for gross misconduct.
Nevertheless, far-sighted companies are successfully trimming their
workforces, using voluntary redundancies and early retirement. William
Cunningham, a Lisbon partner with consultants Arthur Andersen, tells of a
company that reduced the number of its workers from 12,000 to 387 in seven
years and still outputs the same manufacturing volume using more modern
technology.
Companies usually pay one to 1.5 month's pay for each year worked for
voluntary redundancies. They estimate that they can recover this in about 18
months through saved wages and social security payments of 24.5 per cent a
worker.
Portugal's labour laws were liberalised slightly in 1989, making it
theoretically possible to dismiss workers for 'economic, market,
technological or structural reasons'. But the criteria laid down and the
delays involved are so long that the law is rarely invoked. Officially,
employers carrying out involuntary redundancies must pay workers one month's
pay for each year worked.
SPAIN
SPAIN'S restrictive labour legislation has become a major item on the
political agenda. Carlos Solchaga, the economy minister, wants a thorough
reform of hiring and firing rules. He says major foreign investors no longer
ask him about the potential for domestic growth but about the cost of
dismissing employees.
The cost of dismissals in Spain is on paper among the highest in Europe. A
company that seeks to make workers on a fixed contract redundant because it
is losing money or because their jobs have been phased out by new technology
has to pay such employees 45 days for each year worked with a maximum payout
of 18 months' salary.
In practice the cost is a lot higher. The redundancies have to be authorised
by the Labour Ministry and if they are opposed by the unions, as is normally
the case, authorisation is delayed for months as the Labour Ministry's
inspectors evaluate the company's case and that of the unions.
The unions have every incentive to oppose redundancies. Under the existing
labour legislation the company has to continue paying the employees it
wishes to make redundant until such a time as the Labour Ministry delivers
its final ruling.
Should the redundancies be authorised, the company has to pay the full
severance pay as laid down by the law without any deductions based on the
salaries it continued to pay while the case was being heard.
A consequence of this system is that in order to obtain quick authorisation
from the Labour Ministry, companies are forced to negotiate with the unions
redundancy terms of as much as 60 days per year worked. Additionally, the
company often has to pay up to two days' salary per employee made redundant
directly to the unions.
Spain's employers association, the CEOE, has made the elimination of the
prior authorisation for redundancies by the Labour Ministry a priority
issue. Solchaga, who understands perfectly well how the system works in
practice, is sympathetic to their case.
The unions are, however, adamantly opposed to any changes and the
government, which faces general elections later this year and is wary of
waning support from its rank and file socialist voters, has effectively
shelved any meaningful reform of the labour legislation until after the
polls.
SWEDEN
Since 89 per cent of Swedes are in trade unions, collective agreements cover
almost all redundancy programmes. Bargaining between the 'social partners'
has been backed up since the mid-1970s by legislation.
Under the 1977 Co-determination At Work Act, an employer is obliged before
deciding on 'an important alteration to his activity, on his own initiative,
to negotiate' with the trade union to which he is bound by collective
agreement.
If they cannot agree, the issue is referred up to national level for
resolution between employers and unions. Only after that can the employer go
ahead with the decision. If a company ignores this procedure it can be
fined.
The 1977 Act covers specifically any change in work or employment
conditions. However, the law provides a way out for employers 'if special
(unspecified) reasons so necessitate'.
The aim -  as with all Swedish labour law -  is to achieve consensus on
change. Unions and workers have no veto power to prevent plant closures but
through the 1977 laws they are involved before decisions are made by the
company. Under the 1988 Security of Employment Act workers have strong legal
rights when faced by redundancy or closure of their plant. An employer must
give six months' notice to anyone over 45 years of age employed for more
than six months. The period of notice is less for younger workers. Swedish
workers get no other compensation for losing their job.
UK
The UK, along with Ireland and Denmark, is an easy-fire country by EC
standards, indeed probably the easiest of all. Full-time workers have no
protection from unfair dismissal until they have been employed for more than
two years, and part-time workers have no protection for five years.
For large-scale redundancies companies are merely obliged to give 90 days'
notice and consult with a recognised union if there is one. Statutory
redundancy payments are also low. Most workers qualify for one week's pay
per year of service, slightly less for younger workers and slightly more for
older workers.
