FT  05 APR 93 / The Clinton-Yeltsin Summit: Japanese fall into line
LINGERING doubts about the extent of Japan's commitment to the multilateral
Russian aid process have been resolved.
According to the White House spokesman, President Clinton spoke on Friday to
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the Japanese prime minister.
Mr Clinton then told President Yeltsin in their first round of talks that
the US backed Japan's claim to the Kurile islands and that Mr Miyazawa has
assured him of Japan's strong support for the Group of Seven and bilateral
assistance.
This represents no shift in official policies. The US has always supported
Japan's claim to the Kuriles, occupied by the Soviet Union at the end of the
last World War, while Japan, its reservations about the efficacy of
large-scale assistance to Russia notwithstanding, has never publicly
threatened not to take part in the multinational effort.
But it has been important for Mr Clinton, both for his own domestic purposes
and in his presentation to Mr Yeltsin, to demonstrate that the leading
industrialised nations are willing to act in concert to help Russian
economic reform.
Thus the US side in Vancouver emphasised that both Britain and Canada had on
Friday announced increased bilateral contributions, with expectations that
the rest of the G7 countries will have fallen into line by the time the
foreign and finance ministers meet in Tokyo on April 14.
Mr Miyazawa's commitment, as conveyed to Mr Clinton, appears designed to
satisfy US criticism about the extent of Japan's willingness to help
bilaterally and, as current chairman of the G7, to ensure the success of the
Tokyo session. The US is not pushing for early permanent Russian membership
of the G7, which would have disconcerted Japan.
Mr Clinton mentioned, without disclosing details, that other countries
outside the G7 would be approached.
His officials have implied that Middle Eastern nations, most obviously Saudi
Arabia, would be asked to help.
The spokesman also announced that Congressmen Richard Gephardt and Robert
Michel, Democratic and Republican leaders in the House of Representatives,
will would go to Moscow this week to assess Russian reform.
