FT  18 MAY 93 / Clashes at Timex factory lead to 38 arrests: Company now
entitled to rehire dismissed workers selectively
THIRTY EIGHT people were arrested yesterday in clashes outside the Timex
electronics plant in Dundee after 3,000 demonstrators from all over Britain
gathered to blockade the factory to mark the 90th day of the dispute.
The clashes came as the dispute, one of the most acrimonious since the
1980s, entered a crucial phase. From today, the US multinational can legally
begin to rehire, on a selective basis, some of the original 343 workers who
were sacked and replaced by 271 new recruits.
Mr Peter Hall, the company's UK chief executive, said he would issue a
statement today explaining what Timex intended to do. The company is
unlikely to rehire all the sacked workers - a decision that could provoke
further anger on the picket line.
Mr Hall said Timex was already seeking to employ a further 230 workers.
Applications had been arriving at the plant in response to advertisements in
local newspapers.
Mr Hall has refused to enter into negotiations with the AEEU engineering
union or to seek a compromise through the Advisory Conciliation and
Arbitration Service. The replacement workers have been bussed through the
picket line.
Mr Hall is now in a position to rehire some of the original workforce
without fearing charges of unfair dismissal from workers who are not
re-employed.
Local union leaders who had called for a peaceful demonstration said
yesterday's incidents came from a minority of troublemakers. The violence
flared when a section of the crowd briefly broke through police lines. At
least two of the more than 500 police were injured.
Mr Arthur Scargill, the National Union of Mineworkers' president, who
participated in the rally, urged unions to call a 24-hour strike in support
of the Timex strikers. He was joined on a march past the plant by Mr Alex
Salmond MP, leader of the Scottish National party.
AEEU leaders condemned yesterday's trouble. 'Such scenes of violence and
stupidity are in no way organised or condoned by the AEEU,' Mr Jimmy Airlie,
the union's executive member for Scotland, said. 'It will in my opinion
damage the cause of the Timex workers and could prolong the dispute.'
Mr Bill Jordan, the AEEU's president, condemned what he called the 'naive
political posturing' of those who turned up on the picket line. 'We are
still looking for a negotiated settlement, not a confrontation.'
