FT  24 APR 93 / UK Company News: Floating in on the crest of a wave - OGC's
imminent plans for a stock market quote
OGC International, an Aberdeen-based contractor which provides construction
and project management services to oil and gas companies in the North Sea,
is to be floated with a market value of about Pounds 75m.
Its parent, Fairhaven International, the specialist oil contractor
controlled by Mr Fred Olsen, the Norwegian shipping magnate, is retaining a
60 per cent stake in the company.
Fairhaven wants to invest part of the proceeds in its US onshore
construction business. As a Bermudan-registered company quoted in London, it
also had strong advance corporation tax incentives for floating, since UK
investors were subject to double taxation on their dividends.
The 40 per cent stake in OGC which is being offered for sale comprises 24m
ordinary shares, half of which will be firmly placed with institutions, and
half offered to private investors. In the light of the success of recent
flotations, the Stock Exchange insisted that the retail element be increased
to 50 per cent of the offer.
OGC's principal operating subsidiary, AOC, was established in 1976. Its
original expertise lay in managing the 'hook-up' stage of a platform's
construction, when life-support, drilling, oil and gas processing equipment
are brought together to begin production.
Since the mid-eighties, the company has moved towards doing more
modification and safety-related work in the post-production stage. In 1989,
OGC made pre-tax profits of Pounds 3.6m on sales of Pounds 76.21m. A surge
of investment in new platforms and improved safety at the start of the
nineties saw last year's pre-tax profits reach Pounds 10.5m on sales of
Pounds 226.6m.
The recent slump in rig construction and the Budget's changes in the
petroleum revenue tax regime might appear an inauspicious background for
this flotation, but OGC is confident the North Sea will offer solid growth
opportunities for years to come.
Mr John Hyslop, OGC's managing director, said the taxation changes had
favoured the bigger oil companies with established fields, his group's main
customers. There were now greater incentives to extend the life of existing
fields with new equipment and exploit marginal fields by hooking them into
established platforms - installations which OGC had specialised in.
OGC concedes there is a longer-term threat posed to North Sea activity by
the downturn in rig building and the changes in PRT, which mean that
exploration costs can no longer be offset, but believes there will be no
shortage of opportunities in the medium term - and in any case the taxation
regime is likely to change again. Mr Hyslop said: 'Oil companies still have
substantial plans - they are talking about bringing 50 new fields into
production before the end of the century.'
Opportunities also exist beyond the British sector of the North Sea. In
September OGC acquired what it described as a 'toehold' in Norway through a
joint venture. The company hopes to get a bigger share of work in that
sector as the Norwegians become less protectionist in their approach to EC
membership.
The UK group is involved on hook-up work on a platform off western Australia
and has formed a joint venture to bid for work in Malaysia. It intends to
use Australia as a marketing base for a push into the Pacific Rim countries,
which have the world's fastest-growing market for oil and gas services.
OGC has no plans to work in the US, which is Fairhaven's main focus of
interest. Fairhaven has undertaken not to compete with the UK group in
either the geographic or business areas in which OGC currently operates.
Nearer to home, OGC hopes that its close working relationship with the major
oil and gas companies could lead to more onshore work. The group has already
worked on the expansion of BP's oilfield at Wytch Farm in Dorset and Total's
gas terminal at St Fergus in north-east Scotland.
Mr Hyslop believes that the safety and timetable disciplines which OGC has
learned to work to offshore could easily be transferred to doing safety and
maintenance work in onshore sites such as petrochemical plants.
Last year OGC had an average of more than 4,000 employees, comprising about
150 in management and administration and the rest project personnel on
contracts. The group also maintains a computerised register of about 25,000
personnel.
After the flotation, which is being sponsored by UBS, the UK company will
receive payment of a Pounds 6m inter-company loan from Fairhaven, which will
leave OGC with net cash in its balance sheet.
The price of OGC's shares will be set on May 7, the offer will close on May
19 and dealing is expected to begin on June 1.
Last year the group earned 10.9p per share, but turnover was boosted by an
exceptionally high level of activity in the North Sea. The price is likely
to be adjusted to reflect that, but a fairly modest multiple of 12 times
earnings would value the shares at about 130p and the group as a whole at
Pounds 78m.
