FT  24 MAY 93 / Italian Government Bonds: Signs of stability foster
reassurance
THROUGHOUT Italy's recent political upheavals, the bond market has been a
hostage to fortune, with prices unable to uncouple themselves from the
political uncertainties linked to the corruption scandal and the formation
of a new government.
Last week, matters started to change. Signs of greater political stability,
both domestically and in the European Community, reassured investors.
Together, the relaxation of political tensions combined with unexpected news
on accelerated repayment of withholding tax to refocus attention on economic
fundamentals, giving the market one of its best weeks for a long time.
News that the government plans to repay withholding tax to eligible foreign
investors within 30 working days was the biggest surprise. Repayment delays
have shortened, but the system remains cumbersome and highly unpredictable.
The move to accelerate repayments, to be introduced later this year, was
warmly welcomed, although investors will wait for results before giving
unreserved support.
Denmark's decision to back the Maastricht Treaty on European union in its
second referendum also proved a tonic. Doubts about the future of closer
economic and monetary links within the EC had been a big factor depressing
bonds after the first Danish referendum last year, as the market widely sees
Italy to be a leading beneficiary of the 'external discipline' EMU entails.
Domestically, investors have taken heart from the greater stability of Mr
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi's new government after its rocky start. Although the
basis of Mr Ciampi's political support remains somewhat nebulous, market
sentiment has been greatly boosted by dealers' confidence that the
government includes competent ministers who will meet its commitment to
tackle the budget deficit.
Credibility is paramount. Mr Ciampi's expertise and deficit-cutting zeal are
not doubted. Dealers are confident the prime minister - who spent much of
his time as central bank governor criticising politicians' inaction - means
what he says and is much less constrained by party political ties than his
predecessors.
The market has already taken heart from the government's plan to bring
forward the 1994 budget process to July and readiness to meet 1993 budgetary
targets set when seeking a special EC Ecu loan. The only change has been to
adjust the targets slightly to accommodate lower-than-expected economic
growth.
Thus Friday's L12,400bn mini-budget to bring this year's finances in line
with forecast was welcomed. Dealers believe ministers are not only setting
feasible targets - never a certainty in the past - but also showing a
willingness to stick to them.
The mini-budget will be followed by a further package of tough measures for
1994. Figures are still imprecise, but Mr Riccardo Barbieri, of J. P.
Morgan, expects the adjusted 1993 deficit target to be about L155,000bn and
that for 1994 to be between L140,000bn and L145,000bn.
The promise of action on the deficit has been accompanied by
better-than-expected inflation figures. In spite of the lira's sharp
devaluation, there has as yet been little sign of the 'J-curve' effect
usually caused by higher import prices pushing up inflation. Although March
industrial prices rose sharply, preliminary retail price figures showed May
inflation fell to 4 per cent, against 4.2 per cent in April.
Advance knowledge of the May figure - the lowest since 1969 - may help to
explain the Bank of Italy's 0.5 percentage point discount rate cut to 10.5
per cent late on Thursday. The reduction, expected to accompany the 1993
mini-budget, came earlier than forecast but was no less welcome for it.
The market was happy to digest the stream of news. Yields on 10-year
government bonds fell to close at 12.23 per cent on Friday from 12.43 per
cent last Monday morning. Rates on three-month Eurolira deposits declined to
about 10.43 per cent on the bid side from 10.62 per cent over the same
period, while the lira strengthened to around L907.50 against the D-Mark
from L915 last Monday.
After weeks of grim news, it is the sort of thing dealers like to hear.
