FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (7): School
fees - plan ahead to ease the pain / Giving Junior an education could cost
over Pounds 300,000
PAYING FOR school fees has become an industry in its own right. Not only
accountants but financial advisers and computer programmers have done very
well out of the escalating costs of private education - and the increasing
desperation of parents to buy it.
A look down the column of boarding school fees demonstrates the scale of the
problems. Millfield, the most expensive school outside the specialist music
institutions and one of the best-resourced schools in the world, charges
Pounds 12,435 per year to boarders.
School fee inflation is currently running only slightly ahead of retail
price inflation, but has averaged around 10 per cent for the last 10 years -
last year's average of 8.3 per cent was the lowest since 1984-85.
A return to historic levels of inflation could therefore bring fees of
around Pounds 20,000 in another five years. If your child is still an
infant, and you want to pay for a boarding prep school as well, the total
cost will be well into six figures. Sun Life's projection that sending a
child born last year to independent school between seven and 18 would cost
Pounds 310,000 appears accurate.
Projections like that make a wonderful sales aid. Frightening though they
are, they should not scare parents into buying unnecessary financial
products.
Some glossy school fees packages are just a good way to sell life assurance.
They may make sense in limited circumstances, but their crucial weakness is
that they ignore the current state of your finances.
If you already have extensive savings which could be put towards school
fees, it is senseless to take out fresh policies aimed at paying the fees on
their own. In spite of the alarming projections, do not over-provide for
fees.
This can easily happen when dealing with salesmen paid by commission, so try
to seek advice payable via a fee for time spent, rather than by a commission
extracted from the money you invest. ISIS keeps a list of recommended
advisers.
First step is to establish how much money you are likely to need to pay. If
you have a school in mind, telephone the bursar, who should be prepared to
predict how fast fees will inflate in future. If you are still deciding on a
school, the figures in this survey should give a good idea of the figure to
aim for.
Once you have set a target, standard wisdom is to err on the side of caution
by using low-risk products to ensure that fees can be met. Higher risk
products, based on equities rather than cash deposits or government stocks,
have a good chance of doing better, but cannot be guaranteed to do so.
This judgment is finer the further in advance you plan. If your fees will
only be payable 10 years hence, the chances that equities will outperform
cash are so strong that you can afford to take the risk of a few market
bumps. If Junior starts next year, putting money into equities would be more
of a gamble.
Today's low interest rates, good news for the economy, are less appetising
for long-term savers and further complicate the issue. Fixed rates on offer
are so mediocre, as the table shows, that many advisers are prepared to risk
school fees money to the stock market which they would have salted away in
bonds or gilts a few years ago.
Low interest rates have also gnawed away at the value which schools can
offer themselves. Most boarding schools allow parents a discount for paying
in advance via a 'composition plan'. Bursars invest the money in cash
deposits, so the level of the discount is dependent on cash interest rates.
Schools are glad of the help for their cash flow that early payment can
provide, and parents should ask for details, but in this economic climate
schemes are unlikely to be competitive.
Once you have decided the level of risk you can take, the next golden rule
of financial planning is tax-efficiency. For example, if one parent pays no
income tax, they can earn gross interest on deposit accounts. On capital
gains, the authorities allow a gain of Pounds 5,800 each year, once
inflation has been taken into account, before any capital gains tax is
payable. The Weekend FT regularly provides details on how to calculate CGT,
which is one of the most unnecessarily complicated taxes on the statute
book.
Once you have taken advantage of both allowances, two routes are open,
depending on the state of your finances, for the bulk of your investments:
Capital. If you have a lump sum for fees payment, you have plenty of
opportunities.
Educational trusts are popular. Funds can be invested tax-free, provided
they are used to pay fees, and no particular school or pupil has to be
named. The trusts are offered by life assurance companies, which will
guarantee a certain level of fees through a series of annuities starting
when your child starts at school. These schemes are secure, but like
composition plans their attractions have been dimmed by low interest rates.
They should not be touched while other tax allowances remain unexploited.
Products ahead of them in the queue include personal equity plans, which
allow investment in equities free of income or capital gains tax, Tessas
(tax-exempt deposit accounts which must be maintained for at least five
years to maintain the tax advantages) and zero-dividend shares of investment
trusts, which offer a fixed return taxed as capital gains (useful for those
who do not pay capital gains tax).
Income. This is how most people pay school fees.
The traditional recommendation is the 'with-profits' life assurance
endowment. This is the same product, offering investment with a little life
assurance on top, which is used to back up most mortgages.
Their disadvantages in terms of inflexibility and tax-inefficiency are
considerable, as regular readers of the Weekend FT will know. In most cases
they are best avoided.
More flexible and tax-efficient savings schemes would again involve Peps or
cash-based Tessas. National Savings, which offers Children's Bonus Bonds
specifically with school fees in mind, should also be considered. For those
who have not saved in advance, a third route may be inevitable:
Loans. Isis has a special reserve plan which provides cheap lending
facilities for parents. Draw-down loans come from the Halifax; you borrow
money only when it is needed for another term's fees.
This scheme has two big advantages. The first is the rate of interest, which
is linked to the Halifax's base rate of 7.99 per cent. If borrowing is
likely to be more than Pounds 60,000, the rate charged will be 7.54 per
cent; this drops to 7.39 per cent if you borrow more than Pounds 100,000.
The second is that there are no strings to how you repay the loan - you are
not forced to buy an endowment policy. Instead, Claremont Savile steers
parents towards the least risky and most tax-efficient investments first.
The Isis scheme now pays out around Pounds 1m a week to parents. It is
better to save in advance; but if you have no choice but to borrow, you are
highly unlikely to find any better deals.
If none of these schemes are affordable then you might resort to the most
effective way to save fees. Look through this survey - and find a good state
school.
 -----------------------------------------------------
SCHOOL FEES: PLAYING SAFE
(Five-year fixed returns)
 -----------------------------------------------------
                                             %
 -----------------------------------------------------
Gilts Tr 8.75 1997                        5.95
National Savings: 40th Issue              5.75
6th Index-linked                         *3.25
Zero div. pf. shrs. (9/98)                7.32
Guaranteed growth bonds                   5.80
Deferred Annuities                        6.50
With Profits Bonds                        8.50
 -----------------------------------------------------
* + RPI
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: Chamberlain de Broe.
 -----------------------------------------------------
