FT  25 NOV 93 / VW seeks ways to reduce its costs
Renewed efforts to drag Volkswagen out of the red will head the agenda at a
meeting of the automotive group's supervisory board in Wolfsburg tomorrow.
According to independent estimates, the company is heading for a loss of
around DM2bn (Pounds 700m) this year and faces renewed challenges in 1994,
when its key domestic market is expected to shrink by at least 5 per cent.
Tomorrow's discussions will revolve around a draft agreement with unions,
expected last night, to reduce labour costs by temporarily introducing a
four-day week in VW's six German factories.
But the group chairman, Mr Ferdinand Piech, is also expected to seek
approval for cuts of around a third in his medium-term investment programme.
He will also be closely questioned on the group's relatively poor showing in
Europe this year and his plans for rebuilding its loss-making US and
Japanese operations.
The circumstances surrounding the Seat subsidiary's unexpected crash into
losses of at least DM1.25bn this year will feature prominently in a report
prepared by independent auditors, KPMG Deutsche Treuhand, on the orders of
Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of the watchdog supervisory board.
The document, sent to board members yesterday, is believed to blame poor
financial controls and reporting systems. Seat's losses, first discovered in
late summer, followed the collapse of a new business plan, drawn up on Mr
Piech's orders earlier in the year, and designed to generate a break-even
result.
Analysts suggest the group's 1993 results will be pushed further into the
red by the costs of closing Seat's Zona Franca plant in Barcelona and
redundancy payments.
The KPMG report also confirms that investigators have been unable to find
any evidence that industrial secrets allegedly stolen from General Motors by
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, a former GM director and now Mr Piech's
top production executive, have been used by VW.
Criminal investigations are still under way against Mr Lopez in Germany and
the US, following his abrupt departure from GM in March, and Hamburg
prosecutors are also examining a possible perjury charge against him.
The group's difficulties have worsened dramatically in the course of this
year, dashing Mr Piech's early hopes of a break-even in his first year of
office.
Although the company says it expects to sell 1.4m VW marque vehicles in
1994, unchanged from this year, business plan forecasts drafted at Adam
Opel, the local GM subsidiary, say total new registrations in the German car
market - VW and Opel's main outlet - will reach only 3.02m compared with
3.2m this year and 3.93m in 1992. The industry total will slide below 3m in
1995, according to the Opel projections.
