FT  19 NOV 93 / Survey of UK Property (10): The south waits for light at the
end of the tunnel
KENT HAS waited a long time for a project like the Channel tunnel, to help
it counter the attractions that draw businesses west of London. But the wait
for a rail link may be even longer, as transport grants are among the prime
targets for cuts to help fund VAT rebates.
Further postponement into the next century will be a blow to private sector
investors. Some of the biggest business parks in the country are being laid
out in an area that has traditionally missed out on the regions's
prosperity.
The most ambitious is Kings Hill, at West Malling, where the Rouse group has
used US ideas to create a 3m sq ft business park on 650 acres provided by
Kent County Council. 'We hope to shift a lot of space to companies who will
be paying Pounds 15 a sq ft, rather than almost twice that amount west of
London,' says Emma Goodford, of Knight Frank &amp; Rutley.
Only three freehold sales, totalling almost 65,000 sq ft, have been agreed
so far, but these are early days for a scheme planned to take 20 years and
include a creche, shopping and housing.
Bryant and Countryside have bought some of the land, and are keen to start
building homes, but Rouse will not contemplate speculative commercial
development during the current uncertainty.
Competition for pre-lets is intense with so many rivals in the market,
including Eureka and Orbit parks on the M20 and Kent International at
Thanet, each ranging from 100 to 350 acres. Others wait in the wings, such
as the 750-acre Ashford Great Park, but they are all treading water while
tenants wait to see where the London rail link will go and whether the
tunnel boom materialises.
On Crossways park, near Dartford, Blue Circle has drawn on the more
immediate attractions of the M25 to create a massive distribution centre.
Some 200,000 sq ft has been let in the last six months and another 120,000
sq ft is under negotiation. Now the company wants to attract office users -
perhaps envious of the 200,000 sq ft headquarters Colonial Mutual is
building at nearby Chatham Marine.
Competition will intensify as centres west of London exert powerful
magnetism. Developers are now being wooed back by the promise of revival,
just when space is running out. Jones Lang Wootton points out that the
region between the M3 and A23 has only around 18 months' supply of new
buildings left and 500,000 sq ft of outstanding demand.
A recent sub-let on the Guildford Business Park, at around Pounds 18 a sq ft
to CableTel, shows how values have declined since the peak, when town-centre
deals were struck at Pounds 25. But JLW is reminding investors that the
region is poised to return to a strong long-term growth rate.
Squeezed between the rivalry of east and west, Crawley is one of the few
towns with the capacity to take major tenants, following a long period of
growth related to Gatwick airport. At one time, the town had a surplus of 1m
sq ft and rents fell from a peak of Pounds 26 a sq ft to the mid-teens, says
Martin Booth, of JLW. But several deals this year have eased the pressure.
When Masefield House, the 120,000 sq ft former BAA headquarters, was let to
Geco Prakla at Pounds 14.50 at sq ft, it also proved that business could be
sucked in from both directions, as the company consolidated space from
Orpington to the east and Woking in the west, says Emma Goodford, of KFR.
Another significant catch was KPMG, which has centralised regional
operations here.
The town may be squirming with discomfort at rising unemployment, but this
has made it a more viable proposition for employers who can be sure of
getting staff, she adds. And with only two new buildings of any size left on
the market, investors face a brighter future.
Brighton is in a similar position, with a large chunk of new offices left
over from a period when it was the darling of the expanding financial
sector. Most of this sits empty in Trafalgar Place, next to the rail
station, where almost 120,000 sq ft is being offered at Pounds 19 a sq ft by
developer AMEC.
One ray of hope comes from signs of growth among financial groups. Sun
Alliance has just taken the 15,000 sq ft left by KPMG's move to Crawley; and
London &amp; Edinburgh Insurance, based at nearby Worthing, is in the market for
75,000 sq ft.
