FT  16 OCT 93 / US deal with Aideed raises warlord's power: The aftermath of
an airman's release
WITHIN a few days Gen Mohammed Farah Aideed has been transformed from a
villain into a key participant in the future of Somalia, but on what terms
remains unclear.
The tea-stalls on the dusty streets of Mogadishu were buzzing with
speculation yesterday over what Gen Aideed might have extracted from the US
in return for Thursday's release of a captured US pilot.
Despite Washington's insistence that the hostage was freed
'unconditionally', Gen Aideed appears to have benefitted in one immediate
respect: the United Nations' hunt for the rebel warlord has been called off.
Instead of seeking to place him on trial for the slaying of 24 Pakistani
peacekeepers in June, the UN will allow an independent commission to
investigate the incident.
It is unlikely it will find Gen Aideed solely responsible for the escalation
of violence in Mogadishu. UN forces also killed hundreds of Somalis in its
failed attempts to capture the fugitive general.
It is also expected the UN will shortly free some of Gen Aideed's militiamen
and political supporters. Mr Robert Oakley, President Bill Clinton's special
envoy sent to deal with the hostage crisis in Somalia, is said to have given
Gen Aideed his personal pledge the US would do everything it could to seek
his men's release.
But Gen Aideed's greatest advantage from playing the hostage card is perhaps
an intangible one. By forcing the US to the negotiating table, Gen Aideed
has increased his stature in the eyes of all Somalis. His enemies will have
greater cause to fear him. And if the present ceasefire holds long enough to
allow a resumption of national reconciliation talks, Gen Aideed will be a
significant participant, if not the dominant one, in determining Somalia's
political future.
For its part, the UN Operation in Somalia (Unosom) has acquired its own
internal problems. A question mark hangs over the 30,000-strong military
intervention if President Clinton maintains his commitment to withdrawing
the strategic US contingent in six months' time. Other governments have
hinted they will also withdraw their troops if the Americans depart.
'Somalia is just not worth dying for,' says one UN diplomat, who believes
the need to minimise UN casualties has killed their mandate to disarm
Somalia's warlords forcefully. The UN's first attempt at peace enforcement,
as opposed to peacekeeping, has proved an impossible task in the face of Gen
Aideed's defiance.
From now on, UN officials say disarmament and political initiatives will
have to come from the Somalis themselves. More than 14,000 UN troops will
still patrol Mogadishu, backed by an extra 5,000-strong US force in case of
trouble, but the days of weapons sweeps across neighbourhoods and the
storming of militia strongholds are over.
Somalia's rival clans now face the problem of how to contain Gen Aideed's
ambitions without the help of the UN.
Mr Ali Mahdi Mohammed, a hotelier-turned-warlord who controls the north
section of Mogadishu, distrusts the UN's policy of appeasement.
'The time for dialogue has collapsed,' he argues. 'Aideed has always broken
his agreements. This interlude will only give him time to reorganise and
resume the fighting.'
He adds that if the US soldiers pull out 'the situation will revert to the
killing and starvation we had before they stepped in.'
