FT  17 APR 93 / Sport: Power vacuum in the Afrikaner's game - South Africa
RUGBY and politics lie at the heart of Afrikanerdom. There is a certain
natural symmetry, between reform of the body that runs the Afrikaner's
national sport and the search for a new political order.
After more than 44 years of apartheid, the stumblings towards a new
democratic rugby system inevitably reflect the political fumblings of a new
South Africa, trying to find its way towards some kind of third world
democracy.
Just as there are no obvious leaders to take South Africans out of the
escalating mess in the country as a whole, so there are, after Danie Craven,
no readily identifiable leaders with the charisma to take the most important
sport in South Africa in the direction which it requires.
When the South African Rugby Football Union finally came into being through
the amalgamation last March of the predominantly white South African Rugby
Board and the predominantly non-white South African Rugby Union, no one
foresaw that the doughty Craven, who had already been president of the white
union for 35 years, would die within nine months of having become president
of the amalgamated body - even though he was 82 and had not been well for
years.
Craven was succeeded for only two months by Fritz Eloff, his vice-president
of some 23 years. A month ago, Ebrahim Patel, the long-serving former
president of the non-white players became president of the new body, as
agreed at the amalgamation. Patel will hold the post for a year. Patel is
something of an unknown quantity, because black and brown rugby had such a
low profile. He was fiercely anti-apartheid and fiercely opposed to the
white establishment.
Finally, in March of 1994 there will be a genuine vote and a president will
be elected. The 19 executives of all colours, who elected themselves to a
two-year stint as the first representatives of this new phase of South
African rugby, will have to be properly elected to serve on an executive
body of 11; a more manageable size.
The national government has been in power for too long (since 1948) and
wants to cling on in the new South Africa in spite of the almost daily
revelations of misconduct. Similarly, the administration of rugby has been
bogged down. Until recently, rugby presidents and officials, once elected,
stayed on forever and an autocratic system of administration prevailed.
But Jan Pickard, president of Western Province, the most powerful of the old
white SARB provincial unions, has resigned because of ill health. The
presidents of three of the wealthiest, and therefore most powerful,
provincial unions - Koos Vermaak of Eastern Province, Nick Labuschagne of
Natal and Steve Strydom of Orange Free State - have all resigned or been
voted out of office following questions about financial matters. All were at
times candidates to succeed Craven.
Suddenly there are few contenders for Craven's old jobs. In this league
Louis Luyt, the president of the Transvaal Rugby Union, is the only one left
with any sort of pedigree. But he is a maverick. He attracted controversy
when he sanctioned the playing of Die Stem, the South African anthem, at the
test against New Zealand in August. His forthrightness, a commodity rare in
South African rugby and is not always appreciated by his peers. He has
frequently been voted off rugby's hierarchical executive; only to be asked
to return.
I believe he has taken the initiative in trying to shake up the
administration of South African rugby. It is his union which made the first
and largest contribution (in excess of R2m - Pounds 450,000) to the SARFU's
development programme for the black townships. I believe Luyt's heart has
come to be in the right place, and even if he does ruffle feathers, he loves
what he is doing in rugby and could just be the least worst successor to
Craven.
Johan Claasen, the respected former Springbok and president of a less
affluent, smaller and therefore more neutral former white union, Western
Transvaal, would have been a contender for the presidency too. With Craven's
death he may have reconsidered but six months ago he told me he was not
interested in the job.
Although the names of others, mainly former white players outside the
administration of South African rugby, have been mentioned, the autocratic
system meant that younger, more progressive, thinkers could not easily be
accommodated. It would be difficult for anyone who has not been involved in
the nitty gritty of the game to walk into rugby and simply take over the
presidency.
For the immediate future at least, the clout in South African rugby will
remain with the six former white unions. They have the money and while they
have it they will also have much of the power to pull strings within rugby.
But the six, the Currie Cup unions, are also fiercely competitive and it
might not do to have one of their presidents elected president of SARFU at
the expense of the rest.
This could mean that Patel is elected next March; provided that, in his year
in office, he remains neutral between provinces, as Craven was, and shows
that he understands that the key to the presidency is not what he gets out
of rugby but what he can put in. While Patel is in the running for the
presidency, no other black or brown South African will, dare to run.
