FT  05 JUL 93 / Egypt asks US for cleric's extradition: Problems posed for
two governments by an Islamic preacher
EGYPT HAS asked the US authorities to extradite Sheikh Omar Abdul-Rahman, an
Islamic preacher based in New Jersey, some of whose followers were arrested
last month in a thwarted terrorist plot in New York.
He is facing trial at his native Fayoum, south of Cairo.
Mr Nagy Ghatrifi, Egypt's foreign ministry spokesman, confirmed a request
had been made for the cleric's extradition, following weekend talks between
Mr Amr Moussa, foreign minister, and the US ambassador in Cairo.
The request has been prompted by the ruling at the weekend by a judge
presiding over the re-trial of the sheikh at Fayoum, where he and more than
40 others are facing charges of inciting and participating in a riot in
1989, when two Egyptian policemen were killed.
Judge Ahmed Izzat Ashmawi ruled that the sheikh must be arrested to face the
re-trial in person. 'We are asking for his extradition because the court has
said he must be here to stand trial,' said Mr Ghatrifi.
Sheikh Omar Abdul-Rahman denies links with terrorism, either in the US or in
Egypt, but is viewed as spiritual leader of the extremist Gamaa
al-Islamiyya, which claims responsibility for attacks on tourist targets and
security forces in Egypt.
He has openly called for the overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak's
government.
Eight of his followers were arrested last month. They are alleged to have
been preparing explosives in an attempt to blow up the UN headquarters and
two road tunnels. A further seven men, also associated either with the
cleric or the New Jersey mosque at which he preached, have been charged in
connection with the February bombing of the World Trade Centre in New York.
Sheikh Abdul-Rahman was acquitted in 1990 concerning the 1989 riot, but the
Egyptian government this year ordered a re-trial under presidential
prerogative. This began in April, and 19 of 48 accused face capital charges.
The sheikh surrendered himself to US immigration authorities last week for
questioning about a deportation order before US courts since March last
year.
US authorities have stressed that his detention is not directly connected
with the Trade Centre bombing, or last month's intercepted terrorist attack,
but it follows much publicity in the US associating the cleric with both
incidents.
Extradition of the sheikh could pose legal and political headaches for Cairo
and Washington. It is unclear whether any effective extradition procedure
exists. For one thing, the countries have no direct extradition treaty, only
an 1874 agreement signed between the US and the Ottoman empire, of which
Egypt was then part.
Also, it is not clear how ardently Egypt wants Sheikh Omar Abdul-Rahman back
in the country, where he might become a focus for Islamic militants engaged
in a campaign of anti-government violence. Egyptian officials had said that
they did not want the cleric returned.
However, growing pressure in the US to deal with the controversial cleric,
combined with the ruling on Saturday at Fayoum, appear to have forced the
Egyptian government's hand.
Officials may now consider that it would be better to have Sheikh Abdul
Rahman under close scrutiny in Egypt than elsewhere - particularly in the
Sudanese capital Khartoum, from where he flew to the US in 1990 and where he
might have more scope to inspire activity against the government in Cairo.
