FT  07 AUG 93 / Council fined Pounds 25,000 after tenant's death
MANCHESTER City Council was yesterday fined the maximum of Pounds 25,000
following the death of an elderly tenant after hundreds of gas heaters were
wrongly installed by its workers.
Mr Paul Blackburn of the Health and Safety Executive told Mr Derrick
Fairclough, Manchester stipendiary magistrate, that 800 of 1,840 gas
warm-air heaters installed on 19 council estates in a replacement programme
had had to be switched off to ensure the tenants' safety.
Mr Albert Mason, 75, died after a metal plate that should have been screwed
in was fixed with adhesive tape and another plate had become detached,
letting carbon monoxide circulate around his flat.
Mr Blackburn said 'few if any' of the workers who fitted the heaters had
experience of such systems. In spite of the large scale of the scheme the
council 'did not give proper instructions to their employees specifying
methods of installation or quality checks'.
There were no arrangements to check safety, methods of installation were
improvised and the acting supervisor in charge of the replacement on Mr
Mason's estate had received no training or instructions on his
responsibilities.
Mr Blackburn added: 'The consequences of so many heaters wrongly installed
could have been far more serious. It is suggested this arose from attitudes
in the council leading to complacency.'
The council, which pleaded guilty, was fined the maximum of Pounds 5,000
under gas safety regulations for Mr Mason's death and the maximum Pounds
20,000 under the Health and Safety at Work Act for failing to carry out
checks on the other heaters. It was ordered to pay Pounds 500 costs.
Mr Fairclough said: 'The maximum fine within my power is really insufficient
punishment for what happened.'
Mr Charles Garside QC, for the council, expressed its sincere regret to Mr
Mason's family. He said Miss Penny Badcoe, the chief officer of the direct
works department, had resigned and no effort was being spared to identify
those responsible for the deficient installations.
Mr Garside added: 'There are going to be no scapegoats but on the other hand
nobody is going to be protected from proper action being taken against them.
This is not the place where it is sought to identify some low-level employee
and put all the blame on them.'
It is understood the council is facing more than a dozen civil actions from
tenants who claim their health was affected by fumes from the wrongly
installed heaters.
