FT  06 MAY 93 / International Bonds: Council of Europe raises FFr1.6bn
BORROWERS continued to flock to the French franc sector of the Eurobond
market, with yesterday's new issue activity concentrated in the seven-year
maturity sector, where there is reported to be quite healthy investor
demand.
The Council of Europe tapped the market with a FFr1.6bn, 7.25 per cent bond
due September 2000, marking its first Eurofranc issue since 1986.
Banque S. G. Warburg, the French subsidiary of S. G. Warburg, was lead
manager - an appointment which provoked some comments in the market, given
that the lead manager mandate for French franc Eurobonds is seldom award-ed
outside the main-stream French banking sector.
Market sources pointed out that the deal was swapped into yen, although S.
G. Warburg refused to confirm this, saying only that the Council of Europe
has a tendency to borrow in currencies which it on-lends or where good swap
opportunities might be available.
The bonds were priced to yield 35 basis points over the 8 1/2 per cent OAT
due 2000, and narrowed slightly to 33-34 basis points over, as market
participants pointed out that investors were keen to buy a new borrower in
the sector especially given its AA1/AA+ credit rating.
Saint-Gobain Nederland, the Dutch subsidiary of the French glass and
building materials group, also tapped the French franc sector with a FFr1bn,
seven-year deal.
The Eurobond had a coupon of 7.5 per cent and was priced to yield 60 basis
points over the relevant OAT. BNP, the lead manager, said the spread widened
out to 64 basis points.
The Eurofranc sector has proved a popular area of the Eurobond market for
borrowers since the start of the year. The Kingdom of Spain launched a
FFr6bn, 15-year issue late on Tuesday which dealers said was quite well
received - the spread over the relevant OAT widened from 44 basis points at
launch to 45-46 basis points yesterday.
Both the Eurosterling and Eurolira sectors saw new issuance yesterday. GECC
launched a Pounds 100m five-year deal with a coupon of 7.5 per cent which
was swapped into floating-rate French francs.
Deutsche Bank Finance and KfW International Finance both tapped the Eurolira
sector with L200bn and L75bn five-year deals respectively. Deutsche Bank
claimed the Eurolira sector held up 'reasonably well' despite Moody's
downgrading of Italy's credit rating.
Market participants said that they expect to see the launch of a IPounds 75m
deal for the European Investment Bank shortly.
News America Holdings, part of News Corp, has filed to register Dollars
1.5bn of liquid yield option notes for possible future sales by holders who
bought them from the company in March.
