FT  06 SEP 93 / Arafat steps up drive to win Arab backing
MR YASSIR Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman, is
intensifying efforts to win Arab support for his outline deal with Israel,
and to reach an accommodation with Palestinian opposition to the plan,
before he signs the historic accord.
Mr Arafat at the weekend secured backing from the leaders of the mainstream
Fatah faction in the PLO and won full public support from King Hussein, the
Jordanian ruler, who had demurred at the pact, largely in anger at having
been left out of its formulation.
Less clearcut support came from the Syrian leader, President Hafez al-Assad,
yesterday when the PLO leader held several hours of talks in Damascus, on
the most important leg of his tour of Arab capitals.
Mr Assad said it was up to the Palestinian people and their institutions to
approve what they deemed fit.
Presidential spokesman Jubran Kourieh said Mr Arafat explained the deal 'and
circumstances surrounding it'. Mr Assad in turn 'affirmed Syria's attitude
in consolidating the rights of the brethren Palestinian people and that it
is up to this people and its institutions. . . to approve what it considers
fit'.
The Syrian leader has always sought to exercise strong influence over the
pace and course of the Arab partners' negotiations with Israel, and the
surprise announcement of a separate PLO deal with Israel will have come as a
severe shock.
But Mr Assad's approval could also be vital to softening resistance within
the 10 Damascus-based Palestinian opposition groups to the deal - something
which in turn would ease Mr Arafat's task of pushing the deal through the
PLO's broader decision-making bodies.
Broadening Palestinian backing is particularly important since Mr Arafat's
own Fatah faction stipulated, after three days of talks last week, that the
PLO-Israel deal must be ratified by the PLO central council, the 100-strong
body which represents most strands of the Palestinian movement.
Mr Arafat still has to contend with intense debate within the PLO over how
to accommodate Israeli demands without undermining the credibility and
legitimacy of the organisation among the Palestinian people.
Some PLO officials argue that to meet Israel's terms would require
modification of the 1968 PLO charter, articles of which in essence call for
the destruction of Israel. But Mr Arafat is likely to try to avoid this,
since any such amendments would require convening the 400-member Palestine
National Council, the movement's parliament-in-exile, which would provide a
potent forum for opposition to the outline deal with Israel.
Instead, Mr Arafat is working on a draft statement which would trigger
Israeli recognition of the PLO, basing this on the argument that the charter
has been superseded by events and by previous Palestinian resolutions
accepting the existence of Israel.
The United Arab Emirates yesterday voiced support for the PLO-Israeli deal,
Reuter reports from Abu Dhabi.
'We support this agreement,' said UAE President Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan
al-Nahayan. 'What satisfies Palestinians statisfies us and they are more
aware of their interests and the appropriate decision for them,' the
official UAE news agency WAM quoted him as saying.
