FT  29 OCT 93 / Official optimism on unemployment
THE GOVERNMENT'S chief employment adviser revealed yesterday that economic
strategies were being planned in the belief that unemployment had peaked.
In a break with normal practice Mr Nick Monck, permanent secretary at the
Department of Employment, disclosed at the Institute of Personnel Management
conference in Harrogate that the government was optimistic the jobless
figures would fall to the end of the century. He said: 'Unemployment seems
to have passed its peak and employment rose between 1.25m and 1.5m over the
last cycle.'
Mr Monck cited a list of factors for optimism, including a competitive
exchange rate, falling labour costs and spare capacity. 'Employers also seem
to be taking on labour earlier than in past recoveries,' he said. 'Provided
we do things right there is an exceptional opportunity for economic success
between 1993 and the end of the century.'
The unemployment rate - a key factor in economic planning - has fluctuated
throughout the year, falling by 13,600 last month to 2.91m after two months
of increases.
Mr Michael Osbaldeston, chief executive of Ashridge Management College, did
not share the optimism and said it was 'very dangerous' to assume that the
recent fall heralded a period of low unemployment. He said: 'Unemployment
reductions always lag behind a recovery. It took three years before UK
unemployment started to fall after the last recession in the early 1980s.'
Full employment would be a 'fiction' for the rest of the century. He
predicted that the acceptable unemployment rate of 3 per cent to 4 per cent
would not be seen in the UK for the foreseeable future.
Mr John Monks, TUC general secretary, warned against introducing flexible
working practices simply because they were a modern idea. He said
flexibility was trundled out to support government employment policies -
such as the abolition of working councils, the end of employment protection
for nearly a third of the workforce, and the growth of 'poverty pay'.
