FT  04 NOV 93 / Letters to the Editor: Standards institution 'punctilious'
in following Cadbury committee code
Sir, As a board member of the British Standards Institution, and as a member
of the Cadbury committee, I was disturbed to read the incorrect assertion
('Standards authority faces criticism', November 3) apparently made by the
former chief executive of BSI, that proposed changes to BSI's constitution
were 'against the recommendations on good corporate governance proposed by
the Cadbury committee'.
Far from contradicting the code, the BSI board (and its audit committee,
which I chair) has been punctilious in seeking to observe the spirit and the
form of the code. Unjustified criticism, particularly if linked to
inaccurate comment by past employees, provides an inadequate basis for an
effective debate.
In fact, the Cadbury recommendations do not formally apply to BSI, but the
board decided, from the moment that it was reconstituted, that it would
follow the code. Several changes have been made as a consequence, not least
the extensive disclosure now given in the annual report.
The board was reconstituted, following changes in BSI's constitution which
were approved by its members at the 1991 annual general meeting, to reflect
best commercial practice. Recent events have focused attention on the
responsibility of non-executive directors to ensure that the organisations
with which they are associated have proper systems of control and suitable
management information to discharge their responsibilities properly. The BSI
board has no intention of shirking these responsibilities.
The board will welcome constructive questioning from any members who attend
the annual general meeting today, where they will quickly learn that the
actions taken and changes proposed by the board reflect a logical and
considered approach to bringing the BSI into a state in which the members'
interest can be better served.
The challenges facing BSI are profound, and the board has taken action to
ensure that these issues are tackled. The chairman and the executive
committee have been addressing numerous difficult but vital issues, and
report regularly to the BSI board. Effective corporate governance requires
no less.
N C L Macdonald,
10 Lynwood Road,
Epsom,
Surrey KT17 4LD
