FT  26 MAR 93 / Bombings put focus on India's criminals: The growth of
Bombay's underworld and its links with politicians
WITHIN five minutes' walk of the police commissioner's office, street
traders in Bombay are busy selling contraband - anything from French perfume
to Japanese colour televisions. There is even a demand for smuggled condoms.
It is here, working these innocuous-looking stalls in Manish market, that
some of the city's most notorious suspected criminals started their careers
 -among them the two men police believe helped to organise the bomb blasts
which shook Bombay earlier this month.
The pursuit of those held responsible for the attack, which left about 300
dead and more than 1,000 injured, has taken the police deep into the Bombay
underworld.
The hunt has exposed the scale of organised crime in the city - and the
extent to which politicians and businessmen condoned its expansion.
Bombay residents have unwittingly fostered an atmosphere of tolerance of
crime which ultimately helped even the terrorists.
As Mr D S Soman, a former city police commissioner, says: 'Turning a blind
eye to the theft of Rs10 is a little thing, but little things lead to bigger
things.'
The city's criminal underworld was spawned by its port. Prostitution,
gambling, after-hours drinking have long been a part of life, as they are in
many other port cities.
With them came extortion and protection, as well as hiring out thugs for the
settling of commercial disputes.
The opportunities for crime multiplied with an unsuccessful attempt from the
early 1950s to the late 1960s to enforce prohibition in the city. The
efforts by successive Indian governments to protect the country's industries
through high import duties created further scope for illegal profits.
So did controls on foreign exchange, gold and silver. Smuggled gold alone
last year totalled 200 tonnes, worth Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.7bn), against
legitimate imports of 100 tonnes.
The city's gangs accumulated capital and contacts, principally in the
trading centres of the Middle East, including Dubai which has developed into
an off-shore haven for Indian smugglers.
With this growing clout came access to the immensely lucrative international
drugs trade - especially when war in Afghanistan in the 1980s forced many
narcotics smugglers to move their processing operations from Afghanistan and
northern Pakistan to safer locations.
With property prices soaring as the city's population grew, gangs
diversified into land-grabbing - particularly ejecting slum-dwellers so that
their huts could be levelled and the land put to profitable use.
Hindus, Moslems and Christians alike join Bombay's criminal gangs. But
Moslems are the most numerous, partly because Indian Moslems are often
poorly educated, suffer discrimination in mainstream life and because the
most lucrative illegal trade connects India with Islamic countries.
The first to dominate the underworld after the turmoil of independence were
mainly Pathan settlers, tall and strong people from Afghanistan with a
natural advantage in street fighting.
Their leader was Mr Karim Lala, whom the police suspected of controlling
smuggling rings but who escaped prosecution and later engaged in legitimate
businesses. Glorified in Indian films as a latter-day Robin Hood, he now
lives in semi-retirement aged about 80.
Other gangs rose to challenge Mr Lala, none more strongly than a group led
by Mr Dawood Ibrahim, which established itself in gold smuggling in the
1980s. Mr Dawood Ibrahim's and Mr Lala's followers fought a violent turf-war
in which Mr Dawood Ibrahim lost his brother and Mr Lala his adoptive son and
heir.
The violence led police to crack down harder on organised crime. In 1985 Mr
Dawood, Ibrahim, who was wanted by police for questioning in a murder case,
fled to Dubai, from where he continued to direct his operations and earned
the title of king of the underworld. Mr Baljit Parmar, a veteran Bombay
crime reporter who has interviewed Mr Ibrahim, says: 'The stories about
Dawood Ibrahim are sometimes exaggerated. But he is the most powerful gang
leader.'
Criminals could not have prospered without co-operation from police and from
politicians.
'Such connections are difficult to pin down, but they exist,' says Mr Soman.
He says frequent transfers of police between jobs helps to lessen the risk
of policemen falling prey to criminals. But the danger persists, not least
because 15 per cent live in illegal slums for lack of money and proper
housing.
Politicians suspected of gangland links include Mr Pappu Kalani, a liquor
distributor who joined the ruling Congress (I) party and became a member of
the Maharashtra state assembly and a supporter of Mr Sharad Pawar, the chief
minister.
Mr Kalani was arrested last year under the terrorist and disruptive
activities act in connection with a murder investigation and is now in
police custody.
Another state assembly man, a member of the Hindu militant Shiv Sena party,
was arrested under the same anti-terrorism act during the recent riots when
guns were found in his car.
Mr AS Samra, the police commissioner has said the bombers clearly wanted to
cause as much economic damage as possible. He has also said that India's
recent economic liberalisation, including steep cuts in import duties, have
squeezed the smugglers' profit margins.
So the bombers may have had an economic motive. Police decline to be drawn
on the theory that the bombers were paid and supported by an Islamic
fundamentalist group which wanted to avenge the destruction the Ayodhya
mosque.
Officers point out that Yakub and Mushtaq Memon, the brothers they believe
are the prime suspects in the bombings belong to the Memon community, a
wealthy group of Moslems hailing from western India who were hard hit in the
riots because their homes and shops were singled out for burning by Hindu
militants.
The bomb blasts wrought havoc in Bombay. But if they lead to a decline in
the tolerance granted to crime in the city, then some good may come from the
tragedy. As Mr Pawar, the chief minister, told the state assembly this
month, in a veiled reference to the ties between criminals and politicians:
'We have made mistakes in the past. Now we must correct them.'
