FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Analysis): Formula for future financial
turbulence - Raised forecasts for the UK budget deficit will add to jitters
in the market for government bonds, says Barry Riley
The debt mountain is getting steeper. By setting his borrowing target for
the next financial year at Pounds 50bn, some Pounds 6bn more than his
implied forecast last November, and towards the top of the range of
expectation in the gilt-edged market, Mr Norman Lamont has increased the
danger that financial turbulence will develop over the next couple of years.
Certainly the medium term outlook for public finance looks troubled.
In pulling his punches on tax in the near term - with a neutral overall
impact on revenues in 1993-94 - the chancellor has followed the line of six
of his seven Wise Men. At least as influential, however, may have been the
smoothness with which the funding task has been accomplished so far. The
jump in the PSBR from Pounds 14bn in 1991-92 to Pounds 35bn in the financial
year now ending has been financed without crisis and at progressively lower
interest rates.
But already the influence of the global bond markets has become slightly
less benign in the past week or so, with the US long Treasury bond yield
flicking up slightly from its recent 20-year low. As for UK government
securities, there was inevitably a setback last night, with falls of just
over a point at the long end.
First, however, the positive news for gilts. The widely expected relaxation
of the full funding rule duly appeared, with the introduction of a new
provision that gilts sold to banks and building societies will count towards
funding.
This appears to fall a little short of a more comprehensive concession that
all purchases of public sector debt, including for instance Treasury Bills,
would count as funding. However, it is theoretically possible that the UK
banking system, which at present has only about 3 per cent of its assets
invested in the public sector, could absorb a substantial proportion of the
coming year's gilt issues - between Pounds 10bn and Pounds 20bn, say.
As part of the flexible funding policy the market would have also liked to
see a formal target range set for the broad money supply, M4. The woolliness
and inconsistency of monetary policy therefore remains a worry.
Second, Mr Lamont has uttered an Augustinian vow that virtue will be
achieved in the medium term. He has proposed 'wedges' of new taxation for
1994-95 and later years, and on the basis that the economy picks up speed
through the mid and late 1990s the Treasury's computer has been able to
crank out some declining, although still substantial, numbers for borrowing.
If growth continues to be disappointing, of course, the problem will not
fade away as outlined. And even if all goes according to plan the burden of
debt will rise substantially: from around 40 per cent of national income at
present, public sector indebtedness is likely to climb to at least 60 per
cent in another four years.
In itself that would be no worse a position that in the late 1970s and early
1980s. But in the past it has taken several episodes of double-digit
inflation, and a ruinous credit-based boom which pushed the public sector
into temporary surplus, to control the debt burden. This time, if the
government delivers its promise of low inflation, the real cost will be much
higher.
Yesterday Mr Lamont promised inflation of 2 1/2 per cent or less (in the
bottom half of the 1 to 4 per cent target range) by the end of the present
Parliament. But borrowing at the long end of the conventional gilts market
at present costs 8.3 per cent. The implied real rate of almost 6 per cent
will impose a heavy burden on future taxpayers.
What is the tactical room for manoeuvre? First of all, the government can
now look to the banking sector. Already the banks and building societies
have bought Pounds 5 1/2 bn of gilts in the first eleven months of the
current financial year, although under the previous rule this has had to be
duplicated by funding elsewhere.
Now the authorities are in a position to pursue active selling to the banks.
But they will not normally, the Treasury says, sell gilts of shorter
maturity than 3 years. Nor will banks typically wish to buy gilts further
out than five years because the capital risk becomes considerable.
The banks will buy only if they are offered a worthwhile yield incentive and
are confident that money market rates will stay low. It is on this basis
that banks in the US have bought vast quantities of public sector debt.
In the UK, however, the yield curve is all wrong at the short end. There is
no margin between 6 per cent money market rates and the redemption yield on
three-year gilts. Either base rates must go down to 5 per cent or less, or
the authorities must pump out new short gilt issues on a 7 per cent yield
basis, which would disrupt the market. So we must wait for serious action,
perhaps until a significant drop in German interest rates allows sterling
rates to be cut too. But serious action there must be, and soon.
Who else will take up gilts? The life assurance companies have been active
buyers, but pension funds were again net sellers last year, for the sixth
year in a row. In all, investment institutions have an annual cash flow of
about Pounds 38bn a year, but that is unlikely to grow significantly, and in
the past they have never put more than about 50 per cent of new cash into
gilts.
Note, however, the attack on pension fund equity holdings through the cut in
reclaimable income tax. Is this the start of an attempt to tilt the tax
playing-field in favour of gilts? The temptation will grow for this and
future chancellors if the deficit problems prove as bad as they are now
outlined.
The other possibility is to sell debt to foreigners. Since last August
overseas investors have turned their noses up at gilts, but they might
become interested again should sterling strengthen convincingly against the
Continental currencies. Then there is the possibility of borrowing in
foreign currencies. This year the balance of payments deficit is forecast at
Pounds 17.5bn, which the chancellor claimed yesterday would be 'easily
financeable': soon his agents at the Bank of England will have a chance to
demonstrate just how facile a process it can be.
Gimmicks such as tax-free gilt plans for private investors have rightly been
shunned. The chancellor is relying on the arithmetical approach, that
whatever the size of the deficit there must be balancing surpluses somewhere
that can be tapped. But the bigger the deficit the less the likelihood that
the financing can be done without periodic crises. The higher you climb up
the debt mountain the harder you may fall.
