FT  21 JUL 93 / Iraq arms inquiry 'does not understand priorities'
A SENIOR diplomat yesterday accused the judge and two senior lawyers leading
the UK arms-to-Iraq inquiry of not understanding the machinery of British
government.
Sir David Miers, UK ambassador to the Netherlands, told the inquiry team:
'You have a misunderstanding about the volume of work and the priorities.
You are misunderstanding how the system works.'
This is the first time that an inquiry witness has attacked the way it is
conducted. The outburst is understood to reflect growing unease within
Whitehall at the way the inquiry is subjecting to critical scrutiny the
actions of senior civil servants during the 1980s.
Sir David, a former assistant under-secretary at the Foreign Office
responsible for Middle East affairs, was facing repeated questioning by Lord
Justice Scott, his counsel Ms Presiley Baxendale QC, and Mr Christopher
Muttukumaru, an assistant Treasury solicitor and secretary to the inquiry,
about apparent failings by officials to abide by government guidelines
restricting defence exports to Iraq.
Sir David was asked whether he did not think it was his responsibility to
have prevented UK defence equipment from going to Jordan in the 1980s after
receiving intelligence information that the country was being used as a
route for arms to Iraq.
Sir David told Lord Justice Scott that the judge needed to look at decisions
in Whitehall within the context they were taken at the time. 'We were trying
to sell things rather than stop them, and this was being carried out at the
highest level. The whole British government machine from senior ministers
down were trying to conduct a campaign to sell arms to Jordan.'
In September 1985 the government signed a memorandum of understanding with
Jordan which resulted in a Pounds 270m defence package arranged by
International Military Services, a defence company wholly owned by the
Ministry of Defence.
Sir David also hit back when he was questioned about his apparent failure to
ensure that restrictions on the exports of machine tools by British
manufacturers including Matrix Churchill were not enforced.
Documents made available to the Scott inquiry show that Sir David was a
recipient on November 30 1987 of an intelligence report that British lathes
were being used to make shell casings at military industrial complexes in
Iraq.
Sir David said blocking the export of machine tools to Iraq may have led to
financial difficulties for the companies. He added: 'The question was, could
one justify a decision which would have these catastrophic results, with
real people being thrown out of work, when it all turned upon the semantic
exercise of exactly how the guidelines should be drawn up or interpreted.'
The public hearing was adjourned until Tuesday.
