FT  06 OCT 93 / Shell and BP link for oil and gas venture
SHELL OIL and BP said yesterday they would spend Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 790m)
to develop the largest oil and gas discovery in the Gulf of Mexico for the
past 20 years.
The field, known as Mars, was discovered by the two partners in 1989. It
will mark the site of the deepest platform in the Gulf at 2,933ft when
production starts towards the end of 1996.
Shell Oil, the US subsidiary of the Anglo-Dutch Royal Dutch/Shell group,
will have a 71.5 per cent interest in the development and bear a similar
proportion of the costs, with BP Exploration of the US representing the
remaining 28.5 per cent.
For Shell Oil the development, 130 miles off the Louisiana coast from New
Orleans, will mark a significant addition to production.
The first phase of development is expected to yield 500m barrels of oil
equivalent, with a further 200m barrels potentially available in later
stages of development. The company's total proven reserves at the end of
1992 amounted to just under 2bn barrels.
At its peak around the year 2000, Mars is expected to produce 100,000 b/d,
not far short of the total 136,000 b/d that Shell currently produces in the
Gulf of Mexico. The development is also expected to produce 110m cu ft of
natural gas a day.
Deep-water sites in the Gulf of Mexico have become a focus for US
exploration and development as companies apply new seismic and production
technology to the area. Mr John Browne, BP's London-based exploration chief,
said the tension-leg platform technology used in the Mars project will, for
example, 'have valuable applications both elsewhere in the Gulf of Mexico
and in other parts of the world'.
Although many US-based companies are investing heavily in long-term
exploration elsewhere, the application of new technology has made the Gulf
of Mexico a more immediate and accessible source of new production from
proven reserves.
BP has sold its interests in the El Qari'a gas field in the Nile Delta
concession about 100 miles north of Cairo to Amoco, the US company announced
in Chicago yesterday. The price was understood to be about Dollars 50m. The
project is run by the Egyptian subsidiary of Agip.
