FT  19 APR 93 / Survey of Business Air Travel (11): Claims and
counter-claims - Luxury at 40,000 feet
It is a curious irony that airlines are waging some of the industry's most
intense competitive hostilities over cabin hospitality for the relatively
small pool of business travellers in these days of global recession.
It is a rivalry over inches of in-flight leg room and video channel
selections as well as the squashiness of chairs.
The elusive corporate cash has reduced airlines to making claims and
counter-claims about who introduced which feature first as they compete to
seat board members.
Mr Mike Batt, British Airways' newly-appointed marketing director, claims to
have started the trend for airlines to focus less on first class and more on
improved business class.
He says: 'In 1988 we were the first to re-launch our long-haul business
class as a 'diluted' first class.'
BA spent about Pounds 25m on its ClubWorld in 1987: 'Before that it was a
sort of beefed-up economy class. There has been a step-change in quality.'
He says the improvements have increased revenue and the number of
passengers: 'In the first year, revenue went up about 24 per cent.'
BA's move forced all other airlines to match the new standard and more than
20 airlines were forced into re-launching their business air travel
services, Mr Batt says.
Today, BA is in the throws of a further Pounds 100m re-vamp spanning all its
premium brands which it styles as a big assault on the world's business air
travel markets. Much of the new service was launched on April 1, with the
remainder coming into cabins from April 15:
'In 1988 we thought the seat was great; fours years later we realised it
doesn't really suit people over six feet one inch. Also, the cradle for the
head could have been softer and the foam on the base of the seat seemed a
little too hard,' Mr Batt says.
BA is also introducing between six and eight new video channels - beaming
out an estimated 60 hours of programming on a loop which will bring the
executive everything from BBC documentaries to Hollywood films.
Aside from the comfort required by harassed executives who need to be fresh
for their foreign business affairs, Mr Batt believes that business air
travel facilities offer clients the reliability they need:
'We maintain back-up aircraft in case a plane goes down on us. You can't
just say to the business traveller 'Sorry, the plane's sick, you can't go to
New York today.' '
Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic Airlines takes an equal pride in
pandering to the tastes of those able to pay more for their tickets, in
spite of his egalitarian, balloon-and-sandals public image.
A straight comparison between Virgin's Upper Class and BA's Club World is
not appropriate because, like several other airlines, Virgin today offers a
cheaper version of first class while BA and others have stayed closer to
their executive class services.
Coincidentally, however, Virgin also plans to make an announcement about
improvements to services in the next couple of months, timed to coincide
with the addition of new aircraft to the fleet.
'We were the first to introduce seat-back TVs in all the cabins of the
aircraft and we will shortly be offering up to 14 video channels and 12
audio channels,' the company says.
It plans to offer 'interactive systems' which will allow customers, for
example, to book hotels at 40,000 feet presumably while watching TV from
their reclining seats.
Virgin says it is the market leader in seat space: 'We offer 55 inches in
Upper Class which Continental have just copied from us. In terms of
MidClass, we re-designed a business-class seat to give the most comfortable
economy seat with 38 inches of leg room.'
Virgin appears to have a particular concern for its clients' looks. It
provides a care-pack of cosmetics including a facial spray, moisturiser, a
toothbrush and a comb.
The airline offers business travellers the services of an in-flight beauty
therapist who can provide manicures, facials as well as neck and scalp
massage, on selected flights.
The company says it aims to help the business traveller forget about flying:
'It is tiny touches like offering travellers a choc-ice during the films,
and complimentary drinks throughout the flight, which are designed to hide
the fact that they are airborne.'
Virgin believes that ultimately it is the flexibility of service that
attracts business traveller to its cabins: 'Businessmen need that
flexibility. They need to know that if they don't show up they have not lost
their ticket.'
Continental Airlines, USAir and SAS Scandinavian have improved their
long-haul business class to a standard similar to the first-class services
they have abandoned, according to a recent survey of 12 airlines' business
travel services conducted by Executive Travel Magazine.
Last year, Continental launched its BusinessFirst service which does indeed
match Virgin's 55 inches, but both have been outdone by Sabena's
announcement of plans for a luxurious 62-inch stretch across the Atlantic.
BusinessFirst tactfully offers 'extra wide', electronically-adjustable,
sleeper seats (which cost Pounds 5,000 apiece), with six-channel videos
built into the armrests. One programme, called 'Air Show' is a map showing
where the aircraft is at any given point.
Continental's pitch is explicitly about comfort rather than the ease of
in-flight working. Services such as faxes, computers and telephones, for
example, have been ignored on the basis that passengers prefer to leave work
behind.
At the time of the launch, Mr Robert Ferguson, the airline's chief
executive, said the new service would 'deliver far more value for the
traveller's money.'
The push that many airlines have made to improve in-flight entertainment has
been marred by their poor performance, which Executive Travel puts down to a
misguided attempt to install new technology in old cabins. Emirates is the
exception in this.
The success of these Disneyesque efforts to conjure a wonderful world which
will lead executives to one airline's seats rather than another's is
difficult to gauge. Research commissioned by Mintel the research group from
Oliver &amp; Company, however, last year concluded that no single factor
influenced choice of airline.
One 35-year-old resource director who makes more than 15 air trips a year
said: 'I wouldn't go with a Mickey Mouse airline but in terms of reliability
and scheduling, I think so much is in the hands of the air traffic
controllers rather than the airline that whether you fly Lufthansa, KLM, or
BA makes absolutely no difference to whether you are actually going to get
off the ground on time.'
