FT  26 JUL 93 / Economics Notebook: Union will require some social graces
Last week's high drama over the Maastricht Treaty in the British House of
Commons was great theatre. So much so that it has been easy to lose sight of
the core of the enterprise which is the creation of economic and monetary
union in Europe.
However, with ratification completed in most member states, some economists
have begun to show new interest in the problems that could arise if Emu ever
gets off the ground. Their work highlights fears that it could put jobs and
businesses at risk in large parts of the European Community.
In the latest issue of the twice-yearly Economic Studies, published this
month by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Mr
Steven Englander and Mr Thomas Egebo argue that Europe will have difficulty
dealing with regional economic disturbances once it is operating with a
single currency and monetary policy.
Their message is backed up by Mr Bernard Connolly and Mr Jurgen Kroger of
the European Commission. Writing in the Recherches Economiques de Louvain, a
quarterly published by the respected economics department of the Catholic
University of Louvain, they have suggested that the Maastricht convergence
criteria focusing on inflation and budget deficits will not be sufficient to
ensure the successful operation of Emu.
The authors of both papers on Emu were writing in a personal capacity. But
the OECD study, in particular, had formidable backing. A footnote makes
clear that the topic was suggested by some of the organisation's most senior
economists.
Even though existing plans for Emu do not envisage union before 1997 at the
earliest and provide a second deadline of 1999, the two studies indicate
that it will be a much more hazardous venture than it appeared when the EC
member states signed the Maastricht Treaty in February last year.
The potential weakness of Emu in the face of economic shocks is especially
worrying.
An underlying problem, highlighted in both papers, is that the EC has
neither the cross-border mobility of labour nor sufficient flexibility of
wages or prices to be a good candidate for monetary union.
Messrs Englander and Egebo of the OECD see no early change on the labour
front. With limited exceptions (the flow of labour between Ireland and the
UK is one), they say that labour mobility in EC countries is unlikely to
match the standard of an optimal single currency area 'in the medium term'.
Messrs Connolly and Kroger argue that the community will have to achieve
economic convergence on a scale far beyond the Maastricht Treaty's
requirements of low inflation, low long-term interest rates and low
government indebtedness for Emu to be successful.
'Convergence in supply conditions will crucially determine future employment
opportunities,' the two commission economists say. The EC countries will
have to bring their productivity performances more into line before Emu.
After Emu the expected real rate of return in one country relative to others
will be vital for determining regional employment opportunities.
But after weighing all the aspects, Mssrs Connolly and Kroger are doubtful
whether Emu will benefit the poorer areas of Europe. At one point they say
that exchange rate fixity is likely to 'slow down or even halt the process
of economic integration and catching up'.
Messrs Englander and Egebo focus on the difficulties posed by economic
shocks for Emu. With no scope for devaluation or revaluation of currencies,
'real exchange rate adjustments, when needed, must be achieved through
changes in relative costs and prices', they say. 'However, if wages and
prices are not flexible internally . . . such adjustment may require large
shifts in capacity utilisation and employment.'
The OECD economists argue that labour market flexibility or the mobility of
labour and production between regions will have to increase significantly to
prevent localised supply side disturbances having disruptive effects on
income and employment. The problems created by German unification among the
ERM countries give an idea of the difficulties that could arise after Emu.
They are particularly concerned that the EC economies will require a large
increase in unemployment to offset a sharp upwards lurch in inflation. Using
the OECD's 'Interlink' computer model to simulate Emu, they found that
changes in relative wages and prices work very slowly to restore
competitiveness and cost a great deal in terms of output. In one simulation,
they found that misaligned wages, prices and unemployment persisted five
years after an initial localised 'shock' jump in wages.
Such worries about Emu are not entirely new. There were plenty of warnings
about the project at the time of the Delors Report, which gave decisive
impetus to economic and monetary union when published in 1989.
In testimony to the Commons Treasury and Civil Service Committee earlier
this year, Mr Andrew Crockett, the head of the Bank of England's
international division, said the Emu convergence criteria should also take
account of how economies might respond to shocks such as German unification.
The stress placed in the two recent economic studies on improved labour
market flexibility gives some support to the UK government's opposition to
the EC's social chapter.
Britain, of course, has negotiated an opt-out from economic and monetary
union as well as from the social chapter. But it will be ironic if the UK,
with greater labour market flexibility already apparent in falling
unemployment over the past half year, eventually proves more suited to union
than other EC economies.
Adjustment under Fixed Exchange Rates: Application to the European Monetary
Union, OECD Economic Studies, No 20, from OECD Publications, 2 rue
Andre-Pascal 75775, Paris Cedex 16, France or Pounds 16 from HMSO.
Economic Convergence in the Integrating Community Economy, Recherches
Economiques de Louvain, Vol 59 1993 No 1-2. Tel Belgium (02) 627 3500 for
subscription details.
