FT  23 SEP 93 / Ferry operator in link with Belgium
IN THE latest move by the Channel tunnel's rivals in the run-up to its
opening, Sally Line, the UK's third largest cross-channel ferry operator,
yesterday announced a partnership with Regie voor Maritiem Transport, the
Belgian ferry operator.
The partnership with RMT, formed in preparation for the tunnel's scheduled
opening in spring next year, will run ferry crossings to Ostend in Belgium
from the port of Ramsgate.
Sailings between Dover and Ostend, which have been operated for the last
seven years by a partnership between RMT and P&amp;O Ferries, will end.
P&amp;O Ferries and Stena Sealink, the two largest operators, have concentrated
on establishing shuttle services between Dover and Calais, the shortest
channel crossing. Both plan to offer 25 sailings a day in each direction, to
compete with trains running through the tunnel.
The Scandinavian-owned Sally Line operates two passenger ferries and one
freight ferry between Ramsgate and Dunkirk in northern France. The company
also operates a freight-only service between Ramsgate and Ostend with two
ships.
RMT currently operates three ferries and two jetfoils between Ostend and
Dover. Under a five-year agreement to run from January 1 next year, the RMT
service will be merged with the two Sally Line freight ferries to offer up
to 10 freight crossings a day on the route.
The new partnership predicts a combined share of the cross-channel passenger
market of 20 per cent. This would be double Sally Line's current share of 10
per cent. For the freight market it sees a combined market of 23 per cent,
compared with Sally Line's 17 per cent.
Sally Holdings UK, the parent company, also owns the port of Ramsgate, and
will be investing Pounds 6m in increasing its capacity. The company expects
to add 50 jobs to the 800-strong port workforce.
Mr Michael Kingshott, chairman of Sally UK Holdings, said that the move
would secure the future of the ferry operation after the opening of the
Channel tunnel.
'We expect to enter the next century as a major ferry operator on the short
sea routes, increasing our market share for both passenger and freight
operations,' he said.
