FT  18 AUG 93 / California rethinks unitary tax system
CALIFORNIA'S legislature will today open discussions on changes to its
unitary tax law that might help head off a threat of retaliation from the
UK. But already British MPs are warning the proposed changes do not go far
enough.
The dispute arises from California's system of worldwide unitary taxation -
the subject of a long-running legal case involving Barclays Bank, the
British clearing bank - under which companies may be taxed on a proportion
of their worldwide revenues, instead of only on revenues earned in the
state, as is the case in most jurisdictions.
Bowing to pressure from the federal government, California has already made
the unitary system optional.
But foreign companies complain the Californian tax authorities charge a fee
if they choose the alternative 'water's edge' assessment system, which
includes only activities within the US, and reserve the right to impose a
unitary assessment.
Backed tacitly by the Clinton administration in Washington, UK officials
have been urging California to move towards a mandatory water's edge system.
This system was backed by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor of the
exchequer, in a recent letter to Sir Michael Grylls, the Conservative MP who
has been leading the British parliamentary battle against unitary taxation.
Mandatory water's edge would in fact raise more money for the state -
perhaps as much as Dollars 175m (Pounds 117.4m) a year - but for this reason
has been hotly opposed by Californian companies which benefit from the
unitary assessment.
Administration officials hope that if California can settle the dispute with
the UK, they will not have to take a position on the Barclays case.
The Supreme Court has asked for the administration's views on whether it
should hear the case, but President Bill Clinton would prefer neither to
argue openly against the UK nor to side with the UK against California in
breach of a written campaign promise to Mr Brad Sherman, a member of the
California franchise tax board.
Although the bill under formal consideration by the Californian Senate
finance committee today proposes mandatory water's edge, its author, Senator
Alfred Alquist, believes that this would not pass the legislature.
He intends to modify the bill to address only some specific foreign
complaints, including the compliance costs and the tax authorities' ability
to overrule a choice of water's edge assessment.
Officials in Sacramento believe the legislature may also eliminate the fee
levied on companies which make the water's edge choice. If it does so, it
would have to come up with perhaps Dollars 70m in additional revenues to
offset the lost money.
Sir Michael Grylls, however, has written to Mr Alquist to warn him that the
UK would not be satisfied with only limited legislation.
'The UK's resolve on retaliation, in the absence of a satisfactory solution,
remains undiminished and should not be underestimated,' he wrote yesterday.
British retaliation, involving the withdrawal of a tax credit granted to US
companies operating in the UK, is due to take effect at the beginning of
next year if the dispute is not settled.
