FT  06 MAR 93 / Second arrest in New York blast
A SECOND suspect was expected to be charged yesterday in connection with
last week's bombing of New York's World Trade Centre, which killed five
people and injured more than 1,000.
US investigators said they planned to place charges for interfering with
investigations into the case.
New York City police commissioner Raymond Kelly yesterday said more arrests
were expected in the case.
The second arrest in the case followed Thursday evening's charging of Mr
Mohammed Salameh, a Moslem fundamentalist who was arrested as he tried to
retrieve Dollars 400 for a rented van alleged to have contained the bomb.
Mr Salameh was charged with aiding and abetting the bombing and subsequent
fire and with transporting explosives across state lines. If convicted, he
could receive a life sentence.
Mr Salameh was arrested when he returned to collect a deposit on the van.
The rental agreement named him and gave his address.
Details of the charge against Mr Salameh pointed to him as the builder of
the massive bomb that blasted a 100-ft-wide hole in an underground parking
garage at the centre.
The complaint said tools and parts were found at an apartment Mr Salameh
used and that a police expert said they were evidence of a 'bomb-maker'.
US District Judge Richard Owen ordered Mr Salameh to be held without bail.
Investigators are still looking for other suspects, and the FBI warned that
the investigation would probably continue for many months.
New York Governor Mario Cuomo yesterday asked President Bill Clinton to
declare New York a major disaster area, which would allow the city to get
federal funding to help clean up the rubble, install new security measures
at the centre's twin towers and counsel displaced workers.
The federal Small Business Administration has already declared the area an
economic disaster zone, thereby making business owners eligible for
low-interest loans.
In a letter to the president, Mr Cuomo estimated the costs of the bombing at
more than Dollars 700m. Mr Cuomo's estimates were in line with earlier
projection's by the city's comptroller, Ms Elizabeth Holtzman. However,
officials at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns and
operates the complex, believe the figures will be even higher.
