FT  21 MAY 93 / Survey of London Docklands (8): Journey between polar
extremes - Dining in Docklands
A HUGE parcel arrived in the post, full of leaflets, magazines and a thick
business directory about Docklands. All of them made more than a passing
reference to The London Docklands Guide - Good Food Awards.
So, I thought, this cannot be the wilderness painted by other guides such as
Michelin and the Good Food Guide. Apart from a little oasis around Butler's
Wharf, they had virtually nothing to recommend in Docklands.
Thus, with two such polar extremes fixed in mind, I set off to find discover
the latest facilities for dining in Docklands. And where better to begin
than at that rallying point to a new business empire: Canary Wharf. But this
turned out to be a rather fleeting visit. There's a pizzeria and - in Cabot
Place - a capucchino bar and an open-plan concession for snacks ('just
changed hands,' commented the security guard). I managed to find 'The Cat &amp;
Canary' - and a ship, The Lady Gwynfred - and that was my lot.
To raise morale, I felt that the Docklands Guide blue-riband award-winner,
Manzi's seafood restaurant at Turnberry Quay, might do the trick. After all,
the original in Leicester Street has been going strong since 1928.
This new rotunda-shaped building off Pepper Street looks fine from outside:
good views across the quay - and warm brickwork. Inside, it is less
convincing with the flourishes of modern Italian dining (sharp lighting,
murals) offset by ersatz bistro furniture and tableware, even fake gingham.
Sadly, the food is a marked return to the bad old days. Breton fish soup was
divvied up with provencale rouille; the colour and, come to think of it, the
taste of Germolene and it did little to boost a dreary liquid. Chicken
livers with bacon tasted satisfactory, but looked appalling - slung onto the
plate with shrivelled lettuce.
Fish - their speciality - proved hugely disappointing. Some salmon was
completely dried out; and a section of plain-grilled turbot, if more moist,
arrived with a large blob of Hollandaise that tasted like rancid
butter-icing. The sauce chef's night off? Let's hope so.
Image seems to be a prime consideration in Docklands. New roads that have
yet to acquire buildings already have lush rows of trees and shrubs.
Materials used in architecture - steel and glass - help to create an image
of optimism and a bright future.
Even the occasional dockside Georgian dwelling has had its brickwork cleaned
so that any glimpse of history now looks sharp and positive.
Commercial Road - the Limehouse section - at least has yet to receive such
attention. It looks ripe for demolition. But it is here that you'll find one
of the oldest gastronomic links with an earlier era.
'Old Friends' is the descendant of the original venue on West India Dock
Road, established just after the war to provide Cantonese food for visiting
Chinese sailors. With its tassled lanterns and flowery wallpaper, there's
none of today's Soho-chic about it.
The food is acceptable rather than exceptional; standard Cantonese dishes
without the balance or sharpness that you might find in London's Lisle
Street.
Three doors up is Tai-Pan - more modern, lighter and airier and offering
some spicier Szechuan dishes alongside more predictable items: soft shell
crab with peppercorn salt, Mongolian lamb wrapped in lettuce leaves and
wonderful chow nor lok, king prawns in their shells in a tomato sauce.
Heading east towards Silvertown, Beckton and London City Airport, I suddenly
realised what a conundrum Docklands has become as I stood near Gallions
Reach and looked back at the Isle of Dogs.
Here are still vast expanses of land and water virtually untouched with
almost village-like communities tucked away that seem a million miles
removed from the shimmering towers and wharves further west. Fine dining
doesn't exist, but occasionally you will find an established neighbourhood
restaurant doing well.
The Woolwich Tandoori in North Woolwich, next to a boarded-up pub and an
empty Chinese take-away, represents the East End rather than Docklands, and
is doing a rather more down-to-earth job than most of the eateries you will
come across.
Here, tandooris and biyranis are fine, served pleasantly in a gold and
mirrored cave.
This cosy air is in marked opposition to the colder, more brittle edge of
the newer hotels in the area. The Britannia International has both Jenny's
Carvery and Crompton's a la carte restaurant, neither of which manage to
either comfort or challenge. Anywhere still cooking dishes (let alone
describing them thus) such as Canard a l'Orange or Supreme de Volaille Kiev
deserves a suspicious gaze.
My theory was born out by a very pedestrian dish called 'Surf &amp; Turf' which
not even king prawns and tarragon butter sauce could revive.
Across the river in Rotherhithe, the Three Crowns Restaurant in the Scandic
Crown Hotel is barely an improvement. The centre piece is a smorgasbord for
both lunch and dinner. It is unremarkable save only for the fact that the
owners are Scandinavian - and you'd have thought they would know a thing or
two about such buffets. (I bet you don't get rough-cut smoked mackerel,
flavourless ordinary prawns and dreary wilting garnishes at the Oslo or
Helsinki branches).
Thankfully, there is hope on the horizon and his name is Sir Terence Conran.
Not content with Le Pont de Ia Tour and the Blueprint Cafe at the Design
Museum, there's a new, more informal eatery, the Cantina del Ponte. And, as
if that wasn't enough, a new chop-house in Butler's Wharf to be unveiled
later this year.
I have no desire to inflate Sir Terence's reputation at the expense of
anyone else's, but it should be said that this is one of the few places
where you are virtually assured of being served something more than half way
decent. And, the combined effect of this cluster of eateries seems to me to
be in the true spirit of what Docklands is all about. A model of cool,
well-designed business efficiency, reflecting the spirit of the age.
The new Cantina del Ponte majors well on fresh pizzas and calzone, simple
grills and fresh salads. A risotto of tomatoes and baby spinach was
heavenly; and a calzone with three cheeses, aubergine and basil had perfect
texture and taste.
Just when you think you've had your fill, there's also a collection of shops
to enable you to take the experience home with you in the shape of fine
olive oils, basil plants and fresh breads. Conran has proved that you can
take a site and bring in enough people to make it pay.
Others have not been so fortunate. With buildings filling (then emptying) on
the Isle of Dogs, restaurateurs have seen their business ebb and flow.
The Waterfront on South Quay Plaza has recently closed and is now doing bar
snacks, instead. And a ship, Le Passarelle, also moored on South Quay as a
restaurant, was towed away earlier this month.
Facilities for dining in Docklands, it would seem, are unlikely to stabilise
until there's a more firmly rooted population in place. Then, hopefully,
restaurant entries in the London Docklands Guide might overlap more often
with those in the Good Food Guide.
Local establishments include:
Manzi's Seafood Restaurant, Turnberry Quay, off Pepper Street, Glengall
Bridge, E14. Tel: 071 538 9615.
Old Friends, 659 Commercial Road, E14. Tel: 071 790 5027.
Tai-Pan, 665, Commercial Road, E 14. Tel: 071 791 0118.
Woolwich Tandoori, Pier Road, North Woolwich, E16. Tel: 071 511 2818.
Britannia International Hotel, 163, Marsh Wall, E14. Tel: 071 515 1551.
Scandic Crown Hotel, 265, Rotherhithe Street, SE16. Tel: 071 231 1001.
Le Pont de la Tour, 36d Shad Thames, Butlers Wharf, SE1 Tel: 071 403 0267.
Cantina del Ponte, 36c Shad Thames, Butlers Wharf, SE1. Tel: 071 403 5403.
Blueprint Cafe, Design Museum, Shad Thames, Butlers Wharf, SEl, Tel: 071 378
7031.
