FT  10 MAY 93 / Eurofighter costs increase 50% over original estimates
THE COST of Eurofighter, the ambitious pan-European defence project, has
jumped by more than 50 per cent from original estimates when development of
the four-nation aircraft was launched five years ago, according to
confidential official figures.
The programme is now expected to cost as much as Pounds 32bn (Dollars 49bn)
at today's prices. In 1988, the joint venture partners estimated it would
cost Pounds 21bn.
The increase can be attributed only partly to inflation, and arises even
though cuts in the programme were agreed last year. It reflects higher
production and development costs than estimated. The four partners -
Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain - are expected to buy about 600 aircraft
instead of the 765 originally planned.
The latest cost figure will provoke demands from opposition politicians in
the partner countries that governments provide a fuller explanation of
expenditure on the Eurofighter.
The total Pounds 32bn bill for the Eurofighter 2000 includes about Pounds
9bn for development, most of which has been spent or committed, and the cost
of setting up technical support for the initial period of service.
Project managers expect the first flight of the aircraft in September, two
years behind schedule. However, difficulties with the GEC-Marconi software
for its flight control system have still to be resolved.
British officials are now working to a planning figure of Pounds 13bn for
the UK's share of the project, involving 250 aircraft. That is almost twice
the Pounds 7bn figure cited for UK costs when Mrs Margaret Thatcher, then
prime minister, gave the go-ahead for the project in 1988.
The internal government estimate has risen by Pounds 1.5bn in the past year
in spite of an agreement between the partners in December to redefine
specifications and seek cost reductions.
The figure is significantly higher than public forecasts.
Mr David Clark, Labour Party defence spokesman, said at the weekend he was
'shocked' by the increase in projected cost and would table questions in
parliament. 'It behoves the government to be much more open and honest with
the general public as to the cost of defence,' he said.
Excluding logistic support, the bill works out at about Pounds 45m for each
RAF Eurofighter. That is roughly twice what it would have cost to buy the
latest version of the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18, which was rejected by the
four Eurofighter countries.
British Aerospace, the main UK partner, argues that the government could
recoup all its costs through revenue generated by exports of the aircraft.
The UK, which plans a better-equipped version than Germany, is the only
partner not to have reduced its purchase plans.
Under the revised programme, drawn up to enable Germany to stay in the
project, production has been delayed, with the first deliveries not due
until the year 2000.
The only contracts let so far are for development, at fixed inflation-linked
prices. They are being renegotiated to reflect changes in the programme.
Governments are resisting claims for extra funding by the consortium.
Eurofighter fails to find its wings, Page 4
