FT  08 JUL 93 / Tax breaks could boost rented homes market
TAX allowances for invest-ment in new homes for rent could generate 50,000
extra rented homes a year, according to a report to be published later this
month by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, the social research organisation.
The report, prepared by Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountancy firm, says that
annual capital allowances should be introduced for the cost of building
homes for rent and on property which has not been rented out recently.
It recommends that the initial first-year allowance should be 40 per cent,
with the remainder of the cost set against tax at 4 per cent a year. Relief
would be clawed back if the property were sold within 10 years.
Rental income should be treated as trading income, the report says, adding
that rented property should be exempt from capital gains tax - provided that
it is held for at least 10 years.
The cost of the measures would be around Pounds 5,000 for each extra new
home, according to the report. This is a quarter of the cost to the
exchequer of each new home provided for rent under the Business Expansion
Scheme - which is wound up at the end of the year.
The report says that the tax measures are needed to make private renting
attractive to investors. Figures by Coopers &amp; Lybrand show that rented
housing could produce a real return of 6 per cent from net rents  - 2
percentage points less than is needed to achieve significant growth in the
sector.
The report also recommends the creation of residential property unit trusts
to attract funds from investors who do not wish to become directly involved
in rented housing. These would be attractive to investors who do not pay
tax.
Mr Richard Best, director of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, said: 'The
fiscal incentives set out by Coopers &amp; Lybrand could draw in the huge
resources of City institutions which have been denied to the rented sector
for so long. The next Budget provides the moment to revive the rented sector
on a much bigger scale.' Sir George Young, the housing minister, will today
urge financial institutions to become involved in the government's programme
for transferring local authority homes to housing associations. More than
Pounds 500m will be required to fund this year's transfer of 43,000 homes in
13 local authority areas.
