FT  11 SEP 93 / Markets: I'd like you to meet my friend Zoot
Look, here's the deal. I run the business, you own it. At the end of the
year we divvy up the profits. You get what's left over after ploughing back
some money into the business.
Sounds fair? There's just one little wrinkle, a technicality really. Times
are tough, so I'd rather you didn't clean out the Pounds 20 in the petty
cash tin. Instead, I'll give you this bit of paper. Here, I'll write Pounds
30 on it.
That means that instead of just owning 100 per cent of the business, you now
own, er, 100 per cent of the business including a piece of paper. Not good
enough? OK, my mate Zoot will buy the paper from you and pass it on to
someone else. And you'll get Pounds 30, less a little something for his
trouble.
But here's the thing: the taxman doesn't want to know about it. So
everybody's happy. I'm putting the cash to good use - the Roller's looking a
bit scruffy - you're putting one over on the taxman, and Zoot's found
himself a nice sideline.
What's that? Bit puzzled? I know, this corporate finance stuff is tricky.
Let's start again. I run the business . . .
* * * This conversation, or something like it, has been taking place on
every street corner in the City of London over the past couple of weeks.
Perfectly respectable finance directors, pin-stripes and all, have been
elbowing each other off the pavement in Threadneedle St, handing out bits of
paper with engraved curlicues around the side and the words Enhanced Scrip
Dividend at the top. Since the beginning of September, bean-counters from
P&amp;O, BTR, Enterprise Oil, T&amp;N, Burmah Castrol and Ladbroke - all substantial
companies - have been thrusting their pieces of paper at passing
shareholders.
On Thursday, for example, BTR declared an interim dividend of 4.95p (up 6.5
per cent), but offered a scrip alternative of shares worth 7.425p. If you're
a BTR shareholder and you want want to hold on to your new shares, that's
fine. If you want to take the standard dividend, instead of the scrip
alternative, that's fine too.
But if you want to turn your 7.425p's worth of paper into real money, then
BTR's friends at Barclays de Zoete Wedd will give you 7.2765p for it, 47 per
cent more than you'd get by opting for the boring old cash dividend.
Advance Corporation Tax, which a company must pay when it hands out a cash
dividend, doesn't apply to the scrip alternatives. So a company that would
otherwise pay out more in ACT than it can offset later against its
mainstream corporation tax can use an enhanced scrip dividend to avoid this
extra tax burden.
In the short run, this is one of those wheezes from which everyone gains,
except the tax man (and investment trusts, which have a special tax status
that makes it hard for them to take up enhanced scrip dividends on the
shares in their portfolio). But among the throng on the Threadneedle St
pavement, you can find a clutch of investors furrowing their brows, and a
bulky man in hush puppies peering uncertainly at his Tube map.
The investors are worrying if this is not simply a way for managements to
achieve small-scale rights issues the market might otherwise have been
sticky about. And the doubters have a point: as the charts show, though
share prices usually rose at first for the pioneers of this device, back in
the spring, the trend relative to the market for some of them has since been
downwards. Still, when Coats Viyella came back with its second enhanced
scrip dividend on Thursday, the market didn't blink. The shares rose 1p on
the day and closed on Friday at 257 1/2 p, up 6p on the week.
More of a threat, perhaps, is the bulky figure at the back of the crowd: Mr
Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer. He may not be able to find Bill
Bentley's oyster-bar unaided, but he can spot a legal loophole when he sees
one. Since he has the opportunity to do something about such devices in
November's Budget, companies are making the most of it while they can. T&amp;N
and Enterprise Oil, for example, used their interim results this week to
offer enhanced scrip in lieu of the dividends they'd usually be paying at
year-end.
The interim reporting season isn't just about dividends, of course. It's
also an opportunity for companies to tell their shareholders about how
they're doing - and where they're going. Two big companies that reported
this week sent investors mixed messages.
Glaxo told us that its wonder drug, Zantac, is even more of a wonder than
everyone already knew: despite the product's maturity, its sales continue to
grow at splendid rates. But by raising the dividend 29 per cent, the company
focused renewed attention on the question of whether it is able to find
enough lucrative investments to absorb the Pounds 1.8bn in liquid funds its
success has generated. Glaxo's spectacular share-price slide relative to the
market has stopped, for the moment at least. That leaves managers and
investors free to ponder, calmly, a tricky question: if a company has a
product outrageously blessed by fortune, how can shareholders be sure of
getting the maximum return from it?
Cadbury Schweppes clearly thinks it has found the way to invest its
shareholders' money effectively: by buying its way into third place in a two
horse race. It launched a Pounds 324m rights issue, with two thirds of the
money going to finance an agreed takeover for A&amp;W Brands, the leading US
producer of root beer. Together with its 25.9 per cent stake in Dr Pepper,
maker of a soft drink which is even more of an acquired taste, this gives
Cadbury hopes of assembling a third force in the US carbonated beverage
market. Question: if you could choose the two companies in the world to be
number three behind, would you pick Coke and Pepsi? Well, at least they
didn't announce an enhanced scrip dividend.
