FT  20 FEB 93 / How To Spend It: Live a simpler life - throw away those
festoon blinds / These are the brighter, cleaner '90s / A look at ways to
create the uncluttered, personal look of the modern interior
THOSE WHO got their houses all kitted out in authentic 1980s chic may well
find, if they mind about such things, that what once looked so absolutely
comme il faut, today looks more than just a little passe. Eighties chic in
designer-land, you will not need reminding, centred round a sense of excess,
of sumptuousness and opulence. Images in glossy magazines showed us rooms
with not a corner left unmolested by urns or cherubs, with scarcely an inch
of wall left unadorned, no surface left clean and uncluttered.
Nineties rooms are different. Nineties rooms are lighter, cleaner, brighter.
Fashionable walls are often white, or else lime-washed straight onto the
plaster with natural dyes. Where festoon blinds once flourished there are
Roman blinds or even plainer roller blinds. In the place of rich patterns
there are simple muslins, calicos, checks. Furniture is countryfied,
stronger. Chintz has gone into retreat, cherubs into hiding and all those
glitzy bows and furbelows done a bunk.
If your own house or rooms are still a little over-loaded with '80s props a
quick trawl around some of the latest home interior catalogues should offer
lots of ideas of how to simplify and up-date without embarking on massive
expenditure.
A good way to start would be by taking a look at the latest Habitat
catalogue, due out in all Habitat stores from March 5 (price Pounds 2). As
always, the catalogue does more than focus on individual products - it
captures the mood of the times. And the mood, says the catalogue loud and
clear, is natural, sunbleached, weathered. Strength and simplicity are the
'90s virtues.
Fabrics are mainly plain or checked with a few errant florals making a token
appearance from time to time. Furniture is strong and clean-lined with
several pieces that are reincarnations of internationally recognised
classics - the rush-seated Monet Chair (Pounds 39), the Van Gogh chair (in
solid beech with blue-stained finish and a woven rush seat, Pounds 45), the
Chubb Rattan chair (Pounds 75), the Steamer (Pounds 129).
For the kitchen the look is pared-down, practical, sturdy. Look out for the
butcher's range - all in solid beech, there is a table, chairs, a useful
mobile chopping block and storage unit, the trolley (photographed here top
left, Pounds 199) and the console, a side-unit with a hanging rail, knife
rack, chopping surface, rattan drawers and a storage shelf.
For the rest of the house there are big handsome pieces - the Sussex large
cupboard (made to order, the top is Pounds 349, the base, Pounds 399) ), the
capacious Monterey sofa and armchair, (Pounds 1,149), the Bath dining table
big enough to seat eight in comfort (solid pine top, hand-forged steel base,
Pounds 499).
The bedding, always one of Habitat's strengths, offers even more charm than
usual - choose from plain 100 per cent cotton percale Chambray, lots of
crisp stripes and checks, an impeccably plain pure white cotton range and
some patchwork Indian quilts to soften the look. Just as charming is the
handcrafted copper collection of bathroom accessories, sketched right.
This is a simple, classic catalogue with the furniture left to speak for
itself. It is based on the assumption that what the modern home needs is a
series of timeless, constant designs around which personality can be added.
You can add hand-crafted artefacts, loved pictures, quirky lamps, treasured
holiday finds and put together your individual look through the years.
Make sure your big purchases are bought properly and well, is the underlying
leitmotif, then they should last you a lifetime and you can refresh and
revitalise a scheme by ringing the changes in more ephemeral, less expensive
ways.
Jane Churchill is another company worth looking at. It started by offering a
range of pretty, chintzified country fabrics and papers, all of which
co-ordinated in many different ways but since it was taken over by the
Colefax &amp; Fowler group it has blossomed. Its Sloane Street shop offers not
just some exceedingly pretty papers and fabrics but a wide range of all the
smaller accessories that go to make up a 'look'. The photograph, top right,
shows perfectly the new Jane Churchill style  - all crisp checks, in toning
colours and different scales, teamed with strong, simple furniture and
simple woven rush matting. Hand-crafted and one-off are some of the
watchwords of the nineties and at Jane Churchill there is a supply of the
hand-crafted pieces, candelabra or one-off bits of furniture that can add
character and individuality to a classic room. Prices seem to me excellent.
The best place to see the whole look is at Jane Churchill, 135 and 151,
Sloane Street, London SW1 but there is also a concession in Liberty of
Regent Street and another shop at 3, Christopher Place, St. Albans, Herts.
Otherwise all the papers and fabrics can be seen and ordered through
interior decorators throughout the land. Telephone 081-874- 6484 for the
nearest stockist.
Graham &amp; Green also sense the way the decorative wind is blowing and this
year for its annual kilim exhibition (starting on Saturday February 27 and
running until March 27) they are making a point of showing kilims used in a
lighter, fresher way.
Antonia Graham, one of the taste guides behind the shops, has rented a
gallery on the corner of Elgin Crescent and Portobello Road (readers wanting
to go to the exhibition are advised to turn up at 4, Elgin Crescent, London
W11 where they will be directed to the gallery just two minutes away) where
there is lots of wall space and big windows. There she plans to show that by
mixing kilims with plenty of white and cream - creamy sofas, filmy white
curtains, white walls - the look is immediately lightened and updated. As
she rightly points out white walls are anyway the best background for any
interesting works of art, tribal pieces, wall-hangings.
There will be cushions and fabrics from Chelsea textiles - most of the
patterns are taken from 17th-century designs and are so exquisitely done,
using natural dyes and colours, that it is almost impossible to date them.
There will be small Afghan rugs at about Pounds 40 a time, Turkish ones
starting at about Pounds 95, lots to choose from between Pounds 350 and
Pounds 375 and two or three specials costing about Pounds 2,000.
Photographed bottom left are two rugs from the Graham &amp; Green collection -
on the wall is one from Yugoslavia featuring some colourful peacocks (sadly,
sold already) and on the floor is a Turkish kilim (Pounds 245). The
wrought-iron sofa is English, by Stan Pike, and costs Pounds 885 (cushions
extra) and the Indian table, one of a big selection, is Pounds 950.
If you want to update your house instantly there is no need to throw
everything out but there are a few simple things that most of us could
easily do. You could take down the festoon blinds and put a simple white
and, need I say it, natural, fabric at the windows.
Habitat, for instance, is selling a ready-made simple loop-headed curtain
(66 ins by 90 ins, Pounds 39) in handwoven thick white cotton which would
immediately lighten any room. Take down the gilded bows, the bronzed
cherubs, simplify the tie-backs, take off any fringing, cover sofas or
chairs in loose-covers in plain or check fabric and above all, add masses of
white or cream.
