FT  10 MAR 93 / Management: Wasting time in the boardroom - Meetings stifle
ideas, delay decision-making and diffuse responsibility
A meeting is a group of people who keep minutes and waste hours. Yet
research shows the average middle to senior manager may spend as much as 40
per cent of his or her day in meetings.
According to a survey of the working habits of 135 managers published by the
Industrial Society and BBC Education last week, respondents spent the
equivalent of almost a day a week in internal meetings.
The number of committee, sub-committee, task-force, and board meetings that
business people are required to sit on grows exponentially with rank.
Meetings are known to be inefficient. They stifle ideas, postpone and
prevaricate. A committee meeting has been described as a group of the
unwilling, picked from the unfit, to do the unnecessary.
Given such criticisms why are meetings so popular? Meetings may be seen as a
good way to pool resources. Similarly, it has been argued that members may
stimulate each other through discussion - what is known as the synergy
effect. Others describe them as an efficient and democratic way to
communicate with people. Still others believe committees make better
decisions.
These reasons are not convincing. First, most meetings are held not to make
decisions but to avoid them. Further they are mainly about diffusion of
responsibility so that if a wrong, poor or costly decision is made, fault is
spread over all committee members.
There are three significant problems with meetings that render them
inefficient.
The first is sometimes called social loafing. More than 50 years ago a
German scientist named Ringelmann asked workers to pull as hard as they
could on a rope attached to a meter that measured the strength of their
efforts. Subjects worked alone and in groups of two, three and eight.
While the total amount of force on the rope increased as group size rose,
the amount of effort by each person seemed to drop. While one person pulling
alone exerted an average of 63kg of force, this dropped to about 53kg in
groups of three and was reduced to about 31kg in groups of eight. The
greater the number of people performing the task, the less effort each one
expended.
The impact or effect of any social force directed towards a group from an
outside source (eg a manager) is divided among its members. Thus, the more
persons in the group, the less the impact such force will have upon each.
Because they are working with others, each group member feels they will take
up any slack resulting from reduced effort on their part. And since all
members tend to respond in this fashion, average output per person drops
sharply.
The second problem is called by psychologists evaluation apprehension. It
suggests that when trying to make decisions in groups, the presence of some
group members may intimidate others. The voicing of unpopular, if correct,
ideas may breed conflict and may be a 'career-limiting' move.
It should come as no surprise that high-status persons in organisations,
such as presidents and chief executives, are carefully listened to and their
words given high credence. As a result they tend to dominate group
situations and their ideas (right and wrong) are frequently accepted without
question. The result can easily be a group of 'yes men/women' behind the
single dominant force.
Understanding this phenomenon, former General Motors head Alfred P Sloan did
not attend the early phase of his groups' meeting, fearing his presence
would discourage honest discussions of critical problems among executives,
who would insist on pleasing him. There is reason to believe Sloan's status
would have had an undue impact on the group by inadvertently encouraging
uniformity.
The third problem is that in creativity-type tasks, groups rather than
individuals working alone produce poorer decisions. In contrast to
well-structured tasks that can be divided into several discrete parts and
have a definite solution, many everyday management decisions are more poorly
structured.
If an organisation is faced with a decision over the prospect of a declining
market for its products it would be expected that a group meeting would do a
better job of handling such a problem than an individual.
But this is generally not the case. Most research has shown that in
poorly-structured, problem-solving, creative tasks, individuals show
superior performance to groups. This generalisation has important - and
potentially devastating - implications for organisations since some
administrators spend up to 80 per cent of their time in committee meetings.
As for business meetings - the fewer the better. It is best to follow some
simple rules:
Start promptly, no matter who is missing.
Why not have meetings standing up; the Queen does so in Privy Council.
Go around the room to ensure full participation.
Have occasional secret ballots on whether regular meetings are necessary.
Pool ideas and evaluate them but do not have a meeting to generate them.
The author is professor of psychology at University College London.
