FT  06 APR 93 / International Company News: Deutsche Aerospace pares its
business to the core - Dasa is embarking on a period of consolidation as the
industry contracts
DEUTSCHE Aerospace faces two tough years as extensive and costly
restructuring drags the company into the red, warns Mr Jurgen Schrempp,
chairman of the new champion of the German aerospace industry.
The subsidiary of Daimler-Benz was set up by Germany's leading industrial
group four years ago as part of an ambitious plan to restructure and revive
the country's aerospace sector.
The company absorbed disparate components of the German aerospace industry,
launched a series of ambitious international partnerships and sought control
of the Dutch Fokker aircraft group.
But it has been hit by the prolonged slump in civil aviation, defence cuts
and now the slowdown in the German economy after eight consecutive years of
strong growth.
Dasa is now pausing for breath and is about to enter a phase of
consolidation. 'I don't think at this stage we will be looking for further
acquisitions: rather, I envisage one or two areas of disinvestment,' says Mr
Schrempp.
The immediate challenge will be to reduce the workforce by around 10 per
cent, involving up to 8,000 job cuts over the next two years.
The job losses, which will essentially involve the company's military
operations, risk being even higher, especially if Dasa's participation in
the four-nation Eurofighter programme remains compromised by the political
uncertainty surrounding Germany's commitment to the project.
Although the company will show an operating profit when it reports its 1992
figures on April 14, Mr Schrempp said heavy restructuring provisions would
result in an overall loss compared with a DM50m profit in 1991.
He now intends to refocus activities on commercial aircraft, aero-engines,
helicopters, defence and space. After streamlining the management structure
and cutting down corporate staff from 700 to 300 people in the past three
years, Mr Schrempp wants to dispose of non-core businesses to allow
management to concentrate on aerospace activities.
Despite short-term difficulties, he insists Daimler-Benz remains committed
to aerospace. 'There is a great debate in Germany about Daimler-Benz's move
into aerospace, but I'm convinced the strategy is right,' he says.
By 1995, he expects Dasa to start making a meaningful contribution to
Daimler-Benz profits. 'Dasa also brings to Daimler-Benz the ability and
technology of systems integrations, experience in working in international
alliances, and helps balance the risks between the group's car and aerospace
activities,' he argues.
Dasa's strategy also hinges on playing an increasingly significant role in
the new international partnerships being forged in civil and military
aerospace.
Mr Schrempp was the architect of the recent agreement between the four
European Airbus partners to co-operate with Boeing of the US on a joint
study of a new generation super-jumbo aircraft, capable of seating up to 800
passengers. He would like this co-operation extended to other US
manufacturers, as well as Russian and Japanese companies.
After successfully merging Dasa's helicopter activities with those of
Aerospatiale of France, Mr Schrempp says there are advanced talks on
integrating more closely the German and French guided weapons industry and
perhaps, at some later stage, attracting UK companies.
He expects to finalise Dasa's acquisition of a majority stake in Fokker
shortly. In turn, Fokker could become the focus of a broader European
alliance in the regional aircraft market, with the Franco-Italian ATR
regional aircraft group eventually teaming up with the new Dasa-Fokker
partnership.
On the aero-engine front, Dasa has forged a partnership with Pratt &amp;
Whitney, the US manufacturer, which is expected to include
cross-shareholding links between Pratt and MTU, the German company's
aircraft engine subsidiary. Dasa would also like to establish ties with BMW
Rolls-Royce, the recent joint aero-engine venture formed between the UK
company and the German car group.
Mr Schrempp believes Germany cannot afford to have two aero-engine companies
competing in a fierce market. But talks between Dasa and BMW Rolls-Royce
have been unsuccessful. 'We've had discussions, but their ideas and ours
don't fit,' he explains.
Although the European Airbus consortium, in which Dasa holds a 37.9 per cent
stake, produced more than DM400m (Dollars 240.90m) profits for the German
company last year, Mr Schrempp concedes the airliner market is in turmoil.
Dasa has had to scale back its Airbus production and put about 23,000 people
on short time due to the lower workload.
However, Airbus, like the investment in Fokker, remains a cornerstone in
Dasa's aerospace strategy. The roll-out earlier this month at Hamburg of the
Airbus A321, the consortium's new 180-seat, larger derivative of its A320
twin-engine airliner, was particularly important for Dasa. Up to now, final
assembly of all Airbus aircraft was in France. 'With the A321 we were able
to prove it can also be done efficiently in Germany,' Mr Schrempp says.
But his biggest headache remains the Eurofighter. Germany's revolving-door
attitude to the project continues to cast dark clouds over Dasa's role in
the programme. Germany and the three other partners (Britain, Italy and
Spain) still have to agree details of the revised terms and timetable of the
venture.
In the meantime, Dasa is having to continue honouring its obligations under
the existing Eurofighter contract when German government funds are becoming
inadequate to cover its commitments in the development programme. 'We still
don't know what the future holds,' says Mr Schrempp. 'I hope meetings will
take place soon to resolve this situation.'
Ironically, a German exit from Eurofighter would probably have a positive
impact on Dasa's short-term financial position, Mr Schrempp claims.
'But that's not a consideration. I'm personally convinced we need the
aircraft and the damage would be great for us and Germany if we are not part
of the programme,' he insists.
Not only would it be a significant technological blow for Dasa, with huge
repercussions on employment, it would also have broader implications for
Germany's and Dasa's international standing.
'If we are labelled an unreliable partner, it will seriously undermine our
ability to work in international collaborations.' And that is the
rapidly-growing trend in the aerospace business.
