FT  09 OCT 93 / Markets: A standing ovation for the equity market - London
The Conservative party is the party of sound money or it is nothing. Kenneth
Clarke October 7 1993
IF YOU take those words at face value, there was an important message for
the markets in Kenneth Clarke's big set-piece speech to the Conservative
conference.
Yet both the equity and gilts markets were unmoved. Shares closed on
Thursday a little below their levels of the day before. And the yield on
20-year gilts, the best indicator of the anticipated soundness of money,
edged up a fraction.
Does this lacklustre reaction mean that the markets had already fully
discounted what Clarke had to say? Or simply that they do not take
politicians' words at face value?
A bit of both, perhaps. Still, the speech is worth examining, because it
captures neatly the the policy uncertainties the market must deal with.
First, the quotation reprinted at the head of this article. Let us take it
as an earnest of good intentions rather than as a strictly accurate
portrayal of the historical record - Conservative chancellors have, after
all, been responsible for two of the three big bursts of inflation of the
past two decades. Suppose that it means Clarke is fully committed to a
low-inflation policy, perhaps influenced by the 1 1/2 -2 per cent target
proposed by Rupert Pennant-Rea, the new deputy governor of the Bank of
England.
If that is what the government intends, as the basis for its November budget
and its monetary policy decisions, then some, at least, of the stock market
commentators will be wrong-footed. Take the latest thoughts from Robert
Buckland and Bob Semple of NatWest Securities. 'Absolutely key to our whole
equity market valuation,' they say, 'is our expectation that inflation has
now bottomed out.' Gilts will do poorly as a result, they argue, and
equities look more attractive, as the underlying rate of inflation edges up
towards 4 per cent.
True, they do not expect it to break this ceiling, the upper limit of the
government's current official target range. But steady 4 per cent inflation
would halve the value of your money in 18 1/2 years, less than the average
life of a mortgage or the time the typical woman spends on a pension. That
is not what most people understand by 'sound money'.
So, if the chancellor's commitment to sound money is more than rhetoric, it
implies greater stringency than the current outlook for inflation would
suggest. A monetary policy based on truly low inflation would give some
investors, at least, a bit of a surprise. It would make gilts relatively
more attractive than equities; it would dash hopes of a further cut in
interest rates; and it would imply an economic policy tight enough to
undermine the expectations of an earnings recovery on which current share
values are based.
The market clearly read none of this into the speech. As the week ended, the
FT-SE 100 index, having edged past its all-time closing high on Wednesday,
had lost none of its sparkle. It finished the week at 3108.6, a new record.
In one sense, the FT-SE 100 was not alone: other bourses round the world,
from Australia to Switzerland, were setting new highs this week also. In
another sense, however, the UK's blue-chip index was moving upwards
unaccompanied: the two indices which reflect the performance of mid-sized
and smaller UK stocks were noticeably hanging back. The FT-SE Mid 250 index,
which closed the week at 3477.3, is still below its August high of 3513.3;
the FT-SE SmallCap is also below its peak.
The two factors were perhaps connected. A wave of worldwide equity buying,
by big continental and US institutions, has been pushing up share indices
around the world. These investors tend to be interested in the top stocks,
not the smaller fry. In many cases, they buy into the index future, leaving
market arbitrage to drag up the individual constituents. This week, for
example, the FT-SE 100 future has been consistently leading the cash market
higher, trading about 10 points above the 'fair value' calculation that
reflects the interest implications of a forward contract.
Still, volumes in both futures and cash market have been unremarkable: the
week has lacked the true buying frenzy which takes the market well into
fresh territory.
There were few noteworthy developments in individual stocks. One that stood
out was the announcement that Whitbread was giving equal voting rights to
its two classes of shareholders; and also buying out the 50.1 per cent of
publicly owned shares in its sibling, the Whitbread Investment Company,
which has long extended an umbrella over small independent brewers. The
market had obviously expected at least one of these developments:
Whitbread's B shares, which have 20 times the voting power of the A shares,
were among the best performing shares in the world last month, according to
the FT-Actuaries World Indices. As compensation for losing their superior
voting rights, B shareholders will get 1.27 new A shares for every B share
they own.
There was less happy news for shareholders in Tiphook, the heavily indebted
container leasing and transport rental group. On Thursday, its shares fell
nearly 30 per cent after the company warned it would breach its banking
covenants. They closed the week at 123p, half the 253p they fetched a week
ago and a quarter of their May 1992 level. Yesterday, it looked as if Robert
Montague, Tiphook's founder and executive chairman, might pay the price of
dashing shareholders' and bankers' expectations.
The key to survival, perhaps, is to set the financial markets' expectations
so low that there is no danger of missing them. Kenneth Clarke is clearly
set for a long and happy career.
