FT  19 AUG 93 / Overseas companies win draft telecom licences
THE government has granted draft licences to three overseas companies to
offer telecommunications services in the UK.
The draft licences have been issued to Sprint, the third-largest
long-distance US operator; Telstra, the overseas arm of the Australian
national operator; and Worldcom, a London-based company owned by
Telecolombus of Switzerland and IDB of the US, both communications groups.
If confirmed, the licences will give the three carriers wide-ranging powers
to offer services on leased lines and over the public network.
The draft licences give the operators 'code powers' to construct facilities
in the UK, but they will not be allowed to offer international voice
telephony services using their own facilities.
The operators would also be allowed to operate 'international simple resale'
services, re-selling leased lines connected to the public network at both
ends, to Australia, Sweden and Canada.
The government's readiness to grant public telecommunications licences to
overseas companies marks a milestone in the development of competition in
the UK market.
Four large-scale licences have been issued since the 1991 duopoly review,
but none to an existing telecommunications operator.
Mr Phil Madden, Telstra's European business development manager, said that
the company would explore options 'ranging from having a physical 'backbone'
in the UK to leasing lines and using new wireless technology to provide
local connections'.
Mr Vincent Gargaro, chief executive of Sprint International Northern Europe,
said the licence, if granted, was 'only one milestone in a lot of things
that have got to happen before we can offer a service.'
Worldcom has been re-selling leased lines to business customers for nearly
two years. It has more than 100 customers, mainly in London.
American Telephone and Telegraph, the largest US operator, has a licence
application pending. If the three draft licences are granted, AT&amp;T's chances
of direct access to the UK market will improve.
