FT  18 OCT 93 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (7): Development times
cut / A look at changes in attitudes in the motor industry
SINCE THE late 1980s, the motor industry has in effect abandoned the notion
that the wholesale application of computer-controlled automation and
robotics might be the best way for the west to manufacture cars
cost-effectively against Japan's hard-working labour forces and lower social
overheads.
For a period, what was then Europe's largest automotive group, Fiat, did
indeed believe that such an approach would provide the definitive answer to
the Japanese.
Out of that conviction grew Fiat's massive Cassino plant, not far from
Naples, where Tipo and Uno models have been built with a degree of
automation unmatched elsewhere before or since.
An army of automated transfer lines and Comau robots - built by Fiat's own
robotics subsidiary - stamps and assembles pressings carried on integrated
computer-guided transport systems, paints bodies, assembles the car interior
from modules - and even fills the tank at the end of the production process
with the correct grade of fuel.
But just as Volkswagen found with its venture into extreme automation, 'Hall
54' at Wolfsburg, Cassino has proved too inflexible.
Manufacturers are having to diversify their product ranges to cater to the
whims of ever more demanding consumers, and for the same reason car life
cycles have had to shorten.
Not only did Cassino, in the end, fail to yield the hoped-for productivity,
its rigidities have looked increasingly out of place in an industry ever
more concerned with the human resources aspects of Japanese-inspired 'lean'
manufacturing and how to utilise simultaneous engineering principles to
bring products more quickly and competitively to market.
Fiat, too, has seen the flaws in the Cassino concept.
Melfi, its new plant in the south of Italy to produce the Punto small car on
which Fiat's future heavily depends, exemplifies Fiat's new theology of the
'integrated factory', which it has begun to test out selectively at its
plants in the past 18 months.
'Cassino was focused on 'hard' issues, Melfi is about 'soft' issues,' says
Mr Paolo Cantarella, Fiat Auto's chief executive.
'The integration of man and machine is different at Melfi. It is about how
to organise activities, to involve people, to train them and keep them
motivated to the job, rather than how to put the wheel on the car. We know
how to do that,' he adds.
But they will be organising these activities with a sophisticated array of
computers. For computer systems have now permeated every aspect of the motor
industry, from first concept to delivery of vehicle to dealer and the flow
of service and repair parts.
This applies from the largest companies such as General Motors and Ford to
smaller and medium-size companies including the UK's Rover group.
Rover has spent Pounds 200m at its Cowley complex in Oxfordshire to create
what it claims to be one of Europe's most compact and flexible car plants.
Among Rover's prime concerns has been to introduce the team working,
multi-skilling, flexibility, kaizen (continuous improvement) and cultural
attitudes among its workforce that are now recognised as lying at the heart
of Japanese 'lean' manufacturing success in the motor industry.
But to this workforce, the four inter-related systems which control the main
plant processes are servant, not master. The build control system (BCS),
itself triggered by computer-generated dealer orders, tracks bodyshells
through all stages of manufacture by camera-reading bar-coded tags.
The painted body store management system releases the shells onto the
assembly line according to batch requirements. A third system controls the
movement of components within the distribution centre and on-site storage
areas to provide just- in-time line deliveries. A component identification
system ensures correct fitment of components which look alike but which are
specific to a particular vehicle application.
All of these systems work in 'open' mode, which allows information on them
to be accessed by any employee. The control computers are also linked to a
messaging system that can be used to give essential information to employees
throughout the facility.
It is in the visualisation of new design possibilities, however, that the
motor industry has made some of its most valuable advances with computers.
Ford, for example, is rapidly becoming heavily reliant on its Design
Computer System, with which it has been working since 1990.
The most important DCS underlying function, as with most computer technology
in the motor industry, is significantly to reduce product development times.
It allows construction, manufacturing, project planning and other divisions
to be closely involved with a model programme at the earliest design phase.
was developed at Ford's Merkenich research and development centre at
Cologne; that for interior design in Ford's similar centre at Dunton in the
UK, with which Merkenich is connected directly.
Together, they allow the concept designer to produce three-dimensional
designs on-screen which provide both a mathematical and geometrical
computational basis for technical designers. Of major importance in the
process is the generation of life-size, photo- graphic-quality images which
can also be evaluated subjectively.
The system had also to allow early access to design information for
manufacturing purposes, and to provide for the instant display of
corrections and alternatives in order to accelerate decision-making.
Thus, separate paintbox, high-resolution video and three-dimensional
computer modelling systems were integrated to form DCS.
The designer's electronic pen produces a photographic quality drawing on
screen, with the concept vehicle's shape colour and proportions open to
almost instant change - for example during a presentation.
Crucially, the system is also capable of memorising a sequence of such
'drawings' and turning them into a rotatable, 'real life' presentation of
the proposed vehicle, allowing judgments to be made of its styling and
proportions previously possible only by making time-absorbing mock-ups.
This is done with the further aid of CDRS (conceptual design rendering
system), creating a three-dimensional model of the vehicle body, all the
data for which is available for computer aided manufacturing decisions.
Ford executives at Merkenich calculate that the system reduces the 'clay
model' phase by three months because most of the models previously made for
visual evaluation are no longer necessary. Models of both the vehicle
exterior and interior can be machines directly from the database in a
variety of materials.
Even the computer-aided engineering processes by which the vehicle's
structural integrity is analysed can be completed at a far earlier stage
than previously.
Before DCS' introduction, Ford designers generated the initial
two-dimensional design of a future car on paper. This would be amended as
felt necessary by approval committees and only then used as the basis for an
initial clay model.
