FT  13 DEC 93 / Survey of Telford and Shropshire (8): A piece of heaven on
earth - Michael Cassell explains his personal passion for the county
'Shropshire is possibly one of the most bland, boring and monotonous of all
British counties. Holidaymakers should give it a wide berth.'
This advice might come from any Salopian or fan of Shropshire who regards
the county as a little bit of heaven on earth and who wants to keep it that
way. That means scaring off visitors whose tramping feet grind Offa's Dyke
to dust or whose flashy, off-road jeeps turn ancient bridleways into
battlegrounds.
But rural life is not that simple. Shropshire might not like tourists but it
badly needs them. They provide an important source of revenue for a county
trying to combat the decline in traditional industries and, more
specifically, for growing numbers of families who supplement their income
from tourism. One in six farms in Shropshire operate at least one enterprise
for tourists and the number is growing.
It is hardly surprising. Shropshire is as beautiful and under-exploited as
it is sparsely populated, a continuing conundrum given its immediate
proximity to the industrial West Midlands. It is as though a million
Brummies, en route for the beaches of the Welsh coast, have never had time
to stop as they rush through a county too close to home to bother with.
Shropshire, in spite of its size, remains one of those places that people
find hard to put on the map. It usually ends up somewhere east of Manchester
or north of Leeds. Those who find it invariably fall in love with it.
Huge tracts of the county have been designated as areas of outstanding
natural beauty. There is rugged wilderness and rich farmland, rolling
moorland and wooded slopes; it is part-English and part-Welsh and littered
with the evidence of a troubled history imposed upon by its border with
Wales.
Countless hills are topped with ancient, earthwork fortresses; picturesque
Norman fortresses and churches are commonplace.
Rich in minerals, the north of the county was the cradle of an industrial
revolution which is still remembered and celebrated at Ironbridge Gorge,
where Blists Hill living community museum recreates the past in the shadow
of Abraham Darby's famous iron bridge.
Until comparatively recently, visitors to Shropshire were left largely to
their own devices, given the restricted support and information services
available. It was as though the county was deliberately lagging behind,
uninterested in encouraging interlopers from a less welcome, new age.
Hotels were basic, restaurants were mostly caught in a 'meat and two veg'
time-warp and shopping was unexciting. The opening of a delicatessen in one
market town was viewed rather like the arrival of a space ship.
The county still cannot claim to offer the broad range of choice available
in better developed parts of the country but it has made great strides and
can now offer high standards of hotel accommodation alongside the more
usual, and ever-popular, farmhouse style holiday base.
Despite the continuing wish to preserve the county's timelessness, there has
been a marked sea-change in attitudes. Tourism has finally been recognised
as an important element in the county's economy and the proliferation of
tourist information centres alone offers evidence of a more serious, better
co-ordinated approach to the issue.
In south Shropshire, the county council has launched a pilot scheme to
identify the economic impact of tourism on the area and detailing a strategy
and action programme for implementation. If it is successful, similar
projects will be extended to other, rural parts of the county.
The county is easily divided into two parts. To the north - above a line
drawn by the A5 - is the best known area, with its tree-fringed meres,
pleasantly rolling countryside and sandstone hills.
Ask anyone to mention a Shropshire town and the chances are they will say
Telford, possibly Shrewsbury and occasionally Oswestry.
Telford may be Shropshire's commercial 'hot spot', with its influx of
high-tech Japanese companies and expanding housing estates, but tourists can
easily afford to miss most of it.
They might, instead, try Shrewsbury, its medieval buildings struggling to
hold their own against heavy traffic, or Bridgenorth with its remarkable
panoramic views out across the River Severn. Oswestry, on the county's
north-west borders, offers a pleasant and convenient base from which to
explore a little-known corner of England.
But it is to the south of Shropshire where the best treasures lie, tucked
away in the remote, rolling hills around Clun, stretched out along the
Corvedale and hiding down the half-timbered lanes of Ludlow, surely one of
the most beautiful, unspoiled towns in Britain.
The tourist can easily spend a week or two exploring the lanes and villages
of an area which still battle to remain, as AE Housman so famously observed,
among the 'quietest places under the sun'.
Ludlow itself, perched above the River Teme retains an elegant streetscape
largely preserved over centuries. The market in castle square provides a
focal point in the shadow of the castle which was briefly home for Edward
1V's two ill-fated sons.
Nearby are endless walks across Forestry Commission land in Mortimer forest
and there is plentiful game and coarse fishing.
Drive north on the A49 past Stokesay Castle - an exquisite 13th century,
fortified manor house open to visitors - to Church Stretton, dubbed 'little
Switzerland' by the Victorians who established the town as a spa.
At the heart of the Shropshire hills, the town sits under the Long Mynd,
5,000 acres of heather-covered moors which rise like a hump-backed whale
behind it. A multi-storey antique market serves as a useful refuge on a wet
day, of which there are plenty.
To the north-west of Ludlow find Clun, the delightful stone-built village at
the head of the stunning valley which bears its name and which has a
thousand-year-old packhorse bridge.
A little further is Bishop's Castle, immortalised as 'Mallards Keep' by
novelist Mary Webb. The town has seen more robust times but its High Street
still stretches uphill dramatically to the Three Tuns pub which has its own
brewery.
Then there is Bury Ditches, the iron-age fort which stands over Clunton and
offers anyone with a bit of puff and a picnic basket one of the most
spectacular dining rooms in Britain. Shropshire is crammed full of secrets;
let's hope the tourists never find them.
