FT  14 APR 93 / People: KPMG set to pick Sharman
Colin Sharman, head of consulting at accountants KPMG Peat Marwick, is set
to become senior partner of the firm when Jim Butler retires at the end of
the year.
A nomination committee to choose Butler's successor made Sharman its single
recommendation for the appointment last month and is now taking further
soundings before a final meeting of the firm's board of 26 senior partners
on April 27.
Its view is unlikely to change, although the decision must be ratified by a
vote of the full partnership - 600 in all. The nomination committee itself
comprises four members of the firm's board, and three others chosen by the
partnership at large.
'At 64 I'm getting to be quite an old man by the standard of some of the
partners,' Butler says. He is likely to pursue other activities but has not
yet made a decision on what these would be.
Sharman (above) has been credited with turning around the consulting
division of the firm, and is currently responsible for implementing '20/20
vision', a wide-ranging programme to restructure the internal organisation
of the firm and make it more focused on its clients' needs.
Butler's retirement as senior partner will follow shortly after his
resignation as chairman of the international KPMG network after nearly three
years at the end of September.
He will be replaced by Hans Havermann (far right), senior partner of the
firm's German practice and chairman of its European board. Jon Madonna,
senior partner of the US practice, will become international deputy
chairman, and Ross Walker, Canadian senior partner, international executive
partner.
The appointment of Stephen Barrett (right) to the corporate finance division
of KPMG Peat Marwick marks the first time a lawyer and merchant banker has
become a partner in the accountancy firm.
Barrett began his career as an assistant with solicitors Norton Rose and
became a member of the Law Society, before switching to merchant banking. He
worked for 10 years at Lloyds Merchant Bank before its closure, which was
announced late last year.
He says he joined KPMG partly because of its range of professional expertise
and industry knowledge. He also argues that corporate finance is polarising
between the 'big battalion merchant banks' and the professional service
providers such as his new firm. It is those in the middle which will be
squeezed, he argues.
'Gone are the days when a client simply wanted a transaction manager,' he
says. 'They want an adviser to participate in their growth and be truly
pro-active.'
He says the transition from the racy culture of a banker to the more sober
corridors of accountancy is not proving too great, partly because of the
nature of those already working in KPMG's unit.
