FT  01 DEC 93 / Budget 93: Labour market reforms aim at better targeting -
Analysis
The package of labour market reforms, like the government's broader social
security reforms, is all about the more accurate targeting of benefits and
incentives to reflect the realities of a more complex and differentiated
labour force.
Burdens will, however, be carried by the employed, the unemployed and
employers.
Entitlement to unemployment benefit is being cut by six months for
employees, and both sickness and invalidity benefits are being focused more
tightly. Larger employers will have to shoulder a higher proportion of sick
pay costs.
Most of the themes and policy instruments are familiar: improving work
incentives; reducing non-wage labour costs for employers, especially for the
longer-term unemployed; improving vocational training.
There was also a broad hint from the chancellor that he wants the unemployed
to be dealt with by one department rather than two, the Department of
Employment and the Department of Social Security, as at present. He
announced there would be a single benefit for the unemployed called the job
seeker's allowance.
Why was there so much tinkering with the labour market when unemployment is
cruising steadily downward? Partly because it is likely to remain
unacceptably high, and expensive, at more than 2.5m for a long time. There
is also concern in the government about how high unemployment is dampening
recovery.
The government claims that the fall in unemployment has come unexpectedly
early thanks to its own labour market reforms. But given that the recovery
now seems to have begun in the middle of last year, the fall in unemployment
came nine months later, about the normal time-lag.
At present about two-thirds of the unemployed are back at work within six
months, so will not be affected by the cut in unemployment benefit from 12
to six months.
Unemployment benefit - Pounds 44.65 for a single person - is currently
received by all unemployed people for 12 months regardless of savings or
other incomes coming into their household. Anyone who has savings of more
than Pounds 8,000 or a partner in work gets nothing after unemployment
benefit runs out, but about 70 per cent of the unemployed receive
means-tested income support.
Some of the better-off, professional unemployed will not be hit by missing
six months of unemployment benefit. But others, especially low-income people
with a working partner, could be badly squeezed, and it might create an
incentive for that partner to cease working.
The effect of the change in benefit could be to knock about 100,000 people
off the unemployment register, mainly the better off. But the move could
also increase pressure for more comprehensive support measures for the
unemployed after six months in the form of a guaranteed job or quality
training.
Sceptics will argue the main thrust of the government's policy is to force
people off the unemployment register. The government will say it has acted
to improve training and job prospects for the unemployed, with its new
training apprenticeship and cuts in national insurance contributions for
low-skilled jobs to make it more attractive for employers to take on the
long-term unemployed.
The latter changes should help to deal with the long-standing anomaly that
national insurance is considerably higher as a proportion of the total wage
for the lower-paid, lower-skilled workers who form most of the long-term
unemployed.
Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president, is expected to
recommend something similar next week at a meeting to address the EU's
unemployment crisis.
In other respects the government is extending policies, such as the Restart
course, which have proved successful. The childcare allowance recognises
that many women are trapped at home because of the cost of childcare.
For employers' costs the picture was a mixed one.
The government boasts about the low non-wage labour costs for employers in
the UK compared with most other EU countries, but in several areas it has
been quietly pushing them up. The latest area to be hit is sick pay. Smaller
companies will be protected and large companies left to bear the brunt of
the costs.
Employers are also suspicious of the funding of the new apprenticeship
scheme. Another attempt to improve Britain's poor record in vocational
training has been welcomed, but the government needs to prove that there is
substance behind the comforting concept of apprenticeship.
The apprenticeship scheme is not primarily about reducing unemployment -
joblessness in the 18 to 25 age group is falling faster than the 25 to 50
group.
But the fear that unemployment can become the habit of a life-time means
that 18- to 25-year-olds are getting privileged treatment with a doubling of
the Community Action places to 95,000.
