FT  25 NOV 93 / Carsberg investigates food prices
The Office of Fair Trading is investigating allegations that some
supermarkets have colluded with food manufacturers to keep prices high by
deterring price discounting.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director general of fair trading, said his office might
also look into allegations that Dixons, the electrical retailer, was trying
to stop consumer electronics goods being supplied to warehouse clubs such as
Costco.
Earlier this month the OFT ruled against Dixons' complaint that it was
facing unfair competition from regional electricity companies.
Combined with the OFT's decision this week to investigate the net book
agreement, which allows publishers to fix book prices, these two initiatives
are aspects of a widespread assault on restrictive retailing practices
launched by Sir Bryan since he took up his post last year. He believes such
practices inflate the prices paid by consumers.
'We need to be vigilant about things that reduce competition at the retail
level,' he said in an interview this week.
Sir Bryan made it clear that he would not be deflected by this month's
Monopolies and Mergers Commission report on the perfume industry from his
determination to root out restrictive retailing practices.
The commission, which was asked by Sir Bryan to investigate the industry,
gave a green light to the selective distribution practices blamed for
keeping scent prices artificially high.
Sir Bryan is pressing ahead with other cases. 'I continue to feel selective
distribution schemes need challenging,' he said.
He denied that the report on the perfume industry set a precedent. 'I
certainly would not accept that the adverse decision in this case has any
implication for other cases . . . It doesn't mean that anything goes with
selective distribution arrangements.'
Sir Bryan is also undaunted by the increasing extent to which UK competition
policy is being affected by decisions taken in Brussels. In the case of
perfumes this was highlighted by the fact that the European Commission had
already approved the industry's selective distribution practices.
He said he did not view greater European Commission involvement with alarm
because he was confident about its pro-competitive stance. He pointed out
that the consequence of more European decisions was that the OFT, which sat
on the European commission's advisory committee on competition, had
influence over events in the rest of Europe.
Nevertheless, Sir Bryan did not try to hide his disagreement with the
Monopolies Commission's report on perfume. He also said he was 'very
disappointed' that the government had not included in last week's Queen's
Speech a long-promised bill to increase his powers to combat restrictive
practices.
Under planned legislation the director-general of fair trading would be able
to agree legally binding changes to company behaviour without the need to
involve the Monopolies Commission.
Sir Bryan is attacking restrictive retailing practices because he believes
that they harm consumers. His view is strengthened by widespread complaints
that retail prices in the UK are generally much higher than in the US.
Four of his referrals to the Monopolies Commission in the past year have
involved selective or exclusive distribution arrangements. In addition to
the perfume industry, he has referred newspaper, film and ice-cream
distribution practices. He has also launched his own investigation into
links between holiday companies and travel agents.
The number of retailing industry practices in which Sir Bryan has publicly
taken an interest is mounting. In some cases, such as perfume and electrical
goods, the concern is that manufacturers are not willing to supply discount
retailers. In others, such as holidays operators, the concern is that
suppliers are not able to get access to retail outlets linked to larger
rivals.
But Sir Bryan's belief that restrictive distribution arrangements need to be
challenged on grounds of competition is disputed by economists, lawyers and
other professionals. Professor John Kay, chairman of London Economics, the
economics consultancy, says that Sir Bryan's approach is 'very
old-fashioned' because it does not take into account developments in
economic theory over the past 20 years.
Prof Kay says that such practices are often essential if manufacturers are
to add value to their products.
That was the view taken by the Monopolies Commission in the case of the
perfume industry. Although Sir Bryan shows no sign of giving up his campaign
to reform UK retailing practices, he will find it more difficult if the
Monopolies Commission takes a similar view in other cases.
