FT  02 NOV 93 / International Company News: Upjohn survival hopes rest on
new medicines - The expiry of four drug patents has troubled the US drugs
group and brought R&amp;D into sharp focus
UPJOHN, America's 12th largest drugs group, has been one of the
best-performing US pharmaceuticals stocks this year. Its shares have risen
11 per cent over the past 12 months, compared with an 11 per cent decline by
other health and household stocks.
Upjohn's performance is based on the belief that the Kalamazoo-based group
has become a takeover candidate. Like other pharmaceuticals companies, it is
suffering from an increasingly hostile healthcare environment that has
reduced growth of the US pharmaceuticals market to only 3 per cent during
the first half of the year.
But Upjohn is in a worse plight than most. Its predicament has been
exacerbated by a series of patent expiries in the US, its most important
market.
Three of the group's leading drugs have lost their American patents over the
past 12 months. Those protecting Ansaid, an anti-arthritic, expired in
February. Earlier this month, Xanax, an anti-anxiety drug and Halcion, a
sleeping pill, lost their patent protection. Next May, patents for a fourth
drug, a diabetes treatment called Micronase, also expire.
Mr Ley Smith, chief operating officer, admitted last month that earnings
next year would be lower than in 1993. A combination of the patent expiries,
new legislation affecting the tax charge for its Puerto Rico manufacturing
facilities, and a faster-than-expected increase in the power of bulk
purchasers of health will affect the group's bottom line.
The expiries are highly damaging - Xanax is the group's most-important drug
and accounted for 30 per cent of its American healthcare sales in the first
nine months this year.
Brokers Wertheim Schroder estimate the medicine generated 35 per cent of
Upjohn's operating income last year. Altogether, generic competition for the
four drugs could affect between a quarter and a third of Upjohn's 1992
earnings per share by 1994, estimate the brokers.
Just when the group needed firm leadership, its misfortunes were compounded
when chairman Theodore Cooper died of cancer in April. Since he started
leading Upjohn in 1987, he had helped increase sales by nearly 50 per cent.
Since Mr Cooper's death the composition of the board has been unsettled. In
August vice-chairman Mr Mark Novitch announced his decision to step down.
The following month, Mr William Parfet, another vice-chairman and member of
the Upjohn family, stepped down as an executive director. His departure
increased the possibility the family might be willing to sell its
substantial stake.
Mr Smith, also acting chairman, insists the company will remain independent
and has a strategy to deal with the patent expiries.
'When you register a patent you know when it's going to expire. We've had
plenty of time to plan for this,' he says.
However, what Mr Smith does not have immediately to hand are new products
capable of compensating for the lost sales, which is partly a research and
development failure.
'We didn't make enough of the products we had and we missed some good
opportunities to license in some subsequently successful medicines,' admits
Mr Smith.
The top R&amp;D management has been changed and the new team is racing to bring
products through the development pipeline. Most promising is Freedox, a
treatment for stroke and head injuries. The medicine is in a class of
steroids called Lazaroids, discovered by Upjohn and named after the Biblical
character Lazarus who was raised from the dead.
Freedox should be registered with the US Food and Drug Administration for
its first indication before the end of the year, says Mr Smith, and could be
launched by the middle of next year. Some analysts believe it could generate
Dollars 500m annual sales.
Other compounds in development include fluvoxamine, a treatment for
obsessive compulsive disorder, which is being co-marketed with Solvay of
Belgium. Just licensed is a drug for cancer from Japan that could become the
largest or second-largest drug on the cancer market.
The group is also working on a blood substitute and treatments for HIV.
Nevertheless, these new drugs will take time to build up sales. In the
meantime, Mr Smith is trying to defend Upjohn's off-patent products. 'We
expect to lose between 40 per cent and 60 per cent of these drug's sales.
The question is how fast they erode,' he said.
The company has an agreement with Geneva Pharmaceuticals, a subsidiary of
Ciba, which will market generic versions of Xanax, Halcion, Micronase and
Ansaid. Upjohn will manufacture the product for Geneva, which avoids the
group's production facilities standing idle.
Like some other pharmaceuticals groups, Upjohn is also trying to expand its
over-the-counter (OTC) non-prescription drug business. This will allow it to
extend the product life of its medicines, such as the hair-loss treatment
Rogaine, by selling them direct to patients without a prescription. The
group's OTC business has increased 300 per cent since 1986, but with sales
of only Dollars 200m a year the operations do not have critical mass, admits
Mr Smith.
'The problem is whether to form an alliance and, if you do, how to keep
control, or whether to make an acquisition. We have no presence in Europe,
and we need to reinforce the US operations, particularly in the
dermatological area,' he says.
To minimise the fall in earnings next year Mr Smith is slashing costs. The
patent expiries forced Upjohn to cut costs earlier than most other US
pharmaceuticals groups, and last week it announced its third restructuring
package at a cost of Dollars 255m.
By the end of 1994 the group will employ 17,500 people, down from 21,100 at
the beginning of 1989.
Upjohn is also cutting 14 production pharmaceuticals, chemicals and
agricultural products manufacturing sites, although Mr Smith refuses to give
details. The entire cost-cutting programme should generate annual savings of
Dollars 150m by 1995, he says.
Mr Smith insists he will not cut R&amp;D spending, which is running at 18 per
cent of turnover - a high figure by industry standards. R&amp;D is the
life-blood of the company, he says.
'We could match 1993 earnings next year by cutting R&amp;D spending, but we just
have too many good ideas that are getting too close to fruition,' he
explains.
Upjohn's management is gambling on the success of its development pipeline,
and in particular the Lazaroids. The question is whether they will be as
effective at resuscitating Upjohn as stroke victims.
