FT  19 JAN 93 / Survey of The European Single Market (8): Emu can go it
alone - Hans-Peter Frohlich suggests Germans are too enthusiastic for
political union
MANY GERMANS think that the Maastricht treaty is heavily lopsided. It
specifies European Monetary Union (Emu) in great detail but is very vague on
European Political Union (Epu). This result does not conform to the original
German intention: before the Maastricht summit, Chancellor Helmut Kohl
insisted on the need for parallel progress on Emu and Epu.
Numerous voices in Germany have recently called for new efforts to
complement Emu with Epu. Particular support for Epu comes from many German
economists, on the grounds that Emu will not be able to function without it.
This view is based on four main arguments, none of which is truly
convincing. It is possible to create Emu without Epu. Furthermore, the
creation of the single market may give an additional spur to this beneficial
process.
The first of the four arguments for Epu rests on the premise that a single
currency provides an additional incentive for government deficits. This is
because a single currency removes the inflation and interest rate
constraints for public borrowing.
Consequently, the theory goes, fiscal policy must be tightly controlled on a
community level - a process which, in the final analysis, requires political
union. Otherwise, anti-inflationary monetary policies are likely to be
thwarted by fiscal laxity.
Yet, while a single currency does lift some public borrowing constraints, it
also creates new ones, because national governments can no longer use the
inflation tax to finance deficits. The increasing mobility of capital in a
monetary union will at the same time put pressure on governments to project
an image of fiscal soundness.
In addition, the Maastricht treaty itself helps to ensure budgetary
discipline. One of the criteria for eligibility to join stage three of Emu
is that the government deficit must not exceed 3 per cent of GDP. The ratio
of public debt to GDP must also be not higher than 60 per cent.
In practice, these criteria may not be 'watertight'. But would matters be
improved with European political union? There is room for doubt whether in a
political union central authorities really are in a significantly better
position to enforce budgetary discipline among the lower tiers of
government. Federally structured states, such as the US or Germany, provide
numerous examples to the contrary.
The next economic argument in favour of Epu runs like this: a single
currency implies that the exchange rate is no longer an economic policy
instrument. Under these conditions, asymmetric demand or supply shocks in
the Community would lead to large and destabilising fluctuations in output
and employment. Since most pain would be felt in the less productive, poorer
economies, the richer countries would have to provide financial support for
them. A large-scale horizontal fiscal transfer mechanism, however, would be
acceptable to the voters only within an already-unified political entity.
This argument ignores the dynamic effects of economic integration. Monetary
union would further increase the mobility of goods and capital in Europe
which, as experience shows, tends to benefit the poorer countries most.
Spain and Portugal are cases in point. Since joining the EC in 1986, both
have enjoyed growth rates almost twice as high as the rest of the community.
The single market, combined with monetary union, may actually reduce the
need for fiscal transfers, provided national governments pursue the right
economic policies, which must above all be geared to improving the supply
side.
The third line of argument emphasises that price stability cannot be
achieved by the central bank alone, no matter how independent or skilled it
is.
The primacy of price stability often implies painful policy trade-offs in
terms of lower growth or higher unemployment levels. These consequences will
not be accepted unless all segments of society share a broad anti-inflation
consensus. In Germany the Bundesbank has always been able to count on that
consensus, enabling it to play its role as guardian of the currency. Many
observers doubt, however, whether this traditional German preference for
price stability will be shared throughout Europe. Emu would then be doomed
to failure.
This reflects old thinking. There have been times when Germany looked like
an island of price stability in an inflationary sea, but the position has
changed in recent years.
Six countries have, since 1979, participated with Germany in the narrow band
of the EMS exchange rate mechanism. During the 1980s, most of these
countries - Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands - have seen their inflation rates converge with or even fall
below, German levels. This clearly documents their commitment to price
stability.
The EMS split between low and higher inflation countries has been made still
more evident by the currency unrest of last autumn. And, under the
Maastricht rules, those countries which have not attained an anti-inflation
consensus will be barred from joining Emu.
Fourth, some observers hint at constitutional problems if Emu is not
accompanied by Epu. They say it would be mistaken to transfer responsibility
for one aspect of economic policy - monetary affairs - to a supranational
institution, while leaving the rest in the hands of national governments.
Since monetary policy decisions of the European central bank in these
circumstances are not likely to be co-ordinated with national economic
policies, they may produce undesirable effects. More fundamentally, European
central bank actions may infringe national powers to shape economic policy.
This reasoning is rooted in the Keynesian view that central bank actions
influence aggregate economic activity.
Alternatively, one may postulate that a central bank's only job is to
provide sound money, and that this is a goal to which all other economic
policy objectives are subordinate. This is why prudent societies put
responsibility for monetary policy in the hands of an independent central
bank. It does not make much difference in this context whether the central
bank operates autonomously within one country, as the Bundesbank has done
for many years, or on a supranational level, as the European central bank
would.
Thus, there is little reason to assume that monetary policy cannot be
conducted effectively unless Emu is accompanied by Epu. On the contrary, Emu
without Epu might represent a superior institutional framework for price
stability.
In Emu without Epu, policy-makers will have a much better chance of
accepting the fact that monetary policy is no longer within their grasp. In
most European countries, national control over monetary policy has long been
an illusion; under EMS rules, Germany's partners have to follow the course
of the Bundesbank.
In Emu they will be better off. While the central bank continues to be out
of their reach, they will be faced with monetary policies set by a
supranational institution, rather than by an individual foreign central
bank.
If monetary policy is transferred to a supranational level, it will, after
all, be largely depoliticised. With its formal status of autonomy, the
European central bank would be in a good position to live up to its task:
providing sound money for the citizens of Europe.
Hans-Peter Frohlich is senior economist at the Institut der deutschen
Wirtschaft, Cologne.
