FT  24 APR 93 / Fashion: Owls and peacocks, a story of opposites - Dressing
for the Professions, The Journalist / The way the Press dress
AS IN life, so in dress. Journalists are a duplicitous lot.
Are journalists responsible arbiters of public life, sober, sagacious owls
to whom we can turn for truth and wise opinion? Certainly the serious grey
suits worn in the editor's offices of Britain's national dailies imply that
this is the intention.
Or are journalists media peacocks, prima donnas of the word processor with
egos so attention-seeking that they feel the need to tell us their opinions
of the world? The ghastly polka-dotted bow-tie, the sloppy, rumpled suit,
the flamboyant waistcoat, the questionable socks, macs and ties sometimes
affected by journalists would indicate personal style bordering on the
eccentric.
Owls or peacocks? The answer is: both. Journalism is a world in which
individual expression and social convention have their proper place.
Clothing simply reflects this. More homogeneous professions may have more
homogeneous codes of dress, but journalists' clothes are as different as the
organisations they work for, the topics they cover and the opinions they
hold. A newspaper office is one of the few places where one man in green
velvet and another man in grey pin-stripe have equal value and utility.
Traditionally, journalists have a reputation for being notoriously poor
dressers. Like Lou Reed in his fictional Twin City newsroom, or Walter
Matthau type-writer bashing in the bleachers, they are portrayed as
negligent, sloppy, soup-stained men - in the stop-press world of ringing
telephones, desperate deadlines and the passionate search for truth, there
is no room for the consideration of mere clothing. The hard-nosed hack, his
sleeves rolled up and his tie pulled down, just does not care.
There is probably some real basis for this image, but it is hardly as
romantic as popular myth would have us believe. In the past journalism was
one of the lower-paid professions. Despite the occasional gentleman dandy,
this was a hard-living, hard-drinking, somewhat disreputable calling. For
most work-a-day journalists, salaries did not permit large or expensive
wardrobes - if the few suits a journalist owned all looked ready to retire,
it was because they had seen much active service.
Nor was journalism a tidy profession. When reporters were not in
smoke-filled offices pouring over inky proof-pages, they were out pounding
the sidewalks in all weathers - the basis of that eternal cliche, the
journalist and his wrinkled and dirty mackintosh.
Today, journalists (at least in the larger national publications) are better
paid and can afford to dress as well as others in the liberal professions.
Yet the sloppy, negligent image persists.
As potent as money in the creation of the journalist's persona is social
status, his need to feel and be seen as different. If the attitude looks
unstudied, the absent-minded indifference of the intellectual, it
nonetheless has its purpose.
Looking into the doings of the influential, the wealthy and the celebrated
more often inspires cynicism than admiration. Down-dressing or dressing
differently is a way for the journalist to say to such people: 'I may write
about your world, but I am not of your world. I am different. I am an
observer who evaluates.' To the world at large it is also a modestly
boastful way of saying: 'I do not care about the way I look, I want to be
judged by the superlative way I write'.
But the image of the journalist in cheap, nasty and ill-considered clothing
is probably over-done these days; looking competent and professional, at
least to management, now counts for a good deal in this competitive trade.
In an age of journalistic specialisation, styles are varied and specialised
too. Fashion journalists on women's magazines are fashionably dressed in
discounted designer clothes. Diplomatic correspondents dress diplomatically.
Banking correspondents tend to look like second-drawer bankers. Among the
young thrusters of Third World foreign correspondence, multi-pocketed
sleeveless vests are the sign of literate Rambos ready for action. Press
photographers dress like members of motorcycle clubs, but that too is a
fashion statement. Only sub-editors - journalists with no public face - can
these days emulate the ideals of the journalistic slob.
If journalists are no longer permitted simple unfashionability, which way do
they head? In spite of the great diversity of style, they seem to tend
towards one of two opposing poles: the flamboyant, creative personality, and
the serious, responsible journalist of weight.
John Walsh, editor of The Independent newspaper's weekend magazine, is a
self-avowed peacock. He wears tomato soup-coloured Kenzo jackets with green
shirts. He owns a pair of floral braces. He has a ginger-coloured outfit
from Reiss, and a dark green suit by Christian Dior. His favourite article
of dress is a brocade lame waistcoat which is 7 per cent gold thread. He
usually wears it with a dinner jacket.
'Journalists take themselves far too seriously", he avows. 'This is not a
totally serious profession. All journalists are actors to some extent. Some
like to dress like power brokers or tycoons. But our job is not to be bank
managers. Our job is to be right, and not necessarily to fit in.'
When Walsh was literary editor of the Sunday Times, he used to enjoy teasing
editor Andrew Neil. 'Andrew is an actor, too; he plays the nasty and
horrible role and wears power-broker suits. Whenever we heard he was going
to visit the literary desk, we pulled out coloured Balkan Sobranie cocktail
cigarettes, put on floppy black bow-ties and used lots of words like ennui.
It seemed the suitable corrective.'
But there are plenty of correctives to the individualist, Bohemian streak
among journalists, too. Ivan Fallon, formerly of The Sunday Telegraph and
today business editor of the Sunday Times, sits on the other side of the
fence, not a peacock, but an owl. His own dress is elegantly conservative.
His suits are cut on Savile Row by an Irish tailor, his shirts ordered
hand-made from Hong Kong. He has a weakness for Hermes ties. On Saturdays he
abandons his suit for a blazer.
'We are fairly anonymous in the City of London,' he admits. 'Senior and
financial journalists tend to dress the same as those they interview.' But
it is all to good purpose, he says - journalists do a better job as
political reporters, financial analysts and foreign affairs observers if
they fit into their surroundings without causing undue notice.
'All journalists should express a degree of independence, but not in a way
that is embarrassing', he protests. 'If I were at a board lunch and had
dirty shoes, I would feel uncomfortable.'
But everything has its place. 'John Walsh may appear unconventional to most
people', he laughs. 'but in the circles he moves, the way he dresses is
convention.' Even peacocks have their codes.
