FT  05 MAR 93 / International Company News: Axel Springer gives up plans for
alliance in Italy
AXEL SPRINGER Verlag, the German media group, and Poligrafici Editoriale,
the listed Italian newspaper concern controlled by the members of the Monti
family, have wound up their four-year attempt to create a closer alliance.
Springer has sold the 10 per cent stake it took in Poligrafici Editoriale in
June 1989, when the Italian company spent L160bn (Dollars 107m) to buy a
similar sized stake in its German counterpart. Separately, Poligrafici said
it had sold its 10 per cent stake in Springer for DM220m (Dollars 132.5m).
However, plans for closer co-operation, including an Italian language
equivalent of Springer's best-selling Bild Zeitung, never materialised.
Last year, Springer said it wanted to sell its Italian stake, but the
transaction has only took place this week.
The 10 per cent holding, worth L61.4bn, has been bought by Mediobanca, the
Milan-based merchant bank, at a price of L4,650 a share. That is appreciably
below the L5,505 at which Poligrafici shares were fixed on Tuesday, when the
deal took place.
The price represents a substantial loss, particularly in D-Mark terms, for
Springer, which bought its stake for about L70.6bn. According to Springer,
the sale followed its decision to concentrate on its traditional key
markets.
However, relations between the two companies have steadily deteriorated,
with the Italians complaining of insufficient involvement in decision making
at the German group. Last summer, Springer asked for the return of its
shares held by the Italians.
Brokers believe the Poligrafici shares bought by Mediobanca are unlikely to
be a long-term investment.
However, there remains considerable uncertainty as to where they may end up.
Banco Di Napoli, the large Italian bank which floated 20 per cent of its
ordinary shares in late 1991, has taken majority control of Isveimer, the
Naples-based public sector lending institution.
The acquisition, for a price which has not been revealed, marks a further
step in the gradual rationalisation of the Italian banking system and
erosion of divisions between different types of financial institutions.
Banco di Napoli owned over 45 per cent of Isveimer. The acquisition of a
further 6.1 per cent, lifting Banco di Napoli's stake to just over 51 per
cent, had taken place last year. This was formalised this week.
Isveimer, which is likely to keep its independence in the short term,
administers about L25,000bn (Dollars 16.8bn) in loans. Its other main
shareholder is Agensud, a state-owned body being closed down, whose stake in
Isveimer will be transferred to the Treasury.
