FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (8): Magnet for new investments -
Subic Bay special economic and freeport zone
EVEN when it was under US navy jurisdiction because of a treaty with the
Philippine government, Subic Bay was highly regarded for its strategic
location in the Asia-Pacific region.
The former military base served as a jump-off point for American operations
in Vietnam during the 1960s and in the Gulf War of 1991.
Now being converted into an industrial estate after the withdrawal of the
last of the US forces in November 1992, Subic Bay is attracting business
groups that require a well-equipped base to expand their activities in the
region.
More than 2,500 companies, according to the ebullient Mr Richard Gordon,
chairman and administrator of the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority, have
offered to locate operations in the area, now known officially as the Subic
Bay special economic and freeport zone.
Among these businesses are four big international conglomerates, each of
which expressed interest in taking over and running the whole zone. The
SBMA, which is overseeing the conversion, turned down these proposals and
opted instead to undertake the development itself.
Subic Bay 'will be the magnet for new investments' into the Philippines, Mr
Gordon told the Financial Times. 'We are building an economic zone that can
compete with other, similar projects in the region.'
TAIWANESE investors, as a group, are among the most enthusiastic in setting
up shop in Subic Bay. A 300-hectare area is being developed into an export
processing zone for Taiwan companies. The Taipei government has pledged a
Dollars 20m loan to the SBMA to help develop that area.
Having been the US navy's largest military base overseas, Subic boasts a
variety of top-class facilities that can readily accommodate investors. Its
recreational areas, including an 18-hole golf course, are also certain to
attract tourists.
The 6,000-hectare facility sits between a deep natural harbour on the west
opening up to the South China Sea and a mountain range on the other side,
which makes it an ideal anchorage. The surrounding hills are regarded as
protective barriers to any further lahar (volcanic debris) flows from Mount
Pinatubo which is located north-east of Olongapo.
Existing infrastructure facilities include an airport, shipping berths and a
well-maintained road network, as well as utilities (electric power plant,
telecommunications, water and sewerage systems) and structures that can be
used as warehouses, offices, hotels and medical centres. These make the zone
attractive for businesses desiring an early start-up.
A 123-hectare petroleum, oil and lubricants depot has only recently been
leased for Dollars 100m to Coastal Petroleum, the 10th largest
petroleum-refining company in the US. The lease covers a 25-year period.
The depot has 68 individual storage tanks with a combined holding capacity
of 2.4m barrels, and an 844ft pier capable of servicing two 60-80,000
deadweight tonne vessels simultaneously.
Mr James Paul, president and chief executive officer of Coastal, was
recently in Manila to sign the contract with the SBMA. He said its Subic
facility 'has effectively and strategically positioned (Coastal) to supply
gasoline, gasoil, jet and bunker fuel to the Pacific Rim,' which he
described as 'the world's fastest-growing petroleum consumer.'
That is the type of investment that the Subic zone wants to capture. An
official in the SBMA's corporate planning office said the objective is 'to
prove that the Philippines can absorb foreign investments efficiently and
quickly.'
Subic Bay is likely to establish precedents that could benefit other
industrial estates in the country.
In the planned industrial corridor south of Metro Manila, private groups in
the five provinces known collectively as 'Calabarzon' (coined from the first
syllables of the provinces' names) are converting farmlands into industrial
enclaves where investors may put up factories.
Unlike Subic's network of advanced infrastructure facilities, these
Calabarzon estates are still being modernised.
As an incentive to investors, enterprises operating at the Subic Bay
freeport zone are exempt from all national and local government taxes, and
have only to pay a 5 per cent final tax on gross income. Currently, however,
both the freeport zone and Olongapo's downtown are virtual 'ghost towns' as
the transition from a boisterous 'good time' city into an envisioned
industrialising economy proceeds at a slow pace.
While some companies are eager to come in, Mr Gordon speaks of the need to
'make haste slowly'. A master plan for the development of the zone, funded
by the World Bank, covers only the former naval base itself. 'We cannot go
beyond what is in the master plan.'
A factor that has to be taken into consideration is that the area was
originally configured not as an economic zone but for military operations.
The SBMA plans shortly to lease housing units for executives - 'we can use
the income for the construction of housing for the workers,' says Mr Gordon.
BY this July, the first of the nearly 700 light and medium-sized industrial
enterprises that are likely to be set up in the area reserved for Taiwanese
investors, could be operational. Eventually, these enterprises could employ
over 160,000 people.
The new jobs should enable the Olongapo economy, which in the past was
mainly dependent on transient US servicemen, to perk up.
'You will have to devise other businesses when the new occupants of Subic
come over,' Mr Gordon warned Olongapo market vendors and small entrepreneurs
recently. 'If, in the past, you thought you've earned enough by swinging a
sale with a drunken sailor, this time you will have to make your products
and services truly competitive.'
On the side of a hill fronting Olongapo's main road, huge letters are
planted, Hollywood-style, with this exhortation: 'Aim high, Olongapo.'
Subic Bay freeport zone will have to take off before the people of Olongapo
can heed the message.
