FT  14 JUN 93 / General Motors warns VW over Spanish plant
GENERAL MOTORS of the US has warned Volkswagen of further legal action if it
goes ahead with plans for a revolutionary ultra-low-cost car production
plant in Spain.
A letter delivered at the weekend to Mr Ferdinand Piech, chairman of the
German group, said a 'similar' project was prepared by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua while he was still employed by General Motors.
The warning was sent as Mr Lopez prepared to hold his first press
conferences since he defected from the US group to VW in March. In two
appearances today, in Hanover and later in Madrid, Mr Lopez is expected to
announce that Volkswagen will build a new super-lean production plant in his
Basque homeland, where cars can be built in less than half the time needed
in the average European factory.
Last week Seat, VW's Spanish subsidiary, said 'some especially interesting'
proposals had been put forward from regional authorities.
The GM letter represents a further step in the US group's campaign against
Mr Lopez, which is focused on charges, now under investigation by public
prosecutors in Germany, that he and several of his associates took top
secret industrial, model and marketing plans with them when they went to VW.
While still at GM, Mr Lopez shrouded his proposals for the so-called Plateau
6 works in secrecy. Numbered copies of all plans, including draft factory
drawings and car model designs, are still in the possession of the US
group's top executives.
Mr Lopez campaigned fiercely at GM for his Plateau 6 plant to be built in
his homeland, where he retains strong political connections. The US group's
refusal to comply, and its preference for any future investments to be made
in eastern Europe where costs are below those in the European Community, are
understood to be the main reasons for his stormy departure from Detroit in
March.
The Plateau 6 concept is aimed at improving production efficiency beyond the
levels achieved by Japanese manufacturers. The proposals include plans for
component suppliers to ship complete modules rather than single parts into
the works where their employees would install them in vehicles. Other
concepts include a wide range of differential pay rates for car assembly
staff, breaking with the standard practice of paying all line operators the
same basic wage.
Last month GM suffered its first important loss in its legal battle against
VW.
An initial attempt to prevent seven former employees of GM and Adam Opel,
the US group's German subsidiary, from working for VW for 12 months was
thrown out by a Frankfurt court.
The seven included former top members of Mr Lopez's buying team at GM, who
left the US shortly after their boss.
