FT  24 MAR 93 / Arts: Two American sopranos
Given the remarkable dominance of American sopranos at the moment it is
hardly any surprise to see three in London on the same weekend. On Friday
Kathleen Battle appeared in the Queen Elizabeth Hall's International Song
Recital series, where Carol Vaness was to be found in the audience, and
three days later Barbara Hendricks gave a recital of her own at the Wigmore
Hall.
For Miss Battle, the occasion marked the start of a European tour to four
other capitals and Birmingham (March 26). No doubt she is wise enough to
pick her recital halls carefully. The voice is perfectly formed, light as a
meringue, sweet as one as well, but very small. Roger Vignoles worked minor
marvels finding all sorts of delicately different varieties of quiet playing
at the piano.
He is a gentleman accompanist; there was not a moment when the singer was
upstaged, although on that score one imagines so wily a Zerbinetta can look
after herself.
She flitted like a butterfly across the lightest songs of the romantic era,
from Schumann's roses and snowdrops, to Strauss's 'Standchen' and
'Wiegenlied'. All were exquisite sugar-coated bonbons which only
occasionally suggested they might have a hard centre.
The surprise came when it was least expected. A selection of songs from
Andre Previn's Honey and Rue looked as though it was promising a popularist
ending, but this new cycle, composed for Kathleen Battle last year, is an
important addition to the song repertoire, jazz-based perhaps, with a touch
of the blues to end, but the sort of serious popular American music that
Bernstein used to do so well. Battle sang marvellously in it, giving Toni
Morrison's poetry a real presence, and the whole recital gained enormously
from its inclusion.
Barbara Hendricks, another light-voiced American with the art to make her
little go a very long way, sang Schubert and Wolf in the first half of
Monday's Wigmore recital and melodies in the second. In all of it, very
little was less than delicately turned and finely finished; in spite of
that, the artistic temperature only began to warm up once German was
exchanged for the French. The soprano does all the right things in her
Lieder - she was limpid in Schubert's 'Liebesbotschaft', steady in his
'Nacht und Traume', and notably skilful with notes, dynamics and colouristic
effects in Wolf's 'Ganymed' and 'Kennst du das Land?' - but on a strangely
small scale, and at a puzzling emotional remove from the words and their
suggestive shadings.
Singing in French does something wonderful to this singer's communicative
address. It is not so much that she utters the language with more decisive
emphasis, but rather that it lies on her bright, sweetly vibrant tones with
winning grace. Miss Hendricks and her pianist, the alert, sensitive (though
sometimes rather impulsive) Staffan Scheja, moulded Faure's Bonne Chanson
cycle as though well aware that it is one of the shining masterpieces of the
song literature  - but, at the same time, with the deftness and security of
taste not to insist vulgarly on the point.
Taste, indeed, is Miss Hendricks's strong point: she can take a group of six
melodies (two each by Chausson, Gounod and Bizet) and distil the charm of
each with the minimum of fuss or show. Hard to imagine anything more
precisely controlled or exquisite than the account of Bizet's 'Adieu de
l'Hotesse arabe' with which she closed the recital: cool, warm, exotic and
tenderly tactful, all at one go.
