FT  17 NOV 93 / Survey of World Nuclear Industry (8): Models for the next
century - Clive Cookson identifies the world's main reactors and discusses
future design trends
SIX different reactor types are generating electricity commercially around
the world but one, the pressurised water reactor originally developed in the
US, dominates the international nuclear industry. PWRs are operating in 20
countries and generate more than 60 per cent of the world's nuclear
electricity.
The PWR uses ordinary water as both coolant and moderator. (The coolant
carries heat from the reactor core to the generator; the moderator slows
down the neutrons produced in nuclear fission sufficiently to give them a
good chance of hitting another uranium atom in the fuel, so carrying on the
chain reaction.)
In the PWR, the hot water is pumped under high pressure (to prevent boiling)
to the generator, which raises steam in a separate circuit. This
distinguishes the PWR from its closest cousin, the boiling water reactor. In
the BWR (boiling water reactor) the water is allowed to boil in the reactor
circuit and raise steam directly without the need for a heat exchanger. But
the advantage of a simpler circuit design is offset by the requirement for
additional shielding of the generating system.
The third type of water cooled and moderated reactor is the Canadian CANDU
design. It uses heavy water (DO) instead of the light water (HO) in the PWR
and BWR. Because heavy water is a more efficient moderator, the CANDU can
run on unenriched uranium dioxide, while the PWR and BWR require enriched
fuel. On the other hand, it depends on a reliable cheap supply of heavy
water.
In contrast, the reactor types developed and built in the UK - until a PWR
was chosen for Sizewell B - are cooled by carbon dioxide gas and moderated
by graphite. The first generation, known as MAGNOX reactors after the
magnesium alloy used to encase the uranium fuel, were built between 1956 and
1971.
Their successors, the advanced gas-cooled reactors, were designed to operate
at higher temperature and pressure, in order to achieve better thermal
efficiency and power density. The intention was to reduce capital and
running costs, but the more complex design was plagued with engineering
problems which delayed construction and commissioning of AGRs.
The sixth reactor type is the Soviet water-cooled graphite-moderated RBMK,
of which the most notorious example is Chernobyl. Western experts believe
the RBMK is inherently unsafe because the reactor design is unstable at low
power. This feature, combined with human stupidity, led to the 1986
Chernobyl incident.
In the aftermath of the Three Mile Island (1979) and Chernobyl accidents,
the nuclear industry talked a lot about designing a new generation of
'inherently safe' reactors which would shut themselves down safely if
anything went seriously wrong, without relying on human operators or added
mechanical devices. Examples of such designs include Sweden's PIUS (Process
Inherent Ultimately Safe) and the UK's SIR (Safe Integral Reactor).
However, as the Institution of Electrical Engineers points out in an
excellent new booklet on nuclear power published this month*, the industry
has recently stopped using the term 'inherently safe' for its next
generation of reactors 'on the grounds that it is misleading'. The words
suggest a revolutionary approach, whereas the industry's designs are based
on PWRs and BWRs operating today.
The industry prefers instead to talk about building 'advanced' reactors for
the beginning of the next century. Although no orders are forthcoming yet
from the world's utilities, the manufacturers have prepared a dozen designs
to tempt them.
These have several common features, intended to reduce costs and increase
safety. For example the power density of the core is reduced and the reactor
is larger than earlier designs with the same output. And the new designs are
simpler, more rugged and more forgiving of operator error and mechanical
failure.
But their enriched uranium fuel will be very similar to that in current
reactors. The new designs do nothing to answer the anti-nuclear critics who
say the greatest hazard of atomic power is not the tiny risk of a
catastrophic reactor accident but the certainty of more radioactive waste
arising from the nuclear fuel cycle.
The US is developing four advanced reactor designs with joint funding from
the federal government and industry. There is a pair of large 1350MW designs
(System 80+ from ABB Combustion Engineering and the Advanced BWR from
General Electric) and a pair of smaller 600MW designs (AP600 from
Westinghouse and the Simplified BWR from GE).
There is little immediate prospect of new business from the US electricity
supply industry, which has not ordered a nuclear plant since 1978. But the
two larger US designs stand a reasonable chance of winning export orders in
Asia.
Europe's leading design candidate is the 1450MW European PWR (EPR) from the
Nuclear Power International partnership of France's Framatome and Germany's
Siemens. It is very much an evolution of operating French and German PWRs.
NPI hopes the EFR will be ready for ordering in 1997.
All the designs discussed so far are 'thermal' reactors; their water or
graphite moderator produces 'slow' neutrons to sustain the fission chain
reaction. But the founders of the nuclear industry 40 years ago had imagined
that the world would have moved on by now to 'fast reactors' with no
moderator.
The fast reactor is also known as a 'breeder', because surplus neutrons
escape from the core and convert a surrounding blanket of unenriched or
depleted uranium into new nuclear fuel in the form of plutonium. Prototype
fast reactors have operated for many years in several countries (the UK
example is at Dounreay on the north coast of Scotland) but they are more
expensive to build than thermal reactors. With conventional nuclear fuel
expected to remain cheap for decades to come, the economics of the industry
do not currently favour them.
A still more distant prospect is the fusion reactor, whose energy comes from
the joining of two light atoms into a heavier one; this is the exact
opposite of the fission process in thermal and fast reactors. Fusion energy
powers the sun and stars - and the hydrogen bomb - but has not yet been
tamed for use in a nuclear power station. Fusion experiments such as the
Joint European Torus (JET) in Oxfordshire have shown promise but commercial
fusion reactors will not enter service before the year 2040.
*Nuclear Power in the UK, IEE, Savoy Place, London WC2. Pounds 5.
