FT  06 DEC 93 / Official meeting seeks global green funding
International environmental officials hope to win promises of funds
totalling Dollars 2bn from donor countries to tackle global environmental
problems over the next three years.
Delegates from more than 70 countries will meet at Cartagena in Colombia
this week in an effort to turn the three-year-old Global Environment
Facility into a permanent funding mechanism for the Rio de Janeiro
conventions on global warming and biodiversity last year.
The interim GEF, due to expire in mid-1994, has so far distributed more than
Dollars 730m for projects related to the two conventions and for others
meant to protect international waters and prevent ozone depletion.
Mr Mohamed El-Ashry, chairman of the interim GEF, said significant progress
in narrowing differences of opinion among the member nations had left him
'cautiously optimistic' that agreement would be reached. However, he added,
there are 'significant issues that need to be agreed  - any hardening of one
side or another on any of the issues could block agreement.'
Governance and funding are among the most critical remaining issues, he
said.
In other international funds, such as the World Bank's International
Development Association, the US provides 20.86 per cent of funds.
Analysts speculate the US may provide a similar percentage of the GEF, or
about Dollars 400m. This figure would probably make the US the largest
contributor to the GEF.
The US did not contribute to the Dollars 1.1bn core funds of the pilot
project, but has committed Dollars 150m in parallel financing.
Before committing funds, the US must have the ability to screen
controversial projects, according to a US Treasury official.
The US also wants information about projects to be accessible, with
provisions for the participation of local people and non-governmental
organisations.
An independent evaluation of the interim GEF cited problems similar to the
US concerns as issues to be addressed so as to improve the facility's
environmental and social impact.
'If we do not reach key policy objectives, we will not proceed,' the
Treasury official said.
