FT  04 JUN 93 / Boots shares slip despite 19% profit rise: Chief executive
attempts to quell City fears over group strategy
SIR James Blyth, chief executive of Boots, the retailing and pharmaceuticals
group, vigorously defended his company's strategy yesterday, as he unveiled
a 19 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to Pounds 405.2m.
Sir James attempted to quell fears in the City of London that margin growth
at Boots the Chemists - the group's best-performing division - was
threatened by price competition from rivals, and that profits at Boots
Pharmaceuticals could be hit by problems with its Manoplax heart drug.
But his comments could not stop Boots's share price falling 3p to 444p. The
shares have underperformed the market by almost 25 per cent since January.
'Boots has not stopped being a good company, but there is still a big
perceived risk surrounding its strategy,' said one analyst.
Pre-tax profits for the year to March increased to Pounds 405.2m from last
year's Pounds 340.7m - restated according to the FRS3 accounting standard -
on turnover up 8 per cent at Pounds 3.96bn.
The profits improvement was due partly to last year's figure being depressed
by a Pounds 15.8m exceptional provision for a loss on discontinued
operations, while this year's profit was boosted by a lower interest charge
of Pounds 16.5m, down from Pounds 43.1m. That reflected a fall in debt from
Pounds 362.3m to Pounds 203.8m. The total dividend increased 1p to 13.4p,
while earnings increased 17.4 per cent to 27.0p. Operating profits rose 5.5
per cent to Pounds 421.7m, but only two of Boots's four divisions showed
growth. Boots the Chemists raised its contribution from Pounds 246.2m to
Pounds 285m, while Boots Properties, the property management division,
advanced 2.5 per cent to Pounds 53.1m.
Sir James said Boots the Chemists' net margin had increased to 10.7 per cent
thanks to improved productivity and a better product mix. Market research
had shown that customer perceptions of its prices had not been damaged by
recent discounting campaigns by its rival Superdrug. He reiterated his
commitment to increasing margins.
'Severe discounting does not build market share, and destroys long-term
shareholder value.'
Operating profits at Boots Pharmaceuticals fell to Pounds 108.5m from Pounds
120.8m, due mainly to the Pounds 20m spent on marketing Manoplax, its
treatment for congestive heart failure.
Sir James said the drug could still be a success despite trials which showed
that patients suffered higher mortality rates at certain doses than on a
placebo. He said Manoplax was designed to enhance the quality of life for
sufferers, rather than increase life expectancy, and demand from clinicians
was growing.
The company is awaiting a ruling from the US Food and Drug Administration on
whether the drug can remain in circulation.
Operating losses of Pounds 3.4m in Boots's retailing division were unchanged
from last year. A significant improvement at Halfords from a Pounds 9.5m
loss to a Pounds 4.7m profit was more than cancelled out by a Pounds 14.4m
loss (from a Pounds 200,000 profit) on the company's share of Do It All, the
DIY joint venture with WH Smith.
Sir James insisted both partners were committed to bringing Do It All into
profit, by developing its own brand, and introducing a new store format. But
he refused to say how long Boots was prepared to wait for the DIY retailer
to show a profit.
Lex Page 20
