FT  24 JUL 93 / A river runs through it: The US debate over flood controls
and the cost of relief
In a neighbourhood of bungalows and neatly kept gardens on the south side of
St Louis, Hannover Road dips and disappears into a rancid pool of
sewage-laden flood waters. This is not the overspill of the mighty
Mississippi river, but of a small drainage channel called the River Des
Peres, backed up into areas which stayed dry in the last great floods in
1973.
A dozen miles away, the Earth City industrial park was still farmland at the
bottom of the Missouri flood plain when the 1973 floods struck. Today its
rich, alluvial soil, encased in concrete and asphalt, remains snug behind a
massive, rock-faced levee.
All along the Mississippi and the Missouri rivers, about 3,500 miles of such
levees, ranging from private earth embankments to the solid flood walls
built by the US Army Corps of Engineers, protect river basin land from
flooding.
But when a huge levee like Earth City's stops the river from spilling over
into the flood plain where it has spread for centuries, it finds an outlet
elsewhere - in St Charles County across the bridge, now half-submerged, or
even further downstream, where it forces the River Des Peres back up into a
residential area of south St Louis.
Some voices, mostly environmentalists, but also members of Congress faced
with voting more money to meet the disaster, now suggest the levees may be
making matters worse, both by pushing the flood waters higher and by
encouraging planners and developers to site homes and industrial buildings
on the flood-prone bottomlands.
'There's a large part of me that's unsympathetic to people who knowingly
build in the flood plain,' says Mr Jay Lewis, a St Louis building inspector
who says he has come across repeated examples of lawyers redrawing official
maps to certify that a site is outside the flood area, in defiance of
topographical reality.
Over the past 25 years, the number of homes built in flood areas has risen
by 40 per cent. Despite improved dams and levees, floods continue to wreak
havoc, averaging Dollars 2.3bn (Pounds 1.5bn) of property damage and 124
deaths a year in the 1980s.
The National Flood Insurance Programme, a federal government scheme set up
in 1968, provides cover. Yet even though the premiums are well below market
cost, averaging about Dollars 300 for Dollars 85,000 of cover, only 2.6m
properties, out of about 9m to 11m properties at risk, take advantage of the
programme.
'Those who don't buy aren't stupid. They know that the government will step
in with disaster relief,' says Mr Sheldon Richman, a fierce critic of the
flood insurance programme at the Cato Institute, a Washington think tank.
It is usual for Congress to throw budget disciplines to the winds and vote
readily for disaster relief. Despite procedural obstacles in the House of
Representatives, it is expected to do so again next week for the Dollars
2.98bn of flood aid requested by President Bill Clinton.
'The bottom line is this: the American taxpayer is picking up the cost of
predictable disasters, and the American taxpayer is subsidising people to
live by the beach and the flood plains,' says Senator John Kerry, a Democrat
from Massachusetts.
However predictable those disasters are, protecting against floods remains a
question of assessing probabilities. The Army Corps of Engineers, which has
primary responsibility for flood control and navigation along the
Mississippi and Missouri, builds its levees for urban areas high enough to
keep out the sort of flood that only comes along once every 500 years. On
the St Louis flood gauge - a measure of the river's height - this is
estimated at 52 feet, against the record crest of 47 feet earlier this week,
and 43 feet in the 1973 floods.
For farmland, the corps builds only for a 50-year flood, or 45 feet on the
St Louis gauge.
The River Des Peres area of south St Louis, however, was left out of the
flood control system which the corps built for the city in 1959-63. The area
was then much less built up and the corps estimated the cost would not have
been justified. It has a levee built after the 1973 floods by the city and
county of St Louis to cope only with a 37-foot flood. Earth City's levee, on
the other hand, although privately built, is geared for a 500-year flood.
Politics, money and cost-benefit analyses have all played a part in the
level of flood protection provided to different areas in the basin. Critics
say the corps has, on occasion, altered its flood plain impact reports under
political pressure in order to permit development in areas that would
otherwise have remained unimproved land bringing in little tax revenue.
Mr Joe Schwenk, the chief levee specialist at the corps office in St Louis,
acknowledges that levees, by constricting the river, may have increased the
level of flooding this year by 2 to 3 feet, although he argues that this is
more than offset by the containment reservoirs the corps has built upstream
on tributaries such as the Salt River.
Mr Schwenk maintains that the flood of 1993 is a 100-year flood. With rain
falling at more than twice normal levels for months on end over nine
midwestern states which drain into the the Mississippi-Missouri, nobody
doubts that this year's flood is unusual, but some river watchers disagree
with Mr Schwenk on just how unusual it is.
'This is a 20-year flood. The same flood occurred in 1973, but it has been
greatly aggravated because the river has not been allowed to flow into its
natural flood plain,' says Mr Lewis, the St Louis building inspector.
'We seem to get these 100-year floods every 20 years,' says Mr Thomas Dunn,
general manager of Gateway Riverboat Cruise, which operates excursion boats
from St Louis and which has suffered heavy peak-season losses. He adds,
however, that this flood differs from 1973 in its duration.
As heavy rain persists, the return to normal is expected to be slow. The
Mississippi is expected to take at least seven weeks to drop below flood
level, although some river traffic may resume before that.
When the waters subside, there is little doubt that basin residents and the
federal government will want to build bigger and better levees. Flooded
towns will seek to match their drier neighbours' ramparts foot for foot.
River des Peres is likely to be at the head of the list, particularly as its
congressman, Mr Richard Gephardt, is the leader of the majority Democrats in
the House of Representatives. He has asked the corps to recommend 'a
long-term course of action' to improve the flood control system. Corps
engineers say that, unless they are ordered by Congress to factor intangible
elements such as human suffering into their calculations, they would
probably still find a River Des Peres levee economically unjustified.
Even the most ardent advocates of leaving the river untrammelled do not
suggest tearing down factories and homes in the flood plain.
Despite Congress' willingness to cough up for disaster relief, the Federal
government deficit looms as a reminder that government money is scarce. Some
natural controls favoured by environmentalists, such as planning
restrictions to leave undeveloped bottomlands open to flooding, could be
cheaper than structural measures. After years of trying to engineer floods
out of existence, the time may have come for a more adaptive approach.
