FT  25 MAY 93 / Nadir trustees investigate Turkish bank over loan
THE TRUSTEES in bankruptcy to Mr Asil Nadir, the fugitive businessman, are
investigating a Turkish bank which made a loan last year secured against a
house bought for Mr Nadir's girlfriend.
The new probe follows the discovery of documents during a second raid by the
trustees on the home of the former head of Polly Peck International that
took place a few days after Mr Nadir's flight to northern Cyprus earlier
this month.
Among the information retrieved by the trustees was correspondence with
Turkiye Turizm Yatirim ve dis Ticaret Bankasi - the Turkish Tourism Trade
and Investment Bank which was founded in 1988 and owned by the Lapis Group,
an industrial group engaged in tourism.
The bank made a loan last summer to a company based in London. The loan was
secured against a property to which Mr Nadir's trustees have laid claim.
Documents at the land registry in London show that a charge was made against
22 Glebe Place in Chelsea, London, on July 13 last year by the Turkish
tourism bank.
They show that since March 1990 the owner of the house has been Ms Lesley
Ellwood, a girlfriend of Mr Nadir who had two children by him. She was not
available for comment yesterday.
Mr Neil Cooper of accountants Robson Rhodes, who is Mr Nadir's trustee in
bankruptcy, has taken legal action against Ms Ellwood in a dispute over a
transfer of about Pounds 900,000 to purchase the house.
The land register shows that Mr Cooper issued a 'caution' over ownership
last September which led to a High Court order in November to prevent any
further transactions relating to the property.
The Turkish tourism bank confirmed yesterday that it had extended a loan to
a UK-based trading company in July 1992 to finance the export of UK goods to
Turkey.
It would not name the company or the amount involved, but officials said
they had a 'long relation' with the company.
One employee said he was not aware of 'any connection with Mr Nadir,
although in reality it is out of our limits to make that sort of
connection'.
In addition to the documents, the trustees they found two safes at Mr
Nadir's home in Eaton Square, London, which had been overlooked during a
previous raid which took place shortly before Mr Nadir fled. One safe was
empty and another has not yet been opened.
