FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Hard choice for trust investors -
Differing yield calculations make it impossible to compare competing funds
UNIT TRUST investors are being forced to choose funds based on
vastly-differing yield calculations which, in many cases, make it impossible
to compare competing funds on a like-for-like basis even though the
underlying portfolios can be very similar.
This dilemma is now all the more acute for investors who have seen returns
from building societies plummet as interest rates have fallen since sterling
left the exchange rate mechanism.
Unit trusts investing in shares and fixed interest securities can now
provide higher levels of income than building society deposit accounts. But
because yields on unit trusts are calculated using such variable criteria,
investors have no way of knowing if a quoted yield will equate to the yield
actually received by them.
Ken Emery, technical director of Save &amp; Prosper, one of the country's
largest unit trust companies with Pounds 2.7bn under management, says:
'There are various permutations, which is why there's a problem. There is
definitely a need to standardise yield calculations. It's interesting how
unit trusts have similar portfolios but have different yields.'
With this in mind, the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation
(Lautro) is investigating ways to impose a standard method of calculating
yields. It has asked the Association of Unit Trusts and Investment Funds
(Autif) to provide proposed yield calculations for equity funds, cash funds
and bond funds.
The different methods unit trust companies can use at present to massage
yield figures include:
Calculating on an historic or an anticipated yield basis. Philip Warland,
director of Autif and chairman of the working party to examine yield
calculations, says: 'You can get substantial differences because companies
are using past yields, especially if they think future yields will fall. If
yields are going up, they can use future yields.'
Allied Dunbar says it calculates its yield by taking the estimated future
dividend payments over the next 12 months divided by the cash value of the
assets.
Boosting yields on equity income funds by placing assets in cash instead of
equities at different times.
This means unit trusts can quote yields for short periods which are higher
than yields on trusts with very similar objectives but with smaller
short-term cash holdings.
Yields will differ from trust to trust depending on which price is used to
calculate the yield. A fund manager can express a yield either as a
percentage of the value of the fund on an offer price basis or on a bid
price basis. The former will give a lower yield than the latter.
No rules exist to govern the stage at which a fund manager calculates a
yield. This means a yield can be expressed either before or after charges.
If after, the manager can decide which charges to be taken out of capital
and which should be taken out of income, again affecting the final yield
figure.
Graham Large, an independent financial adviser who publishes Income Fund
Analysis, a specialist survey of UK income funds, says: 'A standard method
of quoting gross yields is long overdue. If the numbers are to have any
value to prospective investors and their professional advisers, they must be
comparable, like with like.'
Large suggests that a common sense approach would be for every unit trust
company to quote a yield on an historical basis. This would involve the last
complete year's distributions, after expenses but before tax, as a straight
percentage of the present offer price.
The yield would fall as the unit price increased. As each new distribution
was declared and the last declaration fell out of the calculation, the yield
would be re-calculated up or down.
Large adds: 'Even this basis is not conclusive. But what has actually been
paid out for the most recent year is probably the most reliable guide we can
have, perhaps with the flexibility for the managers to publish a lower yield
if they know the forecast income is going to be lower in the year ahead.'
