FT  28 OCT 93 / Ulster committee wins new backing
THE COMMONS moved closer to establishing a select committee on Northern
Ireland yesterday when its procedure committee decided to examine how such a
body might be composed.
The Labour party, which was opposed to re-opening the controversial issue,
accused the government of doing a secret deal with the Ulster unionists, who
have long favoured the setting up of a select committee to scrutinise the
work of the Northern Ireland Office.
Sir Peter Emery, Tory chairman of the procedure committee, made clear his
support for a select committee urging the government 'to look at our report
and act on it'. The report, first drafted in 1990, supported the
establishment of a Northern Ireland select committee at the appropriate
time.
Mr Tony Banks, a Labour member of the procedure committee, said the
Conservatives wanted a Northern Ireland select committee as part of their
'pay-off' to the Ulster unionists who helped the government avoid a Commons
defeat in a confidence debate on the Maastricht treaty earlier this year.
The Irish government is dismayed by the possibility that the British
parliament might set up such a committee.
Meanwhile, Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, stressed that there
was 'no question of simply adopting or endorsing the report of the
Hume-Adams dialogue'.
His comments yesterday are likely to be welcomed by Downing Street. The UK
government has continued to distance itself from the peace proposals put
forward by Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party,
and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the IRA.
Mr Reynolds praised Mr Hume for his efforts to start a peace process, but
said it needed a wider base.
The prospects of the Hume-Adams plan being accepted by the UK government
further receded yesterday after Mr Adams helped to carry the coffin of
Thomas Begley, the IRA bomber who died in the Shankill Road fish shop blast
at the weekend. Unionists and Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland
secretary, attacked Mr Adams's action.
Mr Hume yesterday defended his talks with Mr Adams, saying that he had taken
a risk in difficult circumstances.
Although the Hume-Adams proposals for peace will be discussed tomorrow at a
meeting between Mr Reynolds and Mr John Major, the prime minister, both
governments now appear to be more interested in reviving the stalled
'three-strand' talks under the auspices of Sir Patrick. A soldier was
charged last night with the attempted murder of Mr Eddie Copeland, a leading
Republican, outside Mr Begley's home. Mr Copeland was among mourners outside
the Begley home in the Republican Ardoyne area of Belfast when he was hit in
the stomach by a bullet.
