FT  24 JUN 93 / International Company News: Saturn profit poses funding
dilemma - A milestone in the history of GM's innovative sports car
SOME 6,500 factory workers have been wearing big grins this month at one of
America's most innovative car plants, hidden amid the rolling hills of rural
Tennessee .
For the factory, set up by General Motors to prove it could match Japanese
quality and productivity by building from scratch a new car, called Saturn,
made its first ever monthly operating profit in May, after nearly three
years of production.
The celebrations have been enthusiastic not only because this represents a
milestone in Saturn's history, but also because the event has triggered a
Dollars 1,000 bonus payment to all employees under Saturn's innovative bonus
and profit-sharing pay scheme.
And the Tennessee workers can bask in the knowledge that the small, sporty
Saturn car has become one of the hottest-selling vehicles in the US,
renowned for quality which matches, or beats, that of its Japanese rivals.
They cannot make the cars fast enough to satisfy demand.
All this means the Saturn project, conceived in the early 1980s by Mr Roger
Smith, GM's former chairman, as a laboratory which would ultimately help
reshape sclerotic General Motors, has in many respects become the winner he
hoped it would.
That judgment, however, requires heavy qualification, for one month of
profits does not make a financial success.
It will be many years - if ever - before Saturn makes a respectable return
on the Dollars 5bn GM invested in the project before production began and
its two-and-a-half-years of operating losses, including an estimated Dollars
600m of red ink in 1992.
Saturn officials say the company seems on target to at least break even in
1993 as a whole. But that is partly because, in a highly unusual ploy, it
has persuaded the dealer network set up specially to sell the car to cut its
profit margin to ensure it reaches the black.
This combination of critical success and lacklustre financial performance
has brought the Saturn project to a crossroads and posed a dilemma for
General Motors: should it pour more money into the business to expand
production at a time when GM is strapped for cash and in the throes of a
radical restructuring of its lossmaking North American operations?
On the one hand, Saturn's popularity with consumers, and reputation for
quality, has given it a much more positive brand image than most other parts
of GM, and expanded production could be a first step for the group to
capitalise on this.
It would also bolster GM's 35 per cent share of the US car market, of which
Saturn contributes 2.8 per cent.
On the other hand, the US small car market is intensely competitive,
suffering from extremely thin profit margins and excess manufacturing
capacity.
GM could arguably deploy its capital more profitably by improving its model
range in the higher margin, large vehicle segment of the market.
The group has made clear that Saturn is extremely unlikely to get any
additional funding unless it does break even this year, and Mr Richard
'Skip' LeFauve, Saturn's president, says the subsidiary is preparing two
alternative business plans to present to the GM board.
One will put the case for expanded Saturn production, while the other will
show how the business can operate profitably at current capacity of about
300,000 vehicles a year.
But there are no plans to extend the Saturn range by producing a larger
vehicle, which many of Saturn's dealers would like to see.
Expanded production of the current model could either take place alongside
the Tennessee plant - where Saturn originally planned to produce 500,000
cars a year - or at an existing General Motors plant.
The GM board might favour the latter, since it would ameliorate chronic
over-capacity at the group's factories.
Saturn officials, however, would probably prefer the former since it would
help cement the unique, co-operative relationship between Saturn's
management and the United Auto Workers' union, which has been one of the
most important ingredients in building the car's reputation for quality.
Under this partnership, which presents a stark contrast to the traditional
gulf between US management and labour, union officials take part in strategy
planning and middle management jobs.
The workforce is made up of small, self-directed teams with control over
their own budgets, staff hiring, division of labour, workplace ergonomics,
relations with suppliers and quality inspection.
There is also a strong emphasis on continual training: some 7 per cent of an
employee's salary depends on him or her spending 5 per cent of working time
learning additional skills.
Why then, has all this not translated into quicker profitability?
Any brand new motor company - and Saturn was GM's first in over 60 years -
would face early losses and high costs to establish itself in the market
place. And Saturn had the additional problem of shaking off GM's reputation
for poor quality products.
When it began production in July 1990 it priced cars at lossmaking levels -
the base model cost Dollars 7,999, compared with Dollars 9,395 today - to
win market share.
And to ensure that Saturns have very high quality, the company has expanded
production extremely slowly.
As a result, the plant is only now reaching its full rate of 1,133 cars a
day, or 300,000 a year.
Only this month is it moving from a system of having two work crews, putting
in six-day working weeks, to a more efficient system of three crews, working
four 10-hour days a week.
As a result, Saturn's productivity still lags the best Japanese and US
rivals.
Mr Michael Bennett, who heads the UAW at the plant, says: ' We need another
year to a year-and-a-half before we can compare ourselves (with them), but
all our projections say we're going to be there.'
However, such calculations could be upset by friction between the local UAW
officers, who have co-operated with Saturn's management in unusually
flexible working practices, and their national union officials.
Union officials are pressing Saturn's management for extra overtime money
and other contract changes which would bring the plant more in line with
conditions elsewhere in GM.
Saturn's expanded workforce, moreover, is not quite as pliant as it once
was: Mr Bennett won re-election to his post last April by a narrow 52 per
cent to 48 per cent margin, in a vote which highlighted a degree of rank and
file dissent, particularly on the overtime issue.
So while some lessons from the Tennessee laboratory are being slowly applied
at other parts of GM - for example, in aspects of marketing - there is
little sign the company and the national UAW can find common ground to copy
Saturn's partnership.
The flower blooming in the Tennessee countryside may well prove an expensive
hot-house experiment, unable to survive the much chillier labour relations
climate of Detroit.
