FT  13 MAY 93 / Survey of Southern France (2): Jobs challenge for Freche -
Montpellier has become a dynamic city. But the locals are missing out
GEORGES FRECHE is not a man to shy away from a fight. In his 16 years as
socialist mayor of Montpellier he has clashed with everyone from the gros
elephants, who run the Socialist party, to Jean Bosquet, his conservative
counterpart in the nearby city of Nimes.
So far, Mr Freche's pugilism seems to have paid off. He has turned
Montpellier into one of France's most dynamic cities, with a string of arts
initiatives, social programmes and ambitious architectural schemes starting
with Antigone, the post-modernist development created by Ricardo Bofill, the
Catalan architect, and continuing with the new Port Marianne development.
Montpellier is at a watershed in its development. Mr Freche's reforms have
helped the city attract a steady flow of inward investment, mainly from
hi-tech and pharmaceutical companies. But most of the new jobs have gone to
outsiders, drawn to the south by the lure of a sunny, less stressful life.
As a result, the level of unemployment has stayed stubbornly above the
national average and is now around 14 per cent.
Mr Freche faces the challenge of trying to improve employment prospects for
the locals at a difficult time when the French economy is still in a fragile
condition and the swing to the right in this spring's legislative elections
has left him increasingly isolated in the political sphere.
Montpellier does, at least, have a sound base to build on. Mr Freche, a
former academic, joined forces with a group of like-minded academics when he
became mayor to map out a long-term strategy.
The result, according to Mr Patrick Geneste, director of the Ecole National
Superieur de Chimie in Montpellier and head of the Technopole economic
development project, was a comprehensive policy that embraces every aspect
of life in the city - social, cultural and economic.
Montpellier, which now has a population of 300,000, traces its roots to the
10th century when it was the crossroads for the salt trade and the pilgrim
trail to St James de Compostelle. It has been renowned for its university
since the 12th century and is noted for its expertise in medicine and
science.
The academic tradition was still strong when Mr Freche became mayor in the
late 1970s. Today, one in six of the city's inhabitants are students. Mr
Freche realised the university could be one of Montpellier's main weapons in
the battle for investment against the larger centres of Toulouse and
Marseille which, unlike his city, have long historic links with industry.
One of Mr Freche's first initiatives was to revive the artistic life of
Montpellier by giving subsidies to reopen theatres, renovate museums,
inaugurate festivals and even to launch an orchestra, which now absorbs an
annual budget of FFr14m. He also brought in prominent figures to co-ordinate
activity in particular areas, notably Dominique Bagouet, the choreographer,
as head of dance.
Sport also received additional resources. 'It's just as important to have a
first division football team as an orchestra if you want to persuade people
to come and live here,' says Mr Geneste. The university was expanded. A new
faculty of law and economics is under construction as part of the first
phase of Port Marianne.
The most ambitious of all the Freche schemes was Antigone, a vast
residential and commercial complex covering 40 hectares of land previously
owned by the army, adjacent to the 17th and 18th century heart of
Montpellier. Antigone has been financed by both public and private money,
but the city council has recouped its investment (in building low cost
housing during the first phase of construction) by selling land to private
developers.
Antigone is now completed. The Place du Nombre d'Or, the first phase, is now
a lively square filled with trees and people. But the later phases are
conspicuously quieter with big 'To Rent' signs festooned across empty
offices. Antigone's admirers see it as a paradigm of public sector
development. Its critics complain the sheer scale of the Bofill design makes
it oppressive. 'It is the kind of place that people either love or loathe,'
says a city official.
However it is instructive that Port Marianne, the new development, has
adopted a more eclectic approach to design by commissioning a number of
different architects including Richard Meier, Christian de Portzamparc and
Ricardo Bofill.
Despite the criticism, Antigone has undoubtedly helped to establish
Montpellier as a cultural centre and, in turn, to persuade investors to come
to the city. Montpellier is too small to compete for large-scale investment.
It got on the shortlist for the relocation of Air Inter, the French domestic
airline, only to lose to Toulouse. But it has attracted a steady flow of new
companies, culminating in the arrival last year of Del Computers with 250
employees and a GEC-Alsthom joint venture with 350 jobs.
A high proportion of these jobs have gone to 'outsiders', many of whom have
moved to Montpellier with the incoming companies. Although Mr Freche's
supporters argue that locals have benefited from the availability of
construction jobs and that the arrival of the new investors bolsters the
local economy in terms of increased taxes and providing new business for
services.
Moreover, the influx of new investment will help to cushion the blow of the
forthcoming cuts at IBM, the US computer group which came to the city in the
1960s and is still the biggest single private sector employer. IBM plans to
reduce its workforce from 4,000 to 2,800 as part of its worldwide
rationalisation. Most of the job losses will come from natural wastage but
will still add to the toll of joblessness.
In the meantime, the city council hopes to get to grips with the long-term
unemployment problem by stimulating the local service sector, particularly
tourism, which has increased healthily in recent years thanks to
Montpellier's arts activities.
'We've already put Montpellier on the map,' says Mr Geneste. 'Now we should
turn our attention to the local economy by helping existing companies to
expand and to create new jobs for local people.'
