FT  03 JUL 93 / Gardening: Sissinghurst is still an absolute joy
EVERYTHING, since Einstein, is supposed to be relative. Absolutes,
allegedly, are out. Tell people that something is better than something
else, and most of them will react as if you are saying more about yourself
than the object in question. I wish them the best of luck.
For years, I have believed there is no better garden than Sissinghurst, in
Kent. Gardens, however, do vary with time and, in order to be sure, you have
to continue visiting them.
It is 10 years since I last put Sissinghurst at the top of the British
league. Meanwhile, relativists have muttered: have you seen it now the
polyanthus no longer can be bedded-out en masse? After all, 30 years have
passed since the founding partners died: can it really sustain the
Nicolsons' view of what gardens are all about?
What about the crowds? Have not the frosts been too unkind too often? What
about Pam and Sybille, the two great bearers of the Sackville-West legacy
who retired two years ago after their inspired tenure as head gardeners?
I know all these mutterings and many more: 'I went to Sissinghurst recently
and I did think that it was going back . . . have you seen what the National
Trust is doing? . . . isn't it dreadful about the alstroemerias? . . . Hebe
Quicksilver did not last long in the White Garden after you wrote so
politely about it . . . Vita never would have allowed it to look so tidy . .
. they have gone and removed the meconopsis . . . aren't the people
frightful? . . .'
Last year, there was a new note to the whingeing chorus: what are we to do
about the timed ticket? Sometimes, you might turn up with a Glyndebourne
picnic in the car boot and find the great British public had turned up, too,
and that the silly National Trust kept you waiting for more than an hour
until the garden was sufficiently empty. In 1991, some 200,000 visited. The
timing of tickets cut that to 150,000 last year, but it remains 10 times as
large as the number in Vita's day.
Anyway (or so the whinge goes), the Sackville-West style has been absorbed
so widely that you can see it all over the world, wherever a stockbroker
lives in an oast house or a lady member of the Garden Club of America has
made a garden in a suburb on the East Coast.
Last Sunday morning, the sunshine was serene: the day had been scripted by
H. E. Bates and, just before the first of the timed tickets entered, I found
myself in the gardens prepared, for a moment, to believe the whingeing might
be right. Could a new head gardener keep up the act? Would it not now be too
familiar, if only through imitation? Like Gertrude Jekyll's books, might not
Sissinghurst's borders seem rather out-dated now that we plant finders can
discover so much more to grow?
The whingeing is absolutely wrong. It is not just that I was the first to
stand beneath that famous central canopy of the white rose longicuspis, in
the heart of the White Garden where hundreds of bees drowned the whingeing
in a superior, contented chorus. Against its ground plan of green box, it
shone soothingly: so what, you imitators, the bees murmured? Do you, too,
think that you can get it quite so right?
Every garden changes, but I cannot see any signs of decline. The point about
Sissinghurst is that it continues to change in the artistic vanguard. I
never knew Vita Sackville-West, but I have been one of her closest readers
and, if she was still there and allowed to enjoy the luxury of the Trust's
seven gardeners, I believe she would have wished to change her garden in
just this way.
The new head is Sara Cook, who is manifestly in keeping with the genius of
the place. Aged 35, she moved to Sissinghurst from the National Trust's more
recent challenge of the large garden at Upton House, near Banbury. At
Sissinghurst, there is less scope for lavender and none for terraces but,
for Cook, it was more a return than a departure.
Previously, she had served in the garden under the great partnership of
Misses Schwerdt and Kreuzberger, both of whom endorsed her succession. As
they had served with Vita herself, there is an apostolic succession about it
all.
On Cook's staff, the four men out-number the three women, but Nigel Nicolson
tells me the gender balance is not representative. When Sissinghurst
advertises for a gardener, about four-fifths of the applicants are females.
In its cosmetics, Sissinghurst is not a stale garden left behind by
progress. It has all the best new bedding plants and half-hardy favourites.
In its framework, it is still true to its origins, and Harold Nicolson's
placing and eye for proportion will never go out of date. Some of the older
rambling roses have a pleasantly time-warped feel, but they merely remind us
that this garden has been made during 60 years.
In the bright sunlight, I saw why parts of this garden have been so
difficult to photograph justly. The light is intense and unshielded in the
main rose garden: visitors, but not cameras, can pick up the dozens of
details.
Sweet Williams lurk beneath a great tangle of blue Clematis durandii and its
satin petals on peasticks. A great buttress of Trachelospermum releases its
sugary scent from hundreds of fading white flowers, looking like stars above
the intense blue of an unusual Felicia which has been bedded underneath.
Photographs cannot catch these details among the glare of full sun and the
challenge of strong pink and purple old roses.
The Cottage Garden is another matter, where the inspired combination of
yellow, red and orange flowers is soothed by the constant inter-play of
green and shade and the tones of the old brickwork. Here, on a cloudless
day, even the strong red roses on the climbing Parkdirektor Riggers lost
their metallic gleam.
Photographs over the years have confronted these contrasts and failed to
catch them. As always, I noted the masterly touches: the tender pink
convolvulus against the brick-red tower, or the dark blue flowers of bulbous
Brodiaea which run through the low perennials in the purple border in June.
I also noted the garden's extreme exposure to light and the consequent
heightening of Nicolson's areas of unplanted green.
Go and see it, on a morning this weekend when the white roses will still be
visible (although perhaps not as perfect as last Sunday). Argue, if you
must, that Keats is only another poet and that Jane Austen seems special
only to people who never read Aphra Behn. Some things are not staled by
repetition or diminished by contention. As Sissinghurst changes with the
times, it is there to prove you wrong.
