FT  06 JUL 93 / Success story's next chapter: Ghana is an African role
model, but still relies on foreign aid
For a man responsible for black Africa's test case economy, Dr Kwesi
Botchwey, Ghana's veteran finance minister, appears remarkably relaxed.
With some justification. Ghana's 10-year structural adjustment programme has
attracted Dollars 5bn in foreign aid, and the well has not run dry. Last
week Dr Botchwey was back in Accra, two days after asking a Paris meeting of
donors for additional funds and getting half a billion dollars more than he
had asked for - a further Dollars 2.1bn over the next two years.
Today, Mr Botchwey will attend a conference in London, sponsored by the
Confederation of British Industry. He will try to woo foreign investors by
publicising Ghana's streamlined investment code, which removes many curbs on
multinational investment.
Times have changed. Ghana, the first British colony to achieve independence
in 1957, became synonymous with African state socialism and economic
mismanagement in the 1960s and 1970s. Now it has embraced the market.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, starved of African
success stories, are quick to present Ghana as a role model. Ten years of
liberalisation, deregulation and devaluation, cushioned by annual aid flows
amounting to 8 per of gross domestic product, have enabled the government to
produce an average growth rate in income per head of 2 per cent a year since
Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, then Ghana's military ruler, agreed to
take the IMF medicine in 1983.
Compared with the rest of Africa, this is impressive. Since the 'economic
recovery programme' began, Ghanaian gross domestic product has grown by an
average 4.9 per cent a year, more than twice the sub-Saharan average. It
follows a decade in which real income per head in Ghana fell by 30 per cent.
Yet, after 10 years of adjustment, Ghana remains desperately poor. Its
average income per head was only Dollars 400 last year. The World Bank
estimates that, at current annual growth rates (5 per cent for GDP, 3 per
cent for population), it would take more than 20 years for the average poor
Ghanaian to reach the current poverty threshold, defined as two-thirds of
today's average consumption per head.
A recent World Bank strategy document, 'Ghana 2000 and beyond - setting the
stage for accelerated growth and poverty reduction', estimates that Ghana
needs to raise its growth rate to 8 per cent a year to free the average poor
person from poverty in 10 years. The government hopes that a leaner,
export-led manufacturing sector will enable it to reach that rate by 2000.
But Ghana's task is immense, as the World Bank report makes clear. The
domestic economy remains heavily dependent on a narrow commodity base -
primarily cocoa and gold - for export earnings while manufacturing exports
are tiny. Private investment amounted to only 8 per cent of GDP in Ghana in
1990, compared with 32 per cent in rapidly growing Thailand  - half the
level at which Thailand started on the growth path back in 1965. Asia's
newly industrialised countries, as well as Thailand and Malaysia, had also
achieved universal primary education before they began to industrialise in
the early 1960s. In Ghana, 20 per cent of young people are not registered at
primary school.
The east Asian economies provide a benchmark against which Ghana can measure
the task ahead. East Asia's experience also suggests lessons for the
Ghanaian government's strategy in the second phase of development.
The focus of Ghana's policy over the past decade has been on reducing the
role of government and, in some areas such as the privatisation of state
industry, this focus continues. But the government also appears to be
pursuing a form of intervention which goes beyond the traditional 'enabling'
role for government: providing information and investing in education,
health and infrastructure.
The government now talks of 'a new agenda of activism' that will offer
special incentives to investors. Mr Botchwey has asked the private sector to
draft guidelines for the selective protection of infant domestic industries.
'Picking winners is a hazardous thing,' he concedes. 'The protection
measures will have to be time-bound and the criteria must be clear and
transparent, to avoid charges of political favouritism.'
At the same time, following the removal of credit ceilings, the Bank of
Ghana, the central bank, is using its indirect influence in the foreign
exchange market to support the government's growth strategy. By keeping
foreign exchange in short supply, the central bank has encouraged the
commercial banks to direct their supply of foreign exchange towards
export-orientated customers who might earn and return foreign exchange in
the future. In the words of one banker in Accra: 'The banks now operate the
Bank of Ghana's exchange control regime on its behalf.'
A third focus of the government's new activism is foreign investment. The
government plans to lure foreign companies with tax holidays and other
fiscal incentives, particularly multinationals which have encountered quota
problems in east Asia.
'A number of multinationals who quit in the 1970s are coming back,' says Mr
Botchwey. 'They are looking at the comparative labour costs and are
interested in producing on a large scale for export.' Sunquist, the tuna
fish company, plans to invest Dollars 10m because it is encountering quota
ceilings on exports from Thailand.
So far, progress has been slow. Ghana's private sector success stories in
export diversification are few, while additional substantial foreign
investments have yet to materialise. One reason is that investors have been
waiting to see how Ghana's transition to democracy will develop after more
than a decade of military rule. The government is engaged in a painful
battle to offset the fiscal and inflationary problems incurred in the run-up
to November's election which saw Jerry Rawlings declared civilian president.
Mr Botchwey has no illusions about achieving economic independence soon.
Ghana's persistent current account deficit is expected to be 6 per cent of
GDP this year. 'If you could assure me of an improvement in our terms of
trade, and a greater measure of debt forgiveness, then Ghana could wean
itself off aid in four to five years,' he says.
Nowhere in Africa are structural reforms so far advanced, and the
government's commitment so deeply rooted. But for Ghana to become Africa's
success story, it must take the qualitative leap into accelerated,
export-led growth. For now, it remains dependent on the patience of the
international donor community.
