FT  19 NOV 93 / OECD urges US rate rise to combat inflation: Government
likely to oppose further tightening
THE US should launch a 'pre-emptive strike' against inflation by raising
interest rates substantially over the next 12 months, officials at the
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development have urged.
The OECD believes the Federal Reserve should begin tightening monetary
policy before Christmas and raise short-term rates to almost 5 per cent by
the end of next year. The key federal funds rate has been 3 per cent,
abnormally low by historical standards, since September last year.
The call for higher rates came from senior officials who were in Washington
for the release of the latest OECD report on the US economy. The OECD has a
lower profile in the US than Europe and its call for rate rises is unlikely
to embarrass the Clinton administration. But its remarks come at a delicate
time for the Fed and financial markets.
There are signs that US economic growth is accelerating and US bond yields
recently moved back above 6 per cent on fears that a faster expansion would
put upward pressure on inflation. Fed policymakers met this week to consider
whether any adjustment of policy was required.
The White House and congressional leaders are likely to oppose a significant
tightening of monetary policy. They regard the recovery as sluggish and
worry about the lack of jobs. Such worries may increase in the new year when
a revised method of estimating unemployment could boost the official rate by
half a percentage point to over 7 per cent.
The OECD, however, believes an increase in US rates is needed to prevent a
resurgence of inflation in 1995 and 1996. Because monetary policy takes
effect only with a lag, much of the tightening needs to occur in the first
half of next year, while there is still some slack in the economy.
'The fundamental message we wish to transmit is that there will have to be a
tightening of non-trivial proportions,' an OECD official said.
The organisation regards the current level of short-term interest rates  -
roughly zero in real terms - as a highly stimulative policy that is 'clearly
unsustainable' in the medium-term. A neutral monetary policy would require
rates of 4.25 per cent or more, officials said.
Many US forecasters expect the Fed to begin tightening monetary policy next
year. Few expect - or recommend - as swift or as large an increase in rates
as the OECD.
If and when the Fed decides to raise US interest rates, the impact will be
felt globally. The dollar will probably rise sharply and the recent bull
market in bond and share markets might be sent into reverse.
The OECD report, which would have required the Clinton administration's
approval, uses more reserved language, arguing that 'an early monetary
tightening would be called for if inflation has indeed bottomed out'.
However, it predicts short-term rates will rise before the end of this year
and will average 4.5 per cent in the second half of next year.
Inflation still the enemy, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 25
