FT  14 JAN 93 / Braer's oil dispersed by storms
THE STORMS that finally broke up the oil tanker Braer on Tuesday appear to
have dispersed most of the remaining crude oil the tanker was carrying,
leaving much of the sea around Shetland clear yesterday.
Oil pollution officials who flew over the area near Sumburgh Head yesterday
reported an 80 per cent reduction in visible oil pollution in the sea,
although there were signs of heavier pollution closer to the wreck.
Mr David Bedborough of the Department of Transport's marine pollution unit
said he thought the effects of wind and waves had dispersed the oil deep
into the sea. Before the ship began breaking up on Monday, it was thought at
least half its cargo of 84,000 tonnes of light crude oil was still on board.
The Duke of Edinburgh, who visited Shetland yesterday with the Prince of
Wales, said what had happened was 'a very serious incident as opposed to a
major ecological disaster which it could have been'.
The Duke, who is president of the World Wide Fund for Nature, said that in
ecological terms its effects were much less serious than the Exxon Valdez
disaster off Alaska in 1989. Whereas in Alaska about 300,000 guillemots
alone were killed, as well as many other species of birds and mammals, the
toll in Shetland was far smaller.
The latest casualty list is 691 dead sea birds, 212 live but oiled birds,
two dead grey seals and three contaminated by oil, and two dead otters.
Mr George Sutherland, the Shetland local authority's director of marine
operations, said the oil had not contaminated very many beaches. Most were
affected by a slick of brownish foam.
Greenpeace, the environmental group, yesterday renewed its calls to the oil
industry to take action to prevent further spills in the wake of the Braer
disaster. In a letter to British Petroleum it called on the company to keep
tankers away from the Shetland and Orkney islands and the Hebrides.
The letter was sent in response to a leaked internal memo from BP advising
managers to 'keep their heads down' over the Braer disaster and not to be
drawn into a debate about tanker safety.
However, the memo, which states it is 'not, repeat not, for the press', goes
on to say that BP believes more attention should be paid internationally to
the prevention of accidents. The company wants action taken to improve
tanker traffic control, ship navigation and better training programmes for
personnel.
Yesterday the tank-barge Tak 10 was sheltering off Caithness, ready to
remove any oil still trapped within the Braer. It was thought that much of
the Braer's 1,600 tonnes of fuel oil may still be on board.
Specialist equipment for detecting air pollution levels was flown to
Shetland from Edinburgh yesterday.
