FT  01 OCT 93 / ERM departure 'boosted steelwork exports'
EXPORTS of steelwork for construction have risen by up to a fifth since
sterling left the exchange rate mechanism last September, manufacturers said
yesterday.
Invitations to tender for international contract have risen even faster,
according to a survey of orders received by the 12 largest UK constructional
steel producers.
The study, by British Constructional Steelwork Association, showed that the
companies had received international invitations to tender and requests for
price quotations involving more than 400,000 tonnes of steel since last
September. This compares with just 20,000 tonnes in the preceding 12 months.
Just over half the inquiries have come from continental Europe, particularly
from eastern Germany where demand for new construction has risen since the
reunification.
The association measures inquiries for jobs involving 750 tonnes or more.
Construction of a medium-sized supermarket would normally involve about 200
tonnes.
Mr Robin Booth, managing director of Booth Industries, based in Bolton, said
some continental European companies with orders in the Middle East and Far
East had bought cheaper UK steel in order to make the jobs more profitable.
Mr Rollo Reid, director of John Reid &amp; Sons in Dorset, said: 'Exports fell
sharply after the Gulf war but have started to pick up during the past 12
months. East Germany and Poland, where there is a strong demand for British
steel, have been particularly good markets.' In the first nine months of the
year the company has generated overseas sales of Pounds 6m, overtaking the
Pounds 5m earned in the whole of last year.
Mr Reid said: 'We have been quoting prices up to 25 per cent lower than
local German fabricators. We have even been asked, for the first time, to
price jobs in Japan.'
Mr Joe Locke, managing director of Watson Steel, part of the Amec
construction group, said: 'Opportunities to bid for international work have
increased considerably following sterling's devaluation. The largest order
we have won since leaving the ERM is a Pounds 2m steelwork contract for a
clothing distribution warehouse for Fruit of the Loom in northern Germany.'
It had been won against strong local competition.
The company is currently erecting the FFr120m (Pounds 13.7m) steel and glass
work for a high-speed rail station at Charles de Gaulle airport near Paris.
Mr Locke said: 'British firms have much more expertise in erecting buildings
with steel frames compared with the rest of Europe. This has allowed us to
develop a technological lead in a number of areas which, allied to our
advantages on price, is helping us to win valuable international work at a
time when orders in the UK have been in short supply.'
