FT  29 JUL 93 / Bosnia deal on partition edges closer
PRESIDENT Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia yesterday appeared to have succumbed
to intense international pressure, when he began discussing with his Serb
and Croat rivals the proposed partition of the republic along ethnic lines.
A Bosnian diplomat confirmed that the Bosnian delegation discussed maps and
the possible formation of a confederation. It was also revealed that western
experts had met Bosnian leaders to discuss the establishment of national
currencies and financial institutions.
Until yesterday, Mr Izetbegovic has consistenly rejected the republic's
partition.
After last night's negotiating session in Geneva, President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia said: 'We are approaching a solution on vital issues.'
Talks are due to continue today.
However, the Bosnian delegation earlier spoke bitterly of betrayal by the
international community. Mr Haris Silajdzic, the foreign minister, said he
was 'pessimistic' about the prospects for a settlement.
Serb leaders seemed increasingly convinced they had achieved their aims. Mr
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, warned Moslems of their stark
choice in ending the war. 'One way would be through talks, the other would
be total defeat of one side - and it would be the Moslem side,' he said.
The Geneva talks represent the first time the main protagonists in the
Bosnian conflict have held face-to-face negotiations for six months,
although they held a meeting without dialogue in Athens in May.
Yesterday's talks focused on maps outlining the future borders of the three
ethnic mini-states rather than on a constitutional framework, according to
diplomats.
The meeting between the faction leaders took place in a room dominated by a
huge map of Bosnia suspended on an easel. Mr Karadzic is said to have
offered 26 per cent of Bosnia's territory to the Moslems, the largest ethnic
group at 44 per cent of the pre-war population of 4.35m.
Mr Izetbegovic remains opposed to the plan to divide his republic, on the
grounds that it will lead to annexation of most of Bosnia by neighbouring
Serbia and Croatia.
Diplomats said Mr Reginald Bartholomew, the special US envoy, was trying to
persuade Mr Izetbegovic to accept a partition, while his Russian
counterpart, Mr Vitaly Churkin, was asking the Serbs to make concessions to
the Moslems.
Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg last night left the warring leaders on their
own behind closed doors to discuss the proposed maps.
