FT  16 NOV 93 / Technology: Industry on the cutting edge - The waterjet
process has come of age and is creating interest worldwide
At the LVD machine tool factory in Belgium, engineers have produced a jigsaw
puzzle map of Europe, adorned with the company logo, that has been cut on a
piece of blue foam rubber about half an inch thick.
A long way further east in Ukraine, automatic dismantling lines designed by
Ingersoll-Rand, the big US industrial equipment group, will soon be in place
to begin dismantling more than 200,000 tons of surplus Ukrainian ammunition.
The link between these two events is water. LVD is one of the most recent
entrants, while I-R was one of the pioneers in waterjet cutting technology.
This process is in use by, or being considered by, a wide range of
industries from fish-finger manufacturers to stone and glass cutters. So
far, automotive and aerospace companies have been the biggest users of the
process.
As is also the case with most technologies involving water, the basics of
the process are simple. Water is filtered, then passed through a powerful
pump and intensifier. It is then squeezed out of a nozzle with a diameter
varying from 0.1mm to 0.3mm, at a pressure of up to 4,000bar.
The result is a stream of water travelling at speeds ranging between Mach
two and three. Alone, the water will cut through paper, frozen foods, thin
wood, car interiors, sponge and rubber and certain plastics, but if
abrasives are added it will cut through steel up to 150mm thick. Waterjet
cutting is not that new - I-R introduced its first waterjet cutting systems
in 1971 and found some of its first applications in the furniture industry.
But the technology has come of age and is generating increased interest
worldwide.
I-R is one of the leading players, along with another pioneer and US rival,
Flow International. This pair dominates the industry, which also includes
companies such as Indiana-based ASI Robotic Systems and Bystronic Maschinen
of Switzerland. There are many smaller players offering niche products and
buying in the pumps.
ln the 1970s, the system was perceived to be too slow, says Paul Etchells,
UK, Ireland and Benelux sales manager for ABB I-R Robotised Waterjet
Systems, a joint venture between I-R and Asea Brown Boveri, the
Swiss-Swedish engineering group.
'But the initial problems have been resolved and since the early 1980s,
we've had highly reliable systems being used in high-volume production,' he
says.
The introduction of abrasives has been the main driving force for the
industrial development of waterjet cutting. A powdered abrasive known as
garnet is introduced through a tube into a tiny mixing chamber before the
water leaves the nozzle. The water then acts as a carrying agent for the
abrasive, which moves almost as fast as the water and does the cutting.
This process has coincided with the growing use by automotive and aerospace
companies of materials ranging from sophisticated plastics and composites to
aluminium and titanium. It has offered faster and more accurate cutting than
traditional methods such as sawing, routing, or cutting with a hot wire.
At Rockwell International, for example, I-R's waterjet cutters were used on
titanium components for the B-1B bomber, which would previously have been
produced through a four-stage process of inking, scribing, hand cutting and
filing. Waterjet cutting eliminated the first two stages and reduced the
filing, so that 12 parts could be cut and finished in the time taken to
polish one part produced by sawing.
Aerospace companies have also found that by using waterjets, they can cut
composite materials without delaminating the edges. Delamination is an
anathema as it can weaken the whole piece: 'It would be like having a piece
of cardboard with a wet edge,' says Ivan Lockett, LVD's UK managing
director.
The second important development has been the tie-ups between robotics
suppliers and vendors of waterjet cutting systems, such as the two-year-old
ABB I-R joint venture. Once attached to a sophisticated, computer-controlled
robot, a waterjet can move around and across a three-dimensional part such
as a car dashboard, cutting the outline and creating the holes for the
instruments.
Along with car carpets and headliners - the inside of the roof - dashboards
are the most popular applications for waterjet cutting in the automotive
industry.
The advantages of waterjet cutting include its flexibility and easy
maintenance. It produces no dust or toxic fumes and the component is not
affected by heat distortion. There is no cutting tool to wear out, although
the nozzle has to be changed occasionally.
But there are drawbacks. The process is noisy, although that can be reduced
by cutting underwater - with the component just below the water surface.
Although the basic running cost without abrasive is only Pounds 3 an hour,
the cost rises to Pounds 10-Pounds 18 with abrasive, says Etchells.
Also, while the process uses very small amounts of water, because the jet is
so thin, the abrasive cannot be recycled, and a typical metal-cutting
application will use 1kg every three minutes, according to LVD. Research is
under way in Germany to find ways to recycle the abrasive, which ends up wet
and contaminated with bits of the component.
For thin metals - for example, steel up to 16mm - cutting with a laserjet
can be five to 10 times faster. Beyond that, however, laserjets are much
slower and rarely used, while the shininess of metals such as copper, brass
and aluminium make it possible to cut only very thin sheets with lasers.
There are occasional problems, too, with the continuation of the waterjet
after it has cut through the component. In three-dimensional work,
situations can arise where the jet will damage a part of the robot, but
cutting in water may provide the solution.
Nevertheless, waterjet cutting has built up an impressive reference list
after more than 20 years. Most US-built airliners, for example, will have
components produced by waterjet. Boeing will be using three big ASI robotic
waterjet cutting machines for the tail section supports and other large
parts for the new 777 airliner.
In I-R's Ukrainian contract, high-pressure waterjets will remove explosives
from tank ammunition artillery shells and mortar rounds without detonating
it. The machines have been ordered by Alliant Techsystems, the big
Minnesota-based munitions manufacturer.
LVD, meanwhile, entered the waterjet cutting market through an agreement
with ASI last year to market the systems in Europe. The Belgian company is
one of the world's biggest producers of machinery for cutting, punching and
bending sheet metal and sees waterjet cutting as complementary to its
laserjet cutters.
In September, it introduced the Aquarius range of machines, mainly for
cutting flat surfaces, but will also market ASI's 3-D systems in Europe.
According to Jean-Pierre Lefebvre, LVD's president, Europe is a step behind
the US in the application of waterjet cutting and the process could
represent 10 per cent of LVD's business in 10 years.
In the future, waterjet cutting is likely to become increasingly integrated
with other parts of the production process. This is already happening -
ASI's system for the 777 tail section, for example, inspects the parts after
they are cut, using a probe from Renishaw of the UK to carry out co-ordinate
measuring.
Not to be outdone, the ABB I-R joint venture recently won an order from
Statoil Europarts, based in Sweden, for a robotised system that cuts,
cleans, washes and dries vehicle instrument panels. It claims that this is
the first time all four operations have been carried out in the same piece
of equipment.
