FT  29 MAR 93 / Survey of Latin American Finance (9): Influences on foreign
direct investors
EXTENT of future development of regional free trade areas will have a
significant impact on longer-term direct investment trends. Ratification of
Nafta - due this year to go before the legislatures of the three countries -
would provide an important pointer.
The huge direct investment into Europe in the 1980s ahead of the creation of
the single market strongly suggests that companies are driven to invest not
only by fears of future trade barriers but also by expectations of improved
growth opportunities.
According to the International Finance Corporation, the private sector arm
of the World Bank, market size is one of the most important considerations
in making investment location decisions, while prospects for market growth
are also particularly important. Larger 'home' markets mean bigger local
sales, which are usually more profitable than exports. Larger markets offer
more diverse resources to make local sourcing more feasible.
According to the IFC, relative costs continue to play an important role in
influencing decisions on the location of foreign direct investment. But some
factors are now less important, in part because direct labour costs in many
industries now account for only 10-15 per cent of manufacturing costs.
To encourage direct investment, many Latin American governments may be
tempted to offer subsidies. A more sensible response would be further
reforms, for example of the labour market. Social security and other systems
act in many countries as a payroll tax and sharply raise the costs of
employing labour while often providing marginal benefits to employees.
With the rising cost of white-collar workers, there is an important
attraction if countries offer a pool of well-educated labour. Many Latin
American economies are well-equipped to offer such labour, although there is
often insufficient skilled labour. There is thus a gap between the highly
educated and the unskilled workers, which can be filled only by improvements
in education systems that have deteriorated over the last decade.
A country's legal system is also critically important. For foreign investors
 -as well as for ordinary citizens - the legal systems of the region leave
much to be desired. Investors are conscious that while Latin America's
judicial processes may be more developed than those of east Europe, they are
still often arbitrary and prone to corruption. The dictum of the Mexican
president Benito Juarez still often applies: 'To my enemies the law; to my
friends everything.'
Perceived country risk also continues to be important to investors, but it
is obviously less so in some industries where, for example, returns are high
or where operations can be terminated rapidly without undue cost, such as
garment assembly. The advertised fast payback period is presumably why some
investors are willing to consider tourist developments in Cuba, where the
risk of political upheaval is hardly remote.
Potential investors also look at the level of existing foreign investment
for assurance and at the possibility of synergies developing as foreign
firms become one another's suppliers. Such a development is already in
evidence in the Mexican car industry.
The quality of infrastructure is an important determinant of the attraction
of foreign direct investment. This underlines again - as in education - the
importance of an appropriate public investment policy as an essential
element in the encouragement of private investment.
FDI prospects depend also on what is happening in a company's traditional
markets. Just as portfolio investors started looking at emerging markets
when returns at home dropped, so corporate investors have stretched out to
developing countries in an attempt to raise their returns on capital.
Some companies facing mature markets at home where they have to battle
expensively with competitors for fractions of a percentage point in market
share are increasingly looking for a foothold in fast-growing developing
country markets. One illustration of this mature market phenomenon suggests
it costs 10 times more to attract one new visitor to Disneyland than it did
a decade or so ago.
Typical of these companies are those in what are now called fast-moving
consumer goods. One such company is Nestle, which first entered Latin
America in 1876, selling to Brazil. It established its first sales office in
Rio de Janeiro in 1914, with a factory in 1921. Today it has 70 plants and
30,000 people in Latin America, providing 11 per cent of Nestle turnover.
The region's share of the volume of production is higher than that, however,
because controls have kept prices down.
Partly because of the general lifting of price controls, Nestle is positive
about the region. After a 'lost decade', the company's sales in Argentina
have trebled in a year. It expects profit margins to recover faster than
sales, but investments will also be higher: its plans call for Dollars 2bn
of investment in the region during the 1990s.
Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch household goods group, is looking favourably at
Latin America and the Pacific and their sometimes 'phenomenal' growth rates,
contrasting them with the position in the US and Japan where the challenge
is 'the laborious winning of market share'. In many developing countries, a
small rise in GDP is enough to bring many new people into markets.
Pepsico said this month that it would invest about Dollars 750m over the
next five years on its bottling operations, extending its distribution
network and marketing its products more aggressively in Mexico.
COLGATE-PALMOLIVE is another company that has seen steady growth in its
Latin American operations since 1985. Now the company is considering
acquisitions in several countries, some of which would be sizeable. It is
interested in extending joint ventures, such as that with Clorox in Mexico
to manufacture bleach. It invested Dollars 50m in the region last year; in
1993 the figure could be significantly higher.
If they want to expand in Latin America, companies such as Colgate-Palmolive
are likely to establish production facilities there rather than export: the
reason is that the low value-to-weight ratio of its products makes it
expensive to transport them.
There are other areas where the region appears attractive to foreign
investors, as the interest in the privatisation of Argentine utilities -
including British Gas's investment in the Buenos Aires gas distribution
company - shows.
Service industries - hotels and financial services, for example - have also
attracted foreign investment. Services have grown considerably in importance
in worldwide FDI: they represented a quarter of FDI stock at the end of the
1970s, but by the end of the 1980s, they represented half of the FDI stock
and 55-60 per cent of all new flows.
Yet, from the Latin American perspective, both service industries and
utilities are areas where competition from foreign tradeable goods is
limited - because there is no significant competition with imports.
Moreover, privatisation encourages capital inflows, but it is a one-off
phenomenon.
There is thus a need to look at the attraction of FDI in Latin America
industry by industry. Chocolate, toothpaste, water, hotels and banking are
important sectors, but it is still hard to see how direct investment in
these areas is going to yield increased exports. And on this, the success of
the model in large part depends.
But there is one area where foreign direct investors regularly mention Latin
America's comparative advantage: its wealth of natural resources. From the
FDI perspective, the freedom that the Chilean government has given to
foreign investors in exploiting its natural resources has been an important
element of Chile's success in attracting investment. Yet many countries -
including the region's two largest economies, Mexico and Brazil - have laws
which substantially forbid foreign investment in the mining and oil sectors.
Foreign raw material exploitation will not provide the answer to the
region's problems of development. But allowing it could well increase
capital flows to the region during a potentially difficult transitional
period when much domestic industrial capacity that depended on import
substitution for survival is closed down.
In fact, the main benefit of FDI over time will lie more in the transfer of
technology than in medium-term balance of payments financing. It fosters
industrial development and the creation of human capital, and provides
access to scarce technology, marketing links and management know-how.
Over a period of time, successful FDI entails a stream of service payments
which will reduce the transfers of resources. US Commerce Department
statistics show that in 1991 income from US direct investment in Mexico was
Dollars 2.3bn, which exceeded new direct investment from the US in that
year.
From 1965 to 1986, net transfers on FDI (that is new investment minus
remitted profits) to all developing countries were either negative or only
marginally positive. The current popularity of FDI in the region may
therefore wane as remittances start adversely to affect the balance of
payments.
