FT  10 MAR 93 / Leading Article: Major must persevere
BRITAIN WILL ratify the Maastricht treaty. If it fails to do so it will lose
its influence in Europe and probably Mr John Major's Conservative government
as well. That is why it is highly likely - nothing is certain - that the
necessary legislation will be passed during the next six months. The defeat
of the government on a minor amendment on Monday night demonstrated that the
Conservative party is divided, and that the prime minister is ruling from a
position of parliamentary weakness. But that is merely to confirm what was
already well-known. It does not mean that the bill will be thrown out.
Nor should it be. The treaty, which is not perfect, is the product of long
negotiations during which a number of important concessions were made to
British sensibilities. The debate about the degree to which the Maastricht
agreement represents a step towards a European federal state is sterile; the
fact is that British business believes it has a chance of prospering within
the wider European economy, while it would be hard-pressed to thrive if it
is obliged to compete alone in the deep blue sea. Even those who are
unwilling to concede the merits of Maastricht as a logical development of
the single market should accept that for the UK it represents the minimum
price of admission to European deliberations.
Most members of the House of Commons understand this. The three national
parties fought the election last April on manifestos that indicated support
for Britain's developing membership of the European Community. Each one has
its contingent of Europhobes, but the prevailing view among Conservative,
Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs alike is that the Maastricht treaty must be
ratified.
Mr Major should do all he can to ensure that the voice of this majority
prevails as soon as possible. The delays caused by the tactics of the bills'
various critics and opponents are getting in the way of other business. If
the process is dragged on through the summer Britain's commitment to
honouring its signature may begin to be questioned by Community partners and
potential investors.
The blame for delay should not be shouldered by the prime minister alone,
although the government's tactics have been less than brilliant. Labour and
the Liberal Democrats, both ostensibly committed to ratification, have
become shameless opportunists. The leader of the Liberal Democrats, Mr Paddy
Ashdown, wants his party to be noticed; the Labour leader, Mr John Smith,
needs to maintain unity in his own ranks by being seen to attack the
government whenever possible. The votes of both these 'pro-European' parties
were cynically combined with those of the anti-European Tory rebels on
Monday.
There is not much that Mr Major can do to end the rebels' filibuster, or
even to avoid defeat on Britain's opt-out from the social chapter. He cannot
agree with Labour that Britain should opt in to the social chapter. That
would be unacceptable to a majority of Conservatives. He cannot agree to the
rebels' demand for a referendum before the treaty is ratified; that would
make a nonsense of his own previous statements, and might even fail to pass
through the House.
He could, however, promise a referendum before Britain opts in to a European
single currency, if a future government chooses to do so. That would not
prevent ratification now. It may allay the fears of at least a few
Eurosceptics. Such an offer should only be considered as a last resort.
Meanwhile Mr Major must persevere, and take his knocks as the bill is fought
according to Britain's quaint rules of parliamentary procedure.
