FT  21 OCT 93 / Kohl learns to say Nein to EC partners: A unified Germany
wants more from Brussels in return for its role of paymaster
FOR more than five years, there was an unwritten rule in EC budget
negotiations: sit tight, if necessary through the night, and wait for
Chancellor Helmut Kohl to cough up the money.
These days, the EC can no longer count on Mr Kohl's grand coeur. Weighed
down by the costs of unification, Germany is less willing to play the role
of paymaster, less reticent about pushing its national interests, and more
unpredictable in its behaviour within the Community.
Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, has sensed the mood
swing. He has given a spate of interviews and speeches in Germany, warning
Germans about the risks of becoming wrapped up in post-unification problems
and ignoring the wider interests of her European neighbours. German-watchers
in Brussels believe that German assertiveness within the EC is the
inevitable consequence of its new size and power. 'This will require
adjustments for everybody,' says one EC official, 'including France.'
Perhaps the most dramatic expression of the national interest was during the
collapse of the European exchange rate mechanism last August. Bundesbank and
finance ministry officials refused not only to succumb to French pressure to
force the D-Mark out of the ERM; they also struck a deal with the Dutch to
maintain the old 4.5 per cent fluctuation margin with the guilder. The rest
of the ERM currencies reverted to 30 per cent fluctuation margins.
Such assertiveness should not be interpreted as a shift in Germany's
European policy. Despite signs that German public opinion is more lukewarm
about the EC than for many years, Mr Kohl has refused to compromise on his
enthusiasm for the Maastricht treaty and the desirability of deeper European
integration.
On the other hand, Brussels officials have identified several issues which
reflect the Bonn government's recent willingness to say Nein to its EC
partners.
An insistence that German farmers be compensated for the revaluation of the
D-Mark as a result of the suspension of the ERM. Bonn wants full operation
of the so-called 'switchover' mechanism, even though the future costs to the
EC budget could be prohibitive.
A refusal to abide by EC limits on the amount of land which can be sown with
cereals in eastern Germany. Germany argues that Brussels miscalculated the
'base area' in 1992 by failing to include 180,000 ha devoted to maize.
An informal non-aggression pact with the US covering potential
telecommunications sanctions. Brussels argues that the pact challenged the
principle of a unified EC trade policy; German officials say the row has
been quietly buried.
German insistence that the Ekostahl steel plant in former East Germany
should be considered eligible for some state subsidies. Brussels officials
believe this stubbornness could wreck efforts to reach a deal to reconstruct
Europe's ailing steel industry.
A senior German official argues that Ekostahl is a test case. The EC should
show more flexibility, recognising that arrangements for reductions of steel
capacity in Italy and Spain are unlikely to be water-tight. The closure of
Ekostahl would invite an anti-EC backlash throughout the east, he says. The
EC is already planning to double its aid to east Germany next year from the
current annual figure of Ecu1bn (Pounds 770m). But some EC officials believe
that more needs to be done. One senior official notes that East Germany
failed to win the same generous 'derogations' on agriculture which were
accorded to Spain and Portugal during their entry negotiations. Yet as a
former Communist country, East Germany's problems of transition were
arguably more severe. 'Remember the second language was Russian, not
English,' he says.
One of the most sensitive questions regarding post-unification Germany is
its political weight within the EC. A recent paper by Mr Karl Lamers,
foreign affairs spokesman of the ruling Christian Democrat Union, advocated
strengthening the voting rights of the big powers in the EC.
Though the Lamers paper did not enjoy official status, it received support
in some parts of the Bonn bureaucracy. The proposition that a country with
80m people should have greater voting strength in an enlarged Community has
a certain logic, but it remains controversial for historical and political
reasons.
The signs are that Bonn has modified its position on institutional reform,
mainly because Mr Kohl has no desire to jeopardise the enlargement
negotiations with Finland, Norway, Sweden and Austria. At the same time,
countries such as France recognise that the pure application of demographics
would inevitably break voting parity with Germany.
However, its seems that Brussels and the member states will have to adjust
their policies to accommodate Germany. Hence the willingness of France and
the UK to cave in quietly to Mr Kohl's campaign to bring the European
Monetary Institute to Germany, most likely Frankfurt. 'It is the price for
Germany giving up the Deutschemark,' says one French official.
France is ready to support putting the European Monetary Institute, embryo
of the European central bank, in Germany, according to Mr Alain Juppe,
France's foreign minister, in an interview appearing in today's in the
Rheinischer Merkur newspaper, writes David Buchan in Paris.
However, France is not prepared to endorse siting the EMI specifically in
Frankfurt, as Chancellor Helmut Kohl insists should be decided at next
week's EC summit. France fears that choosing Frankfurt might whip up concern
in at home about German hegemony, but seems increasingly to accept that this
may be the only way of stirring German enthusiasm for eventual monetary
union. Lyons, France's official candidate, was yesterday still hopeful of
emerging as a compromise choice for the European bank.
Editorial comment, Page 23
