FT  11 DEC 93 / Fostering a culture of contempt
Hugh Dickinson asks how vulnerable families can be expected to produce good
children
What is happening to us? After the first wave of shock and rage over the
latest awful incident of child violence or psychopathic cruelty - or even
worse, non-psychopathic cruelty - has receded, different voices can be heard
in radio interviews and letters to the press. They hold a note of puzzled
horror. What caused people to behave like that? What causes children to
behave horribly? If we knew the cause, we could allocate the blame.
Grown men with guns in Bosnia doing a spot of ethnic cleansing is one thing.
But child murderers in Britain? What is going on? Could the atrocities of
Bosnia be lurking just under the surface of England's green and pleasant
land?
Is there more wickedness about? I know no sensible calculus of evil. I
suspect that all human communities have a certain quantum of evil sloshing
about in the bilges and leaking out in different ways.
The fabric of social controls which keep it from flooding out and destroying
civilised behaviour are only built with immense patience and moral courage.
Many of those controls are now being wantonly eroded. Looking for scapegoats
we often focus in the wrong place. Above all we long to punish - violently.
Are the two lads in Liverpool who so brutally bashed the life out of a
weeping toddler so 'uniquely wicked' that they must be punished by shutting
them up for 'many, many years?' For a 10-year-old, is 20 years in prison
punishment, containment or therapy?
The murder was indeed grotesque. It has aroused a tidal wave of punitive
rage, particularly in the neighbouring housing estates. One of the most
memorable images from all the bizarre media coverage of this horrible little
tragedy was the picture of adult men and women surging forward behind the
control barriers, their faces contorted by grimaces of animal rage, shaking
their fists and yelling obscenities at the police vans bringing the two boys
to court.
Brutality to small children rouses violent passions. Yet, if the crowd could
have got at these two, it would have torn them to pieces. Instinctive rage
is not a good base for moral discrimination.
By what scale of values are the two 10-year-olds categorised as 'uniquely
wicked?' Yes, the deed was horrific. Any normal child brought up to be aware
of and care for the feelings of others, particularly smaller and weaker
people, should have an instinctive or acquired revulsion against such
brutality. But adults have put images of extreme violence in front of
children for years.
Quite apart from violent fantasy, the real world feeds our imaginations with
nightmares every day: a 16-year-old girl tortured slowly to death; horses
maimed; a bar sprayed with bullets; pedestrians slaughtered by drunken
drivers. Hasn't the threshold of moral inhibition dropped dramatically in
the past 15 years? Certainly, violent crime is now common among much younger
children.
All the panels and leading articles and media interviews ask the same
question: why did it happen? Wickedness is real enough. But it does not hide
just in the place where punitive rage focuses the prurient lenses of the
press. And it is increasingly difficult to know where wickedness ends and
insanity begins - or sickness.
Are drug addicts wicked? We do not punish insanity, not even grossly
criminal insanity. We lock it away and try - albeit half-heartedly - to cure
it. There might be a genetic component to both insanity and wickedness but,
certainly, both are largely the product of the interaction of environment
and personality. A society in which the delicate network of community values
and community feeling has dissolved will breed mental illness, insanity and
wickedness. The fault lies in ourselves and in our stars.
Any parish priest or GP will tell you, however, that individuals and
families are feeling themselves increasingly isolated in a disintegrating
community. How far that is the unwitting consequence of public policies over
the past decade is hard to tell. The culture of contempt has been fostered
deliberately in politics and among the comfortable classes.
Collective responsibility has been undermined in the cabinet, in parliament,
in local government and on the streets. Every man - yes, man - for himself
and the weak go to the wall. Is that wickedness? How can vulnerable families
with inadequate parents and no money be expected to produce sane and good
children in such a climate? Amazingly, many do.
The people who might help them - teachers and social workers - equally are
the object of public contempt. It seems we must have someone to kick. If we
can locate evil in a class of people, in a foreign country, in aliens or in
two small boys, we can project into them the darkness which is in ourselves
but which we dare not own. Then we can beat the living daylights out of
them.
A cabinet minister said recently that we should have less 'understanding'
and more moral condemnation of anti-social behaviour. Would he, I wonder,
have 'understood' the sale of arms to Iraq, an action which resulted in the
gruesome deaths of thousands. Would he be 'understanding' of adultery among
his fellow ministers?
The trouble is that if we begin to understand, we find that these simplistic
black and white condemnations do not fit the moral complexities of human
behaviour; in fact, they often turn out to be positively wicked. It puzzles
me that we have to turn to the commentators in the foreign press to find any
hint that the treatment of the two small boys by the press and the court
might itself be thought an instance of extraordinary wickedness.
Or is this urge to condemn, itself a kind of sickness? The psychopath is so
sick that he has no inkling of what it is like to be another person. Doing
gruesome things to them may produce awful pleasures in himself, but there is
a complete dissociation between his inner world and outside reality.
That might have been the case with one of the convicted boys. It certainly
appears to be the case with certain aspects of our society. There seems to
be no real empathy for the accumulating pain down there on the streets of
Britain - only a puzzled angry surprise when it explodes in wicked deeds.
After a decade of punishment, I think Britain plc needs some TLC.
Hugh Dickinson is Dean of Salisbury
