FT  08 NOV 93 / Sweden shows effects of painful cure: Efforts to reform the
ailing welfare system
SWEDEN ran out of influenza vaccine this month, well before winter had
exerted its icy grip. The shortage captured headlines at a time when the
country's much-vaunted welfare system is under enormous strain and is often
said to be breaking down in the face of recession and political pressure for
reform.
The shortage was not, in fact, a shocking sign that the health service had
run out of money for vaccines. But it was directly linked to changes under
way in Sweden's welfare system for several years, shaking its structure more
dramatically than at any time since its construction was completed in the
1960s and 1970s.
In the case of the influenza vaccine, reforms earlier this year in sick pay
regulations, placing responsibility for payment for the first two weeks off
work on the employer, not the state as before, led to an unforeseen surge in
demand for innoculations as employers organised vaccination programmes to
keep down sick pay costs.
Reforms in the sick-leave system have helped produce a more significant
effect in the economy as a whole: in the past three years absenteeism in
Sweden, once a chronic problem, has fallen sharply, from levels where three
out of 10 workers were off 'sick' at any time, to less than one in 10 today.
But rapid growth in unemployment, from less than 5 per cent to more than 13
per cent today, has probably been the most important factor in falling
absenteeism, as fear of job losses has sharpened the incentive to work hard.
This indicates a wider question about the changes in the Swedish welfare
system. To what extent have they been forced on the country by economic
recession, or have been adopted because of broad recognition that the system
had to be reformed to regenerate the economy? When the economy finally picks
up, will 'the Swedish model', however battered, be patched up more or less
in its old form, or are deep structural reforms going to render it
unrecognisable?
The answer probably lies somewhere in between. By the end of the 1980s, the
sheer scale of the public sector in Sweden, and the taxes needed to support
it, had become unsustainable, especially when compounded by economic
downturn. Cash transfers and funding of the health and education systems
grew to 33 per cent of gross domestic product, compared with 24 per cent in
Britain. The tax take in 1987 was 55 per cent of GNP, compared to an OECD
average of 40 per cent.
The subsequent crisis has been so great, with the budget deficit climbing
inexorably to a forecast 15 per cent of GNP next year, that the Social
Democratic party, the architect of the welfare state, has not only
acknowledged the need for reforms, but actively participated in them.
Before losing office in 1991 to the right-centre coalition of Prime Minister
Carl Bildt, the Social Democrats, under their present leader Mr Ingvar
Carlsson, had began the process of cutting Sweden's huge marginal tax rates
and have since gone along with reforms such as the changes in sick pay. Mr
Bo Goransson, a Social Democratic expert on the welfare state, says the
'welfare equation' shifted from a viable balance where 55 per cent of people
in work supported the 45 per cent who were not productive. But the position
today, where only 48 per cent of the population are working, cannot sustain
the old welfare system.
To shift the balance back again, the Social Democrats are prepared for more
reforms - for example in the generous state pension system - to generate
more incentives to work and for employment creation. These, says Mr
Goransson, could be radical.
But the party has pledged to preserve and defend the essentials of the
system. 'We want to make it more visible and autonomous with more direct
links between what you pay and what you get. The redistributive element in
the system won't be so dominant, but the Social Democrats want it to
continue,' says Mr Goransson.
For the time being, to an outsider, Sweden still preserves a great deal of
its welfare provisions: cuts in unemployment benefit still leave dole levels
at 80 per cent of salary; child day care is universally available and
charges are low compared to private systems; generous maternity/paternity
leave is still in place.
On the tax side, employers' social security contributions remain above 30
per cent of employee salaries and marginal income tax of 50 per cent kicks
in at around Dollars 25,000 a year. The standard rate of VAT is 25 per cent.
Mr Bildt's conservative Moderate party would like to take the process of
reform much further. Mr Olav Ehrenkrona, the prime minister's top domestic
policy adviser, talks of extending competition in almost all areas
monopolised by the state, including health and education. 'The problem is a
question of national competitiveness,' he said. 'How do you have overall
conditions that enhance growth and productivity? We have a long way to go
before we have an efficient service sector.'
He says it will be a gradual but inevitable process. But his vision is by no
means shared by political opponents. The extent to which the Swedish welfare
model is ultimately refined or restructured will not be clear at least until
after next year's election.
Previous articles in this series on welfare states across the world were
published on October 25 and November 3.
