FT  29 APR 93 / Survey of Baden-Wuerttemberg (6): Scenery soaked in history
in the shadow of the Alps - Tourist facilities are on the increase
RUDOLF Forcher, mayor of Waldsee, likes to quiz his visitors about the
origin of his medieval town's name. Most think it stands for 'the lake near
the forest', the literal translation of Waldsee.
Historically minded visitors link it with Valdes, reputed founder of a 12th
century heretical movement who was in these parts before settling in the
Swiss canton of Vaud.
Mr Forcher has a more startling explanation - that the name actually derives
from the monks of Wales who travelled throughout Europe in the Dark Ages,
including Baden-Wurttemberg from where they passed on to Switzerland.
'Those who guess it get burned at the stake because we believe they know too
much,' the mayor jokes, referring to the witchcraft trials for which the
place is famous.
Behind him, large iron hooks are anchored in the solid walls of the medieval
town house. Standing up to look on a stone column where dates are inscribed,
Mr Forcher proudly points to 1530, the year 55 witches were enchained there,
interrogated and burned.
'Don't worry, we like tourists here,' he says smiling. 'We like diversity,'
he adds, grabbing a catalogue listing the various pedigrees of local
livestock. 'You see, our best ruminants come from Swiss cows and American
bulls.'
Mr Forcher can go on hours telling historical anecdotes and praising the
beauty of his region.
Together with other local personalities, he is a walking brochure listing
all the tourist attractions Baden-Wurttemberg can offer.
With 11m visitors and 38m accommodation bookings per year, Baden-Wurttemberg
rivals Bavaria as the most popular tourist area in Germany.
One of the best-known areas is the Black Forest with its romantic valleys
and narrow gorges. Lake Constance, with its panoramic views of the Swiss
Alps, is another perpetual favourite. Other attractions include numerous
spas such as Baden-Baden.
Baden-Wurttemberg offers, together with Bavaria, some of the best baroque
architecture in Germany. From a distance, the onion roof of Steinhausen
church could belong to an Austrian or Bohemian landscape. (The Austrians
controlled the area until Napoleon's conquest in 1806.)
Tourism, which earns some DM15bn a year for 200,000 businesses, rivals
agriculture as an important source of revenue, accounting for 4-5 per cent
of the state's gdp.
Unlike manufacturing, tourism has not yet been hit by the recession. The
number of tourists rose by 3.9 per cent in 1991.
But while most tourists are German, more foreigners are also arriving.
Between 1985 and 1989, foreign tourists increased by 12.5 per cent and
tourists from other EC countries rose by 20 per cent. The average stay is
four days.
To maintain this rising trend, Mr Dieter Spori, economics minister, is
anxious Spoto to improve facilities for youngsters and for the elderly.
Because of the recession, fewer Germans can afford the luxury of a fortnight
in the mud baths of the area's spas.
But, with Germans enjoying the longest vacations in Europe, it will remain
popular as a place for a second holiday. It offers Germans many of the
attractions of neighbouring French Alsace and German Switzerland but without
the anti-German sentiments evident in some of those areas.
'I finally put my finger on it and devised my moto,' says Mr Ulrich Ehrhardt
who oversees tourism around Lake Constance: 'If you want a holiday from your
last holiday, Baden-Wurttemberg is the place.'
