FT  07 JUL 93 / Frustrated loyalists turn violent: Heightened tension
marking Orange Order marches
THE RECENT eruptions of loyalist violence in Northern Ireland have made a
traditionally fraught weekend more tense.
As the Orange Order marching season reaches its climax, police and
firefighters have come under gun and bomb attack for three consecutive
nights. These have resulted in injuries to 12 civilians and two police
officers. There have been 35 shooting incidents, 21 of them at police, 48
petrol-bomb attacks, 70 malicious fires and 63 vehicle hijacks.
The trigger for the violence may have been the decision by the Royal Ulster
Constabulary to divert an Orange Lodge march last Thursday by a mere 150
yards, away from what is now a predominantly Catholic area around Ainsworth
Avenue in west Belfast.
A hand grenade, carried by a loyalist paramilitary and apparently intended
to be thrown at the police, exploded in the middle of the march, killing the
grenade's carrier and injuring many others. Rioting began after the man's
funeral on Friday.
Unionist leaders say that tensions have been building up for some time in
Protestant communities. Mr Nigel Dodds, a Belfast city councillor for the
Democratic Unionist Party, said: 'We have been warning for some time that
there is a growing sense of alienation amongst the loyalist community. There
is frustration that people are not being listened to. There is fear that the
situation is not under their control. There is a perception that more money
is now going into republican areas than loyalist ones, and that it is now
harder for Protestants to get jobs than for Catholics.'
A number of events have added to a growing siege mentality among loyalists.
These include the recent controversial visit of Mrs Mary Robinson, president
of the Irish Republic, to west Belfast where she shook hands with Mr Gerry
Adams, the Sinn Fein president; the bilateral talks between Mr John Hume,
SDLP leader, and Mr Adams; and the failure to restart the round-table
political talks process since November.
There has been a rapid increase in loyalist paramilitary attacks. The RUC
says there have been 29 civilian deaths from paramilitary activity so far
this year, the majority of them attributable to loyalists. The constabulary
adds it has stepped up its policing of loyalist housing estates 'as the
level of crime has necessitated'. It is this, as much as anything, which has
apparently angered the loyalist paramilitary. Last weekend, the outlawed
Ulster Freedom Fighters said they were behind the rioting and warned the RUC
to stop 'its repression of loyalist paramilitaries'.
The re-routeing of the march was thus seen as the final stir of an already
dangerously boiling pot.
According to Mr Dodds: 'The (paramilitaries) would not have been on the
streets if the parade had not been diverted.' He said that the march's
routeing was seen as interference from Dublin and that the RUC 'are acting
at the behest of Dublin. It's none of their business where marches go in
Northern Ireland.'
The Irish Republic's foreign ministry acknowledged yesterday that the
routeing of Orange marches in Ulster 'is always a matter of concern to the
Irish government' and said the issue is a matter of 'ongoing discussions'
between the two governments.
The ministry said the concern is for the right to demonstrate 'with due
respect for the rights and sensibilities of others and with due regard for
the maintenance of public order'.
The controversy appears to be deepening with allegations that an officer
from the RUC negotiated directly with a member of the Ulster Defence
Association last weekend in an effort to reduce loyalist street violence.
According to the RUC there are no plans for re-routeing this weekend's
marches. Around 18 are due to be held across the province. The biggest will
be in Belfast next Monday to mark William of Orange's victory at the Battle
of the Boyne in 1690 over James II which ended the latter's attempt to win
back the British crown for the Catholic church.
For most republicans, the Orange marches with their beating drums, banners
and Union Jacks, are a provocative affirmation of Protestant supremacy in
the province, especially when they are allowed to be routed through
predominantly Catholic areas. Protestants for their part are equally
incensed by the ubiquitous flying of the Irish tricolour in many republican
neighbourhoods.
So instead of re-routeing marches this weekend, the RUC plans to have a
heavy security presence at flashpoints such as the Lower Ormeau Road in
Belfast where five Catholics were killed in February last year in a loyalist
attack on a bookmaker's shop.
Whether this will be sufficient to prevent trouble remains to be seen, and
the appearance of gun and grenade-toting loyalist paramilitaries on the
marches ready to do battle with the police is not a good omen.
Mr Dodds said: 'I believe there is a grave danger of the situation
deteriorating.' To defuse the tensions he said that the British government
must take 'a firmer stance' with Dublin - the republic should drop its
territorial claim to Northern Ireland. 'This will get unionists back to the
negotiating table. Otherwise any renewed talks will only end in failure or
betrayal and we are not going to be part of either.'
