FT  16 DEC 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Grain traders eye post-Gatt
Europe - US futures exchanges are jockeying to be the first to offer risk
management in freshly-competitive markets
European Union cereal growers may view the gradual erosion of export
subsidies under the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade with
foreboding, but the world's biggest futures markets are anticipating the
adjustments with considerable excitement and are already jockeying to be the
first to provide risk management services to freshly-competitive markets.
'There is going to be a fundamental shift in the way commodities are priced
and marketed, but it is going to take several years,' says Carol Brookins,
president of the Washington-based consulting firm World Perspectives. 'If
you're no longer protected from the world market, you will tend to need ways
to manage risks.'
World grain traders have hedged risks and established world prices in the
Chicago Board of Trade's wheat, maize, and soyabean futures pits for more
than a century, regardless of the origin or destinations of their produce.
At the end of November, the CBoT had traded more than 5m agricultural
futures contracts this year. Now the CBoT is girding its loins for
challenges and co-operation in Europe.
Two weeks ago exchange members voted to form a foreign consulting subsidiary
to lend technical expertise and other assistance to emerging futures
markets. In exchange for its services, the CBoT will seek equity interest in
the new markets, or low rates for trading access for its members.
Although the subsidiary is equipped to deal with financial futures, 'I think
the immediate demand will be in the agricultural area, as large parts of the
world move from government-controlled markets to open market mechanisms',
says Mr Fred Grede, the CBoT's executive vice president for strategy and
planning. While the new subsidiary has no contracts yet, there have been
many inquiries, Mr Grede says. The CBoT is also seeking co-operative
ventures with established exchanges.
Its first venture may well be with the Matif, France's fast-growing futures
exchange. Matif is best known for its government bond contracts, but in 1988
it merged with the French commodities exchange and it is now well-positioned
to become a dominant player in European agricultural derivatives.
While wheat futures in Paris may have to wait until the market opens further
with the implementation of Gatt, rapeseed prices are already at world
levels, making the need for a futures markets more urgent. Matif plans to
launch rapeseed futures next year, in co-operation with the french oilseeds
trade group, Onidol.
That contract could open the door for other European agricultural
derivatives. The success of Matif's rapeseed project depends on the
participation of German and Danish producers. Like most European farmers,
they are not familiar with futures. 'We have a very extensive education
campaign ahead of us,' says a Matif official.
Officials at both the Matif and the CBoT say the two exchanges are
discussing co-operation on the rapeseed contract, and do not rule out the
possibility of a mutual offset arrangement between Chicago and Paris. Such
co-operation could give the contract more liquidity, and a longer trading
day.
Germany may also make a bid for rapeseed futures. German laws prohibiting
futures trading are expected to be revised early next year. The regulatory
change could pave the way for futures trading in Hamburg, where Mr Peter
Grohmann, a futures consultant, is seeking financing for an exchange. Mr
Grohmann says that he plans to include pig futures, as well as energy and
financial contracts, in his product line.
Germany already has an electronically-traded financial futures exchange, the
DTB, but Mr Grohmann says starting an open-outcry exchange for commodities
will be difficult. 'Germany is in the childhood stages of futures trading.
Investors are very conservative, and producers don't know what futures are,'
he explains.
Although London is firmly the centre of European financial derivatives
trading, industry experts believe France, and the Matif, will evolve as
Europe's agricultural trading centre. 'France is the second largest
agricultural exporter in the world, and the Matif has the people, committed
members with expertise, who want to do it,' says Ann Berg, a veteran Chicago
grain trader and a newly-elected member of the Chicago Board of Trade.
