FT  09 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Down but still not out - The resilience of
George Walker
THERE IS a resilience to George Walker which says that he will not lie down
under the weight of a pending criminal trial.
Having fought off a Pounds 180m bankruptcy petition last autumn, his defence
of yesterday's charges of theft and false accounting will no doubt be as
pugnacious.
But his arrival at Holborn police station in London yesterday morning to be
arrested, apparently by appointment with the Serious Fraud Office, also
suggests he will not waste his strength on being unnecessarily
unco-operative.
Mr Walker's life can been regarded as a catalogue of setbacks or
disadvantages overcome, not that he would see it that way.
He was the East End boy who left school at 14; the light heavyweight boxer
on the verge of the big-time when a fight ended with his eyesight
permanently impaired; the lad who got mixed up with the wrong crowd and
ended up in prison; the businessman who built a public company and took it
private under threat of a takeover; the entrepreneur who made a comeback on
the stock market with a second public company, Brent Walker.
But equally he was the author of his ultimate downfall. His deals became
larger, and eventually the market turned against him soon after the last,
and biggest purchase - that of the William Hill betting shop business for
Pounds 685m - was completed.
By the middle of 1990 Brent Walker was desperate for cash and unable to sell
assets in a falling property market. In an attempt to raise some money, Mr
Walker arranged a Pounds 100m convertible bond issue, investing Pounds 30m
of his and his family's money - much of which was borrowed from banks now
anxious to see it returned - and recruiting many of the other investors
personally.
Again this episode characterises the man. The company would probably have
done better to go to its bankers and start the whole process of a financial
restructuring earlier. When the legal documents for the bond issue were
being drafted it rapidly became apparent that the company was in deep
trouble and a refinancing was inevitable.
But Mr Walker is a proud man, and would have hated to admit that he could
not sort out any difficulties the group had.
As the refinancing talks progressed, the bankers involved found him
difficult to deal with, and eventually demanded his removal from the board.
He lost his position as chairman in January 1991 and ceased being chief
executive in May that year. But he fought so fiercely that he was not
removed from the board until December, when shareholders approved the
refinancing plans.
He has also overcome severe health problems, having suffered two heart
attacks and major surgery for stomach ulcers. Nevertheless he still has the
look of a fighting fit man at the age of 62.
While bankers and some who did business with Mr Walker are little short of
vitriolic about him, he has throughout his life and business career,
inspired deep loyalties and friendships.
His family has always come first with him. He married his boss's daughter
and although he and his wife Jean make a most unlikely looking couple - he
has the build of a boxer and she is on the tiny side of petite - it seems to
be a devoted marriage.
Despite his hard image, his wife has described him as 'a big softie'
underneath. His children, and now his grandchildren, are a source of
delight.
Whatever the outcome of the trial, and Mr Walker, through his solicitor,
yesterday proclaimed his innocence of any dishonesty, he has a record as a
survivor.
