FT  24 DEC 93 / Motoring: Another vintage year ahead
Never mind the recession that has blighted sales of new cars in every
European country except Britain. This year's vintage crop of new models
looks like being followed by an equally bountiful one in 1994.
When the Detroit motor show opens in a fortnight, Saab will unveil
three-door, fixed-head coupe and two-door, convertible versions of its
well-received new 900 five-door. There will be a choice of three engines: a
155 horsepower 2.3i, a 175 hp V6, and a 190 hp two-litre turbo. British
sales start next spring and prices will be announced nearer the time.
Saab was astonished by the success of the present soft top, based on the old
900. Although introduced as a limited edition seven years after the original
900 was launched, it took off like a rocket and is still selling well.
A proper four-seater with a realistic boot, it has a power-operated top that
disappears completely and a glass rear window with defroster. But the new
one will be even better and promises to be a best-seller among convertibles.
The big Vauxhall Carlton (Opel Omega outside Britain) saloons and estate
cars are being replaced early in the new year. Their successors - Omegas,
whether badged as Vauxhalls or Opels - retain rear-wheel drive and will be
in British showrooms next spring.
Omegas will major on safety and security. Most will have airbags for drivers
and front passengers and remote dead-locking of the doors, plus an
immobiliser with 69 bn combinations; enough, one would think, to defeat even
the highest of high-tech thieves.
Petrol engines (all multi-valve) will be a 136 horsepower, two-litre
four-cylinder, and a pair of V6s - one a 2.5-litre producing 170 horsepower,
the other a 210 hp three-litre. The veteran General Motors 2.3-litre,
four-cylinder diesel is being replaced by a BMW-sourced 2.5-litre,
six-cylinder with turbo-charger and inter-cooler.
This engine - which is expected to be used also in a coming Range Rover
replacement - puts BMW's 3-Series and 5-Series diesels ahead of the pack at
present. In the Omega, there is a 'drive-by-wire' electronic link between
accelerator pedal and engine.
Omega diesels, meanwhile, will provide tough competition in the executive
class, especially when fitted with optional automatic transmission and
air-conditioning. BMW, initially most reluctant to sell diesels in Britain,
has been amazed to find them taking 12 per cent of sales, with eager buyers
on waiting lists. Vauxhall expects 15 per cent of Omegas sold in the UK to
be diesels.
Another important newcomer, due for launch on mainland Europe in January and
soon afterwards in Britain, is the Renault Laguna. Although this successor
to the 21 is a five-door hatchback - Renault pioneered this concept 30 years
ago with the R16 - the Laguna looks like a saloon, with a distinct family
resemblance to the larger Safrane.
Ford's Probe sports coupe, which comes to Britain in March, will be the
first American-built Ford to be sold in the UK in any volume for more than
70 years. An elegant 2+2, it began life as a Mazda and has done very well in
left-hand drive markets.
Is it a belated replacement for the Capri? Not really. That evergreen was an
inspired shuffling of Cortina components.
The Probe is far more sophisticated and pitched rather up-market of the
Capri. Front-wheel driven, it may have 2.5-litre V6 or two-litre,
four-cylinder, multi-valve engines of 163 and 115 horsepower respectively.
