FT  04 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Keeping up the pressure
THERE are no grounds for euphoria at the endorsement of the
internationally-brokered peace plan for Bosnia by Mr Radovan Karadzic, the
Bosnian Serb leader. The United Nations and European Community mediators, Mr
Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, have sweated to achieve the diplomatic
breakthrough achieved in Athens on Sunday and they deserve to be
congratulated on the outcome. But even their own spokesman acknowledged that
getting the leaders of the warring factions to sign the Vance-Owen plan was
'the easy part'.
It is only as a measure of the difficulties that lie ahead that such a
description can be applied to the many months of laborious negotiations
between the warring parties, and the frantic shuttle diplomacy of the
mediators. A week ago, the process seemed to be in ruins. Now it has been
signed, its implementation promises to be an uncertain and immensely
complicated task.
Even if the Bosnian Serb assembly endorses the peace plan, by no means a
foregone conclusion judging by the statements of some hardliners, it is
still uncertain whether the military will go along with the decision.
General Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serb forces, has proved
in the past that he is capable of taking the law into his own hands.
Bitter pill
The plan is a bitter pill indeed for the hardliners to swallow. It calls for
the withdrawal of Bosnian Serb forces, currently occupying 70 per cent of
the land surface of the country, to areas making up only 43 per cent of the
total. In return, Mr Karadzic appears to have won only two concessions. The
mediators offered to create a narrow demilitarised corridor across northern
Bosnia, which would link Serbia with Serb-controlled territory in Bosnia.
However, it will be not be controlled by local Serb police, as demanded by
Mr Karadzic, but by UN troops. The other modification in favour of the
Bosnian Serbs is reported to be the initial replacement of Serb by UN troops
in regions like eastern Bosnia, now occupied by the Serbs, but which have
been allocated either to the Moslems or Croats under the Vance-Owen plan.
Yet it is clear that this would be a potential source of conflict since both
the Moslems and the Croats would, sooner or later, want to provide their own
security.
For the United Nations and the western allies, in particular, the
enforcement of the peace plan presents an enormous challenge. Nato, which
has offered to assume the task on behalf of an overstretched UN, has
estimated that it will need at least another 60,000 troops for an
unspecified period to do the job properly. Such a large force will require a
substantial contribution from the US, which should be facilitated if
American troops are placed under Nato rather than UN command.
Shot in the arm
Yesterday's announcement by the White House that the US would be prepared to
provide ground forces for such a purpose was a shot in the arm for Nato
planners. But the US contribution is unlikely to meet more than one quarter
of the total number required. Britain and France, with peacekeeping forces
already in Bosnia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia, will also be
asked to make bigger contributions along with other western nations .
They will have to do so quickly, since any delay will certainly ensure the
unravelling of the peace plan, which provides for the withdrawal of all the
warring parties' forces to their designated provinces within 45 days of a
ceasefire. Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr Warren Christopher, the
US secretary of state, were also right to emphasise at their weekend meeting
that the pressure on Belgrade and the Bosnian Serbs must be maintained until
a ceasefire is in place and the peace agreement implemented.
The emphasis has shifted away from military action following the outcome of
the Athens summit, though the US still insists that it should be retained as
an option in case the Bosnian Serbs do not stick to the agreement.
What is clear is that international economic sanctions must not be lifted
until the implementation of the peace plan is advanced. The evidence is that
it was the fear of reinforced sanctions and the threat of permanent economic
and political isolation that persuaded President Milosevic to make his vital
contribution to the peace process. Such pressures still have an important
role to play in the enforcement of the plan.
