FT  20 JAN 93 / People: Sweet talking for bankers
At a time when the reputation of British banks has sunk about as low as it
can, the British Bankers' Association has hired the services of American
Catherine Sweet for the newly created post of director, communications and
external affairs.
The appointment is part of the response to a survey commissioned from
Professor Ian Morison of Loughborough University by the BBA which last June
concluded that the banks were poor at lobbying, could no longer expect the
Bank of England always to spring to their defence, and consequently needed a
hard-hitting trade association to weigh in on their behalf.
Pauline Hedges, BBA's press and information manager, stays in charge of
press relations - 'a full-time job' she stresses - but 38-year-old Sweet
will pull together external relations, for instance improving the
association's lobbying performance. At Westminster, the BBA's record has
been one of 'winning many battles but losing several wars', Morison
commented at the time.
Sweet, who will no doubt find plenty of new material for the satirical poems
on the City that she has been known to pen, has some schooling in crisis
management having been deputy head of public affairs at the London Stock
Exchange during Big Bang, where she also worked on the Financial Services
Act. Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of TSB Group and president of the BBA
since last year, says it is 'happy coincidence rather than anything else'
that Sweet has worked for him before when he was chairman of the Stock
Exchange.
In 1988 Sweet moved to Charterhouse merchant bank followed by a stint at
Burson-Marsteller. She had turned freelance last November.
Credited with being bright, aggressive and not afraid to make enemies, Sweet
completed a D Phil in international relations from Oxford, while she was at
the Stock Exchange.
*****
Katrina Farrell-Gisse, previously director of corporate communications at
Lafarge in North America, has joined the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development as chief public affairs officer. She replaces James
Rosenstein who resigned last August.
