FT  27 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Details of first rival to Zovirax revealed
DETAILS ABOUT the first competitor to Zovirax, the best-selling product of
Wellcome, the UK pharmaceuticals group, were revealed yesterday.
SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American healthcare group, presented clinical
data showing its new drug famciclovir was safe, and was as effective as
Zovirax while requiring less frequent dosing.
Zovirax, an anti-herpes treatment also used against shingles, had worldwide
sales last financial year of Pounds 586m, making it the world's eighth
best-selling medicine. Brokers Morgan Stanley expect its sales to reach
Pounds 1.3bn by 1997.
The drug, which represents 34 per cent of Wellcome's sales, has had no
competitor during the 12 years since its launch because of the difficulties
of developing non-toxic anti-herpes remedies.
Although SmithKline Beecham's drug is no more effective than Zovirax, the
data is significant because of the Anglo-American group's recent aggressive
pricing strategy. The group, the world's leading antibiotic company, also
has a far larger salesforce than Wellcome, particularly in the US.
Wellcome is developing a successor to Zovirax called valaciclovir. It is
presenting data in New Orleans next month that shows the drug is more
effective than Zovirax and requires less frequent dosing.
SmithKline Beecham expects to file dossiers with regulatory authorities
first for shingles, which represents between a third and a half of Zovirax
sales.
The company also plans to file for genital herpes, including primary
attacks, recurrent episodes and as a maintenance treatment to prevent herpes
outbreaks. It is also hoping to develop the product for treating cold sores
at a later date.
The dossier for shingles was given to the US Food and Drug Administration in
June and has been given to 18 other countries.
The first trial, presented at the European Academy of Dermato-Venereology in
Copenhagen, compared famciclovir and Zovirax in shingles patients and
demonstrated SmithKline Beecham's drug was as effective as Wellcome's.
Famciclovir was tested in 798 patients at doses of 750mg, 500mg and 250mg
three times a day against Zovirax at 800mg five times a day, its present
recommended regimen for shingles patients.
The trials showed that famciclovir at all three doses was as effective as
Zovirax, but did not have any marked benefit over Wellcome's drug.
The second trial is designed to test the safety of the the drug and compares
famciclovir with a placebo in 419 patients. The trial shows no statistical
difference in side effects between patients on the drug and placebo.
The results come as a relief to SmithKline Beecham. Many drugs in the same
class of Zovirax and famciclovir have had to be dropped because of their
toxicity.
Zovirax will also soon face competition from a Japanese drug, sorivudine,
which has been developed by Nippon Shoji Kaisha.
