FT  14 JUL 93 / Personal View: Why World Bank needs an ombudsman
The need for an effective World Bank has never been greater, and confidence
in its operating procedures has never been lower. The international
community expects the World Bank to help Russia and the other former eastern
bloc countries create functioning market economies; help South Africa
transform its apartheid economy; and continue helping borrower countries
alleviate poverty, and improve the efficiency and sustainability of their
economies and the efficacy of their governance.
Recent developments suggest that the bank cannot meet these demands unless
it undergoes structural reform. An internal study found that the bank is
plagued by a 'pervasive preoccupation with new lending' that can distort
loan appraisals. Both staff and borrowers view loan appraisal as a
promotional exercise aimed at the directors who must approve all loans.
Loan administration is also deficient. The study found borrower compliance
with the financial covenants in loan agreements to be 'startlingly low'. The
bank's failure to enforce these covenants suggests both parties view them as
'suggestions', not binding commitments.
The bank's experience with the gigantic Sardar Sarovar dam project in India
provides a graphic illustration of the consequences of these problems. The
bank-appointed independent review panel found that the bank's failure to
follow its own operating rules contributed to the problems associated with
the dam's human and environmental impact. The bank's management is aware of
these problems, and the board has just begun reviewing proposals for
improving the supervision of the bank's operations.
One proposal the directors should be encouraged to adopt is to appoint an
ombudsman. Such an ombudsman should have a mandate to:
Investigate all 'qualifying' complaints about the bank's implementation of
its own operating rules and procedures. A qualifying complaint is one made
about ongoing bank operations by any person directly affected by bank
activities. The complaint must be accompanied by some supporting evidence.
Respond to the complainant and, if appropriate, make non-binding
recommendations to the board within a reasonable period after receiving the
complaint.
Publish a publicly available annual report discussing the complaints
received, the investigations conducted, and the final dispositions of the
complaints.
The ombudsman, who would be appointed by and report directly to the
executive directors, would be independent of the bank staff; should not be
drawn from the bank staff; and would be granted a fixed-term, non-renewable
appointment and control of his/her own budget. The ombudsman would have the
authority to initiate investigations, compel bank staff to produce
documents, submit to investigations and participate in public hearings.
An ombudsman's function is to monitor the administration of public
institutions and prevent administrative injustice. A World Bank ombudsman
would:
provide the board with independent and timely appraisal of claimed
deficiencies in ongoing bank operations;
provide directors with independent information on the staff's compliance
with the bank's operating rules and procedures. The board can use this
information both to design appropriate rules and procedures and to identify
the 'best practice' for their implementation;
create an impartial, independent and competent authority that assures both
bank and public that all complaints about bank operations will receive a
fair hearing and helps educate the public about the bank's operating rules
and procedures;
de-politicise disputes concerning bank operations by providing a complaints
procedure that is based on rules that assure fair access for all qualifying
complainants; and that ensures that fact-finding and decision-making is
carried out by a disinterested body. Decisions must also be based on the
merits of the complaint rather than on the complainant's ability to exert
political pressure on the bank;
protect the bank's executive directors and staff from having to deal with
complaints lacking merit;
provide the board and, through its annual reports, the international
community with empirical information, that is presently unavailable, on the
developmental and human impact of bank operations.
In short, an independent World Bank ombudsman whose findings are public
would significantly enhance public confidence in the bank's ability to
perform its responsibilities and the credibility of the advice it gives to
its member countries. It would also set a precedent for other international
organisations entrusted with the management of public resources.
The author is associate professor of law at the American University,
Washington DC
