FT  31 JUL 93 / Finance &amp; the Family: Leaseholders get the go-ahead - Now,
they are free to enfranchise - but the problems are just starting
FLAT owners with dwindling and unmortgageable leases can look forward to
better times come November when a new law will entitle them to extend their
leases at market rates. But leaseholders of flats in badly-managed blocks,
whose situation was also supposed to be eased by the new law, may find it is
not the answer to their problems.
After a difficult passage through the Commons and the Lords, the Leasehold
Reform, Housing and Urban Development Act received royal assent this month.
It is due to come into force on November 1.
It is immensely complicated but gives flat leaseholders two basic rights: to
extend their leases or, if the block of flats and a proportion of its
residents meet certain criteria, to enfranchise - club together and buy the
freehold. This gives them the power to manage their own block and extend
their own leases as they see fit.
Some of the main conditions for enfranchisement are:
At least two-thirds of the flats must be let on long leases (more than 21
years at the time leases were granted).
At least 90 per cent of the floor space of a block must be residential.
At least half the flats where owners wish to enfranchise must have been the
principal residence of their leaseholder for the previous 12 months, or for
at least three of the previous 10 years.
The ground rent (not maintenance charge) must be low, which is defined as
less than two-thirds of the rateable value, or, if the lease was granted
after April 1 1990, not more than Pounds 1,000.
Two-thirds of qualifying leaseholders must agree to enfranchise.
If a block is converted, or has fewer than four flats, the landlord must not
be resident.
Some of the conditions sound unobjectionable, but they will stop large
numbers of leaseholders from enfranchising. The condition that a maximum of
10 per cent of a block's floor space can be non-residential will rule out
most of the 20th century suburban blocks built over rows of shops.
An unknown number of flats will fail the low rent test, particularly as some
landlords have set the ground rent deliberately at a pound or two over
two-thirds of the rateable value.
The residency test might stymie the hopes of leaseholders in many central
London blocks where a large proportion of the flats is owned by companies or
the properties have been bought as a pied-a-terre by foreigners or people
living in the country. Flats on the south coast and other popular holiday
resorts may have similar problems if more than a few in a block are used as
holiday homes.
Some blocks with severe management problems - excessive maintenance charges
and negligent landlords - may find that they are ineligible for
enfranchisement because the nature of the block or the people living in it
makes it subject to one of the exclusions. Individual residents would still
be able to extend their leases in this situation, but they would not gain
any rights over managing the block.
Even if a block and its residents pass the eligibility test, they must then
decide if it is actually worth their while to enfranchise or extend their
leases.
Owners of leases on high-value houses (also eligible for enfranchisement
under the new law) stand to gain the most. Surveyors estimate that owners of
some leasehold houses in central London could make Pounds 250,000 from
enfranchising their properties.
Holders of flat leases with only 20 or 30 years left have little to lose and
much to gain from extending them; their properties would then become
saleable and mortgageable. But anyone with a lease of 80 or 90 years on a
flat in a well-managed block could find that the amount of time and money
absorbed by the enfranchisement process would outweigh any gains. One
problem is that the costs involved in enfranchisement can only be guessed at
until the first test cases have gone through.
The amount leaseholders will have to pay for the freehold is based on a
calculation of the market value of the freehold of the block, plus the
'marriage value' - how much more the leasehold and freehold are worth
together than as separate items.
The law states that leaseholders must pay the landlord at least 50 per cent
of the marriage value. Many landlords are expected to hold out for more than
50 per cent, possibly as much as 75 per cent.
Many leaseholders will need to get a loan to buy their share of the
freehold. Arranging lots of small loans for residents of a large block could
be complicated and time-consuming, but the Council of Mortgage Lenders is
considering lending directly to companies formed by residents to buy the
freehold, which could simplify the process.
The other unknown cost factor is fees for professional advice. Leaseholders
are liable not only for their own legal costs and surveyors' fees but also
those of their landlord. The law states that these must be 'reasonable,' but
it will not be possible to define that until the ground has been tested.
Also, if a freeholder is unwilling to sell, it will be possible for him to
prolong the process - forcing the case first to a local leasehold valuation
tribunal, followed by the Lands Tribunal and then conceivably to the High
Court, pushing up fees all round.
If you and your fellow-leaseholders decide to go ahead, the first thing to
do is serve a discovery notice on your immediate landlord (who might not be
the freeholder) asking for the name and address of the freeholder and
details of other interests in the property.
The next step is to create a company to act as the purchaser, and to serve a
tenants' purchase notice on the landlord and the freeholder, giving details
such as the proposed price.
The freeholder will respond with a counter-notice saying whether he agrees
with the terms offered. If not, a process of negotiation follows.
If agreement cannot be reached within two months of the landlord's
counter-notice, the matter can be taken to a leasehold valuation tribunal.
The act has just been published and copies are available from Her Majesty's
Stationary Office. The Department of the Environment has an leaflet on the
subject. For a copy, telephone 071-276 3398. The department is planning to
publish a more detailed guide later this year.
