FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Personal and Portable Computers (19): Pile the
small boxes high - Distribution
WHEN IT comes to distrib- ution, the salient feature of the portable
computer sector at the moment is that there is no salient feature. The
construction of an average portable computer is now virtually as trivial a
task as the construction of an average desktop PC; the arrival of the
portable computer as a commodity means the departure of its ability to
command a greater margin than a desktop computer.
Traditionally the trade's ability to charge higher prices for, and therefore
make a greater margin on, portable computers has been dependent on the
expense of producing components that are smaller and use less power than
those that make up a desktop computer. The standard package that these
components have to be placed in has not, however, shrunk significantly in
the past 18 months or so, and the portable's place on the cutting edge of
technology has started to look shaky.
If the target box weighs around 6lb and takes up the same amount of desk
space as an A4 sheet, you don't actually need to make the hard disk smaller
than 2.5in, and if you have not yet made the next breakthrough in battery or
LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) technology, you cannot charge for it. In
effect, you could say that portable computing is between technologies.
The current basic issues in portable computer distribution are therefore
similar to those in the desktop market. The direct channel, typified by
small start-up companies specialising in off-the-page, low margin selling
sets the price for an increasingly experienced user base, while traditional
players react by cutting their own costs, perhaps stripping service out of
the basic machine price and selling it as an extra, and attempting to
segment the market by launching multiple ranges.
It is no accident that the low-cost ranges which Compaq and IBM produce for
the commodity market now tend to include portable computers. Essentially,
portables are now boxes, and the main difference is that, as they are
smaller boxes, you can pile them higher before you sell them cheap.
For other reasons, desktops are likely to become more like portables. The US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Energy Star programme, for example, is
intended to trigger massive reductions in the power requirements of business
computers, and the technologies being used to do this are largely borrowed
from portable computing.
IBM's Energy Workstation prototype, for example, which was demonstrated in
the US last November, is intended to use a low-voltage processor, 'credit
card' storage and a colour LCD. Portable manufacturers can view flat-panel
colour displays as a differentiating factor for their machines, but it is
likely that environmental and health considerations will make them standard
on the desktop at around the same time as they become standard on portables,
and at that point one of the few differences between desktops and portables
will be the level of power management employed.
Because the battery life of a portable computer needs to be maximised, it
probably makes sense to incorporate clever circuitry that switches off parts
not being used. But it is the life of a desktop machine that has to be
maximised, so it probably does not make sense to have bits switching off in
between key-presses, because the machine will break a lot sooner. It is not,
however, clear how much users would be willing to pay for such an apparently
small piece of differentiation.
But there are areas associated with portable computing where differentiation
is still possible, because although the box itself has become trivial, the
way in which it links to the rest of the world is becoming more critical. If
it is now financially viable for a company to buy 2,000 portable computers
for its salesforce, it becomes absolutely vital that the company work out
how that salesforce uses those machines in the company network.
So the perceived value of the machine, and hence the margin, will be greater
if it uses some form of 'base station' of the sort recently introduced by
Apple, where the connections and expansion can be left on the office desk,
and the portable plugged in when it needs to be a 'desktop'.
Because most portables do not use standard expansion slots, manufacturers
which have spent money on developing internal fax modems and network
adaptors for their machines will again tend to be able to command higher
prices.
Theoretically, these advantages should erode, and some companies may give
one the impression that they had vanished already, but credit card
expansion, which will ultimately lead to new capability for both portable
and desktop machines, is not quite as finished as one might suppose.
Although there were numerous credit card-sized fax modems at Comdex, the US
computer show, last year, Mr Bill Goodwin, chairman of British developer
Communicate, claims his was one of the few that actually worked. Credit card
Ethernet and Token Ring adaptors are in a similar state of development, and
although Communicate finds that an increasing number of manufacturers rely
on the imminent arrival of credit cards, rather than pay to have their own
internal modems developed, credit card expansion slots are still not so
common, and when they are fitted are not necessarily of the type needed.
To be used for anything other than memory expansion, the slot has to be
PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card International Association) type 2 or
greater, while for larger peripherals such as credit card hard disks, the
double thickness PCMCIA type 3 is needed. No machines on the market use
this, but then there are no credit card hard disks on the market, either.
But although it is still possible for the channel to make money out of
portables by selling high value expansion, and the next generation of
'standard' portable expansion will also initially be able to command higher
prices, this new equipment is being designed specifically to sell as a
commodity, and should only be able to raise margins for a short period. By
switching to smaller format designs, dropping the weight of a notebook
computer by a few pounds as companies like Dell have recently done, and by
pushing into colour screens, manufacturers will have the ability to restart
the technological spiral.
