FT  21 AUG 93 / Russia's women face a new reign of fear: When communism
fell, women looked forward to the benefits of democracy. But, they are now
in danger of losing a fundamental right: safe, legal abortion
STRANGE THINGS are happening in post-communist Europe. When democracy
supplanted communism as the dominant political system in eastern Europe, its
oppressed peoples expected to inherit greater rights and freedoms. However,
for women, democracy has turned out to be a painful disappointment.
Just four years after democratic revolutions transformed the cartography of
the Soviet bloc, women are in danger of losing one of the fundamental rights
they were guaranteed under communism - the right to a safe, legal abortion.
In Poland, which now ranks alongside Ireland in having Europe's most
restrictive abortion laws, abortion is allowed only in cases of rape and
incest; when the mother's health is endangered; or when tests reveal serious
foetal defects.
In Hungary, women must go before a committee before they can seek an
abortion, and women in the former East Germany must go through official
counselling.
Now the Russian parliament is considering a new law which women say is a
first step toward restricting, and eventually banning, abortion in Russia.
The controversial bill contains a clause which says that the state
'recognises' a child's 'right to life' - the most contentious aspect of the
legislation - and a provision which calls for granting men and women 'equal
rights in deciding all issues of family life, including issues of family
planning.'
While supporters of the bill insist that the latter provision is meant to
enhance the rights of fathers in custody suits, which are largely ignored in
Russia, women's rights advocates fear it could mean that a woman would have
to obtain permission from her partner before seeking an abortion.
'If this bill is passed, the freedom of choice a woman has today will be
destroyed', says Ludmila Zavadskaya, a lawyer and MP who is an outspoken
critic of the proposed legislation. 'A situation could arise where a woman
comes in for an abortion and the doctor says to her: 'Let me see the
decision of your husband'.
'I was at a conference recently and I met a lot of Polish women who are just
horrified. Now it looks like we may be going in the same direction.
Democracy isn't turning out the way it was supposed to at all.'
The Women's Union of Russia, a non-governmental organisation with more than
2m members, recently protested to parliament about the bill. 'We consider it
necessary', the women wrote, 'to preserve the present norm whereby the final
decision is left to the woman . . . a woman cannot be forced into motherhood
against her will.'
'The new catch-phrase is: 'Let's return women to their natural destiny','
says Marina Baskakova, a scholar at the Gender Center in Moscow, which
researches women's issues. 'But we are not in the 17th century. A woman
should have the right to choose how many children she wants to have.' In her
view, the proposed law would reduce women to 'biological instruments for
continuing the human race.'
Another provision that has ignited controversy - it also appears in
President Boris Yeltsin's version of Russia's new constitution - states that
the government has the right to carry out a 'progressive demographic
policy', a well-known euphemism, women say, for reintroducing a ban on
abortion.
Such a law, they maintain, would be a throwback to the pro-natalist policies
of Stalinism when motherhood was considered an obligation to the state and
women could be jailed for terminating a pregnancy.
In the view of Elena Yershova, a liberal MP: 'It is terrible that women in
our country have to have so many abortions in conditions that are far from
ideal. But it's better than having to have an illegal abortion. We already
went through that.
'My mother lived her whole life during the time when abortions were illegal.
They were also conducting a 'progressive demographic policy'.'
The consequences of such a policy have been well-documented. In 1966, after
the government of Romania reversed its liberal abortion policy in an attempt
to create more workers for the state, the number of live births nearly
doubled. But after just two years the rate started to decline and death from
illegal abortions soared.
Opponents of the Russian bill say that it is part of a broad post-communist
backlash against women's rights.
In a telephone interview from Brussels, Anita Pollack, a British member of
the Committee on Women's Rights of the European Parliament, which had
appealed to the Polish Parliament not to approve its anti-abortion bill,
called the Russian bill 'appalling' and 'an infringement on women's rights.'
'One tyranny is being replaced by another', she added. 'Here in the west, we
are trying to advance a woman's right to do what she wants with her body.
This was always something very positive in the east . . . Now, it's just
going backwards for them.'
Indeed, the proposed Russian legislation seems part of a campaign to promote
traditional gender roles. Instead of allocating resources to re-train women,
who account for 70 per cent of Russia's unemployed, the bill proposes that
unemployed pregnant women would stay at home and receive half the monthly
minimum wage of Dollars 7.74. A monthly salary of Dollars 18 is considered
poverty level. Such a development would only create a poor female
underclass, women say.
It seems paradoxical, at first, that a backlash against women's rights could
occur in newly-democratic nations in the throes of revolutionary political
and economic change. But there are various factors at work.
One reason is that a new heterogeneity has permeated societies that were
formerly one-party states. 'Before, we were a monolithic society', says
Elena Yershova. 'Now we have everything - leftist extremists, right-wingers,
centrists and even religious fundamentalists who support a ban on abortion.'
Greater religious freedom has played a central role in the permutation of
abortion policy in eastern Europe. The church, once consigned to the fusty
antechamber of backroom politics, is using its new-found moral mandate to
push through its own social plans.
Abortion is increasingly being re-examined as a moral issue - something that
never happened under atheism. And the law, which once reflected communist
principles, now often supports the position of the church.
After the communists were ousted from Poland in 1989, banning abortion
became a primary goal of the country's bishops. The resulting legislation
was directly sponsored by the church; many legislators who voted in favour
of the law admitted they had done so as a concession to Pope John Paul II.
In Hungary the powerful anti-abortion crusade which led to the new law in
that country was also spearheaded by the Roman Catholic Church.
However, in Russia atheism is still entrenched. Unlike Poland, where 95 per
cent of the population is Roman Catholic, the church in Russia has not, so
far, emerged as a major political force.
Here, the factor behind the conservative backlash appears to be nationalism.
As in Hungary, the number of births in Russia has not kept pace with the
rising number of deaths. As a result, the abortion debate has centred on
nationalist fears about declining population.
In the first six months of 1993 there were 120,000 fewer births than in the
same period last year, and 178,000 more deaths, the Russian newspaper
Moskovskaya Pravda reported on its front page recently. Although
demographers say it is normal for a country's birth rate to fall during big
social upheavals, such as industrialisation, or, in this case, a shift to a
market-oriented economy, Russian nationalists often speak of the declining
birth rate in apocalyptic tones. Ultra-nationalist vice-president Alexander
Rutskoi told a stunned audience of women at a conference that it was up to
them to 'save the motherland' by having more babies. (It was supposed to be
a business conference).
The abortion debate is also a manifestation of what Andrei Popov, a medical
researcher who has studied abortion in Russia for 13 years, calls the
'post-communist syndrome' - an eagerness to undo former policies: a
knee-jerk reaction which Popov compares with the frenzied toppling of
socialist realist statues of communist heroes that began two years ago.
'If abortions were allowed under the communists, it means abortions must be
bad because the communists are bad', Popov explains. 'There is a tendency to
want to stamp out what we had yesterday and turn everything on its head.'
But Popov and others insist that banning, or even restricting, abortion
would have graver consequences for women in Russia than elsewhere because it
has been virtually the sole means of regulating fertility for much longer.
'In eastern Europe, their abortion history didn't start until after the
second world war', says Popov; in Russia, abortion was first legalised under
Lenin in 1920.
However, since no contraception was available, by the mid-1920s there was a
shortage of beds in state-run abortion clinics, and fee-charging
'commercial' clinics opened to meet demand. By the 1960s, says Popov, a
formidable abortion lobby had emerged.
Inside the upper echelons of the ministry of health, a powerful cadre of
doctors, who earned handsome fees for providing 'extra' services such as
anaesthesia during abortions, 'blocked the production and development of the
contraceptive industry to protect their own interests.'
In a propaganda campaign designed to discredit birth control pills, the
doctors warned that they could cause cancer and even madness. In true
centralised fashion, a report detailing all the so-called side effects of
oral contraceptives was distributed to all doctors, hospitals, and clinics
across the Soviet Union. As a result, abortion became the only means of
regulating fertility that was trusted.
'Everyone was sure that abortion was the best method and this attitude
persists today, especially among older doctors', says Popov. In 1991,
3,442,395 legal abortions were performed in Russia, almost 2m more than the
number of babies born in the same period.
Family planning programmes are just beginning to emerge, and while IUDs and
condoms are available, they are often expensive and of sub-standard quality.
Result: most people are poorly informed about them.
Anita Pollack says she hopes that the controversy over the bill might have
at least one positive effect - to help bring women together. 'There's a
whole different aspect to democracy which is ill-understood in these
countries, which is that all this freedom is very well but you have to get
together and fight for your rights. It's a painful and difficult thing to
do, and is perhaps something that's new, but it's part of the democratic
process.'
Russian women say they will put up a vociferous legislative fight. But even
if the bill is quashed, concern among those who favour abortion will not
disappear.
Ironically, if Boris Yeltsin's version of the constitution - which is
generally liberal, apart from the 'progressive demographic policy' clause -
is adopted, Russia's democratisation process could spell a setback to
women's rights.
