FT  20 SEP 93 / Bootle banks on a bonanza: A look at the change in fortunes
which oil may bring to Merseyside
THERE is a whiff of an oil bonanza in the air of Bootle, Merseyside.
News that Hamilton Oil, partnered by Lasmo and Monument, has discovered oil
and gas in Liverpool Bay brought more than 130 local companies to Bootle
town hall last week in search of a share of the action. They were attracted
by the arrival of Mr Terry Aldridge, Hamilton's procurement manager.
Mr Roger Pearson, Hamilton's project director, says there are 200m barrels
of oil, mainly in Douglas, a field 15 miles north of Point of Ayr on the
Welsh side of the Dee estuary. The rest is in a field called Lennox, only
five miles west of the genteel resort of Southport.
Lennox also contains gas - part of one trillion (million million) cu ft
Hamilton has so far found there and in two other fields it has called
Hamilton and Hamilton North. Field life is estimated at 17 years, but the
Hamilton consortium expects to find more, as do other oil companies which
have since dashed for exploration licences.
Fabrication of production platforms will start in April. Hamilton has
scheduled oil production for December 1995 and gas one month later.
Bootle badly needs a boom. About 3,600 people will be employed in the
development of the fields. These are precious jobs in a town where male
unemployment runs at 36 per cent in some electoral wards.
Bootle's people are less healthy and more likely to be unemployed than in
the country as a whole. Between half and three-quarters of households in
eight of its nine wards have no car. A quarter of homes are occupied by
pensioners, many are overcrowded and the overwhelming majority of households
are officially defined as 'working class'. Since the rundown of the local
docks the local authority has been the main employer.
Work has just started on a gas terminal at Point of Ayr. Powergen is to
build a gas-fired power station nearby.
Sefton Borough Council - the local authority for the Merseyside coastal
strip running from Bootle to Southport - arranged meetings at the town hall.
Representatives armed with promotional material and business cards queued
for interviews. Some were from big corporations with plants in the borough,
but most from medium-sized or smaller engineering companies, offering to
make basic metal components. Many were from car-hire operators, corporate
travel agents, caterers, hotel keepers, local builders and taxi firms hoping
to win contracts.
Because the offshore industry has long-standing relationships with large
contractors it knows well, Bootle may get only crumbs. But with Pounds
350,000 of purchased items in Hamilton's Pounds 1bn development budget,
those crumbs could feed a lot of small companies.
Mr Aldridge said there were always shortfalls of every type of equipment and
service to be filled locally and at short notice. Hamilton favoured local
companies with good records for safety, quality, delivery, price and
financial stability - and paid them on time.
Barrow-in-Furness and Heysham are competing for the base to service the
field, but Mersey Docks and Harbour Company has offered what it hopes will
be a winning choice of Bootle and Birkenhead. A potential clincher for
Bootle is that Liverpool has a fully serviced but underused airport.
Bootle's grimy culture is based on servicing the sea. The town was built for
130,000 people who fled famine in Ireland to man the docks. Jobs were handed
down through the generations, and lost in their thousands as the port
modernised.
For the first time in several generations people are looking out to
Liverpool Bay for work.
