FT  16 FEB 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Time nears for late
payers to be called to account
Several thousand UK companies will be affected by legislation designed to
make them publish details in their accounts of the time they take to pay
suppliers. This requirement, which forms part of a government campaign to
encourage prompt payment, was announced by Norman Lamont, the chancellor, in
his last Budget and is planned to come into effect from December.
How many companies will be expected to collect payments information is not
yet clear. A consultative document was issued at the end of last month just
before the government pledged itself to assessing the impact on business of
future legislation. The document says companies covered by the Companies Act
definition of 'large' and not just listed companies will be included.
'Large' companies meet two or more of the following criteria: sales of more
than Pounds 11.2m, a balance sheet total of more than Pounds 3.9m and over
250 employees.
However, there are no readily available statistics on the number of large
companies though small firms specialists estimate between 4,000 and 7,000
could be affected, including 2,500 listed companies.
The decision to make 'large' companies publish the length of time it takes
them to settle bills is, in effect, an attempt to shame them into paying up
promptly. The problems small businesses face in getting paid have worsened
during the recession. Companies typically quote payment terms of 30 days but
on average wait 78 days.
The government is seeking a response to its consultative paper by March 27.
Its preferred option is for companies to disclose the ratio of trade
creditors to average purchases at the end of the financial year. That is
calculated by dividing the total amount of end-year trade creditors (already
in accounts) by average daily purchases (which are not, but which should be
determinable from other data).
The consultation paper also considers other methods, including two it views
as possible alternatives. One is 'countback', where a company adds up total
purchases for preceding months until the total equals the amount of trade
creditors shown at the year-end. The number of months required would show
the approximate time taken to pay. The second is 'age analysis' where a
company analyses the value and age of bills making up end-year creditors.
The choice has been influenced by the need for a system that does not add
significant administration costs, the consultation paper says. Only one
method of calculation will be allowed to enable comparisons, although
companies are free to add information. The figures will be required to be
audited.
Reporting will take the form of a note to the accounts showing the average
time taken to pay, in days. This information will be required for financial
years starting on or after December 23 1993. Grant Thornton, accountants,
called for tougher safeguards, however, and warned of the difficulty and
cost of verification.
Any average figure for payment delays is likely to understate the scale of
the problem facing many companies, said another accountant. Companies take
care to pay essential suppliers quickly but often make others wait longer.
Copies of the consultation document and a questionnaire are available from
Janice Munday, Companies Division, Department of Trade and Industry, Room
523, 10-18 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0NN. Tel. 071 215 3238.
