FT  26 APR 93 / Sickness benefits targeted in search for cuts
STATE-FUNDED sick pay and industrial disablement benefit have emerged as
front-line targets of the government's review of social security spending
after a Treasury demand that the review deliver immediate as well as
long-term cuts in public spending. Reductions in the two benefits would
significantly increase costs for employers.
The sharp squeeze on Whitehall budgets imposed by the government's Pounds
1bn-a-week borrowing requirement also threatens the prospect of legislation
next year to curb eligibility for invalidity benefit and to shorten the
period for which the jobless are entitled to receive unemployment benefit.
After a weekend conclave of social security ministers to discuss the future
of the welfare state, Whitehall officials will today begin drawing up two
separate strategies to cap the inexorable rise in the department's Pounds
80bn budget.
They will examine in detail the prospect for a radical overhaul of the
contributory benefits system, including steps to encourage the better-off to
'contract out' of unemployment benefit and the state pension.
Mr Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, believes that in the long
term, private pension provision and unemployment insurance could replace the
state schemes for many of those in work.
But the potentially explosive political backlash against such inroads into
the core of the welfare state is likely to postpone any firm decisions
beyond the election due by 1997. The government has indicated that during
this parliament it will not break its manifesto commitments to universal
state pension and child benefit payments.
So the Treasury is insisting that Mr Lilley deliver a second set of options
for savings which could be implemented next year. The social security
department's traditional defence against deep cuts - that they involve
politically controversial legislation - has been dismissed in advance by
Treasury ministers.
Ministers believe that the Pounds 1.1bn annual cost of statutory sick pay
and sickness benefit is a prime target because the responsibility could be
shifted to employers. Industrial disablement benefit - which will cost the
government nearly Pounds 600m this year - is also regarded as an area where
employers rather than the state should provide insurance.
Mr Lilley, who has been told by the Treasury to produce an interim report by
June, is expected also to consider a proposal to phase out statutory
maternity pay, with the Pounds 385m-a-year cost again being transferred to
employers.
Suggestions circulating on capping the cost of invalidity benefit include
introducing a cut-off point for the benefit at age 65 and tightening up the
medical criteria for eligibility. The time limit for unemployment benefit
might be reduced from 12 months to six months.
Mr Brian Prime, a former chairman of the National Federation of
Self-employed and Small Businesses, said yesterday that any move to cut
statutory sick pay benefits or require employers to pay such benefits would
be counterproductive.
He added: 'At a time when the recession has hit small businesses very hard,
I would have thought this was the last thing the government would have
wanted to do.'
