FT  09 FEB 93 / International Company News: SGS, Mitsubishi Electric discuss
flash-memory link
MITSUBISHI Electric, the Japanese electrical and electronics group, and
SGS-Thomson, the Franco-Italian semiconductor joint venture, are negotiating
a possible tie-up in the development and manufacture of flash-memory chips,
Mitsubishi said.
The talks between Mitsubishi and SGS highlight the Franco-Italian group's
eagerness to move into the market at an early stage by securing a partner in
a stronger financial position than SGS and with proven competence in flash
technology.
Flash-memory chips, which retain information even when the power is switched
off, are expected eventually to replace disk drives and other magnetic
recording devices in portable electronic products.
The market for flash memories is estimated to grow to an annual value of
Dollars 1.5bn by 1995, according to Dataquest, the high-technology
consultancy.
The discussions between Mitsubishi and SGS are in line with the growing
industry trend to share the financial burden of research and development in
new technologies.
Intel, the US semiconductor manufacturer, and Sharp have already announced
joint development of flash technology. Toshiba, the inventor of flash, and
IBM are also joining forces to develop the technology, while Fujitsu and AMD
have agreed jointly to build a factory to manufacture flash-memory devices.
Mitsubishi has independently developed technology in flash-memory chips of
up to 16 megabits.
Although a tie-up with SGS would enable the company to share development
costs, Mitsubishi would have no difficulty continuing its development
efforts on its own, a Mitsubishi official said.
If joint development and manufacture were agreed, the connection would also
provide Mitsubishi with a route into the European market, the official
added.
Joining forces with Mitsubishi would provide SGS with much-needed funding
and would give it a route into the Japanese market, expected to be a major
source of demand for flash-memory chips.
