FT  01 SEP 93 / MPs condemn renewed News at Ten threat
ITV appears to have shot itself in the foot again over attempts to move News
at Ten, the main evening news programme on commercial television.
Comments by Mr Marcus Plantin, director of the ITV Network Centre, that ITV
executives were about to revive their plans to move News at Ten were
condemned yesterday by MPs.
One senior ITV chief executive conceded yesterday: 'This hasn't exactly
helped our case for relaxing ownership rules.' The rules prevent the largest
ITV companies taking each other over.
Downing Street yesterday said Mr John Major had not changed his mind since
he wrote to Sir George Russell, chairman of the Independent Television
Commission, in June expressing displeasure at the ITV proposals.
Mr Peter Mandelson, Labour MP for Hartlepool, attacked Mr Plantin's remarks,
which were made at the Edinburgh Television Festival.
'This is a snub for the prime minister, the leader of the opposition and the
100 MPs who signed my motion calling for News at Ten to be saved,' Mr
Mandelson said.
The Labour MP also warned that ITV chiefs will ultimately be the losers if
they confront the government and parliament over News at Ten.
Mr Plantin insisted that he and not the prime minister was the person
responsible for scheduling ITV.
Although the issue will come up before the next ITV Council meeting this
month, senior ITV executives believe there is little chance of moving the
main evening news to 6.30pm or 7pm this year. Mr Greg Dyke, chairman of ITV,
has made it clear he would like to see the issue of who has the power to
decide the scheduling of main news clarified, in the courts if necessary.
The Independent Television Commission says eight of the 15 ITV companies
included News at Ten in their franchise application documents. It intends to
hold them to what it sees as commitments.
The hope within ITV is that eventually News at Ten will be moved so that
dramas and feature films can be shown uninterrupted after the 9pm watershed
for more adult viewing.
