FT  20 APR 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Yen remains strong in Europe
THE YEN remained very strong in European trading yesterday after earlier
setting an historic high against the dollar in Far Eastern markets, writes
James Blitz.
The Japanese currency's value against the dollar soared by some 1.5 per cent
in Monday's Tokyo trading, after President Bill Clinton said at the weekend
that the yen's appreciation was helping to curb the US/Japanese trade
imbalance.
Both the Japanese prime minister and finance minister tried to cool the
yen's advance with comments throughout the day, and the Bank of Japan
intervened on foreign exchange markets by buying the dollar.
However, the absence of any intervention from the US Federal Reserve helped
to underline that there was no co-ordination from the Group of Seven leading
industrial countries to stop the yen climbing.
After its record peak in Tokyo trading, the Japanese currency opened even
stronger in London at Y110.70 to the dollar before finishing at Y111.00,
some Y1.6 above Friday's London close. In New York trading yesterday the
dollar finally stood at Y111.09.
In the last two months the yen has rallied from around Y124.00 against the
dollar and few dealers saw much chance of a strong retracement in the next
few days.
Mr Steve Hannah of IBJ International in London said: 'There is feeling now
that a strengthening yen reflects the weakest line of political resistance
in Japan and the US.'
In his view, the Miyazawa government will acquiesce to a strong yen because
of the fear of US imposition of tariffs on Japanese exports. At the same
time, the Clinton administration is unlikely to intervene to support the
dollar because of the need to get the Japanese trade surplus down.
Both the US and Japan might re-think their positions if the yen's rise hurts
Japanese exports and damages the economy. 'If, like the US, you are trying
to get greater access to a market, the worst thing that can happen is that
the market in question starts to weaken,' added Mr Hannah.
European trading was otherwise dominated by the slight weakening of the
D-Mark against most currencies.
The Bank of France's decision to cut its intervention rate for the first
time in five months concentrated expectations that the Bundesbank will, in
turn, ease policy this week. It also underlined the market's confidence in
the new French administration. The French franc closed at FFr3.378 to the
D-Mark from a previous FFr3.379.
However, Miss Alison Cottrell of Midland Global Markets in London said the
Bundesbank is unlikely to reduce its official rates this week because the
repo rate level is so far above that of the discount rate. She also believes
that the market should be wary of the forthcoming consumer price data in
Germany. 'A higher inflation figure might force the market to retrace,' she
added.
