FT  16 NOV 93 / Sealink lowers fares to meet tunnel threat
STENA SEALINK, the cross-Channel ferry operator, yesterday announced a 20
per cent fare cut for some travellers on its Dover-to-Calais sailings in the
latest move by ferry operators to meet the threat of the Channel tunnel.
The company, the second largest passenger carrier on the route, is to
introduce a cheap Apex fare for a car and up to five passengers for
travellers who book 28 days in advance and return within five days. This
will reduce the cheapest fare from Pounds 88 to Pounds 70, and the most
expensive from Pounds 200 to Pounds 160.
The ferry companies which operate on the short cross-Channel routes are
striving to secure passenger loyalty before the tunnel opens next May. Apart
from fare cuts they have increased the frequency of sailings, reduced
check-in times and introduced 'superferries'.
In spite of these efforts the ferries can expect to lose half their
passenger business and perhaps a quarter of freight traffic to the tunnel,
according to some estimates.
As the ferry companies move to defend their market share Eurotunnel is
keeping them guessing about the exact level of fares it will charge. It has
promised that fares will be similar to those charged by the ferries, but
said yesterday it did not expect to announce full fare details until January
12, when the tickets go on sale.
Eurotunnel confirmed yesterday that car drivers using its shuttle service
between Folkestone and Calais would be charged a standard fare regardless of
passenger numbers, while fares would vary by sea-son rather than time of
day.
Seven months ahead of the planned start of its shuttle Eurotunnel is forcing
ferry companies to squeeze every possible marketing advantage out of their
fare structures. While Eurotunnel stresses the advantage of not having to
book in advance, Stena Sealink yesterday said its Apex fares were intended
'for people who want the comfort of a reservation'.
Stena Sealink, which has 36 per cent of Dover-Calais passenger traffic
against just over 50 per cent for P&amp;O, calculates that it has spent Pounds
200m on new ships - including a fifth superferry due to enter service next
year - and port improvements over the past 30 months.
A restructuring of Stena's operations, prompted in part by the threat posed
by the tunnel, led to 2,000 job cuts and a sharp reduction in operating
costs.
P&amp;O said it had spent Pounds 400m in the past five years improving service
quality on short sea routes. Last spring it launched a shuttle service
offering 25 crossings a day and a sailing every 45 minutes at peak periods.
In September it reduced fares on its five-day return sailings by up to 25
per cent.
A system of bar-code labelling of travellers' cars, which means that they
are only checked once instead of twice on quayside arrival, is being
introduced.
By the time the tunnel opens the ferry operators, including Hoverspeed, will
be offering up to 70 return sailings a day between Dover and Calais. Even
allowing for the expected expansion of total cross-Channel passenger and
freight traffic it is unlikely that they will be able to keep this up for
long.
