FT  22 DEC 93 / Hope of deal with S African right revived
Negotiators appeared last night to step back from the brink of failure in
talks aimed at persuading rightwing parties to accept South Africa's
transition to majority rule.
The crucial talks broke down earlier in the day, dealing a blow to prospects
for peace ahead of next year's all-race elections. But hopes were raised
again late last night when negotiators from the so-called Freedom Alliance
agreed to submit a compromise proposed by the government and the African
National Congress to their leaders.
If accepted, this proposal would bind the right wing, provided its
constitutional demands are met, to support the transition to democracy and
to participate in the all-race elections.
Parliament will today pass a post-apartheid constitution which has been
rejected by the Freedom Alliance, which comprises black and white groups,
including the Inkatha Freedom party of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi and the
Afrikaner Volksfront of General Constand Viljoen.
The government last night arranged for a special sitting of parliament early
next year which could be used to vote amendments to the constitution if they
can be negotiated by then.
Previously negotiators had until last night to amend the constitution to
satisfy rightwing demands for greater regional autonomy, but talks ran into
difficulties before substantive amendments were discussed.
The chief government negotiator, Mr Roelf Meyer, said later that negotiators
had found a way to keep talking after missing the Tuesday deadline for
amendments to the transitional constitution due for adoption today.
'We have agreed tonight on a way forward regarding further negotiations.
We've got the best deal we could get,' he said.
When the talks broke down earlier, Gen Viljoen warned this 'may have dashed
the chance of a peaceful solution in South Africa'. Gen Viljoen, whose party
is believed to represent a majority of conservative Afrikaners, said the
stalemate made it impossible for him to sign a provisional accord with the
ANC endorsing an Afrikaner 'homeland'.
The agreement was published by the two groups yesterday, and verbally
endorsed by them, but Gen Viljoen refused to sign it.
He implied that he was not willing to split the Freedom Alliance by making a
separate peace with the ANC. He blamed the ANC and the government for
undermining yesterday's talks by insisting that the alliance commit itself
to participating in elections and the Transitional Ex-ecutive Council before
constitutional amendments could be discussed.
Mr Tom Langley, a Freedom Alliance negotiator, said the ANC and the
government were trying to humiliate his group: 'The ANC were, as always,
arrogant and uncompromising as if the country belongs to them and them
alone.'
Meanwhile, the ANC-dominated Transitional Executive Council continued on its
collision path with the KwaZulu homeland of Chief Buthelezi, summoning the
KwaZulu commissioner of police to appear before it and sending South African
police to intervene in KwaZulu.
