FT  11 DEC 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Distinctive Scotch - Giles MacDonogh samples
some of Campbelltown's pride and joy
Campbelltown is a remote place. It lies almost at the end of that long spur
of Scotland called Kintyre. If you are forced to take a bus it will take
more than three hours from Glasgow. If the driver insists on stopping to eat
his sandwiches, it will take almost four.
Campbelltown's is a sad story of decline. There were once 33 distilleries
here. Today these are reduced to just two (and a bit). Their story has been
told in a recent book by Brian Townsend: Scotch Missed: the Lost
Distilleries of Scotland (Neil Wilson of Glasgow, Pounds 14.99).
No one is completely certain why Campbelltown became the 'Detroit of Malt
Whisky' in the 19th century. At first proximity to Ireland probably had
something to do with it. Then there were the thirsty stevedores of the
Glasgow shipyards to assuage and, finally, the great steamships which passed
Campbelltown on their way out to the Atlantic. Some time around the turn of
the century quality began to tail off in Campbelltown. Most likely the
distillers had been overproducing. The distilleries limped through the first
world war but were rubbed out one by one during the Depression.
Springbank is now the only Campbelltown whisky which can be said to thrive.
Glen Scotia is periodically silent and Longrow is an occasional product of
the Springbank stills.
Springbank is a highly individual whisky, a reflection to some degree of the
fact that it alone of all Scotland's whisky distilleries - with the
exception of Glenfarclas on Speyside - remains a small family business.
Springbank has a modest peat count - about a third as much as Laphroaig
across the water on Islay. Longrow uses 100 per cent peated malt, but wears
it lightly.
At Springbank they call the complicated distilling operation 'two-and-a-half
times distilling'. The spirit which comes off the still should be light and
characterless. Not so Springbank. The Wrights put this down to the eccentric
washstill and its rummager (this whisks around the still) creating
Springbank's much-admired complexity. The rest of the process is also
individual. Most distilleries bottle their whiskies at a convenient central
location after breaking them down to drinking strength with demineralised
water. Springbank bottles at source using water from Crosshill Loch. For
this reason its bottlings are at 46 per cent. At this strength they have
determined that the whisky will not go hazy, unless, for some peculiar
reason, you store your whisky in the fridge.
Springbank bottles whisky in a variety of styles. The classic 10-year-old is
a nice balance of sherry sweetness and peaty smokiness. The 15-year-old has
more bourbon oak character with some floral notes. The 21-year-old is a
return to sherry with a nutty richness about it: a superb whisky; the
25-year-old is a classic after-dinner whisky with great weight, built in a
rich fruity style. The 30-year-old is rather woody.
Springbank also bottles vintage whiskies. A 1972 (19 years in wood) was
another bourbon wood spirit with an attractive nuttiness; the 1965 (25
years) was sherry again; the 1962 (29 years) was already woody but with a
splendid combination of oloroso sherry, licorice and peat. I did not much
like the 33-year-old.
Finally, Longrow should not be overlooked. The 16-year-old is a surprisingly
lemony dram with a very subtle peatiness.
On the other side of Campbelltown Loch is the Isle of Arran where the
Curries are building the Lochranza Distillery on the northern end of the
island.
The shareholders intend making a relatively light whisky at Lochranza, not
some peaty bruiser like an Islay malt. At the moment they believe other
distillers will take fillings of their whisky for their blends but the
survival of this brave venture does not depend on selling to the major
whisky companies.
Lochranza is currently selling Pounds 450 bonds which entitle purchasers to
five cases of a blend based on Lochranza malt in 1998 and five cases of the
malt itself in 2001. This will be a seven- to eight-year-old whisky. They
see the importance of the bonds as a means of establishing a customer base
for the future. They are not issued in order to cover the building costs.
Anyone interested should call 0290-552282 or fax 0290-550177.
