FT  06 NOV 93 / Books: Dreadful wife of drunken poet
DYLAN: THE NINE LIVES OF DYLAN THOMAS by Jonathan Fryer Kyle Cathie Pounds
20, 276 pages
CAITLIN by Paul Ferris Hutchinson Pounds 20, 278 pages
DYLAN Thomas died in New York 40 years ago next Tuesday. His wild widow,
Caitlin, will be 80 next month: she lives on in Catania, on the slopes of
Mount Etna, with her long-term Sicilian partner and their devoted son.
Does Caitlin's angry, disappointed, drunken life really merit a biography of
her own? And is there much more to be said about the equally drunken Dylan,
after the excellent 1977 biography by Paul Ferris (which Penguin keeps in
print), not to mention a stack of other books about Wales' most famous poet?
In Dylan: The Nine Lives of Dylan Thomas, Jonathan Fryer makes a virtue out
of not having known Dylan and not coming from Swansea; you can see his
point. He also has a couple of theses: that Thomas 'was consistently far
better as a prose writer than as a poet'; and that the poet's artificial
public persona cohabited so uneasily with the sensitive inner man as to
create an unbearable tension which, in effect, was to kill him.
Additionally, Fryer claims a new perspective: 'How could someone who was
such a shit (to borrow Caitlin's blunt description) produce such magnificent
work at his best?' Fryer's book never begins to answer that riddle; never
explains how the young Welshman could achieve the heights of, say, Fern
Hill.
He has no difficulty, however, in confirming Dylan's well-documented CV. He
was utterly selfish, a liar, a thief, a sponger, an adulterer, a weakling, a
war-dodger, a drunk who could not hold his liquor, a chain smoker, a failed
journalist and even a plagiarist (his first published poem was lifted from
the Boys' Own Paper). But we may all agree that he also wrote a small number
of very fine poems.
Fryer reminds us that Thomas was a 1930's writer, despite being younger than
Auden, Spender, et al., and delivering a very different voice, style and
subject matter. He was only 18 when And Death Shall Have No Dominion
appeared; he was being feted in London's Fitzrovia at 20. By the time he
first went to America, in 1950, the creativity was failing, as he must have
known; and, says Fryer, he embraced the role of 'poet-performer and
pub-clown.' Only a couple of poems were to come, and then Under Milk Wood.
He was dead at 39.
The Welsh are still in two minds about him. His parents were both bilingual
but he refused any interest in the Welsh language. His father had read
Shakespeare to him from the age of four; he was brought up in a cultural
environment of Celtic Romanticism and Christian Non-Conformity, towering
sermons from the pulpit, and the traditional hypocrisies of the village life
of south-west Wales.
He was writing poetry at nine, and the meticulously-revised notebooks he
kept in his late teens are now known to have supplied the raw material for
more than half his total published output of poems. He fled Wales ('the land
of my fathers, and they can keep it'), yet kept going back - most famously,
from 1949, to the Boat House at Laugharne.
I sometimes suspect that only a handful of the poems will survive the years.
Strange how difficult it is today to separate their quality from the
overwhelming memory of that booming, rich, phoney voice in the recordings
(his plummy vowels were the product of childhood elocution lessons, not the
lower-middle-class suburbs of Swansea). Fryer might be right to commend the
prose. Certainly, Dylan was a radio 'natural,' and his discovery by the BBC
after the war could have lifted the strain of the family's chronic poverty -
but he and Caitlin drank the fees.
There is a mystery in this book. Although the author acknowledges the poet's
estate for permission to quote from the published work, he thereupon makes
zero reference to the text of the poems. It is surely absurd to write about
Dylan Thomas without discussing his poetry, especially if you propose to
argue for the quality of the (equally unquoted) prose. Instead, we get the
detail of every marital squabble and financial crisis. If there were
problems of copyright, we readers should have been told.
In welcome contrast, Paul Ferris is the best authority on the Thomases and
his new book, Caitlin - which is, inescapably, something of a spin-off from
his Dylan biography - goes back over a lot of expert and familiar ground.
The sections about Dylan are always more interesting, and better written,
than anything Fryer can manage.
Caitlin sounds like a right, royal pain. Daughter of a minor and genteel
Protestant household in Co. Clare, and one of the myriad mistresses of
painter Augustus John (she had an unrequited crush on his distinguished
admiral son, Caspar), she became a disappointed, and then an embittered,
woman. In her later years, she chose to blame it on her unreliable and
neglectful father - 'failure has bred, in direct line, failure,' as she
explained to Alcoholics Anonymous.
She and Dylan met in 1936 and the two youngsters played at innocence and
love. It hardly seems worth Ferris's time to sort out the subsequent and
various infidelities. In the beginning, she was usually the casual offender.
When Dylan replied in kind, particularly when he started going to America,
she blew a gasket. Double standards from Caitlin.
The point of this book is that Ferris wants to argue that Dylan's last years
were spent not only in terror of his failing powers as poet but also in a
crisis concerning his crumbling marriage. 'Since Dylan has good as given up
writing for the actor's ranting boom and lisping mimicry,' wrote Caitlin,
'anything he sells is either a rehashed bubble and squeak of adolescence or
a never-to-be-fulfilled promise in the future.' Strong words from a loving
wife.
In a later letter she told him: 'I knew you were abysmally weak, drunken,
unfaithful, and a congenital liar, but it has taken me longer to realise
that . . . you are a plain, stingy meany as well . . . So please consider
yourself free as shit.' By the time that encouraging letter reached New
York, he was dead.
This appalling woman thereupon went over the top, initially in Elba where
she chronicled her promiscuous despair in Leftover Life to Kill. There were
years of drinking, years of litigation with the trustees of Dylan's
fast-growing royalties, and a rather casual response to the demands of
motherhood. She settled down, more or less, with an Italian boyfriend, and
eventually - more or less - she stopped the drinking which she had learned
in the old days with Dylan.
She told Ferris: 'One side of me thinks that he was the most bloody awful
crook in the world. I didn't realise how mean and deceitful he was, what a
scoundrel, a low-down bastard, treading on my innocence.' She doesn't come
across too well herself.
Incidentally, the correct Welsh pronunciation is definitely 'dullan'. But
his doting mother was afraid that he would be nicknamed 'the dull one', so
she insisted that he be called 'dillan.' She had her way, and I have to
retract.
