FT  29 APR 93 / International Company News: Air Canada alliance 'may boost
revenues by Dollars 400m'
CONTINENTAL Airlines, the fifth-largest US carrier, and Air Canada yesterday
predicted that the alliance between them could generate an additional
Dollars 400m of revenues annually, once a US-Canada 'open skies' deal is
agreed.
The forecast was made by Mr Hollis Harris, Air Canada's chairman, at a joint
press conference in New York called to herald Continental's re-emergence
from bankruptcy on Tuesday night. The last step in Continental's
reorganisation was completed then, when the carrier closed an investment
agreement with Air Canada and Air Partners, a Texan investment group. This
deal gives the investors a 55 per cent stake in Continental.
It is two-and-a-half years since Houston-based Continental sought protection
from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code. Continental
went in and out of bankruptcy once before, during the early-1980s.
The increase in revenue, Mr Harris suggested, could translate into a Dollars
25m earnings rise for Air Canada, and something similar for Continental -
but he did not elaborate.
The carriers stressed yesterday that, while they do not anticipate any
'common branding' at this stage (flying under common colours, for example),
they are seeking cost savings through shared maintainence services and
similar moves.
Air Canada has relocated gates at La Guardia airport in New York, to be
nearer Continental, and plans to move to the Continental terminal at Newark.
Air Canada is also launching two daily Toronto-Houston flights next month.
Houston is Continental's chief hub, and this is designed to improve customer
feed.
Meanwhile, Mr Harris said the company had made 'no final recommendation' to
directors on whether its 9 per cent stake in Ireland's GPA group should be
written down. However, it will do so ahead of the board meeting on May 6.
USAir, the airline in which British Airways invested Dollars 300m earlier
this year for a 19.9 per cent voting interest, last night priced its stock
offering at Dollars 20.75. USAir plans to issue 10m new shares at this price
or 11.5m if underwriters' over-allotment options are exercised.
At this price, therefore, the issue raises a maximum of Dollars 239m before
expenses.
