FT  07 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Thatcher raps government over
Maastricht
LADY THATCHER yesterday accused the government of living 'in cloud cuckoo
land' in believing its retreat over Maastricht this week changed nothing -
at the same time as Mr John Major said ratification could proceed
regardless.
The former prime minister admitted to misjudging how the 1986 Single
European Act would increase the European Commission's powers. But she said:
'When you get your fingers burnt, the most silly thing to do is to bring
forward a bigger and worse act which is equivalent to putting your head in
the fire.'
Cabinet ministers are confident that Maastricht's formal ratification can go
ahead once legislation is approved - without waiting for the expected legal
challenge by Tory Euro-sceptics.
In the Commons, Mr Major said the amendment accepted reluctantly by
ministers, which removed Maastricht's social protocol, only affected UK law
 -not the treaty the government would sign. 'No change, no social chapter,
no backdoor socialism,' he said.
Lady Thatcher's intervention, denouncing the federalist ambitions of the
treaty, came as Conservative politicians were preparing for heavy losses in
yesterday's local elections and the threat of defeat in the Newbury
by-election.
She urged Europe to co-operate as individual nations, not a union.
'Yugoslavia was the creation of diplomats after World War One. They put
seven countries - different countries, different histories, different
traditions - into a mould. . . The moment the oppression went, of course it
started to fall apart. We do not want to create the Yugoslavia of the next
century.'
In a swipe at the government's handling of the Bosnian crisis, she added:
'When I was with President Bush, and Saddam Hussein occupied Kuwait, it
never occurred to me to consult the Community, I must confess.'
Lady Thatcher said European Community leaders claimed that December's
Edinburgh summit had changed the Maastricht treaty so Denmark could hold a
second referendum - but the text for the May 18 poll in that country was
identical to the first.
Meanwhile, she added, ministers said the amendment removing the social
protocol from the Maastricht bill, as approved by parliament this week, had
changed nothing - but it had changed the treaty. 'That seems to me to be
cloud cuckoo land.'
Lady Thatcher said that, unlike Maastricht, the Single European Act she
pushed through the Commons had no constitutional implications. 'But because
the Commission did not act in the bona fide way which we, being British,
would have expected them to do, we got our fingers burnt,' she said.
Her attack, which irritated rather than alarmed ministers, was combined with
a fresh appeal for a Maastricht referendum - a call also rebuffed yesterday
by Mr Major.
Results of a telephone referendum on the treaty, organised by Maastricht's
opponents, including Lady Thatcher, showed that, after excluding suspect
calls, an overwhelming majority (93.5 per cent) of the 55,000 callers was
opposed to the treaty.
A referendum amendment is expected to be tabled when the House of Lords
debates the treaty after the second Danish referendum is held later this
month.
