FT  10 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brazil's low-grade crystals
worry New York traders
NEW YORK'S Coffee, Sugar, and Cocoa Exchange, which administers the world's
most traded sugar futures contract, is under pressure from the world's
biggest refiners to tighten its definition of what is deliverable against
its No. 11 raw sugar contract.
The controversy, which has been simmering since April, is crucial to traders
who have been in the midst of a supply-driven rally following crop disasters
in Thailand and Cuba and reduced output from other of the world's major
sugar exporters.
Unusual market conditions have re-arranged traditional price relationships
between raw sugar and other grades. White sugar usually trades at a premium
to raw sugar, and so would not be delivered against the New York futures
contract.
However, as world raw sugar supplies tighten, prices have at times moved
above those for low-grade Brazilian white crystals. The Brazilian product is
of too low quality to be delivered against the London white sugar market,
but technically meets New York's delivery specifications, even though it is
not raw sugar.
New York sugar traders at one point believed as much as 200,000 tonnes of
the Brazilian crystals would be delivered against the expiring July
contract.
The crystals, according to Mr Peter Hulme, divisional trading director for
Tate and Lyle International, are difficult to handle, produce dust that
poses safety concerns for warehouses and could meet with import restrictions
at some international borders.
Now, with July futures well below their high of 13.26 cents a lb, the
immediate threat of white crystal deliveries seems to have faded.
However, the controversy remains, and Mr Hulme, who says he represents the
position of a consortium of sugar refiners, has asked the exchange clearly
to exclude the crystals from delivery before the problem arises again.
The CSCE's sugar committee met briefly Tuesday to discuss the issue, but did
not communicate any findings. The exchange's board was attending a regular
meeting yesterday but an official would not say if the sugar delivery issue
was on the agenda.
French trade house Sucres et Denrees yesterday denied rumors that it sold
white sugar to Russia's Prodintorg trade agency in the past few days,
reports Reuter from Paris.
'I don't know where these rumours come from. They're false. We haven't
signed a deal with Prodintorg recently, but we do sell sugar every day to
Russia through private buyers,' said Sucden's co-president, Mr Serge
Varsano. Private business with Russia was likely to reach 1m to 1.5m tonnes
this year, through small but almost daily sales of 20,000 to 40,000 tonnes,
he added.
