FT  15 MAR 93 / Economics Notebook: A map to put Sweden on the path to
recovery
Sweden's political and economic woes were on full display last week, with
the government plunged into crisis over its budget proposals and a string of
large companies reporting huge losses. Aside from the risk of a summer
general election, which will take place if the government loses a confidence
vote on Wednesday, there is deepening gloom about the economy's prospects
for early recovery.
There could hardly have been a better time then for the independent panel of
economists, led by Professor Assar Lindbeck, to present its analysis of the
deep-seated problems in the Swedish economy. Commissioned by the government
in December, just three weeks after the government was forced to float the
krona, the report's task was to map out a course to sustainable economic
recovery.
It pulls few punches in its analysis of Sweden's economic plight. As
symptoms of the malaise, it cites a 10 per cent drop in industrial
production in 1990-91, an unemployment level of 12 per cent (if various
training schemes are included) and a budget deficit in the current fiscal
year of about SKr200bn (Pounds 18.2bn), or 13 per cent of GDP.
'We are in a very deep crisis and the worst lies ahead of us,' said
Professor Lindbeck, 'It will be a long and painful process before several
decades of mistakes and recklessness can be put to rights.'
The report is nothing if not comprehensive. It presents no fewer than 113
recommendations, calling for radical reform of the political and economic
system, and covering everything from income policy to lengthening the school
day. Although it gives some proposals more weight than others, it urges them
to be considered as a whole.
The banking crisis, the budget deficit and unemployment are identified as
top priorities. The commission broadly endorses Sweden's current monetary
strategy, calling for the central bank to continue its policy of cautiously
lowering interest rates, rather than adopting the UK approach of sharp and
rapid cuts. To follow the UK example, it says, would risk inflation and
reduced domestic demand.
But it is highly critical of current bank borrowing charges, which it says
are doing more to cripple small business than high money market rates. This
requires a quick resolution of the financial crisis, because banks are
charging borrowers high rates to rebuild capital bases ravaged by huge
credit losses. The shake-up requires new capital as well as new competition,
including from foreign banks. Where the state has to take over a bank, the
good and bad parts should be promptly separated, with the good part being
sold back to the market within a year.
As far as the budget deficit goes, the report warns that on current trends
Sweden's public debt: GDP ratio is set to reach 70 per cent by the turn of
the century. It therefore calls for further savings of up to SKr70bn in the
next five years to stabilise debt at 40-50 per cent of GDP by 1998. Most of
these savings would have to fall on the years from 1995 onwards, simply
because the economy is currently too weak to absorb more cuts. To help with
the savings programme, further reductions in Sweden's welfare payments are
proposed, including cuts to sickness and unemployment benefits.
High long-term unemployment is identified as the most serious risk for
Swedish society. But Professor Lindbeck also wants the country to get better
value for money out of the SKr90bn a year which it already spends on the
problem. That means cutting the pay within some schemes and shifting towards
less expensive programmes.
What the report does not recommend is any general reduction in Swedish tax
levels - significant in that this was an important plank of policy when the
centre-right minority coalition government, under prime minister Mr Carl
Bildt, came to power in 1991. But the omission only emphasises the
seriousness of the country's financial position, which has already forced
the Bildt government to abandon its tax-cutting plans.
The commission is as insistent on the need for political reform as it is for
economic change. It calls for an extension of government's current
three-year mandate period, fewer MPs and standing committees, a
strengthening of the budget process and reduced interest group influence
over policy. It presents a timetable for very little of the package, but
makes it plain that time is not on Sweden's side.
Professor Lindbeck is a respected economist both at home and abroad, as well
as being the head of the committee which chooses Nobel Prize winners in
economics. There is no doubt that his views carry weight. But will they be
implemented?
Officially, the report now goes out to consultation to give a wide range of
different organisations the opportunity to present their comments before it
is reconsidered by the government later in the year. Unofficially, the
government is free to act on its recommendations much earlier, possibly
incorporating some of them in next month's supplementary budget.
Most of Sweden's leading economists believe the report comes up with the
right measures to revitalise the country's economy. The reception given to
it by politicians and various interest groups last week was predictably more
mixed. The government was certainly enthusiastic, saying it provided strong
support for its existing policies. Even the opposition Social Democrats
appeared to go along with much of it, although they did not like what it had
to say about labour market reform. Only the unions appeared to be overtly
hostile.
One danger is that only the 'easy' parts of the programme will be
implemented, not the painful ones. Another is that the recommendations are
not carried out as swiftly as the commission feels they should be.
A more immediate risk, however, is that the current political turmoil will
distract attention away from proper consideration of the document. Given the
extent of Sweden's economic difficulties, the country can ill afford three
months of uncertainty which a summer election would entail.
