FT  03 JUN 93 / Budget delays healthcare reform plan
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton is delaying release of his healthcare reform plan in
order to concentrate on winning Senate approval for his deficit-cutting
economic plan, the White House indicated yesterday.
President Bill Clinton said he did not expect a 'sustained delay', but
refused to set a date for publication of the healthcare plan.
'I'm focused right now on passing the budget in the Senate,' Mr Clinton
said, adding that the administration intended to remove as many kinks from
the plan as possible before sending it to Congress.
Since the Senate is unlikely to vote on the economic plan until the
beginning of July at the earliest, the health plan is likely to be delayed
until at least the middle of July. However, this would be only a fortnight
before the month-long August recess, and the plan may be postponed until
September.
Mr Clinton originally promised to send the healthcare reform proposal to
Capitol Hill within 100 days of his inauguration. It was then delayed first
to mid-May and then to the middle of this month. The latest delay reflects
the tough fight the administration faces in the Senate if it is to pass the
economic plan without too many concessions. Mr Clinton said this week he
would accept a shift in emphasis from tax increases to spending cuts.
But a delay is also opportune because Mr Clinton has yet to make crucial
decisions on the shape of the healthcare reform. The administration is still
debating the nature of the healthcare benefits that would be guaranteed, the
details of reforms to the healthcare insurance system and the way the plan
would be financed.
Some advisers are keen on replacing corporate health premiums by a payroll
tax on employers and employees. This would ensure that large companies
shouldered most of the burden of higher health spending, but would be
strongly opposed by conservative Democrats and Republicans.
The administration is also considering a new tax on hospitals to recoup some
of the windfall gains they would receive if the health insurance system were
extended to cover the 37m people currently without insurance.
