FT  29 MAR 93 / Survey of Singapore (9): Challenge of the eastern horizons -
Asia's industrial expansion is a magnet for Singapore investors
LATE last year Mr Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore's senior minister, made a lengthy
visit to China. The trip acted as the catalyst for what is being billed as
one of the main policy shifts in Singapore in recent years.
Mr Lee returned to berate Singaporeans for not participating in China's
economic progress. Singapore had been made too comfortable said Mr Lee. The
country was in danger of missing out because its people were not willing to
take risks and invest overseas.
'That's our problem . . . no one wants to go abroad . . . we have got to
shake Singaporeans up, make them adventurous, or we will be losers.'
All the considerable armoury of the government has since been mobilised to
promote a new more outward looking policy. Ministers constantly talk of the
need for Singapore to develop an external economy, a 'second pillar' or
wing.
They say Singapore must be more willing to take advantage of economic
developments in the region. Singaporeans themselves must become more
entrepreneurial, more willing to take risks, less afraid of failure. 'Who
Dares, Wins' should in future be Singapore's motto, says Mr Lee.
The basic idea behind the new policy is that Singapore, having outgrown its
small domestic base, cannot continue to expand its economy without the boost
of external investments.
Entrepreneurs from Hong Kong and Taiwan and conglomerates from South Korea
have all made huge investments overseas which will provide added growth at
home in the years to come.
Singapore, says the government, has lagged seriously behind and now has to
become more outward looking. The alternative, says Mr Lee, is an unpleasant
one. 'We will be a failed story - one that nearly made it but stalled half
way.'
The Singapore Inc appoach, used so successfully at home, is being duplicated
overseas, with government departments and bureaucracy coordinating with big
business to mount a foreign campaign.
Dr Richard Hu, the Finance Minister, announced a number of incentives to
promote outward investments in his recent budget. The main thrust of a new
tax package, which involved cuts in both personal and corporate tax rates,
was to encourage investments abroad.
Tax exemptions are to be given to various overseas ventures, while the
government will provide cash incentives to operations setting up abroad.
'Individuals will be encouraged to take part in risky but highly profitable
ventures, knowing that if they dare and succeed, government will not cream
off a large share of their rewards,' said Dr Hu.
Singapore trade offices abroad are helping investors identify opportunities.
The government's Economic Development Board (EDB), which has attracted
hundreds of companies to invest in Singapore, is now helping fund
Singaporean businesses which want to open shop overseas.
A number of Singapore schools are planned overseas to encourage families to
live abroad. The government has even set up a special committee to ponder
the difficult question of how to make Singaporeans more entrepreneurial.
Some are sceptical about the new policy. They point out that the government
itself, and Mr Lee in particular, have been in many ways responsible for
fostering attitudes now being criticised.
They argue that by building up an over-regulated, carefully controlled
society with an economy dominated by state companies, the entrepreneur has
been squeezed out of people.
Others say the real aim of the new policy is to tweak the ears of
Singaporeans and prevent complacency. 'The government is once again using
scare tactics, telling us that unless we try harder we are in serious
trouble,' says one critic. 'It's a very familiar refrain.'
In fact, Singapore already has considerable investments overseas. A recently
completed Department of Statistics report said 2,290 Singapore-based
companies had set up subsidiaries abroad up to the end of 1990, with direct
investments totalling SDollars 7.49bn. Malaysia and Hong Kong were the two
top locations both in terms of company numbers and amounts invested.
The report concluded that Singapore's direct investments overseas are
'expected to grow dramatically in the 1990s' as new markets open up and
Singaporean businesspeople gain more experience of working abroad.
That prediction has already been borne out by developments in China and
Vietnam. China says that Singapore investments in China in the first six
months of 1992 totalled USDollars 494m against a total of USDollars 896m for
the entire 1979-91 period.
Hardly a day passes without the announcement of another big China project,
usually involving one or other of Singapore's public companies in
combination with private sector partners (see article below on Singapore
Technologies).
In particular, Singapore is selling its expertise in infrastructural
development and management - covering everything from airports and airlines
to banking and fiscal systems - in the China market.
The same is the case in Vietnam. Singapore is now not only Vietnam's biggest
trading partner, it is also among the leading investors in the country.
For several years Singapore-based companies have been investing in hotels
and real estate, most visibly in Australia but also more recently in England
and elsewhere. Several Singapore hoteliers are now investing in new projects
in China and Vietnam.
Singapore is sitting on a mountain of savings. Its foreign exchange reserves
are officially put at Dollars 40bn though they are generally considered to
be considerably higher.
The government's Singapore Investment Corp (GSIC) which acts as government
fund manager, has substantial funds invested in stocks overseas. The GSIC is
reported to have navigated recent ups and downs on the Tokyo and Wall Street
stock markets exceptionally well. 'They are the smartest guys in town,' said
one merchant banker.
But some government investments have not gone well. A 1991 purchase for
SDollars 821m of a 30 per cent stake in Mount Charlotte Investments, a
British-based hotel chain, has not so far provided any returns. Other
investments in high tech companies in California's Silicon valley have also
proved less than attractive.
The government's answer to its critics is that such investments are made
long term and that once risks are taken, then some degree of failure is
likely.
The government now feels it is vital that such attitudes are passed on to
the private sector. Entrepreneurs from Hong Kong and Taiwan are not worried
about the prospect of failure. As Mr Lee notes, every Hongkonger believes
that he can become a millionaire.
'There is that spirit of adventure, that willingness to take risks, to lose
everything and to try again, that makes them so different and so successful.
On the other hand, Singaporeans prefer secure careers and are home-bound.
They are not willing to give up the security of Singapore for more gain
abroad when they think the risks are too high or where it entails much
discomfort.'
Inculcating a more cavalier, swashbuckling approach in Singapore
businesspeople has its dangers. Singapore prides itself on its above board
business style. Entrepreneurs, to be successful overseas, might have to
learn to be more tricky.
Mr Goh Chok Tong, Singapore's prime minister, was recently asked if he felt
there was a danger that Singaporeans might import less savoury business
habits from overseas.
'I think when they go outside, they have to learn how to succeed and our
rules will be very clear.
'In Singapore we do things in our usual way . . . Outside I think they'll
have to be entrepreneurial. Inside they will have to be correct.'
