FT  08 FEB 93 / BR to consider cut-price tunnel link: Ministers order review
of route through London to Channel
MINISTERS have ordered British Rail to consider a cut-price option for the
long-delayed Channel tunnel rail link that could reduce the cost from Pounds
4.5bn to less than Pounds 2bn.
A significant part of the saving would come from adopting proposals from the
British Rail subsidiary in charge of the project which are strongly opposed
by the British Rail board.
If adopted, the option would mean abandoning plans for a new terminal at
London King's Cross and would seal the fate of the Pounds 3.4bn King's Cross
redevelopment project - the biggest inner city regeneration scheme in
Europe.
It would also mean bringing the trains into London along the surface-level
North London line which cuts a swathe through the residential areas of
Hackney, Dalston, Canonbury and Islington.
Transport ministers have been considering the latest options for building
the 68-mile railway line between London and the Channel tunnel since they
were submitted by BR early last month.
BR is believed to have brought the cost of the scheme down from the expected
Pounds 4.5bn to Pounds 2.5bn-Pounds 3bn by designing a route that goes up
and down the hills between London and the Channel tunnel instead of through
them. This will require more powerful trains to cope with the steeper
gradients.
Still to be decided, however, is the controversial issue of how trains will
pass through the suburbs of London from Stratford in the east to the
proposed King's Cross international terminal.
BR favours a tunnel leading into an underground terminal at King's Cross.
This would form part of its ambitious plans for a Pounds 1.4bn upgrade of
the InterCity and suburban railway interchanges at King's Cross and St
Pancras stations.
Its public position, however, masks deep divisions. Union Railways, the BR
subsidiary in charge of the rail link project, wants to pare up to Pounds
1bn more off the cost by using a surface level approach provided by the
North London line between Stratford and Islington.
International trains would veer off the North London line east of Caledonian
Road &amp; Barnsbury station and run either into the existing St Pancras station
or into a new station built at surface level on vacant railway land.
BR's board strongly opposes this plan because such a drastic change in
approach would wreck its plans for the Pounds 1.4bn King's Cross
interchange. That, in turn, would undermine wider plans for a Pounds 2bn
commercial development of the King's Cross railway lands, of which the
station redevelopment forms an integral part.
An approach by the North London line would prove unpopular with local
residents because of fears that widespread demolition would be necessary and
that remaining homes would suffer from noise.
Details are expected to be published towards the end of next month, followed
by public consultation. If legislation is introduced this autumn, the line
could open in 2000.
Nervous end to 120-year roller-coaster ride Page 7
