FT  06 AUG 93 / MacGregor strives to cut waiting time
BUILDING a new trunk road or bypass takes an average 13 years from the time
of its announcement until the first motorist drives on it.
Reducing that time - at least for priority road projects - is the main
motivation behind the package of measures announced yesterday by the
Department of Transport.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, says that the time can be cut to
10 years, and eventually less.
He also believes that speeding up the process and cutting red tape could
release 'tens of millions of pounds' for building new roads, and lessen the
blight on areas threatened by new roads.
Mr MacGregor is concerned not to be seen as a mad road-builder, riding
roughshod over the objections of people affected by new roads. Most
road-building is in rural areas, and Mr MacGregor is aware of the electoral
dangers to safe Conservative seats in the shires.
So yesterday's announcement was hedged with pledges of support for the
principle of public consultation. 'Everyone whose interests are affected by
new roads should have the opportunity to raise those interests at a public
inquiry,' he said.
In an effort to reconcile these two objectives, the package includes
measures to adopt a less adversarial approach to decision-making on road
schemes. If a broad local consensus could be established about the best
route for a new road at an early stage, then the amount of opposition could
be minimised before the proposals go out to consultation.
New approaches will be tested by calling local conferences on two schemes in
south-west England which have proved difficult to progress.
Mr MacGregor is also proposing changing the rules for public inquiries,
which offer ingenious objectors great scope for prolonging the process. He
was highly critical of delaying tactics of the type used at the Macclesfield
relief road inquiry.
The procedures for planning inquiries are due to be revised to make greater
use of pre-inquiry meetings, encourage the submission of evidence in advance
and eliminate irrelevant or repetitious evidence. Mr MacGregor would like
similar changes for roads inquiries.
More support for inspectors is also suggested: each day of an inquiry
requires two days of work in writing up the report. Often that additional
work must be fitted in between subsequent inquiry hearings, and the
appointment of assistant inspectors could speed up completion of reports.
However, the bulk of the delays lie in the Department of Transport's
internal procedures. According to the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors, most of the delay occurs prior to public consultation and after
the inquiry is finished.
That is why a new highways agency and a review of the 500-odd road schemes
to establish priorities are so important in speeding up road-building. The
creation of agencies for other government services has allowed the strategic
parts of government to be separated from the management of individual
projects.
Ministers will make the strategic decisions about road priorities and argue
the case for roads with the Treasury in the annual public expenditure round.
The agency will be responsible for building new trunk roads and motorways on
agreed timetables and budgets. It will also manage and maintain the existing
network with publicly set performance targets.
The Department of Transport will soon be advertising the post of chief
executive of the new agency. The job will be filled by a dynamic individual,
capable of managing more than 2,000 staff on one of the highest profile
public services in the country. The new chief executive's performance
targets are likely to include a substantial reduction in the delays involved
in building new roads.
Whether such a reduction will be greeted with popular acclaim by those in
the path of those new roads remains to be seen.
