FT  31 MAR 93 / Open markets call by US trade chief
MR Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, yesterday assured trading
partners in the European Community that the US would 'champion open markets
and expanded trade'. But he warned that Washington would expect other
markets to be 'comparably open' to US goods and services.
Mr Kantor, speaking in Brussels after talks with European Community
counterparts over US-EC trade problems, said the US remained committed to 'a
prompt and successful completion' of the Uruguay Round of talks on global
trade liberalisation, but repeated US demands that 'some major improvements'
must be made to the draft text of the agreement.
He said success depended on improved access for US companies to the markets
of trading partners. No agreement would be possible 'if Japan continues to
behave as if it had little stake in the outcome'.
A statement from the Japanese embassy in Brussels said Mr Kantor 'had a
misperception'. A Japanese official insisted Japan had 'done its utmost' to
help achieve a successful Uruguay Round outcome, but said it had been
frustrated by US-EC deadlock over reform of farm trade.
Mr Kantor's wider comments in particular raised the question whether the US
in future would prefer to tackle trade problems on an issue-by-issue basis,
through bilateral negotiations and whether, through the reiteration of the
need for 'fair trade', he was suggesting a weakened US commitment to free
trade.
Speaking at a lunch of the EC committee of the American Chamber of Commerce
in Brussels, Mr Kantor was adamant that he refused to 'get bogged down in
long drawn-out theological debates about free trade versus protectionism'.
He said the Clinton administration saw trade 'as a priority element of
American security', and promised a 'more active, anticipatory, inclusive and
flexible' trade policy that would incorporate worries over the environment,
competition policy, international labour standards, science and technology
policy and sustainable growth policies in developing countries.
Mr Kantor did not discuss public purchasing, which was the immediate focus
of US-EC negotiations on Monday. The US has threatened trade sanctions if
the EC does not dismantle an article in its new public procurement law which
discriminates in favour of EC contractors.
Paris wants Gatt review, Page 3
Clash on air subsidies, Page 8
Time bomb ticks, Page 20
