FT  11 JUN 93 / 3i seeking up to Dollars 400m to fund investment in Europe
BRITAIN'S largest venture capital group, 3i, is attempting to raise between
Dollars 300m and Dollars 400m (Pounds 197m and Pounds 263m) to finance an
ambitious expansion of its investment activity in continental Europe.
This is the first time 3i has sought to manage outside funds and would
represent the biggest fund-raising by a UK venture capital group for several
years.
The group, owned by Britain's leading clearing banks and the Bank of
England, is a significant provider of finance to small and medium-sized
businesses.
3i said last March it was considering the possibility of raising outside
finance but played down the significance of the move, saying it was just one
of several options it had been considering. Investment management sources,
however, said this week that 3i was actively seeking to raise Dollars 300m
to Dollars 400m.
Mr Neil Cross, 3i's international director, said yesterday: 'We were
encouraged by the response we had (in March) and we spoke to more people.
Some have said they will put money up but until people have signed up you
never know. I don't think we will firm up on whether it will happen or not
until the autumn.'
Asked to confirm the size of the proposed fund, Mr Cross said: 'I would have
guessed you are talking about sums of that order.'
3i has focused its fund-raising on large investment institutions in the US
and continental Europe and is believed to have obtained a commitment for
Dollars 100m from a large US pension fund. It has been very selective in
targeting UK institutions, which have proved reluctant to increase their
venture capital invest-ments during the past two years.
UK investment institutions said 3i might have difficulty raising such a
large amount of money, given its lack of a track record for managing other
people's funds. 3i has financed previous investments from its own equity,
bond issues and retained profits. It announced in April that it was calling
off long-standing plans for a public listing.
Raising outside funds allows venture capital companies to finance larger
deals, maximise the use of their investment expertise and spread their costs
over a larger portfolio.
Several other venture capital funds expressed concern that 3i's fund-raising
would suck the market dry.
More than 40 UK venture companies are currently attempting to raise money,
while many others have had to scale down or abandon fund-raising campaigns
over the past 12-18 months.
