FT  24 JUN 93 / Survey of France (12): Interior minister focuses on
immigration issues / Profile of Charles Pasqua
FRANCE'S immigrants might well be warning their children that if they don't
behave, Charles Pasqua will come and take them away - were it not for the
parents' fear that the interior minister may be coming for them anyway.
But for most native-born French Mr Pasqua is far from an ogre. The
65-year-old former Ricard drink salesman, outspoken in his rough southern
accent, is one of the country's most popular politicians. According to one
opinion poll, 70 per cent of French welcome Mr Pasqua's return to the
interior ministry.
He was best known in the later 1980s for promising to 'terrorise the
terrorists' - bombs associated with the Middle East had been planted in
Paris. Now, controlling legal immigration and stopping illegal immigration
is his priority.
'France no longer wants to be a country of immigration,' he says, arguing
that with unemployment so high, job competition requires France to aim at
zero immigration. In fact, many immigrants fill the menial job slots which
most native French no longer covet.
Now the backlash has come; in May France said it was suspending Schengen's
implementation until EC partners joined France in tightening immigration
policies and practices on external frontiers.
But matching the barrage of nationality and immigration legislation which Mr
Pasqua and other ministers have submitted to parliament would be a tall
order. It includes:
Removal of the automatic right of French-born children of foreign-born
parents to French passports. Henceforth, such children must affirm their
right to French nationality, which they can lose if they have committed any
prison-worthy crime. Foreign spouses of French nationals would have to prove
two years of cohabitation, instead of one, before getting citizenship.
A foreigner (who can neither be a polygamist nor a student) must show that
he has lived two years legally in France, and that he has adequate financial
means, in order to get his family to join him. Local mayors can suspend a
marriage ceremony temporarily to carry out an investigation.
The right to political asylum is to be written into French law for the first
time but the practice of granting it will be made more restrictive.
More expulsion orders will actually be carried out; last year only 20 per
cent were.
