FT  19 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Housing pick ups project Marley into
doubled profit
PRE-TAX profits of Marley more than doubled during the first six months of
this year from Pounds 6.1m to Pounds 13.2m, as the building materials group
took advantage of housing market recoveries in the UK and US.
Comparisons with the 1992 first half, however, were flattered as those
figures included a Pounds 3.6m loss on disposals which previously had been
taken below the line.
Mr David Trapnell, chief executive, said figures were re-stated to take
account of the new FRS 3 accounting rules. A better guide to the group's
performance was the 33 per cent rise in operating profits from Pounds 13.1m
to Pounds 17.4m.
Earnings per share rose from 0.8p to 3p, more than covering a maintained
interim dividend of 2.1p.
Mr Chris Beenham, finance director, said the group would prefer to see
dividends covered at least two times by earnings before it increased
payments to shareholders.
Mr Trapnell said the biggest improvement had been at the heavy building
materials division which moved from a Pounds 700,000 operating loss to a
Pounds 1.6m profit.
Volume sales of concrete aerated blocks in the UK, mainly to the housing
market, had risen by about 11 per cent compared with the first half of last
year. Sales of roof tiles increased by some 7 per cent.
Cost savings, mainly in the UK where the labour force was reduced by 500 to
4,300, had added a further Pounds 4m to profits. Lower prices for clay and
concrete products compared with the first half of last year reduced this
gain to about Pounds 1m.
The group had managed to raise building materials prices during early summer
but had still not recovered to levels prevailing 12 months ago. Overall, UK
operating profits had more than doubled from Pounds 2.1m to Pounds 5.3m.
The expanding automotive components business lifted its contribution to
profits from Pounds 1.3m to Pounds 1.8m, helped by rising car sales in the
UK.
Profits from plastic plumbing, wall and floor mouldings, including
international contributions, rose from Pounds 12.5m to Pounds 14m.
The international businesses, which in the first half generated sales of
Pounds 148.4m (Pounds 119.7m), accounted for just under half of group
turnover of Pounds 299.1m (Pounds 273.2m). Its contribution to operating
profits is much higher, following the recession in the UK construction
industry, and rose in the first half from Pounds 11m to Pounds 12.1m
including a Pounds 1.5m gain on currency movements.
Mr Trapnell said profits had risen strongly in the US, helped by an 8 per
cent increase in housing starts in southern states, and in New Zealand. A
strong German market for DIY products meant that profits grew marginally in
western Europe, despite sharply falling demand for construction products in
other continental European markets. Profits from South Africa fell slightly.
The chief executive said the group would be looking to expand its
international plastic products interests.
COMMENT
Having successfully reduced UK operating costs during the recession, Marley
finds itself well placed to take advantage of even a modest recovery in
housebuilding, as evidenced by its latest first half figures. Price
increases, provided they can be held, will improve margins further although
these may never recover to the peak levels reached previously. The US
housing recovery should continue to boost North American profits while there
is still no sign of any slackening in the group's German markets. The
balance sheet is not strong, but at the same time is under no great strain
with gearing of 64 per cent on net borrowings of Pounds 136.7m. Most of the
group's virtues, however, have been recognised already in the share price,
and a prospective multiple of more than 23 on full year pre-tax profits of
about Pounds 30m leaves little room for further improvement in the market
price.
