FT  20 FEB 93 / Private View: Lawyer whose profession is peace - Torkel
Opsahl, a Norwegian expert on human rights, has returned to the Irish
conflict to head a citizens' inquiry
IN AN upstairs room in Belfast this week, a Catholic taxi-driver whose son
was killed by a Protestant gunman was answering questions from the widow of
the last prime minister of northern Ireland.
Listening to him in the front row of the audience was the lanky figure of a
well-known Ulster Unionist borough councillor, one of the Province's landed
aristocracy.
A woman with a well-educated English accent rose to tell the panel that the
front of her house was in a Catholic street, the back in a Protestant one
and that nobody would talk to the army or police for fear of being, as she
put it, 'bumped off'.
At the back of the room a woman with an Irish accent complained of 'a
colonial situation'. A grey-bearded man with a briefcase said both sides
should take up meditation. Could he have Pounds 75,000 to buy a vacant hall
in the city?
This was a session of the Opsahl Commission, an independent, charity-funded
'citizens' inquiry' which has been taking the views of everyone from
prelates to prisoners in the hope of making fresh sense of a conflict which
has defied all efforts for 23 years.
The commission's chairman is Torkel Opsahl, a human rights expert who is
professor of law at the University of Oslo. His experience of human conflict
dates back to the Cold War - he studied in New York and Moscow in the early
1950s - and includes the Middle East and Bosnia today.
But what can a Norwegian professor, however qualified and however well
assisted by his panel of six commissioners, hope to extract from the
most-analysed political problem of the western world?
Over a late-night glass of lager, I asked him why he had accepted the
invitation.
'There is a personal dimension and a professional answer,' he said. Opsahl's
lawyer-like discretion seems more acquired than inborn: he is a man who
appears to enjoy an excuse to unbutton. Several times he emphasised that he
was tonight making an exception of his rule not to talk too much.
He told me that he had heard many Irish cases in the 1970s as a member of
the European Commission of Human Rights and had got to know many victims -
or alleged victims - of the security forces.
Cases sent up from the Maze Prison? I asked.
'Oh, yes I have been to the Maze prison to interview Bobby Sands (the hunger
striker) a week before he died.'
But this is not really a human rights inquiry, is it?
'No, it's not. It's peacemaking . . . no, that's too pretentious. But it's
an effort to see if there is after all any light in the end of this tunnel.
This commission is a very different thing but it rang a bell with me because
I have friends from that time.'
After years working on human rights Opsahl was tempted by the chance to play
a new role. Besides, life in Oslo was becoming dull.
What can an outsider bring to the job, apart from a pair of ears?
'But that's the most important thing. I didn't expect to bring anything but
they asked me to come. I said I will bring whatever understanding I have. I
can listen, I can read.'
Is this really a lawyer's task?
'Lawyers are useful for many things, to find honourable compromises, that's
our purpose. 'Trained incapacity', isn't that what lawyers have?'
The professor of constitutional law is a beefy-looking man who took up his
profession 'for a strange mixture of reasons'; one of which was that 'you
could still become a journalist, playwright or sports star'. He felt no envy
for friends who went on to big things: one is Norway's foreign minister,
another its chief justice.
Opsahl is a founding member of Amnesty International and in that capacity
was an observer at the Daniel and Sinyavsky trial in Moscow. For 15 years he
was an adviser for the Nobel Peace Prize committee but resigned,
unobtrusively, in protest at the joint award in 1973 to Henry Kissinger and
the north Vietnamese Le Duc Tho.
He is also one of the five lawyers who have been collecting information for
the UN about war crimes in Bosnia: their report has just gone to the
secretary-general.
At one point I said something about northern Ireland's middle class being
above the conflict. Opsahl leapt on the word class.
'Are you a Marxist? I thought I was until I met my wife (a teacher of
philosophy). She was a Marxist-Leninist and I had to talk her out of it  -
and at least the Leninist part has gone.
'I was for a time attracted to the class analysis. You say 'middle-class'. I
think of the Protestant and Catholic working class here and I don't think
Marx has helped them a lot. God hasn't either, as far as I can see. But the
class analysis may still be valid here.'
I asked him what prejudices he brought to the job. If he had prejudices, he
said, they would arise from having come in contact with people ill-treated
by the authorities. But, he assured me, he had not from that concluded that
the army and Royal Ulster Constabulary were made up only of oppressive
bigots.
'No more did I come here with the idea that this is the last part of the
Empire which Britain is fighting to preserve, or anything like that.'
Opsahl was reluctant to advertise his views before the commission, whose
hearings end next week, reports this summer.
A few things are clear. One is that he mistrusts the idea of
'self-determination'.
'It is a good slogan wherever you go and it causes a lot of killing and
bloodshed. But I don't think it's a very helpful concept, especially not in
northern Ireland.'
Another is that he thinks ethnic conflict should be tackled pragmatically,
not by brandishing principles. He had learned what he called a deep wisdom:
'It is that conflict is inevitable in all societies, conflicts have no
solutions, conflicts must be managed but they can't be solved. Someone in
the UN Human Rights Commission said once that if you want solutions you
should ask for chemists.
The process was more important than report, he added. One of the 600
submissions had suggested that it might be better to abandon talks at the
political level and try to build consensus slowly, undramatically, on the
ground.
'I like the sound of this, but I don't know where it leads us. Because it
could look rather, what do you call it?'
Defeatist?
'Defeatist, yes - that we can't do anything political, that we only work on
social matters, on the environment, commerce and unemployment. Should one
come out publicly and say there is no institutional answer?'
Opsahl would not answer his own question directly but he reminded me that
there is another argument: unionist fears and nationalist demands mean there
can be no peace until the constitutional problem has been dealt with.
I get the impression your inquiry is not taken seriously here, I said.
'But I have never had so much press in my life before. Anyway, it doesn't
matter so long as we get all these intelligent submissions.'
If the process is ignored, the result may be ignored too.
'Yes. If it's ignored by politicians and those who have influence, ideas and
the will to do something - then we have lost.'
What is your minimum expectation and what is your maximum hope?
'The minimum ambition is to write a good report. You can say that even a
good report will just go into the drawer somewhere. But I think it will be
read with attention by most of those who can influence developments here. I
am not saying they will adopt the proposals, but it may give them some
insights.
'My maximum expectation is of course that the process will lead to peace in
northern Ireland within the foreseeable future. I say 'peace' because I
think the ending of the violence is a precondition for results, but I am not
saying there must be formal peace agreement.
'Most of the parties to the conflict have locked in pictures of each other
as enemies. But they should be told that really they have no enemies. It's
more fear than animosity which is the problem.'
When you are back on your farm in Norway does this commission keep you awake
at night?
'I see this as a job, not as my own destiny. But as I said earlier on I've
done enough fact-finding and applying laws. This is different. It's . . .
again, 'peacemaking' is too ambitious . . . being part of a process for
managing conflict. I've always believed that conflicts are there to be
managed if they cannot be solved.'
