FT  27 MAY 93 / (CORRECTED) Accountancy Column: An old axiom goes by the
board in the boardroom - Jane Simms explains why finance directors without
chartered backgrounds are making the running
Correction (Published 3rd June 1993) appended to this article.
THERE IS a new breed of finance director, whose CV reads something like
this: graduation from Oxbridge, a couple of years in management consultancy,
an MBA course at a good business school. They move through a series of jobs
in blue chip companies to reach finance director of a sizeable quoted
company by their early 40s, with a good chance of becoming chief executive
of another within five years.
They all have one other thing in common: they are not accountants. There is
a perceptible trend towards non-chartered accountant finance directors in
the boardrooms of UK listed companies. Mr Michael Lawrence, finance director
of Prudential and chairman of the Hundred Group of finance directors, says a
quarter - and growing - of the group's members are business school graduates
or management accountants, with the odd banker, treasurer or tax expert
thrown in.
This trend seems to reflect both the increasing complexity of business and
the broadening scope of the finance director's role. Institutional
shareholdings have grown in recent years, the financial sector has become
more complicated and fast moving, and the balance of emphasis in the finance
director's job has shifted accordingly.
Reporting and control are as important as ever, but risk and transaction
management, strategy and external relations have become just as crucial. The
role has become more active, and an understanding of the markets, commercial
flair and a gift for strategy have become prerequisites. Chartered
accountants no longer hold the monopoly on such qualities. Indeed, some
would argue they are at the opposite end of the commercial spectrum.
Mr Simon Duffy, finance director of Thorn EMI and not a chartered
accountant, says: 'The natural instinct of accountants is to say 'no', and
they should instead be supporting good business decisions and finding ways
of saying 'yes'.'
Mr Martin Taylor, chief executive of Courtaulds Textiles, argues that
accountants make good finance directors in that they have 'a disciplined,
rigorous, hard fact-based approach to business'. But they make bad ones in
the sense that 'that's not the whole story, and it tends to divide things
into accounting periods'.
The continued encroachment of non-chartered accountant finance directors
depends on three factors: whether the chartered accountancy institutes make
their training more business-oriented; how far other training grounds -
business schools, the Association of Corporate Treasurers and the Institute
of Taxation, for example - take the initiative; and how the role of the
finance director itself develops.
The first is unlikely: since 97 per cent of accountants do not become
finance directors of public companies, there is little incentive for the
institutes to change. Judging by experience in the US, the business schools
and the treasurers will continue to weaken the stranglehold chartered
accountants have traditionally had on the job. In the US, only a fraction of
chief financial officers are certified public accountants - the nearest
equivalent qualification.
As for the third, Mr Donald Macleod, a partner in the executive search
company Korn/Ferry, echoes the views of many when he predicts that over the
next five to 10 years the finance director will increasingly be the
second-in-command to the chief executive.
Mr Andrew Harrison, finance director of Courtaulds Textiles till earlier
this month, says: 'There is no doubt that it is preferable for public
company finance directors to be qualified accountants, because they spend so
much time talking about accounting and finance. But the more senior you are
and the bigger the company is, the content of the job changes. It becomes
more commercial, more broad, more strategic, and more people-oriented. So it
is possible for the right individual to do a good job without being an
accountant.'
Harrison is himself not an accountant, which he sees as positive. 'I can
explain accounting issues to the City in non-jargon, layman's language,' he
says. 'It does no harm talking about any problem from first principles and
accounting doesn't always coincide with common sense.'
But Harrison and the other non-qualified finance directors stress that a
highly qualified team is an essential back-up. Most would not consider
promoting a non-accountant as finance director of a subsidiary because of
the lack of technical support in the divisions and because strategic skills
are less of a requirement at that level.
It is not just that the finance director's role has widened. Accounting and
treasury have become so much more complex that a good company accountant or
treasurer needs to be a specialist technician. As a result, many companies
have split the job below finance director in two, with a director of tax and
treasury and a director of financial control.
Simon Duffy, who arrived at Thorn EMl via Harvard business school,
Rothschilds merchant bank, Shell International, Bain, Consolidated Gold
Fields and Guinness, says: 'Unquestionably I am not as well positioned to
make judgments on technical and accounting issues. I have to rely more on my
staff for that. On the other hand I don't get bogged down in accounting
detail, nor have any vested interests in accounting principles, so l am able
to stand back and see what l want.'
Nigel Whittaker, corporate affairs director at Kingfisher, points to Geoff
Mulcahy, his chief executive, as the archetype of the new breed of finance
director. Mulcahy was a Harvard MBA who became finance director of Woolworth
Holdings (Kingfisher's previous name). James Kerr Muir, the new finance
director, is also a Harvard MBA and was previously managing director of Tate
&amp; Lyle UK.
'A commercial upbringing is essential to the finance role we have here,'
says Whittaker. 'We have plenty of very good accountants in the finance
functions throughout the group so we need a broader base for the finance
director. Having said that, when we recruited James we had an open mind
about whether we wanted an accountant or not, but he was the right man for
the job.'
Kathleen O'Donovan, the audit partner from Price Waterhouse recruited by BTR
last year, and Richard North, hired by Burton from Coopers &amp; Lybrand in
1991, came straight from the profession. But most companies recruit finance
directors from within industry. Operational experience is seen as vital.
Indeed some finance directors hold a line job in addition to their
functional role.
Many new accountant finance directors today may have had as much operational
experience as the MBAs. And it is true that companies are more open-minded
about the background of a new finance director. But selection revolves
around the nature, experience, and qualities of the individuals rather than
their training.
It used to be axiomatic that finance directors were qualified - preferably
chartered - accountants. The pre-eminence of the qualification is now under
threat to the extent it may even come to be seen as a disadvantage.
It may have taken the MBAs a little time to break through, as a result of
the prejudices and conditioning of British business. But the old adage that
the accountant finance directors have got where they are today despite,
rather than because of, their training is ringing truer than ever. Only
those accountants who can demonstrate a raft of other skills and qualities
will be able to stand head to head with their non-qualified peers.
CORRECTION
MS KATHLEEN O'Donovan, finance director of BTR, was previously a partner
with Ernst &amp; Young, not Price Waterhouse as stated in last week's
accountancy column.
Jane Simms is editor of Financial Director
