FT  24 MAR 93 / Russia in Crisis: Reformers play last economic card - After
parliament, the offensive has moved to the central bank
BY CALLING yesterday for the sacking of Mr Viktor Gerashchenko as central
bank chairman, Mr Boris Fyodorov, deputy prime minister for economics and
finance, was playing his final card in a battle for supremacy over economic
reforms.
Now that President Boris Yeltsin has openly taken on the parliament, Mr
Fyodorov felt he had nothing to lose by demanding the head of Mr
Gerashchenko, who believes the government's strategy will lead Russia to
disaster.
At the height of the Congress of People's Deputies session which two weeks
ago humbled Mr Yeltsin, Mr Gerashchenko, who is accountable to parliament,
told the Financial Times that either the central bank could persuade the
government to change its policies or he would have to resign.
Asked whether he would resign, he said 'let's wait and see' with an amused
look that suggested that the policy rather than the central bank chairman
would change.
Now Mr Fyodorov, a 35-year-old who used to work under him at the central
bank, has declared that he is tired of waiting after three months of trying
to get the chairman to see things his way. As Mr Yeltsin has gone on the
offensive against parliament to put himself in a stronger position, so Mr
Fyodorov has chosen this moment to take the initiative against Mr
Gerashchenko.
In a direct appeal to the central bank's board of directors - which he
believes is divided into 'conformists' who back Mr Gerashchenko and younger
rebels - Mr Fyodorov set out measures he has often before demanded from the
central bank.
They include increasing interest rates beyond their extremely low levels,
limiting credit creation to government-set limits, and allowing all the hard
currency which enterprises must sell for roubles to be sold directly on the
currency market rather than transferring part of it to the central bank.
In another move to help strengthen the fast-falling rouble, he also demanded
that non-residents, who are not currently allowed to own roubles, should be
allowed to place orders to buy the currency through commercial banks.
Finally, he published a separate document emphasising a message already
conveyed in broad outline by Mr Yeltsin to former Soviet Republics: either
follow monetary, credit, customs, and currency guidelines set by Russia, or
give up the rouble as your currency.
Despite his threat that the reforms could not continue until the problem
with the central bank was resolved, he also vowed that the government would
not sit and do nothing at a time when some might take advantage of the
political crisis.
With a sure feel for the popular longing for order, he said he had ordered
the tax and customs services to strengthen their vigilance against tax
evaders and smugglers.
More seriously, he said that the government was working on a package for
tough spending cuts.
As the International Monetary Fund announced it would resume talks with
Russia in the near future, Mr Fyodorov also accused Mr Gerashchenko of
sabotaging Russian attempts to conclude a standby agreement which would
unleash more money from the Fund.
He also took the opportunity to explain tactfully to the Russian public that
the west is entitled to set conditions for any aid it provides.
'Nobody will help a country which is not pursuing economic reform, which is
not generating hard currency to pay off its debts,' he told a news
conference.
In so doing, he wants to dispel popular disillusionment which set in after
the west promised Dollars 24bn (Pounds 17bn) in aid which was either
invisible in its effect, or not granted because Russia failed to meet
conditions for it.
Despite his assurances that his main concern is about the economy, Mr
Fyodorov also confirmed his skill as a politician.
His statements yesterday, designed to deflect at least some the blame for
the country's worsening economic problems on to the central bank, are part
of a campaign to enlist public support ahead of a popular vote of confidence
called by Mr Yeltsin next month.
Starting off by declaring his unconditional support for the president, he
acknowledged that politics and the economy in modern-day Russia are linked
as nowhere else.
Mr Andrei Illarionov, deputy chief of the government's centre for monitoring
economic reforms, made his contribution to the campaign to win the
referendum and save the reforms. He claimed yesterday that it was strong
pressure on the central bank from the government over recent weeks that had
resulted in a slowing of weekly inflation from 5.2 per cent at the start of
the month to 3.8 per cent in mid-March.
