FT  01 OCT 93 / Technology: On a mission to divide and rule - Paul Abrahams
explains the motives behind Glaxo's R&amp;D shake-up
Glaxo, Europe's largest drugs company, is also one of the world's most
innovative. By any standard its research and development labs have in recent
decades developed a series of remarkably successful compounds.
These include Zantac, the world's best-selling medicine, which last
financial year generated revenues of more than Pounds 2.1bn. More recently,
the company has launched a series of ground-breaking molecules such as
Imigran, the migraine drug, and Zofran, an anti-nausea treatment.
Given Glaxo's R&amp;D record, last week's announcement that it is to reorganise
the top of its R&amp;D organisation will be scrutinised by groups trying to
emulate its success.
The reorganisation involves splitting the position of R&amp;D director and
appointing Sir Mark Richmond, chairman of the Science and Engineering
Research Council, as director of research. Goran Ando, the Swedish executive
recently appointed R&amp;D director, becomes director of group development and
product strategy.
Richard Sykes, Glaxo's chief executive who was elevated from the position as
R&amp;D director in March, insists the changes are not merely a result of his
promotion.
'Our mission is to create, discover, develop, manufacture and sell
prescription medicines. We are 100 per cent committed to prescription drugs.
We are not in the business of over-the-counter medicines, distilled water or
ice cream.'
Sykes insists that if Glaxo is to be successful in prescription drugs, it
must develop treatments that are safe and effective and offer added value.
'There's little point developing medicines that have little added value,' he
explains.
Glaxo plans to move into untapped markets not yet satisfied.
'The future success of this company in 10 to 20 years' time will be
dependent upon developing innovative medicines,' says Sykes.
Innovative drugs will emerge from a science base undergoing enormous change,
according to Sykes. 'We are witnessing a paradigm shift in biological
science. First, we are increasingly understanding the genetic basis of
disease. Every week, 3,000 genes are being identified. And second we know
more and more about microbiology - the process of the life and death of the
cell.'
By understanding the physiology of diseases, scientists will be able to
identify target sites for drugs more easily. This offers the potential to
develop more effective agents and treat chronic illnesses not well treated
at the moment, he explains.
'You have to harness these new technologies. Having access to them is really
critical for the future of the company and you need very good people to do
it,' says Sykes.
'We will have to have a lot of help from the outside. We have 1,500 people
involved in research internally, but that is not enough because of the rapid
expansion in knowledge base. Most advances are happening in academia and the
biotechnology industry, so it's critical to have strong ties.
'In the future, drugs will not come out of the pharmaceuticals industry.
They will come from research boutiques working on important targets.'
Glaxo has formal links with eight to 10 biotechnology groups. The company
also gives money to about 70 per cent of the UK's universities.
'In the past, we have had a traditional R&amp;D organisation. We now need to
change the structure to harness and implement the new technologies. It is
increasingly difficult for one man to oversee research and development. That
is why Glaxo decided to split the functions,' he explains.
As for Sir Mark, Sykes says he has exceptional scientific skills from his
experience of molecular genetics at Edinburgh University and microbial
biology at Bristol University. He has also developed organisational
abilities from running Serc and being vice-chancellor of Manchester
University. Sykes believes his period at Serc has placed him at the cutting
edge of science on an international basis.
He says Sir Mark's contacts in the scientific community will help him
recruit top talent for Glaxo's new Pounds 700m research complex at Stevenage
due to open in 1995. The company will hire a number of additional scientists
when the Greenford and Ware operations transfer to Stevenage.
Sykes says another reason for splitting research from development was the
huge difference in their objectives. 'In research you can't see where you
are going. There are lots of different avenues to explore. For development,
you know exactly where you are going. It's just there are a series of
regulatory hurdles in the way that you have to negotiate. Conceptually
they're very different and you need very different sorts of people to run
the two operations.'
The development process remains highly critical, insists Sykes. More than 75
per cent of R&amp;D expenditure goes on development, and 25 per cent on
research. Glaxo has one of the best development records in the industry, and
has set the gold standard for time taken to negotiate regulatory hurdles to
new drugs.
'The safety, efficacy and value data provide the platform for the marketing.
There have to be close links between the product strategy and development
process. That forms the rationale for Ando's appointment,' says Sykes.
Ando will be responsible for pre-clinical development, clinical development,
relationship with the regulators, product strategy, information technology,
management services and licensing. He will also liaise with the powerful
operating companies in Glaxo which explain development requirements of
national markets.
Sykes believes his reorganisation will help ensure the group's
pharmaceuticals R&amp;D investment - the largest in the world set at Pounds 850m
for 1994 - is well spent.
