FT  18 DEC 93 / Markets: A slip from the leading edge - The Bottom Line
Becoming one of the stock market's glamour stocks can be a double-edged
experience - as Peter Gill, finance director of Dorling Kindersley Holdings,
freely concedes. The publisher, which produces illustrated reference books
and futuristic multi- media products, had seen its share price more than
double from last October's flotation price of 165p. However, the shares
dropped nearly 30 per cent on Wednesday, after the group announced the
departure of its managing director and gave its second profits warning
within a fortnight. So what has gone wrong with this former wonder stock?
The company blames continuing computer problems at its distributor, Tiptree
Books, which is owned by Random House, the US publisher, and a slow take-off
for DK Education, which supplies teaching packages to schools. Tiptree says
deliveries are now up to date and it will contest the legal claim which
Dorling Kindersley is preparing. Whatever the outcome of litigation, there
is no doubt that Dorling Kindersley did suffer - along with other book
publishers - after Tiptree installed a new computer in July. Dorling
Kindersley can hardly be criticised for using Tiptree, which was named
distributor of the year at the British Book Awards in February - at the same
time Dorling Kindersley was named publisher of the year. However, the group
seems to have been slow to grasp the seriousness of the problem, and is
still unable to quantify its impact.
Although Peter Kindersley, chairman, said it would be wrong to blame Dorling
Kindersley's problems on Richard Harman, the departing managing director, it
was significant that he emphasised that Harman's successor, Rod Hare, was 'a
particularly effective hands-on manager, with a thorough knowledge of the
business.'
Even if the group was guilty of taking its eye off the ball, Dorling
Kindersley's biggest problem this week has been the puncturing of inflated
expectations. This particularly related to its pioneering role in
multimedia, using CD and computer technology to combine text, images and
sound.
Analysts - and journalists - are intrigued, while financial institutions are
keen to have some stake in what could clearly be the next information
revolution. Unfortunately, there are few quoted vehicles in this field, so
Dorling Kindersley's flotation could scarcely have been better timed.
The fact that a 20 per cent stake in the group is held by Microsoft, Bill
Gates's US computer software group, did nothing to lessen City interest.
The intermediaries element of last October's offer was six times
oversubscribed, and 12 months later the shares were selling on an incredible
multiple of 35 times historic earnings. Such a sky-high rating leaves no
room for disappointment, and the market's reaction to recent bad news has
been predictably dramatic.
Gill, who joined as finance director in August, says the group understands
its core books business well and can reliably predict future revenue, in
spite of a one-off problem such as Tiptree, which in any case only handles
about 20 per cent of group sales. The unpredictability arises in its new
businesses such as DK Education, which has been slower than expected to take
off, and - above all - in multimedia.
Dorling Kindersley says about 10m computers capable of running multimedia
programmes will be delivered worldwide next year. DK's first title, Musical
Instruments, published by Microsoft last year in the US and now selling for
Pounds 49 in the UK, has already won four international awards. The
potential is clear, but Gill says it is difficult to tell when revenue will
arrive.
This week's warning that pre-tax profits for the year to next June would be
less than the Pounds 9.65m achieved last time puts the shares, after a small
recovery, on a forward multiple of 23 times earnings - still hefty premium
to the market.
Many investors have been attracted by DK's beautifully illustrated books and
high-tech potential, but have baulked at the share price. For brave hearts
who like quality and can afford a punt on information trends, this week's
fall offers a buying opportunity.
