FT  29 MAY 93 / House nudges Clinton to the right: Jurek Martin sees a
strategic shift in direction
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton took a number of disparate decisions between the
small hours of Thursday morning and the relief of seeing the House of
Representatives pass his deficit reduction package in the evening. Taken
together they may represent at least a tactical and possibly a strategic
shift in the direction of a presidency that has seemed of late not always to
know where it was going.
The Democrats hung together to pass the budget bill essentially because they
stared into the abyss of failure and drew back. A defeat would have been
catastrophic not only for Mr Clinton but for the party, which has to prove,
as congressman after congressman said in the course of the impassioned
debate, that it is capable of governing after 12 years in opposition.
In the event the 219-213 victory was less of a squeaker than the voting
numbers implied. Once the necessary majority had been secured, several
Democrats, protecting their rear, cast a free vote against the bill. This
does not mean that the Senate, more independent-minded, more evenly divided
and likely to add another Republican seat next month from Texas, will go
along meekly. But at least the president's prospects of obtaining
legislation that he can live with look a little better.
This is because Mr Clinton decided in the early hours compromise on the bill
to cast his lot with the centre-right of his party at the expense of
traditional liberals. He accepted some limitations on social spending and
bought the twin arguments that the energy tax, as now proposed, might be
liable to modification and that the mix of tax rises and spending cuts might
at the end of the congressional process lean more heavily on the latter.
This might seem rough justice for the liberals who have generally been more
supportive of the president than the critical centre. But the balance of
power in Congress, and, as last year's election showed, in the country at
large, remains averse to the conventional liberal agenda. By distancing
himself from it Mr Clinton also opens up the possibility of prising loose
some moderate Republicans in the battles still to come on the budget and on
health care.
His own political roots lie in what might be called the radical centre and
he was elected on the premise that he was 'a new kind of Democrat,' intent
on making a leaner government work better but not to the extent that it
interfered with the assertion of individual responsibilities.
These principles and Mr Clinton's well developed populist instincts have
seemed obscured of late, not least by his association with what are
perceived as elitist Hollywood liberal causes. Mr Ross Perot, the Texas
billionaire and independent candidate in last year's presidential election,
gave a TV interview on Thursday savagely and personally critical of the
president.
But also on Thursday Mr Clinton took a step back from another liberal (and
Hollywood) cause - the complete ending of the ban on homosexuals serving in
the military - by stating that the government should not 'appear to be
endorsing a gay lifestyle.'
He said he was inclined to favour the 'don't ask, don't tell' compromise,
under which military recruiters would stop inquiring about sexual preference
in return for limitations on homosexual behaviour by serving men and women.
Although this has been advanced by Congressman Barney Frank of
Massachusetts, one of only two openly homosexual House members, it falls far
short of demands of the gay lobby.
The president's decision to extend China's most favoured nation trading
status with only the mildest of human rights caveats also breaks a campaign
promise designed to bring liberals on board.
The next obvious test concerns his nomination of Ms Lani Guinier to be
assistant attorney general in charge of civil rights. She is black, a leader
in the civil rights movement, a brilliant law professor from the University
of Pennsylvania and a Yale classmate of the Clintons.
But some of her written work on voting rights in the context of the causes
of minorities is considered radical even by Democrats and her confirmation
may be obtained only by the expenditure of much political capital, which Mr
Clinton still cannot spend too freely. A similar caution may apply to his
imminent nomination of a new Supreme Court justice, now likely to be a
middle-of-the-road judge from the federal system.
Moving away from the liberals is not cost-free. It makes more difficult
agreement on the energy tax and congressional approval of the North American
Free Trade Agreement. It will require the president to find ways of offering
more to the inner cities. It may mean offending Ms Barbra Streisand and her
Hollywood set. But the consequences of not doing so now appear to the
president to be far worse.
