FT  03 NOV 93 / Violence and distrust mark Colombia polls: Politicians duck
bombs while they battle with voter disillusionment at corruption
POLITICS is not a safe profession in Colombia. Yesterday the campaign
offices of the governing Liberal party's presidential candidate was
dynamited, injuring one person. Last month, guerrillas blew up an electoral
registry office and a political party campaign office.
Over the last five years, five of the top six presidential candidates in
next May's presidential election have variously survived shootings, a
kidnap, a grenade attack and bombings. Politicians acknowledge that it is
too dangerous to campaign in some parts of the country.
On top of this, Colombia's 14 presidential contenders are having a difficult
time overcoming disillusionment with party politics and corrupt political
practices.
So many candidates might be expected to produce wide-ranging programmes and
choice, but the early stages of the campaign have been marked by moral
skirmishes rather than debates about violence, social problems or the
economy.
The 1994 electoral calendar is a heavy one for apathetic voters:
congressional elections take place in March and Colombians will vote for
president in May. If no candidate polls more than half the ballots there
will be a run-off between the winner and runner-up. Then local government
elections - which excite much greater enthusiasm now that budgets and
responsibilities have been decentralised - follow in October.
The two candidates leading the opinion polls by a big margin - Mr Andres
Pastrana of the Conservative New Democratic Force and Mr Ernesto Samper of
the Liberal party - will probably fight it out in the second round of the
election. Both are under 50 years, firmly entrenched in the political
establishment and neither would represent an abrupt change of direction.
Mr Pastrana, the son of a former Conservative president, was the first
elected mayor of Bogota and is now a senator. Keeping his distance from the
campaign scramble - he has yet formally to declare his candidacy - appears
to have done Mr Pastrana's popularity no harm, though some commentators are
becoming impatient with his reticence.
Although Mr Samper was minister for economic development at the beginning of
President Cesar Gaviria's government he has criticised the speed of the
liberalisation process. His emphasis on jobs and social spending does not,
however, imply an about-turn in economic policy.
As a strong party man Mr Samper has had the time to build up a big
parliamentary and regional following. But in a country where a third of the
mayors and more than 15 congressmen are being investigated for
irregularities ranging from misuse of public funds to collaboration with the
guerrillas, this is not always an advantage.
A few weeks ago Mr Samper used the 'ethical code' developed for his campaign
to expel three congressmen from his movement because they had attended a
political meeting with someone accused of drug trafficking.
Despite much talk about clean campaigns and the vetting of contributions,
the incident took most people by surprise. Not only did Mr Samper risk
losing some 50,000 votes controlled by the congressmen but, politicians
asked anxiously, where would such purges end?
On the outskirts of Bogota, in the poorer barrios of Usme, people are
sceptical about candidates and voting procedures. Neglected by the local
administration, the inhabitants took matters into their hands and organised
a strike in June. As a result, some teachers have been appointed, water
pipes put in and pot-holes filled.
'Last time about 20 per cent of the potential electorate voted. There are
two positions - either people vote because they are offered housing
subsidies or school places for their children or some other bribe. Or they
don't vote at all, because there's no real difference between the
candidates,' said Mr Nelson Cruz, a founder of the Usme civic movement.
The murders in the last campaign of two left-wing presidential candidates
and Senator Luis Carlos Galan, who was expected to win the election, fuelled
distrust of the process. At least four candidates are standing on largely
anti-corruption platforms.
General Miguel Maza, former head of the secret police, is one of them:
"People want change . . . . Drug trafficking has brought a distortion of
moral values. We have to fight this. The surrenders and negotiated sentences
have been a failure.'
Like most of the candidates, Gen Maza is against the legalisation of drug
use or trade. But the issue is being debated more frequently as successive
administrations fail to find other solutions and as the infiltration of key
state institutions by traffickers is exposed.
Without doubt, the biggest disaster of President Gaviria's four-year term
was the escape from jail last year of Pablo Escobar, the leader of the
Medellin cocaine cartel. Any candidate with an outside chance must be hoping
that the drug chief will be dead or back in prison before the new
presidential term begins next August.
