FT  13 MAY 93 / Survey of Southern France (1): The sun, sea and politics -
Thousands of visitors head to the south of France each year for its stunning
landscapes and sunny lifestyle. But behind the scenes the area has been torn
apart by political feuds and economic recession
THE TINY fishing port of Saint-Tropez is a picturesque place with narrow
streets, a yacht-filled harbour and gaudy cafes stretched along the beach
where Brigitte Bardot, its most famous resident, frolicked in her prime as
the star of Roger Vadim's 1956 film, And God Created Woman.
But Saint-Tropez is also a political powderkeg as Mr Alain Spada, its former
mayor, discovered in this month's municipal elections. Mr Spada, an
independent conservative, was forced to call elections two years ahead of
schedule after all 28 of his fellow councillors resigned and a troop of
Tropeziens protested against him by carrying a black-draped coffin through
the streets.
Mr Spada, who was criticised by his constituents for allegedly towing away
too many illegally parked cars and for banning Ms Bardot's dogs from
urinating on the beach, lost the elections to Mr Jean- Michel Couve, the
Gaullist whom he had ousted four years before. But the defeated mayor did at
least have the consolation that Mr Bernard d'Ormale, one of his fiercest
critics who is Ms Bardot's husband and a close friend of Mr Jean-Marie Le
Pen, leader of the extreme right-wing National Front, withdrew his candidacy
before the vote.
The Saint-Tropez storm, which provoked the village priest to tell his Easter
congregation that he had 'never seen scandal-mongering pushed to such
lengths', could be dismissed as a Cloche- merlien saga of local protest. But
the theme of an icono- clastic mayor at loggerheads with his fellow
politicians, and his constituents, is reflected across the south of France.
Southern France is a vast region stretching from Perpignan in the
Midi-Pyrenees on the Spanish border to the city of Nice by the Italian
frontier in Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur. Its population expanded rapidly in
the 1980s as people flocked from the chilly north towards the sun, sea and
sand of the coast and to the serenity of the unspoilt parts of Provence.
The region is a study in contrasts. Toulouse is a prosperous, industrial
city trading on its historic strengths in aerospace and electronics.
Montpellier is still building on its ancient academic laurels and its recent
reputation in the arts to establish itself as a liberal technopolis. Nimes
is now trying to follow suit. Marseille is struggling to come to terms with
the demise of its traditional manufacturing base in the post-colonial era.
Nice is flourishing, thanks to the successful science parks hidden in the
Provence hills around the city and to its traditional trading links with
Italy.
The south has not been spared the pain of the French recession. Marseille
has probably suffered most of all as current pressures have aggravated its
longer-term economic problems. The toll of joblessness has reached 19 per
cent for the whole city (double the national average) and 30 per cent in the
most deprived areas.
But other cities are suffering, too. Montpellier made great progress in
generating new jobs during the 1980s by capitalising on the publicity
produced by the ambitious arts and architecture schemes initiated by Mr
Georges Freche, its dynamic socialist mayor, notably Antigone, the vast
post-modernist development designed by Roccardo Bofill, the Spanish
architect. But most of the new jobs went to outsiders. The level of
unemployment is still 14 per cent.
Even Toulouse and Nice, with their well-established industrial bases, have
felt the effects of the economic squeeze. Toulouse remained resilient until
a year ago, but the rate of joblessness has since risen to 10 per cent,
mainly due to the pressure on the small and medium-sized companies working
as sub-contractors for the large aerospace and electronic groups. Meanwhile,
Nice has been hit by the construction slump and by the local impact of the
worldwide cuts in information technology.
Rural areas have also been affected. The grape growers of the Languedoc are
still trying to adapt their crop to make higher quality wines, thereby
reducing their dependence on cheap table wines. Similarly, the old family
farms of the Provence hills are struggling to come to terms with the
consequences of the European Community agricultural reforms.
These economic pressures could not have come at a worse time for the
southern cities that spent heavily in the 1980s, notably Marseille, Nimes
and Montpellier. All three are now trying to repay the heavy debts that they
amassed by initiating ambitious architectural schemes and public works
programmes in the last decade.
The chilly economic climate was one of the chief catalysts for the political
swing to the right across the south in this spring's parliamentary
elections. Some cities, notably Nice, have long been under conservative
control. But the RPR-UDF coalition also swept the board in such traditional
socialist strongholds as Marseille and even Toulouse, long regarded as a
bastion of French radicalism.
The trend to the right may have made the politics of southern France more
homogenous in terms of party affiliation, but the political mood of the
region and the relationships between individual politicians are as
tempestuous as ever, as Saint-Tropez illustrates.
Even conservative Nice is still shaken by the scandal over Jacques Medecin,
its long-serving mayor, who three years ago fled from France for Uruguay to
avoid corruption charges. Perpignan is now spoiling for a fight between the
two conservative factions, the RPR and UDF, over who will succeed Mr Paul
Alduy, the veteran UDF mayor.
The opening in Nimes earlier this month of the Carre d'Art, the spectacular
museum and mediatheque designed by Sir Norman Foster, the British architect,
was clouded by a row between Mr Jean Bosquet, the conservative mayor, and Mr
Simon Casas, the high profile director of the city's bull ring who was fired
three days after the parliamentary elections.
The bust-up with Mr Casas is only the latest in Mr Bosquet's battles. One of
the running dramas of his decade as mayor of Nimes has been his feud with Mr
Freche in Montpellier over which of their cities has the right to be the
contemporary cultural centre of the south.
It is testimony to the tangled nature of Marseille politics that Mr Robert
Vigouroux, its mayor, although nominally a socialist, has crossed swords so
often with the party establishment in the Bouches-Rhone region, that his
supporters suspect that the city's best chance of drumming up political
support is with Mr Edouard Balladur's new centre-right government.
These political rows make for great spectator sport and add to the colourful
character of the region. But the feuds and friction between different cities
has undoubtedly made it harder for the south to make the most of its
logistical advantage in being the geographic centre of southern Europe and
the hub of the Mediterranean.
Montpellier and Nimes have at times seemed to expend more effort and energy
on battling against each other than on raising their profiles to the outside
world. At one point, they even scheduled arts and literary festivals at the
same time, to scupper the other's efforts. The feud between them is now
officially over, but the old competitiveness still surfaces from time to
time.
Moreover, the schisms within the political establishment have accelerated
the rise of the extreme right-wing National Front. The influx of pieds noirs
immigrants from the old French colonies in north Africa wrought dramatic
changes to cities such as Nice, Marseille and Montpellier in the early
1960s, leaving a residue of racial tension for the Front to exploit.
Mr Le Pen failed in his bid to win a Nice constituency in the parliamentary
elections and the Front's 12 per cent share of the first round of the
national vote was slightly below the 14 per cent it achieved in last year's
regional elections. But the Front is still a powerful force in French
politics with the potential to reassert itself, particularly in the racially
splintered south.
National Front extremism is undeniably one side of life in southern France,
but it is the side that most of the region's visitors choose to miss.
The wealthy owners of the Cap-Ferrat villas, the young zonards heading for
liberal Montpellier on the European hippy trail, the multinationals setting
up subsidiaries in Nice, and the thousands of tourists pouring onto the Cote
d'Azur beaches or into Provence hill villages come for the south's stunning
landscapes and sun- ny lifestyle, not for its politics.
