FT  14 DEC 93 / Ruhr plans a challenge for Disney
Mickey Mouse may be in trouble in the cultural fortress of France, but Bugs
Bunny isn't bothered - he is planning to hit the ground running in
neighbouring Germany, in the unlikely surroundings of the industrial Ruhr
region.
Warner Brothers, the US entertainment arm of the Time-Warner media empire,
and the Nixdorf family, who made their money from Germany's leading computer
company, yesterday announced plans to open a DM350m (Pounds 138m) 'film
leisure park' and studio complex at Bottrop, once the heart of a thriving
coal mining industry.
Now Bugs Bunny, Batman, and the Gremlins, not to mention the stars of
Germany's biggest international war film spectacular, The Boat, will seek to
bring some good cheer - and jobs - back to the depressed industrial area.
The leisure park will be on a smaller scale than the troubled Euro Disney
theme park outside Paris, but it still amounts to the biggest film industry
investment ever undertaken in Germany, according to the delighted state
government of North Rhine-Westphalia.
The idea is to combine both a leisure park, with roundabouts, shows and a
funfair, with a studio complex for both film and television productions, on
the lines of Warner Brothers' Movie World complex in Australia.
The venture is intended to provide 900 jobs in a region badly hit by the
collapse of coal mining. Unemployment at Bottrop alone is some 12.3 per
cent.
Mr Kurt Schmitz, mayor of the town, greeted yesterday's announcement of
'provisional agreement' on the investment with enthusiasm.
The decision amounted to 'one of the greatest financial commitments ever
undertaken by an individual investor in Bottrop,' he declared. 'For the town
of Bottrop, the Warner Brothers decision is particularly happy, because it
means that the efforts of the community to carry on the process of economic,
structural change have been given a new impetus.' It was all a matter, he
said, of transforming an economy dependent on the primary industry of
mining, into a blooming landscape of the tertiary sector - the leisure
industry.
The North Rhine-Westphalia state government, battered by rounds of
redundancies in the traditional coal mining and steel industries, has
promised big subsidies to promote the project. Money will come from the
state's mining industry development programme, according to Mr Gunther
Einert, economics minister.
