FT  17 JUL 93 / Sporting chance at the big time: Throwing, kicking or
hitting balls can still put some bounce into your business career
The venue was the 350-year-old Englefield Estate in the royal county of
Berkshire. The players were members of Lloyd's of London and the Stock
Exchange. The game was polo.
Wednesday's match marked the pinnacle of the corporate sporting year,
offering a lavish display of money, skill and snobbery. Yet one element was
missing: influence.
Once upon a time, a polo tournament would have been a golden opportunity for
anyone wanting to make friends and influence people in either market. But
this year the Stock Exchange could not even find four suitable players, so
that half of those on its side had never seen the inside of a dealing room.
Sport is no longer a sure means of career advancement. There was a time when
to be in the rugby First Fifteen at a private school would mean you were
never out of a job and when being the star of the company golf team would
improve your chances of promotion. These days most companies like to think
they promote people on merit and sports teams have become so competitive
that many have gone outside the company to pick their best players.
Even at the Bank of England, which has one of the finest private sports
grounds in the UK, things have changed. Robin Leigh-Pemberton (now Lord
Kingsdown), the former governor who has a cricket pitch in his own back
garden, was taken aback when his Governor's Eleven (culled from the great
and the good among his chums) played the Bank's first team. He found that
the captain of the Bank's team did not even work there. Now the Bank's club
has a commercial manager and outsiders are welcomed as members.
Yet this does not mean that ambitious thrusters should spend less time on
the playing field and more in the office. There is a link between sport and
business success, although it is more circuitous than is often thought.
A Financial Times survey of top British businessmen reveals an overwhelming
preponderance of sports enthusiasts. All but two of the bosses of the 30
constituents of the FT Ordinary Share Index list sport among their
recreations in Who's Who. Only Colin Southgate of Thorn EMI and Allen
Sheppard of GrandMet prefer pruning the roses to throwing, kicking or
hitting balls.
There are plenty of famous sportsmen who have made it in business. Tony
O'Reilly, president of Heinz, was an Irish international rugby player, while
Jan Leschley, chief executive designate of SmithKline Beecham, used to play
tennis at Wimbledon. Allan Munro, managing director of Ivory &amp; Sime,
Scottish fund manager, was a professional footballer, and Norman Sansom,
head of McKinsey, used to be an international rugby referee.
So does sport help to open doors in business? Or are the sort of people who
are good at sport also likely to make good businessmen?
Yes to both, up to a point.
Christopher Rodrigues, a Cambridge rowing blue who is now chief executive of
Thomas Cook, denies that his rowing helped him get a job. He admits,
however, that 'fellow blues will answer each other's phone calls. Having a
blue tells you who to talk to.'
Much more important, he says, is that anyone with a blue has a 'demonstrated
ability to deliver and they also know how nice it is to win'.
It is this ultra-competitive streak that best explains the link between
sport and business. One keen golfer says you can recognise big businessmen a
long way off on the golf course. 'They are very, very determined. The act of
winning gives them a rare degree of satisfaction and pleasure.'
In sporty organisations it may help to be a hearty. 'How you perform within
the culture is what matters. Like-minded people tend to perform better,'
says Lenny Kristal, an occupational psychologist.
Barry Dinan of Hanson Green, a specialist headhunter for non-executive
directors, says that, in extreme cases, a sporting bent could be a
pre-requisite for employment. At Johnson Fry, the small merchant bank run by
Charles Fry, son of famous cricketer C B Fry, 'someone who was not a cricket
enthusiast might not last long', he says.
So, which sport should hopefuls take up?
The FT survey shows golfers in a strong majority, with tennis players coming
a distant second and, behind them, yachtsmen. The fact that some 60 per cent
of top businessmen play golf suggests the course and the clubhouse must
present formidable opportunities for networking. A survey published last
week by Hyatt Hotels and Resorts found that a third of golf-playing
businessmen said they had made some of their biggest deals on the golf
course.
Golf is not a universal passport, however. At Freshfields, the London
solicitors, employees face a tough challenge if they are to keep up with the
senior partner. John Grieves started to run the London marathon in the 1980s
and, since then, six or eight colleagues have started doing likewise. 'This
has no relevance to career at all,' Grieves insists. 'If you are fit, your
energy levels are higher, you have more enthusiasm and drive.'
More way out still are Sir John Harvey-Jones and his donkey racing and Alan
Lewis, the Yorkshire wool baron, who is a black belt at Karate.
The career-enhancing opportunities of many sports may be limited, as is that
of the 'work-out', which is gaining in popularity among younger managers.
In the modern company, sport is seen not as a way of building team spirit,
but of building personal fitness. According to Nigel Whittaker, a director
of Kingfisher who is frequently to be found in the gym of his local sports
club: 'It is not a networking matter. I take exercise because I find
physical fitness helps mental alertness.' With the same aim in mind, Geoff
Mulcahy, chief executive, plays a fierce game of squash nearly every day.
Whether it is golf or something more obscure, sport may present a problem
for women trying to make it in business. A young woman who recently joined a
City merchant bank was taken aside by a male director and told to do
everything that the others did: play squash and go on the company skiing
holiday. She did not follow his advice and is no longer with that company.
According to Rhiannon Chapman of the Industrial Society, it is not just a
question of playing sport but being able to talk about it. 'Quite a lot of
corporate hospitality is around sport, golf, car racing and football. Unless
you are known to be interested, you won't get invited to the right
function.'
Yet sport is not always a winner in business: a headhunter was told recently
by Fairclough builders, a British construction company, to find a manager
with a golf handicap of at least 24, as it did not want to employ someone
who spent the whole day practising his swing.
Neither are all big sportsman-turned-businessmen successful. George Walker,
the ex-boxer and boss of the bankrupt Brent Walker, is now fighting in court
rather than in the ring.
And if anyone needed an example of how sport and business need not mix, they
need look no further than Alan Sugar and Terry Venables.
