FT  09 DEC 93 / Thatcher denies detailed knowledge on Iraq arms
Lady Thatcher yesterday publicly distanced herself from responsibility in
the arms-for-Iraq affair.
In an energetic performance before the Scott inquiry which at times echoed
her confrontational style at the parliamentary despatch box, she claimed
that while serving as prime minister she had no knowledge of much of the
detail behind the decisions taken by officials and ministers or of key
intelligence relating to illegal British defence exports.
She was giving evidence to the inquiry being conducted by Lord Justice Scott
into the government's handling of military-related exports to Iraq during
the time she was prime minister.
Her appearance before a packed audience of journalists, Whitehall officials,
personal advisers and ordinary citizens in rooms belonging to the Department
of Trade and Industry, marked the first time a former or present prime
minister has been subjected to questioning by a public inquiry on pivotal
aspects of government policy.
However, the hearing appeared to raise more questions than it answered,
given her persistent refusal to be drawn on some of the main aspects of the
inquiry.
Amid tight security, she told the inquiry that, while in government, she had
not seen many of the documents referred to by the inquiry, which showed
officials and ministers sidestepping government guidelines restricting
defence exports to Iraq.
'Most of the documents before me I had never seen (while in government) . .
. If I had seen every copy of every minute . . . I would have been in a
snowstorm,' she said.
Her statement came in one of the sharp exchanges with Miss Presiley
Baxendale QC, counsel for the inquiry, whose inquisitorial style and
persistent cross-examination drew sighs of exasperation from Lady Thatcher.
Lady Thatcher said she had not been made aware until the summer of 1990 of
intelligence suggesting that British machine tools were being used to boost
Iraq's military capability and that Jordan was being used as a diversionary
route.
As prime minister, Lady Thatcher was supposed to be provided with weekly
summaries of intelligence on matters affecting government policy.
But asked to explain evidence from officials and ministers that intelligence
had been badly distributed, she said: 'Either the machinery was there and
was not effective . . . or else the machinery itself was defective. Either
way it is a matter for concern and inquiry.'
The Scott inquiry was set up by Lady Thatcher's successor, Mr John Major,
after a political furore surrounding the collapse of the trial of three
businessmen from the Midlands machine tool company, Matrix-Churchill.
The businessmen were prosecuted for illegally exporting arms to Iraq, but
their trial collapsed after it emerged that government ministers had known
and approved the exports.
Lady Thatcher said the first and only time she had personally been involved
in the export of machine tools to Iraq was in July 1990, which she claimed
was in line with an international relaxation in restrictions on the export
of industrial goods.
Asked about an earlier intelligence report she had seen suggesting that Iraq
was possibly building up its military capability, she said she had not
linked this with the machine tools.
She denied she had personally been involved in earlier approval of
defence-related machine tools as claimed in evidence by a senior Whitehall
official.
Lady Thatcher said she had no recollection of doing so and that a 'trawl' of
Whitehall documents since the beginning of the Scott inquiry had not backed
up the evidence.
She denied that she misled Parliament about government policy towards Iraq
and argued that in 1988 her ministers had changed the words of guidelines on
defence exports but not the policy. The change which allowed more exports to
Iraq came from 'changed circumstances' arising out of a ceasefire in the
country's war with Iran.
Lady Thatcher originally indicated she wished to appear before the inquiry
only once but has now agreed to provide further assistance if asked.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, said Lady Thatcher's
evidence lacked credibility. 'There is clearly a major scandal that goes to
the heart of government and Mrs Thatcher is at the heart,' he said.
Clash of Titans draws the crowds, Page 10
