FT  15 JUL 93 / Book Review: Better in the black than clean and green
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILES OF EUROPEAN BUSINESS By Dion Vaughan and Craig Mickle
Royal Institute of International Affairs and Earthscan Pounds 15. 107pp
Moments of candour are rare when the environment is on the business agenda.
I experienced one last year when asking the manager of a large UK oil
refinery what benefits he got from investing in green technology. He
answered: 'Absolutely none.'
It made a refreshing change from the platitudes about getting ahead and
doing one's bit for Mother Earth which businessmen feel compelled to utter
on such occasions. But even this direct response was little help in plumbing
the murky depths of business attitudes towards the environment. It is a
subject rich in complexity, laced with emotion, tinged with fear - one where
clear and honest thinking is notable for its scarcity.
This book is an attempt to shine some light through the murk - at least so
far as European business is concerned. It is only partially successful
because the light is frustratingly patchy. But it does pick out the main
features, and it gives readers a reassuring sense that what they are
glimpsing bears some resemblance to the truth.
The frustrating part is the anonymity given to the companies which are the
subject of the book. This, the authors tell us without a trace of irony, was
to allow the interviewees 'to define corporate positions clearly'. In
itself, this tells us a lot about those positions: they are highly sensitive
 -and probably embarrassing as well.
The book is a straight piece of research insofar as its authors, working
under the aegis of the Energy and Environmental Programme of Chatham House,
have collated the responses to questionnaires sent to 55 companies in
France, Germany, Italy, Benelux and the UK, representing the automotive,
metal processing, petrochemical, power generation and steel industries. The
questionnaires asked them how important the environment was, where the
pressures lay, how they dealt with them, where they saw environmental issues
heading, and so on.
The questions boil down to whether companies have any kind of policy on the
environment. The chapter on the auto industry lays out what must be a fairly
widespread view: 'Although all companies consider the environment an
important corporate priority, most clearly consider profitability more
important. Analysis of the responses suggests that few companies have a
strategic plan to generate additional profitability from their environmental
positioning and expenditure.'
In other words, they do not associate the environment with profit-making. In
the steel industry, environment ranked behind profitability, health and
safety, and none of the companies interviewed had a main board director with
sole responsibility for it. However, the survey did find a more advanced (if
that is the right word) attitude in the chemical industry, where companies
'see their role as optimising value added . . . to raw materials through
manufacturing. Environmental management is now a very important input to
this process; polluting wastes are seen as unused resources.' Here, the
environment is forcing companies to make fuller use of their materials.
The chemical industry and the electric utilities emerge from the study as
the sectors most deeply engaged in environmental issues, probably because of
the strength of outside pressures, such as the carbon tax proposal and
concern about acid rain.
But for the utilities, the environment is a damage limitation exercise: the
opportunities to gear up environmental spending are few. By contrast, the
auto industry ought to see the environment as a challenge to respond to
rising emission standards and excise taxes to develop new vehicles. But the
study comments: 'What is surprising, however, is that only some automotive
companies take this view. The rest react to, but do not seek to exploit or
pre-empt, consumer demand for environmentally friendly products which at the
moment appears somewhat artificial.'
Why does business take such a reactive, even passive, stance? The
respondents give a number of reasons: uncertainty about future legislation,
the poor financial returns from environmental investment, and the lack of
strong customer pressure. Notice, though, that these are all extraneous
factors.
Might the explanation also lie in the attitude of business itself? Two
components of that attitude come through clearly. One is a narrow perception
of the environment as a requirement to limit harmful emissions or make safe
products, rather than as a broader concept representing a scale of values.
The other is a lack of conviction that many environmental issues are
genuine; many companies seem to see them as fads embraced by a fickle public
 -and exploited by press and politicians.
These are sweeping statements, of course. They do not apply equally to all
industries, and they only contribute to the way people think. But my candid
oil refinery manager would recognise them straight away.
The green lobby may seize on this study as confirmation of industry's
minimalist approach to the environment. But that is not the real message.
The findings depict businessmen who are primarily - and rightly - concerned
with making a profit within the confines of the law, but who are confused by
the buffeting of environmental pressures. The authors are probably right to
conclude that nothing much will change without clear-sighted legislation,
and a public that is willing to pay premium prices for environmentally
friendly products.
