FT  21 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: Hurd in passionate Maastricht
defence
MAASTRICHT IS not a blueprint for a European superstate, Mr Douglas Hurd
told MPs yesterday as the bill implementing the treaty moved towards its
third Commons reading.
The foreign secretary used the 205th hour MPs have spent debating the
measure in the past year to warn passionately of the dangers of eroding
European competitiveness and to set out his vision of the Community's
future.
In a confident and relaxed address he assured Euro-sceptics that their fears
of a 'lurch' towards a superstate were 'misguided.' He concluded with a
clarion call to MPs before the bill moves to the Lords to 'find again' the
decisive will to act together in the 'great matters' where there was a
common European interest.
On the eve of the first anniversary of the bill's second reading Mr Hurd
devoted much of his speech to concerns that the costs which the social
chapter would impose on employers could have serious consequences for
European competitiveness.
'More and more people' were concerned about the high labour costs European
companies were 'having to shoulder' compared with their international
competitors.
The social chapter could 'place in jeopardy many of the achievements of the
last 14 years in freeing our labour market from restrictions which destroy
jobs.'
His views were rejected by Mr Jack Cunningham, shadow foreign secretary, who
said the government's decision to exclude the social chapter was
'fundamentally unacceptable.'
Referring to the manoeuvring that had forced the government to remove the
protocol containing Britain's social chapter opt-out, he said Labour had
secured a 'valuable legal situation' that may yet allow British workers to
use the European Court to gain access to the chapter's benefits.
Turning to the future, Mr Hurd referred to a need to build a more
decentralised and diverse community that was both outward looking and 'free
trading.'
The European Commission should be more accountable and the role of national
parliaments built up. 'We are no longer heading for a community in which
diversity will be smothered or smuggled away.'
But in one of numerous interventions from Tory and Labour Euro-sceptics the
foreign secretary sidestepped a demand for assurances that control of
foreign and defence policy would not in time move to the EC. 'I cannot say
what will happen in 1996,' he said.
He also mocked Labour for its decision to abstain on last night's vote after
so many hours devoted to detailed scrutiny of the Maastricht bill. Labour
MPs had come to Westminster 'from all parts of the kingdom' to abstain in
person, he said.
Mr Cunningham said Labour could not support the bill because of the
government's decision to exclude the social chapter. But since the party's
efforts had procured for MPs an opportunity to vote on the chapter's
principle, it would be 'obtuse' for Labour to vote against it. To do so
would deny the social chapter to workers in Europe as well as Britain.
Brandishing a copy of the bill with more than half of its wording
highlighted in lime-green marker pen, he said Labour had had 'some
considerable success' in amending the measure. The government had 'sidled
away' from so many votes recently that 'we have lost count.'
