FT  31 AUG 93 / Survey of Malaysia (17): Malaise in the plantations - Rubber
and tin have been displaced as the top currency earners
NOT so long ago the price of rubber, tin and timber was the weathervane of
the Malaysian economy. Price rises and falls on the international market
determined Malaysia's overall economic health. Commodity traders represented
a powerful group, at the very centre of the country's economic activity. Not
any more.
Rapid industrialisation, particularly over the past five years, has
dramatically changed the structure of the Malaysian economy.
In the early 1970s agriculture, forestry and mining (including the petroleum
sector) accounted for about 80 per cent of the value of Malaysia's exports.
As recently as 1987 commodities and mining made up 55 per cent of export
values.
In 1992 manufactured goods accounted for 70 per cent of the total value of
exports. At the same time agricultural goods (including timber) slumped to
17.4 per cent of the value of exports.
Malaysia's manufacturing sector continues to achieve double digit growth
rates. Last year overall manufacturing output rose 10.5 per cent (13.9 per
cent in 1991).
Agriculture, forestry and fishing accounted for 16.3 per cent of total GDP
in 1992, down from 17.2 per cent in the previous year. Meanwhile,
manufacturing's share of total GDP rose to nearly 29 per cent last year,
compared with 27 per cent in 1991.
For the industrialists times are good. But things have been increasingly
tough on the plantations.
International prices for many of Malaysia's commodities have failed to keep
pace with increased production costs. Investors are turning to the
relatively short term gains and opportunities offered by the industrial and
commercial sectors, rather than wait for years for returns from the
plantation sector.
Most seriously growing labour shortage problems are imposing serious
constraints on agriculture: workers are migrating to jobs in urban areas. In
many country areas production is falling with smallholders abandoning their
crops.
Malaysia was once the world's leading natural rubber producer. But in recent
years Thailand and Indonesia have both surpassed Malaysia in output terms.
In 1992 Malaysia produced 1.2m tonnes of natural rubber, a 3 per cent drop
on the previous year and the fourth consecutive year of falling output.
(Malaysia's 1992 output represented 22 per cent of total world production).
World natural rubber prices have been falling since the late 1980s. Rising
wage and land rates mean that Malaysia cannot compete with lower cost
producers such as Indonesia.
While Malaysia has made significant advances in mechanisation techniques,
thousands of foreign workers have to be employed to take the place of locals
who have opted for more comfortable - and better paid - jobs in the cities.
Several rubber plantations and smallholders have either converted their
lands to other more remunerative crops or they are selling it for real
estate development and golf courses. Others have transferred operations
overseas: Malaysian rubber planters are now investigating making investments
in plantations in Vietnam.
Malaysia, faced with the decline of a crop once at the heart of its economy,
has been at the forefront of efforts to negotiate a new international price
mechanism for natural rubber. 'We must have a new price structure,' says Mr
Lim Keng Yaik, Malaysia's minister for primary industries. 'Consumers cannot
be allowed to dictate prices. We cannot allow ourselves to be trampled on by
the rich and powerful.'
Cocoa, though a less significant crop than natural rubber in export terms,
has suffered a similar fate. Ten years ago Malaysian cocoa growers were
getting more than MDollars 13,000 (Dollars 5100 at present exchange rates)
per tonne for their crop. At one stage last year prices on the international
market dropped to under MDollars 2,000 per tonne.
Malaysia's tin miners have suffered even worse. In 1981 Malaysia was earning
between MDollars 32 and MDollars 34 per kg for its tin exports. In early
August prices on the Kuala Lumpur tin exchange were hovering around the
MDollars 12 per kg mark. With production costs estimated at MDollars 16 per
kg many mines have closed. In 1992 Malaysia's tin production fell by 31 per
cent on the 1991 figure to just over 14,000 tonnes.
Mr Hew See Tong, president of the All Malaya Chinese Mining Association,
says production is likely to fall further. 'The industry is doomed if
current prices and demand continue. Many miners will not be able to sustain
operations.'
The outlook for palm oil is brighter. With generally buoyant prices over the
past two years more land is being turned over to the crop. In 1992 Malaysia
produced 6.3m tonnes of palm oil, accounting for about 55 per cent of total
world output.
But rapidly expanding palm oil production by Indonesia is posing a threat.
Malaysia has to battle to find new export markets: the economic problems of
the former Soviet Union, once a big importer of Malaysia's palm oil (and its
cocoa and tin), has hurt the industry.
But labour shortages are the most serious problem. Mr Borge Bek-Nielsen is a
Dane who has been in the palm oil business in Malaysia since the 1950s and
now oversees operations on 94,000 acres of plantations on the west coast of
peninsular Malaysia.
'Estate workers cost three times as much in Malaysia as in Indonesia. On
some of our estates 70 per cent are foreign workers. Many just come for a
few months, get their training, but then leave for the towns or cities.'
There are those who feel that the government is too focused on the
manufacturing sector and does not pay enough attention to agriculture and
mining. They say the government should provide more facilities in country
areas in order to keep people on the land. A government MDollars 300 levy on
every foreign worker employed on plantations only adds to the financial
problems of the sector.
Commodities still play a vital role in the economy: the agricultural sector
(including timber) still employs 27 per cent of the workforce, compared with
20.5 per cent in manufacturing. The commodity lobbyists say the economy
should not be too overly dependent on one sector - and neglect agriculture.
In 1992 palm oil was one of Malaysia's biggest export items, bringing in
more than MDollars 6bn in revenues.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister, has no doubt that the move to
industrialise was a wise one. 'Just imagine what would have happened to us
today if we had continued depending on tin and rubber,' says Dr Mahathir.
Plantation owners and smallholders agree. But they warn of problems ahead if
precious natural resources are neglected.
 -------------------------------------
MAJOR COMMODITIES OUTPUT ('000 TONNES)
 -------------------------------------
                       1991      1992p
 -------------------------------------
Rubber                1,257      1,220
Rice                  1,792      1,722
Saw logs*            40,252     43,279
Sawn timber*          8,893      9,702
Palm oil              6,141      6,373
Palm kernel oil         782        812
 -------------------------------------
p Preliminary.
* Expressed in '000 cu metres.
 -------------------------------------
SOURCE: Malaysian government
 -------------------------------------
