FT  21 JAN 93 / Russia adopts a crisis plan to avert collapse
THE Russian government yesterday adopted an ambitious programme of financial
stabilisation and tight monetary policy in an effort to stave off financial
collapse.
The package was adopted after what Mr Boris Fyodorov, the deputy prime
minister in charge of the economy and finance, said was a 'heated'
discussion in a cabinet faced with bitter choices.
According to Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime minister in charge of
privatisation, inflation is now running at 10 per cent a week - heading
rapidly for the level which marks the doleful entrance to hyperinflation;
production fell 20 per cent last year and has not yet stabilised;
unemployment is forecast to rise from well under 1m to more than 5m; the
budget deficit is variously put between 15 and 25 per cent of GNP; and
domestic and foreign investment has more than halved.
In the face of this Mr Fyodorov said that the plan adopted yesterday would
be aimed at bringing the budget deficit down to 5 per cent of GNP, and
inflation down to 5 per cent a month, by the end of this year.
To this end, interest rates, presently set by the central bank at 80 per
cent, would be raised to a level 'which would combat inflation'; enterprises
would have strict criteria to meet, in wage levels and productivity, before
qualifying for credits; the deficit would be financed in part by issuing
government bonds, with short-term denominations to protect against
inflationary losses; and budget deficit targets would be set quarterly.
At the same time, however, Mr Fyodorov said the government aimed to slow the
fall in production levels, double the interest paid on savings, and provide
better social protection for the population. Anticipating opposition from
the Russian Supreme Soviet, Mr Fyodorov said that some of the stringent
measures would be pushed through by presidential decree - while others would
be submitted for parliamentary approval.
At the same time an economics ministry official revealed that
inter-enterprise debt has soared to a level of Rbs3,500bn, surpassing the
crisis levels reached at the middle of last year before the central bank
advanced credit to bring the level down.
Mr Chubais said that Russia now had 46,000 private companies, and another
5,600 large enterprises had completed or were completing the process of
conversion.
The Belarus parliament yesterday passed a privatisation law, but proposed
legislation on use of land was delayed by continuing debate on the future of
collective farms, Reuter reports from Minsk.
The privatisation law was suspended last November after allegations of
illegal dealing. But many deputies said failure to approve the land bill
made a farce of the programme. The land bill ran into opposition from
farmers unwilling to relinquish control of state farms.
