FT  24 NOV 93 / Survey of the Basque Country (3): Suspicion-fraught alliance
 -Politics
The Basque Country needs restful political consensus and then a restorative
sense of common political purpose like an all-night reveller needs 12 hours
sleep and a strong pick-me-up. Unfortunately it has neither such balms.
Politics in the Basque Country are criss-crossed by demarcation lines that
have historically fractured the area's political framework and created a
plethora of tribal groupings. Superimposed on the classic division between
left and right is the confrontation between the nationalists and the
non-nationalists.
The nationalist camp itself is divided between those who support violence
and those who oppose it and the latter are themselves split between those
who settle for home-rule autonomy and those whose final aim is independence.
The area's two main political parties, the Partido Nacionalista Vasco (PNV),
and Partido Socialista de Euskadi (PSE), the Basque subsidiary of prime
minister Felipe Gonzalez's ruling socialist party in Madrid, share just
under 50 per cent of the Basque vote between them and form a PNV-led
coalition government in which mutual suspicions abound.
Were the PNV and the PSE marriage partners, each would sue the other for
divorce on the grounds of mental cruelty for they could hardly be less
suited as a couple. The PNV is nationalist, sentimentally rural,
conservative and Roman Catholic; the PSE derides ethnic politics, prides
itself on its trade union origins in Bilbao's industrial belt and styles
itself as modern, progressive and emphatically secular.
Mr Ramon Jauregui, the Basque socialist leader, admits that 'a certain
amount of expectation' envelops the local political scene. When, in Madrid
recently, Mr Gonzalez opened talks with the main national opposition party,
the centre-right Partido Popular (PP), the PNV behaved as if it were a
scorned bride. Do the socialists think, asked the nationalist leader Mr
Xavier Arzallus, that the PNV is 'a concubine who can be trifled with?'
The PNV, which holds 10 portfolios in the 16-member Basque government
including that of chief executive, is to a great extent in a quandary of its
own making. It was invited by Mr Gonzalez to join the national government in
Madrid as a junior coalition partner after the general elections last June
left the prime minister short of an absolute majority. But it rejected the
invitation and now it appears to wish it had not done so.
Somewhere between the invitation and its rejection, the PNV seemed to have
peered over its nationalist shoulder and lost its nerve; the very idea of
propping up a Madrid government filled it with dread. It was fearful of
losing its nationalist credentials to the radical Herri Batasuna (HB), the
coalition which supports Eta and, more plausibly, of handing over votes to
Euska Alkartasuna (EA), a minority party lead by former, and more
uncompromisingly nationalist, PNV members.
The PNV's hesitancy had a lot to do with the staging of local Basque
elections which are due in October next year. Unlike the PSE, which appeals
basically to non-nationalists, Mr Arzallus' PNV has to contend with splinter
groups such as EA and with solid formations, such as HB - the third-biggest
political party in the Basque Country - that dispute the strictly
nationalist constituency.
Negotiations to join Mr Gonzalez's government broke down when the PNV tabled
a long agenda - the final list totalled 54 separate chapters - of home rule
prerogatives that it demanded be urgently transferred from the Madrid
administration to the Basque government. That was the price that the
nationalists set for co-operation with Madrid and Mr Gonzalez judged it far
too expensive.
Certain PNV home rule demands - which deal, for example, with jurisdiction
over vocational training - can be granted immediately, because the Basque
government already runs its own education department. Others, including
transfer to the Basque Country of responsibility for health and social
security and for unemployment benefits, involve costly and complex
administrative adjustments.
A third chapter of devolutionary demands that seek to establish local
control over airports and harbours in the Basque Country fall into a grey
area in which it is not constitutionally clear where the prerogatives of
Madrid end and those of the autonomous governments begin.
A final shot of self-rule ambitions came in the form of a demand for a
Basque central bank, a monetary institution that would supervise and
regulate the local financial sector and which would clearly undermine the
responsibilities of the Bank of Spain. The adamant opposition of the PSE to
this pretension has further soured the relationship between the coalition
partners.
In the delicate negotiating process that followed the June 6 general
elections and which led to the ultimate formation of a minority government
by Mr Gonzalez, the PNV played for high stakes and it lost. Now it is in the
uncomfortable position of being stuck with the socialists in the autonomous
Basque government and being unable to play any meaningful role in the
socialist-run central government.
for the mainstream Basque nationalists because the Catalan nationalists, who
are the PNV's clone party on the periphery of Spanish politics, proved
themselves infinitely better negotiators. The Catalans also rejected
overtures to join Mr Gonzalez's government but they have cunningly supported
the Madrid government's draft budget, influenced much of the blueprint's
proposals and, as a result, ensured fiscal benefits for their Catalonia
stamping ground.
The PNV's obduracy earns it a bad press in Madrid whereas the suave Catalan
practise of the art of the possible is hailed as statesmanlike. The problems
facing Mr Arzallus' PNV are not, however, at all easy.
The Basque Country's mainstream nationalists do not have the ascendancy in
their home base that their Catalan counterparts enjoy and, unlike Catalonia,
the Basque Country has a federal-type administration in which power is
shared between the Basque government and the county councils of the three
provinces that make up the Basque Autonomous Community.
Consensus politics has never been the PNV's strong point but its
brinkmanship tactics have failed and its options are now running out.
Concessions have to take the place of confrontations and the wintery
realities of economic recession should cool nationalist ardours and shelve
devolution agendas for the time being.
The likelihood is that elections next year to the 75-member Basque
parliament will once more return the PNV and the PSE as the main parties but
will again leave the two of them well short of a majority, thus forcing them
into a renewed coalition. What the Basque Country cannot risk is a
continuation of the present suspicion-fraught alliance.
