FT  29 MAR 93 / French fishermen warned after seizing boat
MR DAVID CURRY, fisheries minister, last night warned French fishermen that
they face a strong reaction from the Royal Navy if their 'provocation' over
British fish exports continues.
His warning followed an incident in Cherbourg harbour when French fishermen
seized HMS Blazer, a Royal Navy patrol boat, for three hours and another
incident in which officers from a British vessel were abducted at sea aboard
a French trawler.
Mr Curry said on BBC radio: 'The first thing I will be doing is to review
the operating instructions we give to the Navy and consider whether or not
we should give them instructions to use a higher degree of force if
necessary.'
He added: 'The next time the French are going to meet with something just a
little bit more severe than they did this time.'
HMS Blazer was on a goodwill visit to Cherbourg when French fishing vessels
hemmed it in against a jetty and it was boarded by fishermen who burnt her
white ensign. On board were a crew of six, plus a Royal Naval Reserve
training officer and nine students from Southampton University. The Foreign
Office said the French authorities had brought the incident to an end last
night and the fishermen had left the ship.
Mr Henry Feral, Cherbourg's vice-prefect, called the protest 'inadmissible'
and said the incident had been 'particularly serious' to Anglo-French
relations.
In an earlier incident, fisheries protection officers from HMS Brocklesby
boarded La Calypso, a French trawler, off Alderney in the Channel Islands
after it was suspected of illegal fishing under EC rules. The French vessel
ignored orders to head for Guernsey and made for Cherbourg with three of the
boarding party still aboard.
The men were not given the chance to leave, although they were not
threatened with any violence, the UK fisheries ministry said. HMS Brocklesby
chased the trawler as far as French waters. The MoD said: 'It was decided
not to use force to stop the boat because obviously we didn't wish to
endanger life and limb.'
La Calypso took the three officers to Cherbourg where a French pilot boat
took them back to HMS Brocklesby.
British diplomats in Paris will raise both incidents with the French
Ministry of Sea tomorrow.
French and British vessels fished in Channel Islands waters until last
September when the EC recognised a British six-mile limit around the
islands. EC fishing regulations give fisheries officials the right to order
foreign vessels suspected of fishing in British waters to put into a British
port.
The incidents come at a time of renewed tension between French and British
fishermen. French fishermen have attacked British exports of fish and
shellfish or denied them access to French ports. They are angry because the
fall in the pound means British fish undercuts French prices.
Earlier in the weekend French fishermen warned their English counterparts to
stay away from French ports. British fishermen landing catches would do so
'at their own peril', Mr Jean le Boucher, leader of the French fishermen in
lower Normandy, said.
