FT  10 MAR 93 / Argentine balance of payments worsens
ARGENTINE trade figures released this week showed the country's balance of
payments position deteriorated more rapidly last year than the government
has admitted.
The figures, which will be subject to one more revision before they are
final, showed Argentine trade swung into a deficit of Dollars 2.87bn (Pounds
2bn) last year after a 1991 surplus of Dollars 3.7bn.
This sharp deterioration has raised questions about the sustainability of
the government's economic policy, which is using the exchange rate - fixed
against the dollar since April 1991 and increasingly seen as overvalued - as
a central plank of its strategy to fight inflation.
The deficit was caused by a 79 per cent rise in imports last year to Dollars
14.84bn, while exports were little changed at Dollars 11.98bn. More worrying
to some economists was the pace of the deterioration from the first half
when there was a Dollars 1bn surplus to the second half when there was a
Dollars 3.9bn deficit.
Mr Geoffrey Dennis at James Capel in New York said he expected the deficit
would jump to Dollars 8bn this year, with the rate of growth of imports
slowing somewhat and that of exports rising. At just over 3 per cent of
gross domestic product the deficit would not be large in absolute terms and
hard currency reserves were substantial - sufficient to cover 10 months'
imports. Nonetheless, he believed the trade position was eroding so quickly
figures that a shift towards a crawling peg devaluation of the peso was
required.
The figures also indicated trade with the US and Brazil more than accounted
for the trade deficit: the shortfall in trade with the US was Dollars 1.82bn
and with Brazil Dollars 1.75bn. They showed a relatively small proportion of
imports were directly for consumption: capital goods and spare parts made up
38.2 per cent of imports, semi-finished goods 34.8 per cent and consumer
goods, including cars, 27 per cent.
The government has said the deficit will be constrained this year because of
imports levies imposed in November. Mr Juan Schiaretti, trade and industry
secretary, was quoted by Reuters saying latest figures from the customs
service showed a substantial fall in imports during the first two months of
1993. He gave no figures.
