FT  06 JAN 93 / (CORRECTED) International Company News: News Corp shares
fall as Fox TV chief quits
Correction (published 8th January 1993) appended to this article.
SHARES in News Corporation tumbled Dollars 2 1/2 , or about 6 per cent, to
Dollars 37 7/8 in heavy trading in New York yesterday following the
unexpected resignation of Mr Jamie Kellner as president and chief operating
officer of the company's Fox Broadcasting television unit.
Although Fox moved quickly to calm investors by yesterday naming Ms Lucille
Salhany as Mr Kellner's replacement, the market was unsettled by Mr
Kellner's resignation, the latest in a series of high-level departures at
Fox.
In the past year, Fox has lost Mr Barry Diller, creator of the Fox network,
Mr Joe Roth, chairman of the 20th Century Fox studio, and Mr Peter Chernin,
president of Fox's network entertainment division.
Ms Jessica Reif, an analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, said: 'Jamie's leaving
is a negative because every senior executive has changed in the last 12
months. But Lucie is the absolute best person for that spot. Fox could not
have picked a better person.'
Ms Salhany, who was named Fox Broadcasting chairman, was previously chairman
of Fox's 20th Century Television.
Mr Kellner, 45, had been at Fox since its birth in 1985 and is credited with
helping to mastermind Fox's meteoric rise into the fourth-biggest US
network.
'When Fox Broadcasting first began it was a question mark in everybody's
mind,' he said.
'While there are still challenges ahead for the company, there is now no
question that the Fox network is here to stay.'
Mr Kellner said he would pursue other business opportunities but would
remain associated with the company as a board member.
Fox's television and film businesses contribute about 25 per cent of News
Corp's operating income.
Mr Kellner stressed that he was leaving Fox on friendly terms.
CORRECTION
Mr Peter Chernin moved from Fox Entertainment to replace Mr Joe Roth as head
of the 20th Century Fox. He did not leave the Fox group, as stated in later
editions of the FT on January 6.
