FT  28 JUL 93 / Congress grapples with S&amp;L funding: Bank regulators appeal
for urgent action
DEMOCRATIC leaders in the US Congress yesterday tried to work out a way to
approve the Dollars 34bn (Pounds 22.6bn) needed to complete a clean-up of
the savings and loan debacle after a plea from top banking regulators for
Congress not to welch on the government's 'most solemn promises'.
The bill would provide a final instalment of Dollars 18bn to the Resolution
Trust Corporation, the government company set up to take over and close down
or sell off bankrupt S&amp;Ls, as well as Dollars 16bn to float a new deposit
insurance fund for the industry.
Congress failed to pass the legislation last year, and the RTC has since
been living hand-to-mouth. While the Senate has passed the bill, Democratic
leaders in the House of Representatives are unwilling to bring it to a vote
unless they win some support from Republicans.
Regulators say failure to provide the money costs the government Dollars 3m
a day; without authorisation to absorb the costs the RTC is unable to close
down the failed S&amp;Ls in its portfolio.
Mr Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, joined by Mr Eugene Ludwig,
Comptroller of the Currency, and the acting heads of the Office of Thrift
Supervision and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, urged this week
congressional leaders to delay no longer.
'Failure to provide timely funding for the RTC can only undermine confidence
in the government's willingness to honour its most solemn promises. Those
promises backstop the safety and stability of our entire financial system
and provide incalculable benefits to millions of Americans not directly
involved in the thrift clean-up,' they wrote.
The message was reinforced yesterday by members of a commission
investigating the causes of the S&amp;L crisis, who said the RTC should
immediately be given the money it needs to complete the clean-up.
The commission, chaired by Mr Andrew Brimmer, a former Fed governor, and Mr
John Snow, chairman of the CSX transport company, said in its report that
although the S&amp;L industry was essentially bankrupt by 1982, the government
continued to extend deposit insurance protection while encouraging the
industry to spread into ever riskier activities.
At the heart of the commission's recommendations for reform is a proposal to
limit federal deposit insurance to separately capitalised institutions,
which it calls monetary service companies. These could invest only in
low-risk money market instruments. This would reduce the risk of default
borne by taxpayers and cut the cost of supervision.
