FT  26 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Complacency and esoteric money
THE GROWTH in the volume of trade in derivative financial instruments such
as swaps, forwards, futures and options, has been an impressive but slightly
disconcerting feature of modern capital markets. There is good reason to
welcome the resulting opportunity for improved risk management at individual
banks, together with the wider economic benefits that arise from increased
financial efficiency. But innovation can pose threats for the system; and in
today's global market, such risks are infectious. In downplaying the
systemic challenge in a report published last week, members of the
Washington-based Group of Thirty (G30) think tank err on the side of
complacency.
The report is right in attributing to management the prime responsibility
for controlling risk. Its recommendations on how the job should be tackled
are, in the main, constructive. The controversy arises from a statement that
the amount of capital needed to support dealing in derivatives is 'a matter
of judgment for individual institutions, depending on their appetite for
risk and their ability to measure and manage it'. This is followed by an
assertion that there is no need for any change in the present regulatory
arrangements because the nature of the risk in derivatives is no different
in kind or scale from those already present in other markets.
Twitching eyebrows
That should make the eyebrows of any self-respecting central banker twitch
uncontrollably. Of course, it is true that the danger in new financial
instruments lies in such old-fashioned threats as credit risk and market
risk. But there is one basic practical, as opposed to theoretical,
difference in the present market place. Most of the people now in charge of
the institutions that deal in derivatives learned their trade before
computerisation introduced an unprecedented degree of complexity into
financial products. They were also brought up in a period when the culture
of banking smacked more of the co-operative ethos that prevails in utilities
than the current ethos of aggressive profit maximisation.
The implication is that operational risk, resulting from inadequate systems,
human error or management failure, is unusually acute in derivatives. So,
too, in view of the novelty and international nature of the business, is the
legal risk that contracts may prove unenforceable. And given that a majority
of the trade is through privately negotiated contracts in over-the-counter
markets, there is also less discipline from disclosure than in business
conducted on organised exchanges. After the Third World lending debacle and
the subsequent disaster in property lending, it would clearly be foolish to
take anything on trust from the banks.
Financial innovations
The authors of the G30 report would be entitled to respond that despite the
plethora of financial innovations over the past decade or so, no bank of
significance has foundered as a result of the mismanagement of these risks.
But that is hardly surprising: as the report itself points out, the size of
derivatives business is modest in relation to trading in bonds, equities or
foreign exchange. The headline figures may sound frightening - Dollars 3.9
trillion swaps outstanding at the end of 1991 - but the real measure of risk
is a much smaller and less readily available figure, namely the cost of
replacing the cash flows over the rest of the derivative instruments' lives
at prevailing interest and exchange rates.
Even so, there have been expensive, if underpublicised, cases of mis-pricing
of derivatives at large international banks. And the Bank of Credit and
Commerce International (BCCI) would have gone out of business in 1986, after
losing nearly Dollars 300m on options trading, had not the ruler of Abu
Dhabi come to the rescue. Much politically inspired criticism of
derivatives, notably after the Crash of 1987 and the later Tokyo market
crash at the start of this decade, has been ill-founded. But the
reservations expressed by successive heads of the New York Federal Reserve
and by officials at the Bank for International Settlements are plain common
sense. Ensuring a tough capital regime for derivatives should remain a high
priority of the central banking fraternity for the foreseeable future.
