FT  18 OCT 93 / In search of common cause: A challenge for the Commonwealth
THE Commonwealth's fox has been shot, its demise underlined by pictures of a
beaming Nelson Mandela and a jubilant President F W De Klerk, joint winners
of the Nobel peace prize.
The search for a new quarry begins in Cyprus on Wednesday, when leaders and
representatives of 50 nations gather in Limassol for the organisation's
biennial conference.
It will be the first time in more than two decades that South Africa need
not dominate the proceedings. How to end apartheid sharply divided the
Commonwealth (usually Britain from the rest); it also gave the association a
sense of purpose and power, whether illusory or not.
With sanctions lifted and a general election in the offing, the Commonwealth
has to refocus, say diplomats from within its ranks.
Efforts that began in Harare two years ago to find a raison d'etre must
produce results this week they warn, or the loose association of states with
little in common other than the English language and historical links with
Britain will become increasingly irrelevant.
As Australia's proposed move to republican status illustrates, Commonwealth
ties with the former colonial power are wearing thin. But as one senior
British official made clear last week, the reverse applies. In the run-up to
Limassol, British diplomats do not conceal their doubts about the wisdom of
allocating five days of Prime Minister John Major's time to a conference
whose merits 'are not entirely self-evident', as one put it.
Past acrimonious exchanges over South Africa sanctions, as far back as the
arms-to-Pretoria row in Singapore in 1971, are readily recalled. Not even
radical change in South Africa was enough to lay the sanctions issue to rest
in Harare in 1991.
Britain still bears the scars. At least one African high commissioner in
London detects irritation and impatience in the speech to the English
Speaking Union last week by Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary.
The South African issue had 'distorted' the Commonwealth, he said.
Since it 'is not an organisation with voting rights or international legal
authority, these differences never got us anywhere.' It only 'convinced many
people in Britain that the Commonwealth was an institution for lecturing
Britain, and its effectiveness suffered as a result'.
Commonwealth officials and delegates challenge that view, but none is likely
to pursue old scores this week.
Instead they will press for a substantial Commonwealth role in South
Africa's April election, assisting in the preparations and monitoring the
poll.
Mr Hurd, who pointedly noted that 'change lies in the hands of South
Africans, not their well-wishers', will want to ensure discussion of this
role does not divert attention from a broader objective for the
Commonwealth, say Foreign Office officials.
Other items on the agenda are important, they acknowledge, such as the state
of multilateral trade negotiations, the emergence of a 'global humanitarian
order', and the environment and development.
But the conference is not the best arena for action in these areas they
argue: what member states can do is to put the Commonwealth house in better
order. Mr Hurd himself says: 'A new task is staring it in the face. Good
governance and democracy cannot be imposed by imperial means.' It requires a
combination of persuasion and reward, and 'expressions of displeasure' if
democracy is undermined. 'These are all characteristics of the Commonwealth,
and that is where its task for the nineties could lie.'
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, the Commonwealth secretary-general, would not disagree.
Writing in the organisation's annual report, published this month, he sees
the 1991 Harare communique as a renewal of a commitment to 'fundamental
political values: democracy, the rule of law, just and honest government and
human rights.'
In the intervening two years there has been change for the better, and
Commonwealth observers have monitored the transition to multi-party states
in Kenya, Ghana and elsewhere.
Critics, however, note the continued reluctance to appoint a Commonwealth
group to monitor and publicise human rights abuses in member states and the
fact that two governments which have flouted democracy - Nigeria and Sierra
Leone - will take their seats on Wednesday.
The challenge at Cyprus will be to close the wide gap that remains between
the Harare principles and their practice.
