FT  25 NOV 93 / Survey of Turkish Finance and Industry (5): How TV got Gama
to Russia - The dynamism of the country's construction sector
As Russian troops blasted the White House building in Moscow during the
anti-Yeltsin rebellion, executives at Gama Industry in Turkey watched on
televison with particular interest. For they were working out how to put the
building back together again.
Within days of the ending of the rebellion on October 4, Gama was on the
phone to Moscow. A verbal agreement was secured on October 14, and Gama
workers were on site the next day.
It is only a small contract - Dollars 17m for the first phase of repairs -
but Gama, one of Turkey's leading construction and engineering groups, was
keen to establish a reputation in Russia.
It is a story that illustrates the relative dynamism of Turkey's private
sector. Gama is owned by its managers and other key employees, although it
is considering a stock market flotation.
Gama earns much of its income from public contracts at home. It undertakes
big infrastructure projects, including hydroelectric schemes, a new
underground rail system and residential building. But, while the government
is battling to contain costs and reduce the budget deficit, Gama is looking
overseas for new work.
'Spending on infrastructure projects is our bread and butter,' says Mr Ergil
Ersu, Gama's managing director. 'But on the other hand, Turkey has to cope
with an inflation problem. To reduce inflation, this government, or any
other government, needs to curb investment.
'A second point is that Turkey is borrowing - securing foreign financing to
support such projects. There is a limit to this  .. As much as we want to do
more work in Turkey, we realise there are limits.' The domestic market,
according to Mr Ersu, cannot be relied on in coming years to sustain
Turkey's large construction sector, which contributes about 5.5 per cent to
gross domestic product.
Along with many other companies in the sector, Gama has grown steadily by
tapping the overseas market. It is the second major push by Turkish
contractors in recent years to bolster earnings abroad because of a
tightening domestic market. Turkish construction companies produced
spectacular growth overseas in the mid-1980s because of a depression in the
industry at home in the early 1980s.
In the past year, contracts won overseas have pushed Gama earnings towards
an even split between domestic and foreign work. Turnover more than doubled
last year to Dollars 97.8m, producing pre-tax profits of Dollars 7.62m
against Dollars 3.97m in 1991. It currently has Dollars 500m contracts in
progress, and says it is close to concluding a further Dollars 500m.
Contracts secured in the past two to three years have averaged about Dollars
200m.
Gama has targeted Russia and other countries in the Commonwealth of
Independent States for expansion. It believes that, despite the
uncertainties, there are vast opportunities in Russia's wide-open market.
'No matter what, even if governments change, there will be a need for our
services,' says Mr Ersu.
The company, which employs on average around 5,000 contract workers, has
operated in eastern Europe since 1985 in a joint venture with four other
Turkish contractors. Last year, Gama pulled out of the Mir Construction
partnership to build up its work as a single operator. As a result, nearly
half of its new business volume last year came from Russia.
Gama recently completed a 650-room luxury hotel in Sochi on the Black Sea
coast, in which the company retains a 16.6 per cent interest. The Dollars
35m hotel, which is due to take its first guests by the end of the year, is
operated by Radisson, the US hotels group. The contract did not produce a
huge profit for Gama, but like the White House deal, it was important in
terms of visibility.
'We see the hotel as our show case in Russia,' says Mr Ersu. 'It has the
best of everything - carpets from the UK, wallpaper from Belgium, kitchens
from Sweden, marble from Turkey.'
Gama's investment in the hotel represents a further strand of
diversification. It is shifting away from construction into property, mining
and tourism. Construction is still the core business, but, says Mr Ersu,
'there are ups and downs in contracting work, so we are investing in a way
that will provide more constant returns and improve overall cash flow.'
Other big contracts in Russia include a Dollars 78m complex in Moscow for
Gazprom, Russia's gas distribution company. Work began in April on its
36-storey headquarters, due to be completed by mid-1995. The company is also
building a Dollars 12.5m hotel and offices in Tyumen, western Siberia, to
service the oil and gas industry.
It recently completed work with Babcock and Wilcox International of Canada
on a Dollars 100m heat-waste project in Bratsk, east of Lake Baikal. The
project, for which Gama won Dollars 35m of the work, was to convert heat
generated at a pulp and paper mill into energy.
Gama's push in eastern Europe could underpin growth for the company in
coming decades. Earlier this month, Turkmenistan signed a letter of intent
with a US-Turkish consortium, including Gama, that could lead to the
construction of a Dollars 4bn natural gas pipeline across Europe. A
feasibility study on the project is under way.
The company has secured small contracts in Turkmenistan, including a Dollars
10m scheme for a mosque, financed by a Turkish government grant. But it
believes that opportunities are limited in other Turkic states, which it
says would be hard-pressed at the moment to secure western financing.
Gama is established in the Middle East, particularly in Saudi Arabia,
although it has secured fewer contracts in the region recently than it had
hoped. Elsewhere, the company signed a Dollars 50m contract last month to
build a cement plant in Malaysia in partnership with Krupp of Germany.
Several high profile contracts are under way at home. Work began in March on
the first phase of Ankara's underground metro rail system. Gama has secured
a Dollars 260m contract shared with Guris of Turkey to build a 15km line and
station from the city centre to the west, due to open by the end of 1996 or
early 1997. Other companies in the project include Bombardier and SNC
Engineering of Canada.
One of Gama's biggest contracts to date is for a 672MW hydroelectric power
dam on the Euphrates river at Birecik close to the Syrian border. Gama and
Philipp Holzmann are leading a European consortium on the DM2bn contract,
which was signed nearly a year ago. Gama says it hopes financing
arrangements will be finalised soon.
The project is a build, operate and transfer (BOT) scheme, under which the
consortium of Turkish, German, Belgian, French and Austrian contractors
build and operate the dam and then transfer it to the government under a
15-year contract. Gama has a 19.4 per cent stake, Philipp Holzmann 16.4 per
cent, TEK, Turkey's state electricity company, has 30 per cent, and the
other three companies hold smaller stakes. The financing package will be in
export credits and commercial loans. The dam, which will take more than five
years to build, is part of Turkey's south-east Anatolian project to provide
irrigation and power in the poor and arid south-east.
Gama has linked up with Thames Water of the UK on a Dollars 700m water
supply scheme for the city of Izmit, east of Istanbul. The plant was to have
been financed by government money, but it was converted to a BOT scheme when
the budget allocation was cut. Financing, which is still to be finalised,
will now come from export credits, commercial loans and direct investment by
the partners.
Gama will construct the dam and pipelines. The water treatment plant will be
built jointly with Thames Water, the majority owner, which will operate the
plant. The project is underpinned by government guarantees to buy the water
and energy.
For the moment, Gama will continue to look east, towards Asia and the CIS,
for future growth. It believes that while Ankara's politicians look west, to
membership of the European Union, it will be some time before Turkish
industry as a whole will be able to compete effectively in western European
markets.
