FT  13 DEC 93 / Drugs R&amp;D is at risk, says Pfizer
The UK is becoming increas-ingly unattractive to drugs groups, according to
the largest foreign-based employer of pharmaceuticals scientists in Britain.
Pfizer, the US drugs group, says the collapse of the science base,
increasing government interference in National Health Service drugs spending
and growing violence from animal rights activists are undermining Britain as
a base for pharmaceuticals companies.
Dr Peter Ringrose, senior vice-president of medicine R&amp;D at Pfizer Europe,
warned that the UK's pre-eminence in medicines research was under threat. He
said: 'Six of the world's top 20 selling drugs were discovered in the UK.
Britain has the highest per capita number of Nobel prizes of any country in
the world. But there are now rising concerns about the UK as a site for
pharmaceuticals research in the future.'
Pfizer's R&amp;D centre at Sandwich, Kent, employs 1,250 research staff and is
the largest investment by a US drugs group anywhere in the world. The
facilities, which have received Dollars 300m (Pounds 200m) of investment
over the past five years, have doubled in size since 1987.
But Dr Ringrose said such investment could be threatened by government
controls on prices and demand for drugs. These included a 2.5 per cent price
cut last month and the introduction earlier this year of lists of products
that NHS doctors could no longer prescribe. In effect the NHS would only
allow doctors to prescribe new products whose prices had been cut to the
same level as older products.
He said: 'When the price of a new product is determined by a basket of old
generic products, what is the point of developing the new drug?'
Dr Ringrose said the attractiveness of the UK for drugs research was also
being undermined by the dire state of the academic infrastructure. The
government's white paper on science, engineering and technology was
encouraging, 'but so much damage was done to British universities during the
1980s that what is required is more than platitudinous comments from
ministers'.
However, Dr Ringrose said that animal rights violence was becoming the UK
drugs industry's biggest concern. 'If you stop the use of animals you can
shut down most of UK pharmaceuticals research. Ironically, Britain has among
the tightest regulations on the use of animals.'
Mr Hugh O'Connor, chairman and managing director of Pfizer UK, said:
'Throughout Europe there will have to be rationalisation. What does not make
sense is to manufacture on eight sites.' The company now manufactures in the
UK, France, Germany, Belgium, Spain, Portugal and Italy. It recently sold
its Greek manufacturing operations.
The increasingly difficult environment for drugs groups could encourage them
to cut manufacturing, endangering the UK's Pounds 1.3bn trade surplus in
pharmaceuticals last year.
