FT  22 SEP 93 / Moslems say sea access agreed: Deal with Croats could clear
obstacle to Bosnian peace
BOSNIAN Moslem leaders yesterday said they had agreed with Croat leaders on
the crucial question of access to the sea for the Bosnian Moslem republic,
potentially clearing a big obstacle to a broader peace deal.
In Zagreb, Mr Haris Silajdic, Bosnian foreign minister, said the dispute
over access to the Adriatic had been resolved during secret talks between
Croat, Serb and Bosnian Moslem leaders on a British naval vessel in the
Adriatic on Monday.
But in an apparent blow to a rapid agreement, Bosnia's Moslem President
Alija Izetbegovic yesterday said he could not recommend acceptance of the
latest peace plan to end the republic's 17-month war.
'I personally am not inclined towards that proposal,' he said in Sarajevo.
'I think that the solution for access to the sea fits the needs of Bosnia in
an economic sense. . . But I am not satisfied with the territorial
solution.'
Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, international mediator, said however: 'We are
closer to a solution than at any time in the history of the negotiations.'
The Bosnian parliament is due next Monday to consider the peace plan, which
would create a loose 'union' of three ethnic mini-states.
The latest peace proposals includes four separate territorial agreements
between the Bosnian Moslem and Croat leaders, including a plan to give the
Bosnian state a port on the River Neretva near the village of Celjevo,
joined by an additional corridor and road to the Moslem state, and a 99-year
lease on a facility in the Croatian port of Ploce.
Mr John Mills, the mediators' spokesman, yesterday said the Bosnian Serbs
had also offered the Moslems extra land around the eastern enclaves,
although Moslem demands for land around the northeast enclave of Bihac had
apparently not been met. Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, however,
played down Serb concessions.
Although the Moslems have repeatedly said the village of Neum should be
their port, the Croat leaders have resisted this, saying Moslem control of
Neum would leave the Croat port of Dubrovnik isolated.
However, as a sign of the pressure now mounting on Mr Izetbegovic to accept
an alternative, Mr Mills said that the talks had taken into account findings
which confirmed Neum would be ill-suited for a deep-water port.
The accord now envisages that part of Neum will be controlled by the
Moslems, with a joint Croat-Moslem authority to develop tourism in the area.
Meanwhile, heavy fighting was yesterday reported to be continuing in Central
Bosnia, in defiance of the latest ceasefire accord. Moslem troops were
reported to be advancing on Croat-held areas in the central Bosnian town of
Vitez, and on Mostar, further south.
And in a grim omen for winter, 10 people were reported to have died of
starvation in the central Bosnian town of Zenica, where some 150,000 Moslems
have been increasingly isolated by recent fighting between Moslems and
Croats.
