FT  26 JUN 93 / Safe Sir John emerges from twilight: PM's choice of a
replacement for Mates has avoided a reshuffle
THE appointment yesterday of Sir John Wheeler, the lofty and deeply loyal MP
for Westminster North, as Ulster security minister signalled determination
by Mr John Major to play safe in replacing Mr Michael Mates.
By plucking Sir John from the back benches, the prime minister avoided a
wider ministerial reshuffle. He also rewarded an MP who, since he entered
parliament in 1979, has seemed unwilling to cause unnecessary waves in
Westminster or Whitehall, even when chairing the influential Commons home
affairs committee.
There is a logic to his appointment, nevertheless. Sir John is an aficionado
of security, crime prevention and policing policies. He was assistant
governor at Brixton and Wandsworth prisons before entering parliament. As
chairman of the Commons committee he had intimate knowledge of the work of
the Home Office.
Sir John, 53, has affinities with Mr Mates, who resigned this week after
embarrassment over his links with Mr Asil Nadir. Both served lengthy
back-bench apprenticeships and were passed over by Mrs Margaret (now
Baroness) Thatcher because of perceived political wetness.
Both have a slightly pompous air. Mr Mates was ex-Army. Sir John would be an
archetypal 'knight of the shires' if his constituency was not in London. He
was knighted in 1990, and became a privy counsellor this year - usually the
rewards of a loyal, long-serving Tory MP not expected to enter the
government. Slim but ponderous, Sir John has a near-permanent look of
disdain and is far from garrulous, snapping yesterday at television cameras
when asked who he had voted for in the 1990 Tory leadership election. The
twist in Sir John's career was his toppling from the home affairs committee
last year. Government whips were anxious to end the tenure of the
troublesome Mr Nicholas Winterton, Conservative MP for Macclesfield, as
chairman of the health committee. They therefore decided that MPs should not
serve on a committee for more that three parliaments. But they appeared to
forget the implications of that ruling for the equally long-serving Sir
John.
Ministerial office will be adequate compensation - in spite of the
oppressive personal security and the frustrations of working in a province
bedevilled by more than two decades of terrorist violence and political
intransigence.
Sir John's first priority will be to win, as far as possible, the confidence
of unionist and nationalist politicians. To do both is difficult, if not
impossible. Unionists want ever tougher measures; many back internment
without trial of terrorist suspects. Nationalists lack confidence in the
security forces.
Sir John is regarded as generally liberal on law and order, and has opposed
hanging terrorists. So any radical change in government security policy is
unlikely.
