FT  24 AUG 93 / International Company News: China to impose freeze on
corporate bond issuance
CHINA will place a freeze on enterprises issuing bonds in the latter part of
this year in an effort to curb a bond-issuing spree that has raised concerns
about the circulation of billions of yuan of worthless paper.
The English-language Business Weekly reported at the weekend that the
People's Bank of China, China's central bank, and the State Planning
Commission, were scrutinising all applications for new bond issues.
The paper quoted Mr Lu Pansheng, a central bank official, as saying that
bond issues that have not already been approved will be stopped.
Companies seeking working capital through bond issues will be asked to apply
for bank loans, the official said.
Some Yn20bn (Dollars 3.45bn) of corporate bond issues had been planned for
this year, but worries about the ability of enterprises to service their
commitments, and concerns about bonds draining money from the banking
system, have prompted the latest measures.
Steps to curb unrestrained bond issues by enterprises seeking funds to
expand their activities are part of a widespread crackdown by the Chinese
authorities on a financial sector that had mushroomed out of control.
China's efforts to cool its overheating economy include a squeeze on credit,
a demand that banks recall billions of yuan in loans for speculative
ventures such as property, and a strengthening of control over the countries
fledgling capital markets.
Mr Zhu Rongji, China's senior vice-premier in charge of the economy, was
appointed last month to head the central bank. He wasted little time in
installing a new team of deputy governors to assist him in unravelling
China's financial morass.
Regulations issued earlier this month were also aimed at clamping down on
the bond issuing binge. These included the requirement that enterprises not
be permitted to issue bonds unless they had been profitable for the last
three years.
Proceeds from the issuing of corporate bonds could not be spent on real
estate speculation, securities, futures trading, or other risky investments
that are not related to the enterprise's central business.
Companies which float bonds without approval or provide an interest rate
higher than the one set by the central bank will be severely punished, the
report said.
No mention was made of China's capital raising abroad. China has embarked on
a fairly ambitious programme of international bond issues. These are almost
certain to be coming under careful central bank scrutiny.
