FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of World Car Industry (26): Age of the city car is
about to dawn - The Car of the Future
For most of us, the name Mercedes-Benz evokes images of large luxury cars.
Yet one of the most significant potential trends for cars of the future is
that Mercedes will unveil a concept car smaller than a Ford Fiesta at the
Frankfurt motor show this week, and that the ideas it incorporates will
provide the basis for a production Mercedes of the late 1990s.
The age of the 'city' car - small, light, miserly on fuel or alternatively
using electrical energy - appears to be about to dawn in Europe.
The Twingo runabout from Renault, and the Polish-built Cinquecento from
Fiat, have already given renewed momentum to the European market for very
small cars - a market all but ignored during the economic boom years of the
1980s. (The sector is long-established in Japan, where there is a
flourishing market for 'microcars' specifically designed for urban use.)
Current cars, however, are equated with cheapness and utility. Mercedes'
model, which in concept form is called the Vision A 93, should show, once
and for all, whether the 'city' car concept can be satisfactorily taken
'up-market.'
Rapidly increasing urban traffic congestion, concern about the pollution
thus caused, and even the prospect of city centres being closed to all but
electric cars or other very 'clean' alternatives have been driving factors
behind the development of the 'Vision' - together with Mercedes' own
acknowledged need to find commercially attractive new market sectors.
But Mercedes is not alone. BMW has produced a three-seater prototype of its
own, the Z13. Volkswagen will start production of its city car, the Chico,
in 1995, and many other manufacturers have similar projects in development.
BMW's Z13 is more obviously a 'city only' car than the Mercedes. It has been
designed and developed mainly for driver-only operation; it is powered by a
1.1 litre motorcycle engine mounted at the rear with a continuously variable
automatic transmission. The driver is seated centrally, with two full-sized
seats for possible passengers set back slightly on either side.
The Vision has been designed as a four-seater and is intended to be usable
on longer journeys. With impact safety in mind, the engine - petrol, diesel
or battery-powered electric - is located centrally under the passenger
compartment.
Importantly, Mercedes claims that the petrol and diesel engines would both
qualify as 'ultra-low emissions vehicles' under California's draconian clean
air regulations, and the electric version would qualify as a 'zero emissions
vehicle' (ZEV). Starting in 1998, California will require 2 per cent of a
manufacturer's total car sales to be of ZEVs, rising to 10 per cent by the
year 2010, if the manufacturer wants to go on selling its vehicles in
California's 1m-plus annual new car market.
Both the BMW and the Mercedes models would have in common in their bodies
the extensive use of aluminium, seeking the lightness needed for good fuel
economy from small capacity power units, or in compensation for the weight
of the air conditioning, mobile telephone, navigation system and fax - all
considered as possible de rigeur fitments for cars towards the end of the
1990s.
Not surprisingly, aluminium producers are watching these developments with
the closest interest: it now looks increasingly likely that the material
will have a much expanded use in the car of the future.
Aluminium's attractions are obvious: it is extremely light and much easier
and cheaper to shape than steel. On the other hand it is more easily
damaged; it is more difficult to weld than steel; and it requires a great
deal of energy to produce, so it is a good deal more expensive.
In terms of total energy requirement, however, its exceptional capacity to
be recycled works in its favour in the long term. Smaller, lighter engines,
gearboxes, driveshafts and other mechanical components can be used.
So far, aluminium has provided the main bodywork only for expensive, limited
production cars such as Aston Martin or Honda's NSX sports car. But the next
substantive move towards wider adoption by vehicle manufacturers is
imminent, within the next few months, with the launch by Audi of its
replacement for the V8 saloon and which will have an aluminium chassis.
The car will mark the culmination of an ll-year collaborative project
between Audi and Aluminium Company of America (Alcoa). It required not only
the development of new alloys with the required crash protection properties,
but also new production processes. The car will have a skeleton-like
spaceframe made up of about 100 robotically welded pressings - about one
third the number required in a steel-bodied car.
The partners' faith in the future of aluminium for the motor industry is
such that Alcoa has built a Dollars 70m facility at Soest, Germany, to make
the spaceframes - and to offer its services to other vehicle makers.
However, the material is not yet a candidate for cheaper, very high volume
production cars; at present the process is cost-effective only for
production runs of up to 100,000 cars a year.
But the revival of interest is aluminium is causing a certain amount of
wariness at some large chemical groups such as Dow and DuPont, which have
large plastic composites interests. For much of the 1980s it appeared that
plastic composites could emerge as stronger, non-rusting rivals to metal for
the load bearing main structure of a car. Complexity and recycling
difficulties make this a more distant prospect, although the use of plastics
continues to increase steadily in other non-stress bearing applications.
With or without aluminium, 'downsizing' of cars is occurring across most
vehicle sectors as sophisticatedcomputer aided design and manufacturing
systems allow much better packaging of mechanical components, thus leaving
more room for occupants.
Mercedes is even investigating ways of making its top-range 'S' class models
appear smaller, following criticisms in some sections of the press that it
seems too much of an environmentally-unfriendly leviathan.
