FT  24 APR 93 / Arts: Dancing to independence
DELICATELY, Birmingham Royal Ballet is beginning to detach itself from its
parent at the Royal Opera House. Quietly pushed by the Arts Council, over
the next year it will work out a formula for autonomy which will then be
presented to its main financial supporters, the Arts Council and the
Birmingham City Council.
Peter Wright, the director, said this week as he announced the programme for
1993-94, the fourth season since the company changed its prefix from
Sadler's Wells to Birmingham, that the move to independence was 'bound to
happen' but 'we have to proceed with the utmost caution.'
Certainly he is not interested in rivalry with the Royal Ballet in London.
There is too much joint experience and joint reliance on the Royal Ballet
School for the next generations of dancers, not to speak of a joint
collective memory held in past productions, for a simple cut to the
umbilical cord.
Wright held out the possibility of a new Royal Ballet School in Birmingham
but made it clear that it must be associated with the existing school in
Richmond.
The formula for autonomy then is likely to involve the use of the Royal
Opera House as a services centre, with BRB buying what it needs - a system
roughly akin to independent rail companies paying British Rail to use
established track. But such a formula may be easier to devise than to bring
into operation. It presupposes that the BRB can pay its way. And that is by
no means sure. In the 1992-93 financial year it received an Arts Council
subsidy of Pounds 4.7m and a Birmingham City Council grant of Pounds
980,000, both increased from the year before.
For all that, BRB still ended the year with a Pounds 232,000 deficit,
absorbed in the Royal Opera House accounts. This year, though, the
Birmingham City Council grant is down to Pounds 850,000 and Wright warned
that 'funding from the Arts Council may be going downwards rather than
upwards.'
Reduced grants and the absence of a parent would put BRB in a financial
trough. BRB's administrator Derek Purnell said the City 'is reluctant to
agree to a formula of deficit; it wants it to come with a clean sheet.'
BRB's independence is thus likely to involve more corporate sponsorship
unless it falls back on an endless diet of theatre-filling Tchaikovsky
ballets.
