FT  06 JAN 93 / US stops BP chemical technology sale to Iran
THE BUSH administration yesterday blocked the proposed sale of controversial
chemicals plant technology to Iran by the US chemicals subsidiary of British
Petroleum (BP).
The rejection, which caught both BP and the State Department by surprise,
was announced by Mr Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's press secretary. It
followed reports yesterday morning that US government agencies remained
divided about the proposed sale because of concerns that Iran might be able
to develop chemical weapons with a hydrogen cyanide by-product of the BP
technology.
In Cleveland, BP's US chemicals company said BP had not been notified of any
decision.
Mr Fitzwater said the decision to reject the sale to Iran had been taken a
month ago. But a State Department official said he understood the BP
proposal and a separate US company proposal to sell aircraft for crop
dusting to Iran had both been scheduled for further discussion yesterday at
an inter-agency meeting. The State Department said, however, it would defer
to the White House on the issue.
Mr Tony Kozlowski of BP's US chemicals company in Cleveland, Ohio, said the
company was first approached 18 months ago by Fibchem, an Iranian fibre
chemicals company. He said BP subsequently consulted various US government
agencies and was told there were no objections to the sale from the
Commerce, Energy and Defence Departments or from the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA).
Some officials at the State Department had apparently opposed the sale on
the grounds that it could help Iran's effort to develop a series of chemical
weapons.
The technology proposed for sale by BP included blueprints, plans, technical
assistance, training and catalysts needed to build a chemical plant at
Bandar Imam that would produce acrylonitrile, a base chemical used in the
manufacture of synthetic fibres. The value of the proposed transaction was
believed to be less than Dollars 50m.
BP said it was seeking to address concerns as it continued its application
for an export licence from the Commerce Department. The company said the
cyanide by-product could, however, be obtained on the open market.
Congressional critics have worked behind the scenes to oppose the proposed
transaction. Mr Yossef Bodansky, director of the House Republican task force
on terrorism and unconventional warfare, said yesterday he was pleased at
the rejection. He said the chemical by-product was 'a very fast-acting nerve
agent that is extremely effective for battlefield use'.
