FT  22 FEB 93 / UN agency for refugees relents on Bosnian aid
THE United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees yesterday said full
operations would be resumed in Bosnia-Hercegovina following assurances that
the three warring factions would no longer block aid convoys or
distribution.
A statement from Ms Sadako Ogata's office said she had agreed with Mr
Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, that operations would resume
'as soon as possible, perhaps as early as Monday'.
The decision came hours after a 10-truck convoy carrying 72 tonnes of aid
reached Zepa, a Moslem stronghold in eastern Bosnia. Bosnian Serb commanders
had given way to international pressure for the delivery of emergency aid to
Moslem enclaves besieged by Serb forces.
The commanders said the convoy, stranded for five days, could pass at its
own risk. It crawled along a winding snow-covered route, reported to have
been mined, to reach Zepa yesterday afternoon.
It carried wheat flour and family parcels and was only the second UNHCR
convoy to reach the village, whose population has been swollen by refugees
fleeing Serb 'ethnic cleansing' in the region, since the war erupted 10
months ago.
The successful mission follows a week of confusion in the international
community over how to distribute aid in Bosnia.
In the hope of winning Serb permission for aid to reach government
strongholds in eastern Bosnia, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Moslem president of
Bosnia, announced a ceasefire at the weekend.
The announcement followed reports of an advance by Serb forces, besieging
Sarajevo on the western edge of the Bosnian capital.
The convoy reached Zepa after US President Bill Clinton said he was
considering making air drops to the 100,000 Moslems trapped by the Serb
stranglehold of eastern Bosnia. But UN commanders in Bosnia yesterday were
sceptical about the idea. It raised many problems, including securing the
co-operation of all parties to the conflict.
Meanwhile, in the poor former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, 300 policemen
fired tear gas and batons to disperse hundreds of Macedonians gathered in
Skopje, the capital, to protest against the building of houses to settle
Moslem refugees from the Bosnian war.
Several people were injured in the clashes, which began on Saturday.
