FT  07 OCT 93 / The Conservative Party Conference: Prison expansion brings
bonus for private sector
THE tough-sounding stand against crime announced by Mr Michael Howard, the
home secretary, yesterday, will bring a substantial bonus for Britain's
growing private prison sector.
Mr Howard unveiled proposals for six new prisons to be built and managed by
private companies.
Two of the six - at Bridgend, Mid Glamorgan, and Liverpool - had already
been announced. But the addition of another four will accelerate the pace of
private involvement in Britain's penal system.
There are only two privately managed prisons - Wolds on Humberside and
Blakenhurst, Hereford and Worcester. In August Mr Howard decided to expand
the private market by asking it to build and run the Bridgend and Liverpool
establishments, and take over the management of eight public sector prisons.
Yesterday's announcement will put about 3,600 more prison places under
private sector management. No sites for the four new buildings have decided,
but there is heavy pressure on prison places in London, the Midlands and the
north-west.
Ministers hope the private sector will finance the new projects as well as
building and running them. There are about eight companies trying to
establish themselves in the private prison market. Those that do not have a
base in the construction industry are likely to be seeking partners to
prepare bids for the new projects.
Prison building in Britain has traditionally been a slow process. Private
companies believe they will be able to bring new sites on stream more
quickly.
The tougher approach to offenders announced by Mr Howard yesterday will,
however, increase the prison population well before new prisons are
available. 'We shall no longer judge our system of justice by a fall in our
prison population,' Mr Howard told the conference.
Britain's prisons are already close to capacity and short-term options such
as opening up disused army camps and housing prisoners in police cells are
likely to be needed soon. The possibility of building extra blocks in
prisons has also been considered.
Penal reform organisations reacted with dismay. Ms Frances Crook, director
of the Howard League for Penal Reform, said the home secretary's package
would prove the 'most comprehensive programme of crime promotion in recent
history'. Mr Adam Sampson, deputy director of the Prison Reform Trust, said
successive home secretaries had increased the capacity of the prison system
but failed to reduce the rate of crime.
