FT  10 SEP 93 / Volkswagen urges prosecutors to interrogate Lopez
VOLKSWAGEN lawyers have written several times to public prosecutors
demanding that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, group production
director, should be interrogated as soon as possible on the suspicions
against him.
Even telephone calls to Ms Dorothea Holland, the senior prosecutor in
charge, had failed to produce a summons, Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs, VW
spokesman said yesterday.
He was responding to charges from General Motors that VW was not
co-operating fully with the probe into suspicions that Mr Lopez and
colleagues stole secrets from Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, and took
them to their new employer.
A claim from Mr Louis Hughes, president of GM Europe, that VW was paying
only 'lip service' to co-operation was 'unbelievable', Mr Wachs said.
Mr Lopez offered personally to testify on August 26, when Ms Holland and her
team searched VW's headquarters for possible evidence to support suspicions
of industrial espionage, he added.
During the raid Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman, sent an electronic mail
message welcoming the search and asking all employees to co-operate
'constructively and openly'.
Mr Hughes could not be reached yesterday, but GM officials said Mr Lopez's
offers were 'tactical manoeuvres'. Ms Holland was more likely to be
interested in examining the haul from her search and preparing questions
based on the results than seeing him now.
Under German law a suspect may, at the prosecutor's discretion, see files on
the investigation at the time they are questioned. They are guaranteed
access when charges are imminent to allow them to prepare a public
statement.
According to an internal VW letter, signed by Mr Piech, the searchers
confiscated documents, 25 personal computers and around 250 diskettes.
People in the areas searched said the material was VW data, the letter
added.
'We have, as far as we were able to attend the search action, been able to
establish no indications that any secret data originating from GM/Opel was
found by the investigating authorities.'
Mr Hans Gab, vice-president of GM Europe, reached last night, noted VW had
already admitted 'potentially significant evidence' had been destroyed on
its premises.
