FT  11 FEB 93 / US line on Bosnia welcomed at UN
THE long-awaited US peace initiative on Bosnia was welcomed at the United
Nations, not least because it puts an end to a period of uncertainty since
the stalled international negotiations on Bosnia moved from Geneva to New
York at the beginning of last week, and it offers an opportunity to break
the deadlock.
Mr Fred Eckhard, spokesman for the co-chairmen of the conference on the
former Yugoslavia, Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, said they welcomed the
decision by the US government 'to take an active role' in the peace process.
They were particularly pleased at the US commitment to help enforce any
settlement.
The two international mediators would 'go out of their way' to make
available to the new US envoy, Mr Reginald Bartholomew, all the information
at their disposal. Their assumption was that the Vance-Owen plan was still
on the table and would form the basis for further negotiations.
Mr Vance said later that he and 'Reggie' (Bartholomew) were old friends. 'He
is a fine person. I have worked with him for many years.'
Lord Owen described Mr Bartholomew as 'a serious professional', whose
appointment he welcomed. He had last spoken to him when he briefed Nato
ambassadors in Brussels in December. 'It was clear then that he was
well-versed in the (Bosnian) problem.'
In spite of the warm words of welcome, some anxiety was expressed in
conference circles about how Mr Bartholomew would go about his task.
The Americans were not coming to the negotiations with their own map but,
after talking to the warring parties, they would have to decide what changes
they wanted to propose to the Vance-Owen plan for dividing Bosnia into 10
semi-autonomous provinces.
As the representative of the US, which had openly expressed support for the
Bosnian Moslems, Mr Bartholomew would also have to establish the same kind
of impartiality that Mr Vance and Lord Owen had achieved in their dealings
with the warring parties.
That might be difficult in the case of the Bosnian Serbs, who have been
openly criticised by the US administration for their policies of ethnic
cleansing and territorial conquest.
Ralph Atkins reports in London: Mr John Major, UK prime minister, welcomed
the US move, saying the appointment of a representative would 'give added
impetus' to peace negotiations.
