FT  06 MAR 93 / Markets: A tricky calculation over Barclays - The Bottom
Line
IT HAS almost become old hat for British banks to make losses after a decade
in which first Third World debt went wrong, and then a reckless lending
spree at the end of the 1980s led to huge bad debt provisions. But Barclays
still caused a stir this week with its first ever pre-tax loss in 96 years.
Barclays has had an uncomfortable relationship with some larger shareholders
since it said it was appointing Andrew Buxton to the twin posts of chairman
and chief executive from this January. Some fund managers argued that Buxton
should split the roles, as he has now promised to do.
But the decision this week to halve its final dividend to 6p per share,
cutting Barclays' total dividend for 1992 by 28 per cent to 15.15p, raised
fresh questions about whether the stock is worth having. It might even have
made some depositors question whether their money was entirely safe.
The second question is easier to answer. Barclays remains an extremely
well-capitalised bank by international standards. The bank actually managed
to increase its overall ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets to 9.1 per
cent despite recording a loss of Pounds 242m before tax for the year.
This is well above the 8 per cent ratio that the Bank for International
Settlements has set as a safe minimum for any bank to ensure funds are
well-secured. Barclays' ratio of core capital such as ordinary shares fell
to 5.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets, but is even further above the BIS
minimum of 4 per cent.
But if the bank's borrowers and lenders face little risk, its shareholders
face a more tricky calculation. The first problem is the future of the share
price. Barclays' shares underperformed against the FT A All-Share index
during 1992, falling 12 per cent from January to December.
A growing market conviction until this Thursday that the dividend would be
maintained helped raise the price to 433p before it fell nearly 10 per cent
on the dividend cut. Shares recovered yesterday as the market absorbed the
notion that Barclays had prepared itself for recovery.
The second problem is the dividend yield. The cut reduced the yield sharply
from 6.5 per cent on Wednesday to 5.2 on Thursday. Shares were yesterday
trading at a gross yield of 5.02 per cent compared to 5.4 for National
Westminster.
The answers are hard to assess because Barclays' results next year are
themselves uncertain. If the bank has set itself on the way to solid
recovery and the reduced dividend is safe from further cuts, then some
analysts argue the sheer size of its recovery potential means it is a good
long-term bet.
Julian Robins, of BZW, who predicted a reduced dividend, is recommending
holding Barclays' shares. He predicts a Pounds 300m pre-tax profit for 1993,
and a yield of 5.2 per cent.
The contrary view is that Barclays has done itself little good by bolstering
its tier 1 capital at the expense of its dividend, and the strength of
recovery is unknown. Buxton says he recommended a cut dividend because he
could not predict how far bad debt provisions would fall.
Tim Clarke, bank analyst at Panmure Gordon, says NatWest shares are now
appealing compared with Barclays. He believes the uncertainty over Barclays'
recovery means the gross yield should be half a percentage point above
NatWest. 'NatWest looks stronger, and is recovering earlier,' he says.
The calculation between the two banks thus comes down to how firm Barclays'
recovery will be in 1993 and whether it will need its stronger core capital.
A brisk economic upturn - bringing a sharp rise in loan demand, and recovery
in property prices - would help tip sentiment towards Barclays.
