FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (10): Light-footed heavyweights
 -David Lawson on industry's revolution
Industry was once the most obvious of Britain's energy wasters.
Born to plentiful coal, raised on subsidised electricity and fattened by
natural gas, it should have been almost impossible to tame. Yet it is the
only sector to cut demand - down a hefty 40 per cent since the 1973 oil
shock and 7 per cent since the recession started.
The figures were bound to shift as the economy veered away from heavy
production towards service, but much of the saving can be put down to
greater dedication towards cutting bills. This is understandable among users
where energy is an obvious - and expensive - part of the production process.
Glucose is a ubiquitous component for foods, drinks and drugs which requires
a lot of heat to generate steam for extraction from grain. Tunnel Refineries
in south-east London saved Pounds 1.5m a year through a series of
investments in electric mechanical vapour recompression systems which
recycle energy through heat pumps. Not content with this, the company called
in AHS Emstar, one of the country's biggest contract energy management
groups, to examine further options.
This led to a Pounds 10m contract to design, finance, install and operate a
new combined heat and power plant based on gas-turbine generators. The
investment will reduce energy bills by around 10 per cent or more than
Pounds 500,000 a year - a sweet solution to a sticky problem.
Careful planning and monitoring can reduce bills up to 30 per cent, says
Emstar. This can involve anything from replacement of inefficient systems to
juggling with the mix of fuels.
Hoover went all the way on its Merthyr Tydfil factory in South Wales. The
appliance manufacturer spent Pounds 1.3m on new equipment, switched from
coal and oil to gas and installed a computerised energy management system
remotely monitored down a phone line. This not only cut energy bills by
Pounds 750,000 a year but reduced CO emissions by more than 70 per cent,
says Emstar.
Cutting fuel bills has become more feasible since privatisation, with gas
and electricity companies willing to tear up tariff sheets in the battle for
business. Independent consultants flourish as power brokers but each
supplier also has an army of engineer-salesmen touting advice. Regional
electricity groups are even ranging into each others' territory to win
orders.
Suggestions sometimes involve cutting consumption of the very product they
are selling. The logic is that less leads to more; reducing energy cost per
unit will improve efficiency, which may raise overall production and end up
with the customer asking for more. It is better to have a satisfied customer
taking less power than one buying elsewhere.
Other factors such as the environment also get drawn into the equation.
Glass recycling is a popular subject as it takes this most enduring of
materials out of an overloaded waste disposal system and cuts down road
deliveries. United Glass at Harlow ships in sand from Surrey and Kent,
limestone from Derbyshire, plus essential soda ash and mineral additives for
new bottles and jars. Every tonne of old glass (cullet) saves the energy
equivalent of 30 gallons of oil, says British Glass, the pressure group
which co-ordinates the industry's recycling campaign. Total savings amounted
to more than 7m gallons at the last count in 1988 and will now be much
higher, as recycling is growing in leaps and bounds.
The government is aiming for 10,000 bottle banks and a 50:50 split between
new and old glass by the mid-1990s.
United cut energy consumption of its recycling furnace by 17.5 per cent and
raise output by a fifth by replacing oil burners with electricity power
elements. The Pounds 230,000 investment could be recouped in just over a
year. A lot of the work at the electricity industry's Capenhurst Research
Centre is centred around similar energy-saving schemes designed to
supplement efforts by users themselves.
Meanwhile, British Gas is also fighting the same corner. It has helped
Tioxide Europe, for instance, to switch part of a titanium dioxide pigment
processing plant at Grimsby from liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) to natural
gas. This will cut fuel bills by Pounds 1m a year and has environmental
spin-offs, such as improved working conditions and the elimination of 18
tanker deliveries a week.
Inco Alloys spent two years working with the British Gas Technical
Consultancy Service on upgrading to extrusion press facilities at its
Hereford plant. This involved building a special test furnace, which
eventually proved itself against an initial idea to use electrical induction
heating of metals. Energy costs have been cut by 50 per cent, saving more
than Pounds 80,000 a year.
Even the smallest reductions in consumption can help some users because they
are so energy-intensive. Ford's Dagenham plant needs 56 megawatts of
electricity - pretty much the requirements of a fair-sized town. Vauxhall
introduced a computerised energy management system which cut its
requirements at Luton by 6.5 per cent in three years to 29MW. The importance
of such customers keeps a supplier such as Eastern Electricity constantly on
its toes, helping to cut and trim.
Vehicles need half-a-dozen or more coats of rust-proofer and paint, and each
layer can cost up to Pounds 30 per car to dry, so even small savings are
significant on a line producing thousands each year. Meanwhile, new EU
emission rules are forcing changes away from solvent-based paints to
water-based glosses. So Eastern Electricity took a pro-active line, doing
its own research into technical and economic problems.
Not all these large customers are mainstream industrialists. British Gas
claims to have saved the RAF Pounds 800,000 a year through development of a
long-term energy management campaign on various bases while introduction of
combined heat and power units at Heathrow's cargo area and the 53-acre
University Hospital of Wales cut annual energy bills by Pounds 1.5m and
Pounds 350,000 respectively.
Little things can also mean a lot - such as making sure your quiches are
cooked properly. Farmer Giles Foods in Aylesbury was distraught that its
snacks were being rejected. Tilting oven racks tipped the fillings and left
unappetising burned goo along the sides. A modern electric conveyor oven
stabilised the substandard quiches, added 50 per cent to sales and doubled
output.
Food processors are like movie doctors and midwives: they need hot water,
and plenty of it, because people and plant need regular scouring. Farmer
Giles found a chilling solution to further energy saving with the help of a
little lateral thinking from Eastern Electricity. Refrigeration plant
normally ejects the heat into the atmosphere. Now the hot gases pass through
an exchanger inside water tanks, providing around 12,000 gallons for
hand-washing and plant cleaning. Initial savings were expected to be Pounds
13,000 a year - a payback of less than 12 months.
