FT  02 DEC 93 / Ferranti calls in receivers after GEC drops offer
Ferranti International, the UK-based defence electronics group and
high-technology leader, went into receivership yesterday when the General
Electric Company withdrew a 1p-a-share rescue offer after examining
Ferranti's books. The move puts at risk 3,700 jobs at factories and offices
around the country.
Although GEC gave no explanation for its decision, it had made its offer
conditional on finding nothing 'materially adverse to the financial
condition or prospects of Ferranti'.
Ferranti's board met yesterday and said in a statement: 'Having carefully
considered with its advisers the alternatives available to it, the board of
Ferranti has now invited the company's bankers to appoint receivers.'
There was speculation that GEC's detailed 'due diligence' inquiries showed
that Ferranti was in worse shape than expected. But other observers noted
that GEC will probably be able to 'cherry pick' any Ferranti assets it wants
for bargain prices from the receivers - without having to assume Ferranti's
debts.
The move marks the end of a three-year battle by Mr Eugene Anderson,
Ferranti's chairman and chief executive, to keep the company afloat.
He joined in 1990 after the discovery of a fraud at International Signal and
Control, the group's US subsidiary, which Ferranti acquired in 1987.
At its peak in the wake of the ISC acquisition, Ferranti had a market value
of Pounds 1bn and was a leading force in the global defence market, with
26,000 employees in a dozen countries and an order book worth more than
Pounds 1.5bn.
Ferranti subsequently disclosed, however, that it had been the victim of
massive fraud. Mr James Guerin, ISC's founder, who had become deputy
chairman of Ferranti, is now serving a 15-year sentence for financial fraud
and illegal arms sales.
The fraud, coupled with the recession and declining defence spending, hit
Ferranti hard. In spite of massive asset sales and job cuts, which reduced
the workforce to just 3,700, the group continued to lose heavily.
Ferranti had been looking for an equity partner for several years and GEC
was finally persuaded to offer a token 1p a share, or Pounds 11.4m, early
last month when it became clear Ferranti could no longer survive as an
independent company.
The 15 banks, led by National Westminster, which are owed about Pounds 100m,
announced that Mr John Talbot and Mr Murdoch McKillop of Arthur Andersen had
been appointed.
Ferranti's shares were suspended at 1p before the start of trading
yesterday. The company's 48,000 shareholders are unlikely to receive
anything.
Although Ferranti still operates successful businesses and had an order book
of about Pounds 165m at September 30, it also has debts and liabilities of
at least Pounds 155m.
Fatal attraction to wrong decisions, Page 23
Lex, Page 24
Background, Page 26
