FT  03 MAR 93 / Jobless rate in Japan falls to 2.3%
JAPAN'S unemployment rate unexpectedly fell in January to 2.3 per cent,
although government economists cautioned that the fall was likely to be
temporary.
The Management and Co-ordination Agency said yesterday the seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate in January fell from 2.4 per cent in December.
The fall largely reflects a strong growth in employment in the construction
sector which is enjoying a surge in orders from public works programmes.
The main federation of construction contractors yesterday announced an 8.6
per cent increase in orders in January compared with last year, the first
rise in order intake for 10 months.
It is likely, however, that unemployment will grow over the next few months
as manufacturers attack their costs by laying off workers.
In the past two weeks leading employers such as Nissan, the carmaker, and
NTT and KDD, the telecommunications groups, have announced plans for
sweeping job reduction programmes.
Toyobo, the textiles company, yesterday announced it was suspending
production at 10 of its factories for between four and eight days this month
to help reduce production by 20 per cent. About 3,000 factory workers will
be paid to stay at home during the shutdowns.
The aggregate employment figures disguise subtle shifts in the character of
the workforce which are helping to restrain the growth in officially
recorded unemployment.
The ratio of job offers to applications rose from 0.92 in December to 0.93
in January, which means there were 93 job offers for every 100 people
looking for work.
The improvement in the ratio was mainly caused by a sharp drop in the number
of people looking for jobs, which fell by 3.1 per cent between December and
January as many women withdrew from the workforce. Manufacturers, in
particular, are cutting deeply into recruitment with a 28 per cent fall in
job offers.
Employment rose by 0.5 per cent, the smallest increase since 1987, with a
6.3 per cent increase in construction employment and a 1.5 per cent rise in
the service sector offset by a 1.5 per cent fall in manufacturing.
A substantial part of the rise in service sector employment is accounted for
by a growth in part-time jobs at the expense of full-time jobs.
