FT  30 SEP 93 / Some good news and a call to arms: This year's meeting may
one day be viewed as a turning point
IT IS easy to be cynical about events such as this week's annual meetings of
the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
The descent on Washington of legions of pin-striped officials and assorted
hangers-on does wonders for the local hotel and stretch-limo trade. But the
jamboree often seems worlds away from the realities of widespread poverty in
many developing nations and near-zero growth and rising unemployment in the
industrialised world.
Take last Saturday's gathering of ministers from the Group of Seven leading
industrial nations.
The talks among the finance ministers and central bank governors of the US,
Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada were never likely to be
more than a stock-taking exercise. The muted outcome, with no official
communique on economic policy but all participants claiming, with hindsight,
that decisions over the previous five months reflected Group of Seven
co-ordination, was bound to dissatisfy observers brought up on a heady diet
of G7 exchange rate activism in the 1980s.
And yet, the 1993 IMF-World Bank meeting, which ends today, may be viewed
one day as a turning point: when suddenly the glass that is the world
economy moved from being half empty to half full.
The meetings opened under the cloud of the latest IMF forecasts for the
world economy. The Fund's twice-yearly World Economic Outlook scaled back
already weak growth expectations for the industrialised nations in 1993 and
1994.
The talks in Washington have also produced no noticeable improvement in the
prospects for trade liberalisation through conclusion of the Uruguay Round
of trade talks under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade. This was to be expected because finance ministers are not trade
negotiators.
But a more optimistic tone has been seeping into private conversations and
the statements of ministers and officials. Bankers on the cocktail party
circuit have been talking about better business than a year ago. The IMF
forecast downgradings, on closer inspection, did little more than reflect
the consensus of financial markets.
Seven days ago, there was widespread concern that Japan might be heading for
further economic contraction and that Russia would fall into chaos.
These worries have not gone away. But Japan is contemplating a tax reform
that may eventually boost the economy. There is greater hope that
continental Europe might have seen the worst of its recession and that
short-term interest rates will fall in Germany, allowing its neighbours to
benefit from easier monetary conditions.
In between valedictory parties for Mr Helmut Schlesinger, who hands over the
presidency of the Bundesbank to Mr Hans Tietmeyer tomorrow, German officials
have stressed their belief that Germany's recession is past its worst. As
inflationary pressures might also be easing, the Bundesbank, with its
customary caution, may be more inclined to use what scope it has to lower
interest rates.
The other good news has been the rapid growth of some developing countries
in east Asia and Latin America.
A visitor to Washington is quickly aware of the advertisements on US
television criticising imported cars and castigating the proposed North
American Free Trade Agreement, which will turn the US, Canada and Mexico
into a trading block.
But the IMF has underlined just how far the industrialised world is
benefiting from trade with fast-growing developing nations.
In his keynote speech to the annual meeting, Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF
managing director, noted that US exports to China, the Middle East and Latin
America grew in 1991 and 1992 at 10 times the rate of increase of US exports
to western Europe. Japanese exports to the same markets grew 10 times faster
than Japanese exports to the US. While EC exports to the US and Japan
declined, the Community's exports to China. the Middle East and Latin
America increased by 13 per cent.
Against this background, the chorus in favour of an early resolution of the
Gatt round has grown into a crescendo.
Officials take notice when the IMF's policy making Interim Committee, which
represents all the Fund's membership, says it expects 'leadership and vision
from all in order to resolve the remaining issues and conclude the (Uruguay)
Round by the end of the year'.
The repeated insistence on a speedy end to the Gatt round should put
pressure on negotiators in Geneva and on prime ministerial offices at home.
The strong language of the Interim Committee statement means that the
finance ministers and central bank governors representing the IMF's members
are really saying that the G7 heads of government who said after this year's
Tokyo Summit that completing the Gatt round was their 'highest priority'
will be manifestly lacking in 'leadership and vision' if the talks fail.
Any final verdict on this week's G7 and IMF talks will hinge on whether the
round is completed successfully.
In spite of all the problems surrounding the round, it is too early to
predict failure. International trade negotiations always go to the limit.
There are, among the finance ministry and central bank officials who
attended this week's IMF and World Bank meetings, some who argue that a
positive conclusion will be reached because the mid-December deadline,
unlike all the others in the past seven years of trade negotiation, is so
obviously a final crunchpoint.
