FT  04 FEB 93 / Hungary signals state utilities sell-off this year
HUNGARY, anxious to maintain the momentum of foreign investment and
privatisation, is to sell its main national utilities this year, the
government announced yesterday.
Telecommunications, gas distribution and electricity sectors, as well as the
state-owned commercial banks, all stood on the threshold of privatisation,
said Mr Tamas Szabo, minister for privatisation.
Big western European gas utilities, France Telecom and British Telecom have
already examined their Hungarian counterparts; and Bayerische Landesbank,
the Bavarian bank, expressed an interest in taking a stake in Hungary's
Magyar Kulkereskedelmi Bank.
The authorities have given no precise timetable but Mr Szabo said that the
transactions would get under way this year and some could be completed
before the end of the year.
Hungary needs the 'big projects' to take up the running from consumer goods
and food companies which have provided the momentum for privatisation so
far. The finalisation of large deals is essential if Hungary is to follow up
last year's foreign investment inflow of an estimated Dollars 1.7bn (Pounds
1.18bn) and privatisation proceeds of Ft67.6bn (Pounds 553m).
The large transactions are particularly important at a time when Hungary  -
which has accumulated more foreign capital than the rest of eastern Europe
put together  - faces competition from Poland and the Czech Republic.
Budapest's ambitious programme for utility privatisation depends heavily on
the government's ability to draw up and pass through parliament legislation
setting regulatory frameworks for each sector. Potential investors'
valuations of their acquisition targets hinge on price regulation and so far
only a telecommunications act is in place.
The privatisation of Hungary's four large state-owned commercial banks
similarly rests on the implementation of a coherent strategy to
'consolidate' institutions' bad loans. The Finance Ministry, at odds with
the privatisation authorities, is reluctant to countenance a debt write-off
sufficiently generous to make the banks attractive to investors.
The ministry, under pressure from an International Monetary Fund delegation
currently in Budapest, is worried about the budgetary consequences of a debt
write-off.
The authorities, torn by internal divisions, have delayed a formal
announcement that Credit Suisse First Boston, the investment bank, has won
the hotly-contested mandate to advise the government on privatisation
strategy for the banking sector.
The drive to privatise the utilities and banks must also contend with a
heightened political sensitivity about foreign economic domination, much in
evidence at the recent annual congress of the Hungarian Democratic Forum,
the governing centre-right party.
