FT  23 APR 93 / UK Company News: Smiths Inds continuing to reduce activities
in avionics
SMITHS Industries is continuing to cut its traditional core activity of
supplying avionics and components for civil and military aircraft. The
company is currently earning more profits from medical products than
aerospace.
Mr Roger Hurn, chairman and chief executive, said he expected civil aviation
to recover in the second half of the decade, but could not predict when.
Smiths has accordingly continued to reduce its aerospace workforce, cutting
200 jobs in both the UK and the US in the six months to January 30. This
leaves the total workforce at 6,000, split equally between both countries.
The company, which this week reported a decline in interim pre-tax profits
from Pounds 44.3m to Pounds 40.3m, spent Pounds 122m on acquisitions outside
aerospace.
The pre-tax figure was depressed by a Pounds 3m provision to cover an
unsuccessful investment in a device for measuring blood pressure.
Mr Hurn said: 'All parts of the company have shown a resilient performance
in this first half, and we expect to achieve steady progress in the
remainder of the year and beyond.'
The aerospace division's trading profits fell from Pounds 18.2m to Pounds
13.9m, on sales down from Pounds 184m to Pounds 175m.
The downturn was offset partly by the rapidly expanding medical systems
division.
This area increased trading profits from Pounds 11.6m to Pounds 16.1m on
turnover which advanced from Pounds 63.8m to Pounds 84.8m.
Industrial, the group's third division, increased trading profits from
Pounds 8m to Pounds 8.6m in spite of being exposed to the worst effects of
the recession. Sales increased from Pounds 59.6m to Pounds 68.4m.
The division's ducting companies, in particular Flexible Technologies, the
US acquisition now in its second year with the group, had performed well.
Smiths also said that Vent-Axia, the fans and hand driers maker bought for
Pounds 56m in December, had proved a natural fit.
In medical systems, Smiths paid Pounds 16m for HG Wallace of Colchester in
July and Pounds 66m for Intertech Resources of Florida in October.
Both companies manufacture single-use products, mainly in the field of
anaesthesia and respiratory products, and have been integrated with the
existing businesses.
Mr Hurn said he would be willing to borrow to make further acquisitions if
the right opportunities arose.
