FT  10 JUL 93 / Receivers at Swans cut 286 more jobs
ANOTHER 286 jobs are to go at Swan Hunter, the Tyneside shipbuilder,
receivers Price Waterhouse said yesterday.
The latest cuts bring to more than 700 the total number of redundancies
since the company went into receivership two months ago after failing to win
a helicopter carrier order.
Mr Tommy Brennan, Tyne chairman of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and
Engineering Unions, said: 'It's quite obvious that Swan Hunter is bleeding
to death in the present circumstances.'
The company, he added, was 'haemorrhaging jobs' as delays in finding a buyer
and securing a prospective Pounds 40m Omani patrol boats order continued.
Swan's greatest asset, he said, was its workforce. 'Now we are seeing the
workforce decimated.'
The 286 redundancies, more than unions had expected, cover 143 hourly paid
employees, 78 managerial, technical and clerical staff and 65 short-term
contract workers.
Half will leave next Friday and the rest the following Friday, when the
company's two-week summer holiday begins. Employees will not learn until
next week which of them are to lose their jobs. The latest cuts will reduce
the payroll to 1,700, including 60 short-term contract workers.
Mr Ed James, one of the receivers, said the redundancies were inevitable in
view of the company's present workload. He said he was confident however
that key technical expertise had been retained while the search for a buyer
continued.
Price Waterhouse confirmed yesterday that no firm bids for the company had
been received. The receivers told the unions they were in contact with four
interested parties.
A week ago the Ministry of Defence agreed to allow the shipyard to finish
three Type-23 frigates, its main workload, giving it work until November
1994.
Mr Brennan urged the government to offer Swans a breathing space by giving
it some refit and repair work. He feared Swans was in a 'chicken-and-egg'
situation over the Omani order, with prospective buyers waiting to see if it
materialised.
Mr Steve Byers, Labour MP for Wallsend, said government delay in taking
positive measures to assist Swan Hunter had created a climate of
uncertainty, leading to job losses.
Talks on Thursday between Mr Tim Sainsbury, the industry minister, and Mr
Karel van Miert, European Community competition commissioner, on whether
Swans should become eligible for EC subsidies ended inconclusively.
Workers were disappointed yesterday but not surprised at the latest cuts. Mr
George Tweedy, an ancillary worker, said: 'We're just hoping it's the last.'
