FT  30 JUL 93 / Street war against the skinheads: Two of a kind - How secret
service chiefs are coping with the post-cold war world
United Germany is living in an unsafe new world, warns Mr Eckart Werthebach,
president of the German domestic security service, the Bundesamt fur
Verfassungsschutz (BfV) - Europe's most public relations-minded intelligence
agency.
In his airy office at the BfV's sprawling Cologne headquarters, Mr
Werthebach, a 52-year-old veteran security specialist, ranks as the
continent's chief hunter of spies, political extremists and assorted state
enemies.
His checked jacket and confidence-inspiring suntan give him the air of a
star clinical psychiatrist: a man who takes pride in precise observation of
derangement. With aplomb and, when required, humour, he analyses his own
anxieties about the changes since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
'Espionage has become less important,' says Mr Werthebach, in charge since
1991 of the BfV and its DM230m (Pounds 89m) annual budget. 'But, overall,
both Germany and the rest of Europe have become more unstable. So internal
security needs to be defended more than during the time when we had the two
power blocs - a situation which had a certain stabilising influence.'
Mr Werthebach's main concern is the rise of right-wing German extremist
violence, especially against foreigners. 'The threat comes no longer from
the east but from the overall wave of nationalism in Europe.' A recorded
total of 1,008 German far-right attacks claimed eight lives in the first
half of this year.
Most of these attacks were the responsibility of 6,400 'militant users of
force' (often skinhead groups) classified by the BfV as the most aggressive
of the 42,700 members of right-wing extremist parties and organisations.
Xenophobic violence endangers not just asylum-seekers, but also the state,
Mr Werthebach says. In best consulting room manner, he offers reassurance:
'They will not be able to eliminate our liberal democracy.'
Domestic extremists, together with agents of unfriendly foreign governments,
have always been the BfV's targets. The service (literally, federal office
for the protection of the constitution) was set up in 1950, with the aim of
collecting intelligence on adversaries of the freshly established West
German state.
To scotch any idea that the BfV itself uses anti-democratic methods, the
agency has an active public relations policy. One brochure contains a
diagram illustrating its methods, including secret photography, telephone
and post interception, infiltration and electronic eavesdropping.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, many Germans thought the BfV had
outlived its usefulness. The agency started to cut its 2,350 federal staff,
separate from a further 2,500 Verfassungsschutz employees in the states or
Lander. (Britain's secretive domestic security service, MI5, is smaller,
employing 2,000.)
In view of the need to deploy more resources against extremism, these plans
have now been reversed. 'In a few years, we will be back to our old level,'
Mr Werthebach says.
As far as spying is concerned, he says Russia is maintaining espionage under
the auspices of the SWR, the successor to the KGB. 'The personnel who were
previously used for political work are now deployed to carry out economic
and scientific espionage.'
Somewhat bizarrely, the BfV is still helping round up former East German
spies. 'According to information from defectors, there were 5,000 to 7,000
agents of the MfS (the East German state security ministry) in West Germany,
of whom about 10 per cent were in sensitive positions. In some cases, they
have since been taken over by the SWR. We are pursuing more than 2,200
leads.'
Trials will continue, he says, for two or three years. There will be no
amnesty until all details of the former East German spy network have been
revealed. 'If in the (Bonn) foreign ministry or defence ministry there are
still informants of the MfS, the former KGB can put these people under
pressure to work for them.'
Tracking down former East German agents is probably the least arduous of the
BfV's post-cold war challenges. Intelligence techniques are of limited use
in combating shaven-headed neo-Nazi groups. A second problem is that when
the BfV makes a bid to extend activities into new fields - for instance,
cross-border crime - the public becomes uneasy that state surveillance is
going too far. A third difficulty, Mr Werthebach admits, is that right-wing
parties under BfV surveillance, such as the Republicans, can sometimes
increase public support by claiming the state is adopting Nazi methods
against them.
He says Germans voting for the far right are mostly 'protest voters' rather
than neo-Nazis. But he adds: 'German history makes us look at right-wing
extremism more critically than our western partners.' Is Germany more
vulnerable than other countries to extremism? Mr Werthebach emits a
mellifluous chuckle. 'The British have a certain calm which the Germans
lack. The Germans thus react more hectically to social changes, raising the
impression that they have a leaning towards right-wing extremism.'
He mentions unemployment and reunification-induced economic problems. 'The
German experience is that right- and left-wing extremism fades when the
economic situation is good. I assume that we will recover economic stability
 -and extremism will lose its importance.'
In the meantime, an institution many thought would fade with the end of the
cold war has a chilling new importance. 'People say we have never needed the
Verfassungsschutz as much as today.'
