FT  21 JUN 93 / Chessmen look for rich takings: How the game is entering the
world of big money
BY THE end of this year there will be at least two rival claimants for the
title of world chess champion. The next few months will see considerable
turmoil, described by Leonard Barden, the FT's chess correspondent, as an
'intellectual Bosnia'.
The upheaval dates back at least to November when two old stars of the chess
world, Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, played a match in the former
Yugoslavia for a purse of Dollars 5m (Pounds 3.3m), sponsored by Mr Jezdimir
Vasiljevic, a Yugoslav banker.
The match did not produce sparkling chess but it did bring megabucks to a
game where large purses are unusual. Fischer won and received Dollars 3.35m.
The match did not have the backing of Fide, the world chess federation.
Spassky's international rating was equal 96th and Fischer had been a virtual
recluse for 20 years. If they could command Dollars 5m it seemed that the
coming match between Nigel Short, the first British contender for years
playing in his home country and ranked eighth by Fide, against Garry
Kasparov, the world champion, could force the stakes a little higher.
So Kasparov and Short were disappointed when Fide accepted Manchester's
Pounds 1.2m bid to stage the world championship. They rejected the bid and
set up the Professional Chess Association to rival Fide. They are still the
only professional chess-playing members of the association, which has signed
a deal with The Times newspaper for a purse of Pounds 1.7m  - Pounds 1m to
the winner, Pounds 700,000 to the loser  - for a match of 24 games in London
in September.
Last week Fide responded by stripping both Kasparov and Short of their
rankings. It announced that newly first-ranked Anatoly Karpov  - decisively
beaten by both Short and Kasparov in the last year  - and Jan Timman, ranked
34th, beaten by Short to qualify for his match against Kasparov, would
contest its world championship.
Fide further announced it would put up Pounds 800,000 of the Pounds 1.8m
purse for the Timman-Karpov match, to be staged half in Oman and half in the
Netherlands, starting at the same time as the Short-Kasparov match.
The PCA has announced that it is to hold qualifying matches for its own
world championship, promising a prize fund of Dollars 200,000 and unifying
the men's and women's world titles. Fifty of the world's leading players
will be invited to compete in the Netherlands, in December  - one month
before Fide plans to host its own world championship qualifying round, also
in the Netherlands.
Mr Stewart Reuben, a director of the British Chess Federation, does not
support the PCA, but he reflects a growing view that Fide may have
overplayed its hand by removing its ratings from Kasparov and Short. He
said: 'I regard Fide's action as absolutely disgraceful and perhaps a
restraint of trade, since without Fide ratings who knows how good any
international chess player really is?'
If they make a better living, neither Short nor Kasparov may feel too
unhappy about that. And the marketing industry has got in on the act. Daily
tickets to watch the games at the Savoy Hotel, which can seat about 1,100,
will cost between Pounds 45 and Pounds 150. Telechess World Productions has
worldwide television rights. In the UK, Channel 4 will run 60 hours of the
match.
Fide will survive, and also perhaps the PCA, but chess will never be quite
the same.
