FT  08 MAY 93 / Guards held over City looting: Many tenants report thefts
from offices after IRA bomb
THREE SECURITY guards were arrested by the City of London police yesterday
in connection with theft from buildings damaged by the IRA bomb two weeks
ago.
The police said the latest arrests, together with five arrests made last
weekend, concerned six burglaries committed in the wake of the bomb blast in
Bishopsgate.
Nine 'relatively minor' thefts were reported by tenants after they regained
access to their buildings five days after the bomb.
Bottles of wine, paintings, fountain pens, Dictaphones and petty cash were
among items reported stolen.
'The things that were taken were small in value terms but disproportionately
upsetting,' said Mr Chris Manners of Norton Rose, a firm of solicitors,
which believes the thefts took place on the Monday after the bomb. 'They
were often things of sentimental value.'
'It's more upsetting than the bomb itself,' said one solicitor, whose office
was looted and vandalised. He said that when staff returned to the office on
the Tuesday after the bombing they found most desks, drawers and cabinets
had been forced open and drinks cabinets emptied.
Petty cash, cheques, squash rackets, gold pens, luggage and wine were taken
from the London office of Blake Cassells &amp; Graydon, a Toronto law firm,
which had an office on the 15th floor of 99 Bishopsgate.
'It's crystal clear that widespread pilfering has been going on and that
whoever was responsible had the time to go through the office and decide
just what they wanted,' said Mr David Glennie, managing partner.
'It's very, very disturbing. It's bad enough to have had your offices
sprayed with glass and have suffered other damage without someone coming
along and dancing on your grave.'
The Banco di Sicilia, which has offices at 99 Bishopsgate, said some
paintings were stolen during the bank holiday weekend. Mr Peter Franklin,
finance director of Rea Brothers, reported thefts from the merchant bank's
offices in Alderman's House, Alderman's Walk, before the building was fully
secured.
The thieves, whom he described as 'rank amateurs', had jemmied open desks,
forced briefcases and taken small items of little value from offices. 'They
even broke open a coffee machine to steal the money inside, not realising
that the coffee was free so there was no money,' he said.
Many of the companies affected said that the large numbers of workers
drafted in to clear up the bomb damage had created conditions for
opportunistic theft.
Mr David Stedman, managing partner at Penningtons, solicitors, said security
in the building had been a problem after the bombing, with different
security staff and contractors working for different tenants. 'It was very
difficult to know just who everybody was,' he said.
'It would have been easy for anyone to put on a hard hat and come into a
building,' said Mr Chris Manners of Norton Rose, solicitors.
Reporting by Vanessa Houlder, Michael Morgan, John Pitt and Emiko Terazono
Insurance cover, Page 7
