FT  21 OCT 93 / Envoys call for broader Haitian government
US and United Nations envoys are pressing Mr Robert Malval, Haiti's
pro-democracy prime minister, to include ministers loyal to the military in
an expanded government, an aide to ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide
said yesterday, Reuter reports from New York.
The aide said the US Ambassador to Haiti, Mr William Swing and UN special
envoy Dante Caputo want Mr Malval to sign a communique saying he will
'expand' his government if military leader Lt Gen Raoul Cedras and
Port-au-Prince Police Chief Michel Francois step down.
Their resignations are called for in the peace accord signed by Gen Cedras
and the democratically elected President Aristide on New York's Governors
Island last July 3.
The refusal of the two men to resign has led to a showdown between Haiti's
military rulers and the UN with an oil and arms embargo reimposed and US and
other warships patrolling waters off the Caribbean country.
The Aristide aide said that Mr Malval has so far not agreed to sign the
communique, presented to him Tuesday at a meeting with the two envoys. He
has informed Mr Aristide of the plan, the aide said.
The aide said Aristide supporters were worried that such a 'compromise'
would in effect make the Governors Island accord largely meaningless because
including military supporters in key positions would prevent Mr Aristide
from ending the military's hold on the country.
It was not specifically known what ministries pro-military allies would be
given if Mr Malval 'expanded' his government.
But Mr Evans Francois, the police chief's brother who is an adviser to Gen
Cedras, told the Los Angeles Times on Tuesday that the military wanted its
allies in control of the ministries of defence, interior, social welfare and
information in a government of national reconciliation.
'Malval is under intense pressure to sign the communique,' the Aristide aide
said.
The aide said the communique that Mr Malval has been asked to sign for the
military to honour the Governors Island accord and for a law to be passed
banning paramilitary groups from owning guns.
The aide said a key paragraph in the proposed communique would have Mr
Malval say: 'As far as I am concerned as head of government, if this general
plan is implemented, I am prepared to further expand my government. I will
be looking for individuals whose integrity and honesty is unquestioned.'
