FT  31 DEC 93 / Kinkel urges stronger ties with the east
Mr Klaus Kinkel, Germany's foreign minister, yesterday said greater security
and economic links between the European Union and the Nato alliance must be
extended to the countries of eastern Europe and Russia.
In an end-of-year foreign policy statement, Mr Kinkel said the EU, and
Germany in particular, must strengthen the region's security, economic and
democratic structures through more intensive relations.
'It should be our goal to build up our relations with our eastern neighbours
as intensively and confidently as we have done over the past decades,' he
said.
However, Mr Willy Claes, his Belgian counterpart, said a more hurried
approach to Nato membership for eastern European countries would cause
serious trouble for Russian reformers, adding that Nato membership for
countries such as Poland and Hungary was 'not for tomorrow'.
The ministers' views reflect a fundamental debate within the EU and Nato on
how best to consolidate reforms in both central Europe and Russia, which is
likely to figure high on Nato's agenda when it meets on January 10.
Mr Kinkel's statement also reflects concern, particularly in the
Chancellery, that if the EU does not adhere to the timetable in admitting
the Nordic countries and Austria, then prospects of opening up full
membership to the countries of eastern Europe will fade and disillusionment
among the young democracies will set in.
'If the expansion (of the EU to include the Nordic countries and Austria)
runs into difficulties, it would be a hard blow to the prospects of
membership for other states for which we have held out hope.'
Mr Kinkel said Bonn would do its utmost as holder of the EC presidency in
the second half of 1994 to make sure that planned enlargement suffered no
setbacks. 'We Germans have a special responsibility here because of our
past, but also because of our size, our economic power and our central
position in Europe.'
'In the coming year we want to conclude the negotiations for European Union
membership for Finland, Norway, Austria and Sweden,' Mr Kinkel added.
Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and other former Soviet bloc states are
seeking to join the European Union.
