FT  12 JUN 93 / Japan ready to test US resolve on targets
IN THEIR first few months of dealing with the Clinton administration,
Japanese trade officials were busy trying to assess how serious the US was
in its calls for measurable targets in opening up Japan's markets.
As they face their US counterparts in their first round of trade talks,
which began yesterday in Washington, the Japanese now are able to test first
hand the resolve of the Clinton administration in pressing for measurable
progress.
With just a few weeks to go before the two nations are committed to agree a
framework for bilateral trade negotiations, Japanese officials still cling
to the hope that, in the end, their arguments against the dangers of the
US's results-oriented trade policy will prevail.
In response against US demands to establish measurable indicators of
progress in opening up the country's markets, the Japanese authorities have
taken up the banner of free trade, assuming the moral high ground.
'Given the importance of US-Japan trade and the influence it has on world
trade, what we decide to do is important enough that it will determine what
kind of world trade system we want to leave our children in the 21st
century,' says a foreign affairs official.
He argues that there is no alternative to the free trade system that has
guided the world since the end of the second world war. Any benchmark used
to measure economic activity, whether it be the number of foreign
subsidiaries that are set up in Japan, or the ratio of imports to gross
domestic product, leads to managed trade, he says.
But there is another reason for Japanese sensitivity towards numerical
targets.
The US-Japan semiconductor arrangement, which recognised the US expectation
that the foreign share of Japan's semiconductor market would reach 20 per
cent by the end of 1992, appeared to prove that Japan's markets were indeed
'managed' when that expectation was met.
That arrangement has been hailed by US officials as a model to be emulated
in other sectors, and the Japanese authorities have been at pains to dispel
the perception that if pushed they can control economic activity so that
such targets are met.
Unless it insists now that it cannot control economic activity in a free
trade system, the Japanese government fears that it could soon find itself
faced with demands from other countries or regions, not least the EC, to do
the same.
'Reducing the trade surplus is beyond the reach of the government because
the surplus is the result of economic activity,' the official emphasises.
If the Clinton administration is determined to achieve quick results in
reducing Japan's trade surplus, the Japanese authorities are just as firm
that it will take considerable time and patience to resolve the situation.
Japanese officials do not expect the current talks in Washington to produce
concrete results.
In keeping with Japanese custom it will be more a chance for both sides to
get to know each other and confirm each other's position.
They have drawn up a six-point guideline that underlines their refusal to
accept numerical measures, in spite of signs that the Clinton administration
is willing to be 'flexible' on demands for numerical indicators.
Measures that could lead to managed trade are to be avoided as well as
unilateral actions such as those allowed by the Super-301 trade bill.
The guideline also insists that any agreement should be done according to
internationally accepted rules and should benefit third countries as well as
Japan and the US. Discussion must be limited to matters within the
government's reach.
In addition, Japan will insist that the discussions should be a joint
exercise, with the US dealing with its problems as well.
One key problem the US has which Japan intends to cite, for example, is its
low level of savings.
Although the Japanese insist that no compromise is possible on the issue of
measuring results, officials in Tokyo are confident that the US and Japan
will eventually be able to take their talks forward.
There are alternative proposals on the Japanese drawing board being kept as
a last resort.
The show of confidence in Tokyo stems in part from a conviction that it has
significant international support for its opposition to results-oriented
trade policy.
Tokyo is also firm in its belief that the bilateral relationship is too
important to be dealt with through quick-fix measures such as fixing targets
on market access.
That belief is increasingly coupled with a feeling in Tokyo that the
US-Japan relationship has reached a turning point and that Washington is
beginning to treat Japan more as an equal.
Confirmation reached Tokyo on Thursday that the US intends to back Japan's
permanent membership of the UN Security Council.
'The US-Japan relationship has become a mature political relationship in
which it is possible to speak frankly and discusss things frankly and this
is a good development which allows for constructive talks,' says the foreign
ministry official.
