FT  03 APR 93 / Markets: Dow sent reeling by a storm in a teacup - Wall
Street
NEW YORKERS love bad weather. It gives them an opportunity to kick and
scream, gripe and grumble, and all without apportioning blame to anyone in
particular, or without having to accept any responsibility for the mess it
creates.
Wall Street economists also love bad weather, because it provides them with
a fall-back position when faced with a set of statistics that defy easy
explanation.
Take yesterday's employment report for March, for example. When it was
released at 8.30am, the headline number came as a big surprise. Wall Street
had forecast a rise in March non-farm payrolls of between 75,000 and
100,000. In the event, non-farm payrolls fell 22,000 last month.
The bad news provoked an immediate rally in bond prices, as fixed-income
investors interpreted the decline in payrolls as evidence that the economic
engine, so strong in late 1992, was beginning to splutter.
Yet the bond rally lasted no more than a few minutes. Within half an hour of
the employment report's release, bond prices had dropped back into negative
territory, pushing the yield on the benchmark 30-year long bond decisively
back up through 7 per cent for the first time since mid-February.
As soon as the jobs data was released, economists had to come up with an
explanation as to why the figures did not fit the trend pattern - after all,
payrolls jumped 113,000 in January and soared 365,000 in February.
The answer was bad weather. The sharp turnaround in March payrolls was due,
said economists at the Labor department and on Wall Street, to the fact that
the survey upon which the figures were based (in the survey the government
asks businesses what has happened to their payrolls, and how many hours
their employees have worked, etc, during the month) was taken in the second
week of March, at the time when the 'Storm of the Century' was laying waste
to the entire Eastern seaboard of the US.
Consequently, the severe winter weather temporarily depressed demand for
jobs in crucial industries such as construction (where payrolls tumbled
59,000 in the month), and had a big impact on other figures. The number of
hours worked that week, for example, showed a marked decline in the
manufacturing and retail sectors.
If the effect of the weather was removed from the numbers, the head of the
Bureau of Labour Statistics in Washington DC said, the March data revealed
that the labour market had 'held steady' last month.
Even so, this is hardly a ringing endorsement of the recuperative powers of
the US economy and its effect on the working population. Remember, gross
domestic product grew at the healthy annualised rate of 4.8 per cent in the
final quarter last year, and although it is unlikely to match that for the
first quarter of 1993, the economy is still growing at a respectable pace
when measured against previous post-recessionary periods. The fact that the
labour market has not responded more vigorously to the improvements in
economic conditions continues to worry stock market investors.
This helps explain why share prices fell almost 40 points yesterday morning.
The bad weather story that so impressed bond investors had much less of an
impact on their counterparts in the equity markets, who looked at the jobs
numbers and did not like what they saw - winter storm or no winter storm.
Yet the employment report was not the only action in town this week. After
four extremely quiet trading days in terms of corporate and economic news,
the food and tobacco group Philip Morris stunned Wall Street by announcing
that it expected operating earnings from its key domestic tobacco businesses
to fall by as much as 40 per cent this year.
In an attempt to halt the decline in its share of the domestic market,
Philip Morris also said it would cut prices on its popular Marlboro brand of
cigarettes, a move that represented a dramatic reversal of the company's
pricing strategy.
The news left tobacco stocks, and the market, reeling. Philip Morris shares
plunged more than 20 per cent to just over Dollars 50.
Yet there may be an explanation for Philip Morris's problems. Again, it was
probably the bad weather. Stringent anti-smoking laws in many US cities mean
working smokers have to indulge their habits outdoors, on the street in
front of their offices.
But this winter's severe weather must have forced many of those smokers to
stay indoors, hitting cigarette sales in the process. Simple, really.
 -------------------------------
Monday      3455.1   +   15.12
Tuesday     3457.27  +   2.17
Wednesday   3435.11  -   22.15
Thursday    3439.44  +   4.33
Friday      3370.81  -   68.63
 -------------------------------
