FT  24 AUG 93 / Letters to the Editor: Wind farms generate storm (1) - David
Lascelles' article on the future of wind energy, published on August 19,
provoked a large number of letters, both for and against the development of
wind power. Here is a selection
Sir, In his article 'An ill wind of change' (August 19), David Lascelles
states that wind energy is 'not a subject of rational discourse'. It is a
pity that one of the FT's finest writers then demonstrates this by raising
five objections to wind power that betray a depressing misunderstanding of
the issues involved.
Two of his five arguments are that the UK has no need for additional
generating capacity and that the existing resource base gives little value
to diversity. Both are true for the next 10-20 years; both are grounds for
not building any additional capacity; both are arguments that have been
consistently rejected by governments and many others in the support of
nuclear power because they are too short term.
On the timescale that it takes to develop substantial capacity of any
non-fossil source, current plant capacity will be outstripped, North Sea oil
and gas production will decline, as will the availability of low-cost UK
coal. And the outlook for imported oil and gas prices at least will become
increasingly volatile.
Mr Lascelles' third argument, that wind's variability is an important
objection, is plain wrong. Variations in wind output cause far fewer
operational problems than the tripping of a single main power generating
set. Like an investment portfolio, what matters is the correlation of a new
input with other variations on the power system.
In fact wind energy is well matched to demand on a seasonable basis and many
technical studies have shown the short-term variability, at the levels being
considered over the next two decades, to be economically irrelevant.
The statement that wind energy is environmentally insignificant because its
contribution will be very small is true for this decade. But in the longer
term, '10 per cent of electricity' is neither small nor an ultimate limit,
and its environmental benefit will be proportionately much larger because it
will displace the dirtiest marginal plant on the system. It could easily
displace 20-40 per cent of power system sulphur dioxide emissions, for
example.
Resource estimates are largely subjective, but obtaining 10 per cent of
electricity from the wind would require wind turbines to be a significant
landscape feature in about 1 per cent of the UK, not allowing for any
possible offshore siting. The acceptability of that is subjective, but
public opinion surveys in areas that have wind farms reveal a large majority
in support.
Which leaves us with the economics. Current wind farms are certainly more
costly than power from new gas stations at current prices, or existing coal
stations.
But with the costs falling steadily as this nascent industry becomes a big
business, it is likely to be competitive if gas prices rise and against new
coal or nuclear stations.
The central point is that new energy industries cannot be created overnight.
The government has created a system of phased supports to reflect indirect
costs of conventional production and to help the early stages of an industry
that is likely to be an important component of sustainable energy supplies.
As part of a major project on renewable energy strategies, I at least have
been led to the conclusion that it is a remarkably rational and valuable
policy.
Michael Grubb,
head, energy and environmental programme,
Royal Institute of International Affairs,
10 St James's Square,
London SW1Y 4LE
