FT  02 SEP 93 / Leading Article: A message in the Sky
MR RUPERT MURDOCH was in cocky form yesterday, launching Sky TV's latest
assault on the UK market, and not without reason. Sky's 14-channel satellite
pay-TV service may represent a turning point in British broadcasting.
Within four years, Mr Murdoch has moved from no stake in British television,
to running a company delivering 10 more channels than his earth-bound
competitors put together. According to a report by consultants Booze Allen
and Hamilton for the terrestrial ITV companies, commissioned as part of
ITV's submission to the government's green paper on the BBC, BSkyB (Sky's
parent company) may well have revenues greater than the entire ITV system by
1996. By 2000, it is forecast to be solidly ahead.
Having approached financial disaster three years ago, Mr Murdoch can again
lay claim to visionary status. His conviction is that five industries -
telecommunications, computers, entertainment, publishing and consumer
electronics - are converging and that News Corp can establish itself as one
of a handful of master salesmen along this global highway.
This may all seem a great distance from the issues preoccupying British
broadcasting policymakers, but it is surely worth them reflecting upon Mr
Murdoch's meteoric ascent.
Perhaps their first thought should be that this has occurred in spite of,
not because of, government policy. It was policy to license a single,
private-sector monopoly, British Satellite Broadcasting. Mr Murdoch,
technologically opportunistic, challenged that monopoly from a base outside
the UK regulatory framework, fought BSB to a bloody standstill and merged
the two companies.
BSkyB's regulatory status remains hazy, with the company exempt from many of
the constraints which affect terrestrial competitors. These include
programme schedules (see this week's renewed argument over the future of
ITV's News at Ten) and rules on national origin of programmes, which allow
Sky more freedom to use cheap American material.
To this, there are two possible policy responses: to deregulate all
commercial broadcasters or to bring BSkyB within the terrestrial regulatory
regime. Naturally, the terrestrial broadcasters prefer the latter, for them
safer, option.
As they consider this, policymakers should, however, note another point
about Sky's new service, namely the extent to which it is an alliance of
many broadcasting companies, including even the BBC, which is a major
shareholder in one of the new Sky channels, much to ITV's annoyance. At the
same time, few have noticed that Mr Murdoch's recent purchase of Star TV in
Hong Kong makes him the Asian distributor of BBC World Service TV.
In broadcasting, the corporate and geographical boundaries are well and
truly down. It must be asked whether a regulatory model based upon
assumptions of limited air space and state regulation of programmes might
not have had its day.
