FT  16 JUN 93 / Ministers set to back Thorp plant
THE THORP nuclear re-processing plant at Sellafield should gain approval if
environmental and legal questions can be settled, ministers argued yesterday
in their first formal discussions about the plant's future.
The government is likely to issue a paper in the next few weeks setting out
the case for British Nuclear Fuels' Pounds 2.8bn plant, the subject of the
most contentious environmental decision facing the government.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats, yesterday wrote to Mr
John Major, the prime minister, to express 'grave concern at the national
and international implications' of giving approval for Thorp. Proliferation
of plutonium and nuclear-weapons capability heads his list of worries -
Thorp reprocesses used nuclear fuel into reusable uranium and plutonium.
The plant, which has taken nearly 10 years to build and is waiting for a
government licence to start operation, has been attacked as 'Britain's
biggest white elephant' by environmentalists. The government has been warned
by its lawyers that it could face a judicial review prompted by legal action
from pressure groups if it took a decision without further consultation.
Thorp's future appears unlikely to be brought into the review of the nuclear
power industry, due to start in the autumn. That would have postponed a
decision - originally expected by BNF in January - for months.
Yesterday's cabinet committee discussions, which Mr Major did not attend,
focused on the plant's earnings. BNF has argued that Thorp will earn Pounds
900m for the UK in the first 10 years and that each week of delay costs
Pounds 2m.
The final decision falls to Mr John Gummer, the new environment secretary,
who is a known supporter of the nuclear power industry. But several
government departments have some responsibility. The Department of Trade and
Industry is BNF's shareholder, while the Foreign Office is concerned about
relations with foreign customers.
BNF denied claims in advertisements yesterday in UK national newspapers
taken out by Japanese pressure groups. The group, Japanese Citizens
Concerned About Plutonium, claimed that the Japanese power utilities,
Thorp's biggest overseas customers, no longer wanted the plant to go ahead
because it was accumulating too much plutonium.
