FT  16 NOV 93 / Reform deal fails in Japan
LEADERS of Japan's coalition government and the opposition Liberal
Democratic party failed to reach agreement on electoral reforms early today,
setting the scene for a parliamentary showdown that could again shake the
country's political system.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa met Mr Yohei Kono, the LDP leader, for two
hours in an attempt to resolve disputes over proposed legislation, but the
two leaders were left far apart on important sections of four bills intended
to clean up Japanese politics.
'It's very disappointing,' Mr Hosokawa said. 'We have given them a lot of
time to discuss these things.'
Mr Hosokawa has indicated that he will resign if reforms are not introduced
by the end of the year, and his coalition needs to have the bills passed by
the Lower House of Japanese parliament this week if the prime minister is to
keep to his timetable.
He said that unless the LDP was prepared to make concessions, the coalition
would break with tradition and attempt to push the bills through the
parliament without reaching prior consensus with the opposition.
The meeting of the two leaders was seen as a last attempt to settle disputes
amicably, and while Mr Kono said the discussions were 'useful', Mr Hosokawa
said the LDP had failed to respond to the government's offer of concessions.
Even before the meeting, the Nikkei average lost 2.3 per cent, partly on
fears that if the reform bills do not pass through the lower house in the
next few days, there will be big delays in decisions over measures to boost
the economy.
The government wants the present scandal-prone multi-seat constituency
system to be replaced by a mix of single seats and proportional
representation, with 250 representatives chosen through each method, making
a total of 500 members in the Lower House.
However, Mr Hosokawa offered to have 274 seats chosen through small
constituencies, bringing the government closer to the LDP demand for 300
single-seat representatives, which should favour it as the largest party. Mr
Kono, under pressure from party elders, rejected the government offer.
'I don't think there is much more we can do. We have offered concessions,'
Mr Hosokawa said.
Both sides fear a compromise could provoke a split in their own ranks.
Government concessions to the LDP's demands for a higher proportion of
single-seat constituencies might anger the Social Democratic party, largest
partner in the seven-party coalition. Socialists feel they will do best
under proportional representation.
The LDP's Mr Kono fears losing young reform-minded politicians to the
coalition if he fails to make a contribution to reform. Several older LDP
members could abstain if the party leans too far to reform, for fear of
losing their seats.
