FT  21 SEP 93 / Survey of Using Computers in Business (12): Europe points
the way to new standards - Ergonomics
MOST companies only think about ergonomics when there is evidence that
something, somewhere, is going wrong.
But according to the latest bulletin on the subject from the International
Data Corporation (IDC), ergonomics is about to become a big issue among
employers in Europe. It believes litigation and productivity will bring the
issue to the fore.
IDC analyst Andrew Baul-Lewis points out that more attention is paid to the
ergonomics of the average car than is paid to the comfort of the worker's
desk. Along with other voices in the IT industry, notably ICL and Olivetti,
IDC argues for a broader interpretation of ergonomics, traditionally
associated with engineering issues, the design of screens and visual display
units. There has been a tendency to isolate such things as screen displays
and eye strain as separate issues, without realising that health and safety
affects the whole person, mental and physical.
Ergonomics is a growing standards issue in Europe, where the recent European
Commission directive which came into force on the 1st January 1993. IDC
argues that employers will soon have to take such regulations, along with
the International Standards Organisation's recommendations, into account
when purchasing equipment.
In the US, there is also concern for the environment, and electricity
consumption, promoted by the US Environmental Protection Agency's Energy
Star programme, which is encouraging PC power consumption to be reduced to
30 watts. This concern is beginning to be reflected in European legislation,
such as Germany's law, coming into force in 1994, that makes electronic
suppliers responsible for collecting obsolete equipment.
Hans Malmkvist, director of ICL's ergonomics programme based in Stockhom,
has proof from many Scandinavian companies that ergonomics pays in terms or
productivity and reduced absenteeism. 'There are lots of EC directives, but
the real challenge is to get users to understand and take responsibility for
their own layout,' he says.
ICL's so-called 'Just In Time' training uses the computer to teach in situ,
using self-programmable multimedia techniques, including videos of physical
exercises. Taking the lead from Nokia, acquired by ICL in 1991, ICL now has
'ergonauts', as Malmkvist calls them, advising customers all over Europe.
An enlightened holistic approach would take into account the entire working
environment - surroundings, view, lighting, noise level, seating and
posture, as well as the keyboard and terminal. Software is also coming under
scrutiny, at a time when graphical user interfaces and object-oriented
programming are making products easier to use, but are also creating a
confusing diversity of options.
Software ergonomics are an increasing part of the picture. More end-users
are coming online, and are expected to use a variety of software products.
The frustration of finding that they all use different keyboard conventions
can lead to much time-wasting and unacceptable levels of errors. How
sensible it would be to have a set of accepted rules, similar to those which
established the F1 key as the escape or 'reverse out' route in the earliest
generation of PC applications. But this goes against commercial judgment,
and companies such as Apple, Microsoft and Sun are fighting through the
courts to retain their own individual 'look and feel' on the desktop.
'The problem is litigation,' says Therese Cory, main author of the 1993
Software Quality Report from IT researchers Butler Bloor. 'It would make
more sense, instead of the legal battle for the desktop, for them to agree,
or at least allow, some flexibility.'
Software designers are beginning to appreciate the need for clearer
signposting. It is possible, with graphical user interfaces and
object-oriented programming, for software to be a delight to use. Software
house Unify has just launched its own client-server development software,
Unify Vision, which mimics human thinking by using icons and pointers to
develop 'intuitive' applications. 'It's a matter of productivity and ease of
use' says Reza Mikailli, senior vice-president of products at Unify. 'The
mouse gives you a screen of options and you can jump from one to another:
there is no dictation of the thinking process as with old style systems.
It's a matter of getting closer to people's thinking processes: these can
change fast, so the tools you use to write programs should let you react to
every event. That's what being human is all about.'
