FT  22 OCT 93 / Transatlantic lesson in passing on risks: John Gapper
explains banks' moves to securitise assets
Few predictions appear as safe as the notion that the European market in
securitised assets is about to grow explosively, yet few have been proved
wrong so many times. The gap between the enormous US market and the infant
one across the Atlantic has grown wider with each false dawn.
Yet this time, the prediction could be right. The UK high street banks, with
their huge capacity to generate assets such as mortgages and personal loans
that can be securitised, may have detonated the explosion. 'It is finally
starting to move,' says Mr Robin Monro-Davies, of IBCA, the European bank
ratings agency.
There has been a flurry of milestone deals involving banks in the past few
weeks. Barclays made a Pounds 280m issue backed by 10,000 personal loans and
National Westminster has made a Pounds 300m mortgage-backed issue. Both
these banks have publicly declared their interest in future securitisations.
These transactions have raised the prospect of the European asset-backed
securities market both growing and spreading into more exotic areas, such as
credit card receivables. There are Dollars 1,000bn of US mortgage-backed
securities alone, while only Dollars 1.4bn were issued in Europe last year.
The market could subside again, as it did following issues by centralised
mortgage lenders in the mid-1980s, under the housing market collapse. But
the high street banks' involvement may mark a turning point because of their
dual role as both issuers and investors. The banks have enormous power as
issuers because they have ready access to huge asset pools. Once they have
borne initial costs of securitisation, including legal fees and paying for
ratings agencies to give their processing systems a seal of approval, they
have a ready supply of useable assets.
Their reputation as large and safe institutions also means their issues set
benchmarks for what has been a rather imponderable market. 'Until these
deals, nobody knew exactly how a quality institution could price a deal,'
says Mr Guy Fletcher, Barclays' head of asset securitisation.
On the other side, banks' willingness to invest in asset-backed securities
provides demand. The Bank of England cleared a barrier at the end of last
year when it said banks could hold mortgage-backed securities as assets with
a 50 per cent weighting, absorbing less capital.
Securitisation has a number of attractions for banks:
It allows them to devolve credit risks to investors. 'One sacrifices an
earnings stream, but the risk is reduced even more sharply,' says Mr Richard
Goeltz, NatWest's chief financial officer.
By selling assets to the vehicle companies which issue bonds, banks can
release the capital which they must hold against assets under regulatory
guidelines. This means that they can both raise return on capital by
're-using' it and add assets without breaching capital adequacy limits.
They can diversify their sources of funding. This could have particular
attractions for building societies, which operate under strict limits on
wholesale funding and face strong retail funding pressures.
If the market expands, their investment banking arms may be able to
securitise assets on behalf of client companies. This would form a parallel
with the derivatives trading expertise which banks have started using both
to hedge their risks and offer risk management services.
Given these attractions, why have banks been slow to move into
securitisation? Mainly because it has been too expensive. Banks not only
have to pay the legal costs of setting up vehicle companies, but must ensure
that their securities attract investors.
One reason for the rapid growth of the US market is that the US government
guaranteed the assets underlying the first mortgage-backed issues by
agencies such as Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. 'There is no guarantee here, so
credit risks have to be studied carefully by agencies and investors,' says
Mr Fletcher.
Asset-backed securities also face the difficulty that it is impossible to
predict their exact maturity. Mortgages will be repaid at different speeds
depending on interest rate movements, creating the 'pre-payment risk'
suffered by US investors.
Banks thus have to offer an attractive margin  - 20 and 40 basis points over
Libor for the two main parts of NatWest's Pounds 300m issue. They also have
to inject some extra capital to compensate for defaults by borrowers.
NatWest injected an extra Pounds 3m 'shortfall fund'.
While the attractions now seem to outweigh the costs, the question remains
of whether banks face unforeseen risks. Mr Robert Weir, treasurer of
Household Mortgage Corporation, says the only threat is to their reputation.
'The bonds might be issued by something called Lombard, but everybody knows
it is really NatWest,' says Mr Weir. Any issue which had problems would thus
affect NatWest's reputation. Yet it would not be able to use other capital
to help investors because of the Chinese wall between it and the vehicle
company.
For the moment, such theoretical risks appear distant in a market with such
huge potential. Mr Goeltz thinks packaging assets for sale should be a
routine technique for banks. 'Securitisation is not witchcraft. It is a
straightforward tool for managing assets and liabilities.'
 ---------------------------------------------------------
      CUMULATIVE VOLUNES TO DATE IN EUROPE to end 1992
 ---------------------------------------------------------
(Dollars m)
 ---------------------------------------------------------
              Residential    Vehicle   Trade
              mortgages      finance   receivables   Total
 ---------------------------------------------------------
UK             20,772         1,988      1,000      24,782
Germany             -             -        600         736
France            168            83        500       6,057
Italy             150           457        800       1,524
Spain             214            73          -         377
Sweden            952             -          -         952
Total          22,258         2,601      2,900      34,428
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Source: Ratings Agencies, market Reports, Chemical Bank
data
 ---------------------------------------------------------
