FT  06 OCT 93 / Pressure grows in US for troops to leave Somalia
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton cut short a West Coast trip to fly back to Washington
yesterday for discussions with senior advisers on the next US moves in
Somalia. The decision comes in the face of growing domestic pressure for an
early withdrawal of US troops from the country.
As General Mohammed Farah Aideed, the Somali warlord, taunted the US in
radio broadcasts, the US public and its politicians recoiled from graphic
television pictures of US servicemen killed or captured in Mogadishu on
Sunday.
The weight of political pronouncements was heavily in favour of US
disengagement from Somalia. Senators as philosophically different as Bill
Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat, and John McCain, the Arizona Republican,
urged the president to bring US troops home.
Last week the House followed the Senate in passing a non-binding resolution
requiring Mr Clinton to seek Congressional approval by November 15 for
continued deployment of US forces. On Monday, demonstrating comparable
concern, the Senate appropriations committee voted to delete all the funding
requested by the administration for peacekeeping purposes.
Some senior voices, including Senator Sam Nunn, Democratic chairman of the
armed services committee, and Senator Richard Lugar, the Republican foreign
policy expert from Indiana, argued that continued deployment for protective
purposes was necessary while a more definitive policy was worked out.
On Monday Mr Clinton dispatched reinforcements to Mogadishu after the
heaviest losses in the 10-month US presence in Somalia. He warned Gen Aideed
of the severe consequences of harming any of the captured servicemen.
The president also said on Monday that US troops were now more vulnerable
because there were fewer of them - about 4,000 compared to a peak of nearly
30,000 - and because Somalis, no longer starving, seemed more susceptible to
the exhortations of warlords like Gen Aideed.
Mr Clinton and Mr Les Aspin, his defence secretary, said the reinforcements
were essentially protective in nature. But neither denied that it remained a
US objective to capture Gen Aideed and his leading supporters.
The Pentagon said yesterday the reinforcements would include US Rangers,
Bradley armoured vehicles, M1 tanks and MH6 and AH6 helicopters. A
spokeswoman said: 'We just want to make the point that we are not escalating
here.' The Pentagon said a 'handful' of its troops were still unaccounted
for but said it had evidence of only one person held by Gen Aideed's forces.
US policy remains ultimately to withdraw from Somalia, on the grounds that
the humanitarian mission has been completed. UN contingents are then
supposed to keep the peace and encourage the process of reconciliation and
nation building by the Somalis.
