FT  28 APR 93 / Understudy with a principal role: Roger Altman, deputy US
Treasury secretary, outlines his views on policy
I thought I knew Washington well,' fumes Mr Roger Altman, deputy US Treasury
secretary, 'but I didn't expect the Republicans to reach this new height of
hypocrisy.'
He is referring to the Senate filibuster that killed President Bill
Clinton's economic stimulus plan last week. How, he wonders, can a party
that presided over a tripling of the national debt have the effrontery to
block a Dollars 16bn jobs package on grounds of fiscal prudence.
Yet, with hindsight, should Mr Clinton have invested so much political
capital in so minor a part of his programme? (Most observers say the
stimulus would not have had an appreciable economic impact.)
Mr Altman will not entertain the idea. 'It was an important insurance
policy,' he says, and warns that gross domestic product figures for the
first quarter (due out tomorrow) will 'underline the economy's fragility'.
Mr Altman has the brisk, confident manner of a successful middle-aged
investment banker. He approaches the interview with deliberation, insisting
that questions are precisely posed and frequently pausing mid-sentence to
collect his thoughts.
He is on the defensive partly because congressional opposition to the
Clinton plan is mounting almost daily. Republicans are certain to fight big
increases in income taxes on high earners while Democratic leaders are
opposing new tax credits for business - seen on Capitol Hill as a flagrant
violation of the 1986 Tax Reform Act which eliminated many loopholes.
The proposed energy tax is also in trouble; Mr Leon Panetta, the budget
director, has publicly voiced fears that Congress may pass a blanket
exemption for agriculture.
A contemporary of Mr Clinton's at Georgetown University, Mr Altman gained an
MBA at Chicago before making a career in financial services. He served as a
senior Treasury official in the Carter presidency then flipped back to Wall
Street for the 1980s bull market, making a pile of money at the Blackstone
Group, an investment bank.
Now he is back in Washington, relishing his role as one of the president's
'inner circle' of economic advisers, intimately involved in crafting policy
on everything from healthcare reform to exchange rates.
But while admirably qualified for the job, is he giving Mr Clinton sound
advice? What does the administration hope to gain by talking the dollar down
against the yen - a policy that is deeply resented in Tokyo especially when
the president himself seems to be one of prime culprits?
Mr Altman denies point blank that this is the policy. 'I don't believe you
can talk a currency in any direction for very long that markets don't want
it to go.' The yen's rise, 'is a product of market forces', a natural
response to the Japanese fiscal stimulus which has improved the outlook for
growth.
With the example of Japan in mind, where gross savings amount to 35 per cent
of GDP, isn't the real challenge for the US to raise the national savings
rate? Given the scale of the challenge is the deficit-cutting plan adequate?
Cutting the deficit in half as a percentage of GDP over four years is a big
step forward in terms of reducing public dissavings, Mr Altman says
defensively.
But is it? The structural deficit (the deficit allowing for cyclical changes
in economic activity) is scheduled to fall about Dollars 45bn next fiscal
year to Dollars 205bn.
But no further reduction is planned; the structural deficit rises steadily
to about Dollars 242bn in fiscal 1998. Wasn't the administration really just
holding the underlying deficit stable?
'Well . . . that's a very important way of looking at it . . . but it's not
the primary way we did look at it.' The target you set, Mr Altman explains,
is 'a combination of what is required by the economic environment and what
it is possible for the system to absorb'. He claims that planned healthcare
reforms will slow the growth of spending and that the economy may do better
than assumed in the plan.
But given the electoral cycle, haven't you just missed your big chance to
get the deficit down?
'I just don't agree with that.' Mr Altman says the president deserves credit
for bringing about a 'sea-change' in attitudes on the deficit. This is a
moot point: many attribute the change to Texas billionaire Ross Perot's
populist calls for balanced budgets and argue that the Clinton team
misjudged the country's mood. At a time when people were willing to face
sacrifices, it asked for too little.
What is to be gained by proposing increases in marginal tax rates on high
earners of more than a third (from 31 per cent to 40 per cent or more for
those earning in excess of Dollars 250,000 a year)? Won't this depress
savings?
Mr Altman's response is that tax rates are not being raised to levels that
would seriously interfere with economic incentives. 'Let me be very
personal. Nobody I know who earns that kind of money is going to work less
because of those tax increases.'
But won't they rearrange their tax affairs to reduce their tax liability? He
seems unperturbed by suggestions from Professor Martin Feldstein of Harvard
and others that high earners will find ways of dodging the new taxes. 'I
guess we're going to disagree.'
But does he not accept the principle of the 1986 act - that lower rates and
a broader base make sense? 'Yes, I do.' But the inequalities of the 1980s
have to be reversed. 'If it's a choice between simplification and
progressivity, I choose progressivity.'
But what about small business? The income tax increases will hit proprietors
of small businesses who file under the personal code. Why depress the sector
that created the most jobs in the 1980s?
It seems that fairness is more important. If they earn enough they will just
have to pay the higher taxes, says Mr Altman.
Is a value-added tax likely, especially given the need to finance healthcare
reforms? He is careful not to rule it out. 'Shifting the emphasis of taxes
from investment to consumption is an important goal. That's why we
recommended an energy tax which, after all, is a consumption tax.'
Picking his words, Mr Altman adds: 'Whether we ever raise a VAT is not known
to me. I truly have no idea.'
Extending health cover to an extra 35m people and guaranteeing everybody a
generous package of basic benefits could be hugely expensive. What chance is
there of Congress agreeing to an extra Dollars 90bn or so a year in extra
taxes to pay for the new benefits?
He dislikes the tone of the question. A primary goal of the healthcare
reform is to reduce the rate of growth of spending, not increase it, he
explains patiently. But he is vague both about how costs will be reduced and
over what time horizon.
There has to be more market discipline in the health system - 'that's why
we're enthusiastic about managed competition,' he says. But he won't be
drawn on whether direct controls, such as a cap on health insurance
premiums, are likely. 'I'm not going to debate that with you.'
How soon will any cost controls take effect? Will we see results, say, by
1995? 'I don't know about 1995. I genuinely don't know.'
On economic and social policy, Mr Altman seems to enjoy working as part of
an extended economic team. But is there a risk of having too many economic
cooks? Won't the new National Economic Council run from the White House by
Mr Robert Rubin ultimately undermine the Treasury? (By international
standards, the Treasury is already weak, controlling neither monetary policy
nor the budget.)
He brushes off the question. 'It's a co-ordinating mechanism . . . It's so
successful because of Bob Rubin who has a remarkably winning style.
Everybody likes working with him.'
Mr Altman, it must be said, is just as smooth an operator. If Mr Lloyd
Bentsen, his boss, were ever to decide that retirement in Texas looked more
attractive than endless wrangles with Congress, his understudy is more than
ready to take centre-stage.
