FT  14 DEC 93 / Survey of Charities Investment and Finance (1): No help from
the Budget - Charities are now at the centre of a redefinition of the UK
welfare state. As provision of welfare services fragments between the
public, private and voluntary sectors, charities are under pressure to
provide more - and to be financially efficient
Do charities exist at all?
This pained, bewildered question was posed in the response to Mr Kenneth
Clarke's Budget from the Charities Tax Reform Group, which represents many
of the largest voluntary organisations.
The immediate cause for alarm was the absence of any specific new financial
support for charities in the Budget, and in particular the government's
failure to address the burning question of irrecoverable VAT which costs the
sector nearly Pounds 350m a year.
But the comment also signifies a wider sense of frustration over whether any
comprehensive strategy for charities exists at all. Government policies are
pushing the voluntary sector into mainstream welfare service delivery, while
many of its leaders feel that the financial and structural implications are
not being fully addressed by either ministers or some charities themselves.
1993 is closing dramatically for the sector. Voluntary Action, a report by a
group of former advisers to the Home Office voluntary services unit (the
Centris report) proposed in October that charities should literally not
exist at all, with recommendations for abolishing charitable status and tax
relief. The report argued that charities funded through contracts with the
public sector had surrendered their independence, and advocated a clear
split between charities delivering services and campaigning organisations.
The government reacted with immediate assurances that tax relief was safe,
but broader issues raised in the report will not disappear. As Mr Michael
Howard, home secretary, commented last month, the report had 'stimulated a
discussion on the very nature of voluntary activity.'
Some leading figures in the sector believe this debate, in the context of
the changing shape of the welfare state, is so significant that there should
be a royal commission on the voluntary sector.
As with any other sector of the economy, finance dominates the immediate
issues facing charities. The recession has had the inevitable effect of
curtailing income growth. But, according to the Charities Aid Foundation,
all charities have not been equally affected: the very biggest organisations
gained at the expense of the rest.
While the largest 200 fundraising charities saw their voluntary income grow
by 4 per cent in real terms last year; medium sized ones suffered a 9 per
cent reduction.
The same pattern applied to income from government and local authority fees
and grants, rents and investments. This rose by 5 per cent for the biggest
200, while falling by 16 per cent for charities in the medium-league 200-400
size bracket.
Financial pressures, combined with stricter requirements on trustees under
last year's Charities Act, are forcing charities of all sizes to give top
priority to the performance of their investments.
Under the act the Official Custodian, a public official who handled the
investments of many smaller charities, is returning them to the charities in
a staged exercise to 1996. Many of these organisations are being attracted
to common investment funds (CIFs), a unit trust arrangement for charities
operated by fund managers.
The first decision for charity trustees lacking previous experience of
dealing with fund managers is between choosing a charities specialist or one
of the large investment groups. Not surprisingly, both work hard to persuade
charity trustees that there is only one choice they could sensibly make.
Viscount Churchill, a director of Church, Charity, and Local Authority Fund
Managers - one of the specialists - says: 'We have long experience of
investing for charities and churches and find that our dedicated interest is
appreciated by clients. Our staff are particularly well equipped to deal
with questions arising from particular legal restrictions facing charities
and ethical and other concerns.
Big organisations also have teams of charity specialists on their staff.
While stressing the benefits of a large group, they are anxious to
demonstrate that their interest is not confined to large charities.
'We recognise the need to cater for smaller charities without full-time
finance managers, and offer a personal investment management service with
access to a fund manager, to charities with as little as Pounds 20,000 to
invest,' says Martyn Bensley, head of Fleming Investment Management's
charity division. As a spin off, Mr Bensley offers small charity clients
free places on management training courses run for Fleming's own staff.
Parts of the Charities Act are being phased in, and it had been expected
that regulations covering professional fundraising, reports and accounts and
collections would be introduced between March and December next year. At
least some of these - and the publication of a final version of the Charity
Commissioners' SORP 2 recommended accounting practices for charities - will
be delayed. The government has decided to await the outcome of a
deregulation task force examining charities.
While a tighter legal structure may help increase standards of efficiency
and integrity, it will not provide a short-cut to solving immediate
financial pressures.
Charities are particularly concerned that they cannot recover VAT even in
circumstances where local authorities that provide identical services do not
pay it, and had lobbied the Chancellor for a rebate system similar to a
Canadian one. Not only did the government fail to respond, but this year's
two budgets will increase financial burdens on charities. The National
Council for Voluntary Organisations estimates that VAT on power and cuts in
tax credits on dividends will cost the sector around Pounds 100m a year.
Increased petrol duty will bring a bill for Pounds 29m, while transferring
sick pay to employers will cost around Pounds 20m.
This year's community care reforms have seen charities drawn further into
the provision of services that were once a public sector monopoly. The
British Red Cross, for example, provides aftercare at home for people
released from hospital, medical equipment loan services, patient escorts and
transport under contract to local authorities.
The British Red Cross community programme depends greatly on volunteers, and
is a good example of the way in which charities are seeking to mobilise the
support of voluntary workers in far more sophisticated ways than simply
rattling tins on flag days. Volunteers working on the British Red Cross's
Home from Hospital scheme, which supports dependent patients after
discharge, undergo training including body mechanics and mobility, emergency
life support and hygiene practice. Some are being trained for specialised
tasks like administering eye drops and catheters.
Volunteering is something the government is keen to encourage, and Mr John
Major, the prime minister, recently announced plans to establish a national
network of volunteers. From next year, local organisations will be able to
submit bids under a new government-sponsored grant scheme for projects that
increase the scale and impact of voluntary effort. Mr Major also intends to
double the number of awards for voluntary service in future honours lists to
300.
Involvement of charities in the delivery of services is a reality and will
grow. But two concerns remain.
One is financial - a report last month produced by three charitable groups
after consultations with Whitehall departments warned the government not to
place additional burdens on the voluntary sector without making adequate
resources available.
The second issue is ethical, and raises the questions about the 'very nature
of voluntary activity' referred to by Mr Howard. Do charities that rely on
government finance lose their independence? How businesslike can a charity
become? While there is obvious need for managerial and financial efficiency,
there are signs of public aversion to over-commercial fundraising techniques
and charity shops that imitate High Street retailers. And will volunteers
continue giving their free time to huge, businesslike charities engaged in
open competition to win public sector contracts?
There has been a 20th century tradition of public bodies providing
mainstream welfare services, and charities acting as the advocates of the
service recipients. The government's purchaser-provider split in health and
community care has begun to reverse that process. Local authorities and
health authorities are becoming the champions of the consumer, and unelected
charities and arms-length trust hospitals and community units the providers
of services.
Some voluntary sector leaders think the implications of that issue alone are
profound enough to merit the attentions of a royal commission.
