FT  09 FEB 93 / Technology: Fundraising for a breakthrough - Technically
Speaking
THIS IS a tale of two companies; both attempting to develop breakthrough
technology, both deemed the leaders in their fields. One is American, the
other Scottish. One is attempting to break world records for computer
performance, the other to deliver on the promise of monoclonal antibodies to
cure deadly diseases.
Both have struggled to raise capital to continue their work. Supercomputer
Systems (SSI) of Eau Claire, Wisconsin, is desperate for new backers. Two
weeks ago the company closed its doors and laid off its employees when funds
ran out.
Founded five years ago by Steve Chen, a reclusive but renowned master of
supercomputer design previously at Cray Research, SSI set out to build the
world's most powerful supercomputer.
Chen's venture won the backing of IBM, which is said to have invested more
than Dollars 100m in the venture since 1987.
However, beset by its own financial problems and impatient as SSI overran
its development schedule, IBM pulled the plug at the end of January. Finding
alternative funding has so far proved impossible.
But SSI's employees have not given up. They continue to seek backing and
claim that by November the company will be able to ship its first product.
They say they have fulfilled SSI's founding dream by creating a prototype
supercomputer which combines vector and parallel processing - the classic
and modern approaches to supercomputing. They believe SSI could still become
the supercomputer market leader by offering a unique combination of
technology, fulfilling the requirements of general-purpose users as well as
research scientists.
Half a world away, Scotgen, of Aberdeen, Scotland, a leader in techniques to
'humanise' mouse antibodies so they are accepted by the human body and can
attack viruses, has also found it hard to raise capital. However, Scotgen's
prospects were significantly brightened by a Dollars 7m injection of US
venture capital, as a result of last week's merger with Vasocor, a
California biotechnology company.
The merged company aims to develop diagnostic tests and treatments for heart
disease, infectious diseases and cancer. Research will be conducted in
Scotland, while the journey from trials to regulatory approval will be
handled from California.
These stories provide several lessons. Scotgen's experience confirms the
concerns of many in the UK that a dearth of venture capital is inhibiting
the formation of new businesses. However, as SSI's plight demonstrates, the
belief widespread among would-be British entrepreneurs that US streets are
paved with venture capital gold is sadly mistaken.
Scotgen's deal was masterminded by Englishman Robert Fildes, a pioneer of
the biotechnology industry and former president and chief executive of
Cetus. He has raised more than Dollars 500m in funding for biotech companies
in the past and has been the architect of several corporate alliances. A
proven management record and experience in raising funds is critical to the
prospects of a development-stage venture.
In contrast, Chen's experience in designing world-acclaimed supercomputers
has not equipped him to address the critical funding crisis that his company
now faces.
Scotgen's story might suggest that national pride should not be allowed to
inhibit companies from seeking funding abroad.
Ironically, SSI may not be free to seek a foreign backer, though it has
tried. Foreign investment in US-based high-tech companies, especially those
whose technology might be of military value, has has long been seen by many
in Congress as 'selling the crown jewels'. Early evidence suggests this will
be the approach of the Clinton administration, too.
While the US may provide a more plentiful capital market for high-tech
ventures, the UK might offer a more benign political environment. In other
words, the grass is not that much greener on the other side of the pond.
