FT  04 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Biotrace plans flotation via private
placement
BIOTRACE International, a small biotech company which has developed a simple
and quick electronic test to check food industry hygiene using the substance
in fireflies which enables them to glow, is planning a stock market
flotation later this autumn.
The Bridgend-based company, which claims to be an industry leader in hygiene
and microbial testing systems. plans to come to market through a private
placement organised by Allied Provincial, the company's financial advisor
and broker to the issue. In the year to July 31 Biotrace had sales of about
Pounds 2m, roughly double the previous year, and is thought to have made its
first small profit.
Biotrace systems use a natural phenomenon, luciferase, which emits light
when it comes into contact with a substance called Adenosine Triphosphate
(ATP) which is present in all living cells including bacteria. An electronic
instrument called a luminometer is then used to measure the light.
Its rapid hygiene and microbial testing systems are mainly supplied to the
international food and drinks industry. Its products are used by almost all
the top 20 UK and European food and drink manufactures. About one-third of
its systems are installed overseas.
Legislation covering food factory hygiene in Europe and the US is being
tightened, resulting in a rapidly growing market for test systems.
The company was founded five years ago by Mr Ian Johnson, a former Welsh
Water Authority microbiologist, and Mr Colin Griffiths, an accountant, who
retain a 60 per cent equity interest. A further 30 per cent is in the hands
of Questor and Abingworth, two venture capital groups which invested Pounds
1.35m in the company, another 8 per cent is in the hands of a local investor
and the balance is held by the Welsh Development Agency.
Mr Brian Levett, managing director, said the original investors still have
to decide how much of their equity holding will be released to the market.
He said additional funds raised through the placing would mainly be used to
fund an overseas marketing drive. Biotrace already has a direct sales
operation in the US and a marketing partnership in continental Europe with a
Danish group, Foss Electric.
'The plan is to become the world market leader as well as the technological
leader,' Mr Levett said.
Biotrace currently has three new rapid testing systems in its range, the
Multi-Lite which is used for laboratory testing of food and drink, Auto-Lite
used for testing long life products for sterility and its recently launched
Uni-Lite, the first direct hygiene swab monitor.
Biotrace has also sold instruments to companies in other industries
including water treatment, sanitation, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals.
