FT  18 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tin producing countries in
quandary over languishing prices
OFFICIALS OF the Association of Tin Producing Countries finished a meeting
here at the weekend confused about what action to take to try to shore up
world tin prices and prevent further hardship in the industry.
The association groups Australia, Bolivia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nigeria,
Thailand and Zaire, together accounting for about 60 per cent of world tin
production. In 1981 tin was fetching between MDollars 32 (USDollars 12) and
MDollars 34 a kilogram on the Kuala Lumpur tin market; they are now
languishing close to the MDollars 14-a-kilogram level.
In 1985 the International Tin Council's buffer stock operations collapsed
and more than 100,000 tonnes of stockpiled tin was released on to the
market. The industry has never recovered.
In 1987 the ATPC introduced an export quota scheme to try to control world
supply and bolster prices. But prices have refused to rise. Because of
continued low prices members exported a total of 76,578 tonnes last year -
12.1 per cent below the total amount allowed within the scheme.
At the same time world tin stocks have increased. The association estimates
that world tin stocks stood at 40,000 tonnes at the end of March 1993, up
from 38,200 tonnes at the end of last year. Originally it had been hoped to
bring global stocks down to 20,000 tonnes by the end of 1993.
There is widespread frustration at the situation. Mr Redzwan Sumun, the
ATPC's executive secretary, said that members were now debating whether it
was worthwhile carrying on with the export quota scheme. 'The stock level is
nowhere near our estimates. . . it makes our export curbs meaningless.'
The association has put forward various reasons for the continued depressed
state of the tin market. The recession in several industrialised countries
has resulted in a big drop in demand: in 1991 global tin demand fell by more
than 14,000 tonnes. The ATPC says demand was reduced further last year -
from an estimated 176,000 tonnes in 1991 to 172,000 tonnes.
Meanwhile a number of countries not in the ATPC - Peru, Burma, Vietnam and
Portugal - have been increasing their exports. The former Soviet Union,
until recently a large tin importer, is desperate for foreign exchange and
has become a tin exporter.
The problems of the tin market have also been aggravated by growing Chinese
exports.
China and Brazil are now the world's two top tin producers. While not ATPC
members, both countries have agreed to observe quotas set by the
organisation: Brazil was set an export quota of 24,000 tonnes last year,
while China was allotted 15,000 tonnes. The ATPC says Brazil's tin exports
were 19,900 tonnes last year - nearly 30 per cent below its quota.
'Only China was estimated to have exported in excess of the agreed amount,'
says the ATPC. Exactly how much tin China is now exporting is not clear; it
refuses either to confirm or deny that it is breaking its quota. But some
ATPC members estimate that China exported more than 30,000 tonnes of tin
last year.
'China is one of the main causes of low tin prices,' says a metals trader.
'It produces at costs well below countries like Malaysia and doesn't seem to
care too much about the general state of the market.'
The US is the other focus of discontent among the tin producing countries.
The US Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is selling off increasing amounts of
its substantial tin stockpile. The ATPC says that the DLA sold 6,200 tonnes
in 1991 and 8,800 tonnes last year.
Tin producers claim that such disposals are doing further damage to the tin
market. The ATPC is urging the DLA to enter into a long-term disposals
programme to minimise market disruption. But traders say there are
indications that the DLA is intent on disposing of a further 12,000 tonnes
of tin this year.
There seems little hope for relatively high cost producers like Malaysia,
until recently the world's leading tin producer. The country's tin miners
say that present price levels mean that they are producing at a loss. The
industry has shrunk in recent years: last year Malaysia produced 14,339
tonnes of tin-in-concentrates, down from 20,710 tonnes a year earlier.
One of the country's biggest tin mining companies, Malaysia Mining
Corporation, announced earlier this month that it was pulling out of the
business. As a result the country's total production this year is likely to
fall to well under 10,000 tonnes.
The optimists say that as the industrialised world climbs out of recession
then tin demand is bound to increase and prices will rise. The pessimists
disagree: they say that even if demand increases, non-ATPC maverick miners
have shown they can make nonsense of efforts to control supplies.
