FT  29 JAN 93 / Survey of Personal Equity Plans (24): A vehicle for the long
journey - Financial Planning / Equities, linked with concessions, can help
most people to meet their three biggest financial commitments, provided they
look beyond a five-year horizon
HOW DOES a personal equity plan fit in with your other financial plans?
For anything short-term (less than about five years) the answer is likely to
be 'not at all'. Peps are, after all, packaged equity investments, which can
go down in value. They should not be used to fund short-term commitments.
But over longer terms, when the strengths of equities as an asset are more
likely to be felt, and when the income and capital gains tax concessions
begin to make a difference, Peps now plainly have many uses.
The most obvious ways to use them are for what, for most people, are their
three biggest financial commitments: mortgages, school fees and pensions.
MORTGAGES
A Pep mortgage works in exactly the same way as an endowment mortgage. You
repay only the interest on the loan, while putting money into the Pep in
order to save to repay the capital, just as you would invest in an
endowment.
The most significant disadvantage, compared with an endowment mortgage, is
that you do not buy life insurance cover as part of the package. However,
term assurance is the cheapest form of life assurance, and it is usually
possible to shop around for a good rate. Those without dependants have no
need of life cover, in any case.
Peps' advantages include their superior flexibility. You can stop
contributing at any time without penalty, and invest with a different Pep
provider each year - both options which are not open to endowment-holders.
When arrears start to mount up, the painful experience of endowment
surrenders in the last two years has shown that this flexibility is a big
benefit. Then, Peps have tax advantages, as their funds are untaxed, unlike
those of an endowment.
Endowments offer slightly more security, as they are not invested wholly in
equities, and can quote a minimum 'sum guaranteed' in advance. But most life
funds are predominantly invested in stocks and shares anyway. So the case
for Peps as a mortgage repayment vehicle is strong - perhaps the poor
commission they pay to building societies and banks, compared with
endowments, has something to do with their failure to catch on.
SCHOOL FEES
School fees should work out cheapest if you save regularly, a long way in
advance, aiming for capital growth. The money from the investment can then
either be gnawed into regularly to meet fees as they become payable, or used
to provide an income generator, such as an annuity.
The only problem with using Peps, rather than life products, to do this is
risk-aversion. They cannot offer a guaranteed sum to pay off the fixed
commitment of school fees at a given date. However, school fees are prone to
inflate faster than other prices, and there is little point aiming for a
fixed sum, particularly as you pay for the guarantees by losing the chance
of some extra growth on top, or 'limiting the up-side'.
Even so, Peps should still probably not be regarded as the bedrock of a
school-fees plan. This distinction should belong to tax-efficient
investments which carry less risk, such as Tessas, deposit accounts held by
non-taxpayers, or, possibly, zero-dividend shares of investment trusts.
PENSIONS
Nobody suggests that Peps should replace your mainstream pension - the
benefit of having your premiums 'grossed up' when you invest should not be
foregone. But when it comes to topping-up the pension in the last few years
before retirement, a valid case can be made for using Peps rather than the
standard pension product for this purpose, the additional voluntary
contribution (AVC).
Like any other pension, premiums paid into an AVC are grossed up, an
advantage which Peps do not share. But after this, all of an AVC must by law
be converted into an annuity when you retire. This is not tax-efficient, as
the annuity is largely taxed as income, and limits your freedom either to
keep the fund invested, should you not need the income immediately, or to
splash out on a large capital sum for a round-the-world cruise.
So the trade-off is between: tax-efficiency as you enter, with an AVC; and
tax-efficiency when you exit, plus extra flexibility, with a Pep. The case
for using Peps, at least partially, in planning a pension top-up is strong.
Peps can also, more riskily, be used as part of a 'back-to-back' scheme with
a temporary annuity to pay a high regular income. An investor would put part
of a capital sum into an annuity, which would pay out the high regular
income by gradually repaying the capital. The remainder would go into a Pep,
which would re-invest its income and with luck would grow enough to replace
all the capital paid out from the annuity by the end of the annuity's term.
These schemes are very efficient income generators, but investors should not
enter into them without realising that there is a distinct risk that some
capital will be lost.
