FT  16 APR 93 / Arts: Royal views of Windsor Castle - Susan Moore reviews
the work of Thomas and Paul Sandby
One of the major consequences of the Queen's 'annus horribilis' has been an
increase in public debate abut the Royal Collection. The ill-informed have
been tempted to speculate that the Queen might start selling off works of
art to pay the tax man. Yet a splendid if unassuming exhibition at Windsor
comes as a timely reminder that the collection is growing, albeit modestly.
Since the number of paintings, drawings and watercolours is an awesome
10,000, 20,000 and 30,000 respectively, some say that the collection is big
enough, while others press for contemporary acquisitions. As it happens,
portraits of the current holders of the Order of Merit are in the process of
being commissioned, and recent additions to the already rich holding of
Sandby drawings of Windsor represent a special case.
Amid the throng of tourists gripped by the Changing of the Guard and the
burnt-out shells of rooms ravaged by the recent fire, the new drawings
gallery is a haven of tranquility. It has been formed out of a Georgian
Gothick lobby that led to the Grand Staircase before Wyattville remodelled
the castle for William IV. A gallery has been there since the 1960s, but it
has been transformed by the designs of Alec Cobbe into an environment that
is both intimate and grand. Drawings are shown to striking advantage on
Gothic screens against dark burgundy damask.
As a topographical draughtsman to the Duke of Cumberland, and then Deputy
Ranger of Windsor Great Park, Thomas Sandby was resident at Windsor for much
of his life. His views of the castle and its environs, along with those made
by or in collaboration with his younger brother Paul, constitute an
unparallelled record of Windsor and the development of the Great Park in the
second half of the 18th century.
Grand, showy gouaches by Paul open the show. Three out of the four are
relatively recent acquisitions and, given their fragile condition, may never
be exhibited elsewhere. The clarity of light and artfully casual
distribution of figures in his delightful 'The North Terrace looking east',
suggest why Canaletto should have been so readily collected by the British -
and bring to mind the gouaches of his fellow Venetian Marco Ricci.
Thereafter, we move between Paul and Thomas, and sheets that can only be
read as a combination of their talents. Few works are signed and even
signatures need not always tell the whole truth, but it seems reasonably
clear that the most ravishing of all the sheets, those carefully
pencil-drawn and subtlely washed prospects of the castle and the untroubled
landscape beyond, are the work of Thomas. Their meticulous mapping of every
tree, field, turn in the Thames - almost every roof tile - mark them out as
the productions of the trained military topographer who was to become the
first Professor of Architecture at the Royal Academy of Arts. In one
masterly panorama, a sign undecipherable to the naked eye offers 'Coffie and
Tea' in the old guardroom.
Figures appear to have been largely Paul's responsibility. Here are one or
two larger-scale studies of the personalities found in the Duke of
Cumberland's household in the 1750s. Thus we find Bob Dun, one of the Duke's
gardeners, 'a most facetious fellow', Voules the bailiff, the steward and an
un-named negro servant. More usually, however, the figures are simply
staffage, there to be busy in the Moat Garden wielding watering cans or to
stand guard in immaculate and picturesque uniforms.
Even in this small selection, numbering a slim 28 sheets and representing
perhaps a tenth of the collection, there is considerable evidence of
unevenness. Thomas is seen to best advantage in a series of masterly
panoramas, and more modestly at work designing various rustic structures
like the root house and the rockwork bridge for the Great Park. Paul is
shown capable of bravura gouaches but also of a coarseness of touch which is
even more pronounced beside the precision and delicacy of Thomas.
It is not easy to judge this show purely on its artistic merits, or on its
historical interest. It is impossible not to be seduced by what comes across
as a cloudless golden age before the castle was troubled by the Heathrow
flight path and the bad weather John Piper found there during the war.
One note of high drama reminds us of the present more than the past: Paul's
spectacular watercolour and gouache of 'Windsor Castle on a Rejoicing
Night'. Shooting fireworks confected out of flecks of gold paint light up
the night sky and a massive gold and pink-tinged bonfire ominously
silhouettes the Winchester Tower and sends out billowing black smoke. And
the presence of a drunken man being half-carried away from the revelry
suggests that Saturday nights have not really changed all that much.
The exhibition continues at Windsor Castle until October 3
