FT  08 FEB 93 / Survey of Iran (1): Keen to leave the cold - Iran is edging
back towards the international mainstream. Whether it will be admitted is
another matter
When an Iranian diplomat asks earnestly 'What do you think my country can do
to improve its international image?' it is obvious that something is afoot
in the world's first Islamic republic.
For more than a decade Iran's clerical leaders have done their best to give
the impression of caring not a jot what the rest of the world thinks of
them. Some still do not. Others, however, have begun better to appreciate
the demands of administering a state of 60m people, and understand that
satisfying popular needs is one of the keys to retaining power.
There are plenty of straws in the wind. President Ali Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani is receiving weekly lessons in economics. Privatisation,
deregulation and liberalisation have entered the vocabularies of members of
parliament.
Senior officials discuss western political philosophers, and mullahs are
being been sent abroad for months at a time to live and study in western
democracies.
If that gives the impression of a country wanting to come in from the
diplomatic cold, into which it had cast itself, that is probably what is
intended. But whether Iran will be admitted while carrying so much other
ideological baggage and still festooned with labels hostile to the west is
another matter.
The motivation for Iran's shift in attitude is almost exclusively economic.
Back in the mid-1970s, Iranians used to talk portentously of their country
becoming the world's fifth power. Fanciful perhaps, but it is a reminder of
the huge potential that population, hydrocarbons, agriculture and geography
give the country. Revolution and war may have set back Iran's development by
20 years or more, but the fundamentals remain strong. How effectively they
can be exploited will depend in large measure on the political balance
within the country and how the rest of the world reacts to it.
Iran is at the moment the embodiment of the only political idea that is
gaining adherents in the Middle East. Islamic fundamentalism is being
promoted as an alternative for peoples frustrated and oppressed by
governments which offer them little hope, politically or economically. It is
a source of pride to Iran's leaders that others seek to follow their
example, and a boost to their own political legitimacy at home. Equally, it
is a source of fear and suspicion elsewhere in the region and in the west.
The freeing of western hostages in Lebanon and Iran's stance during the
Allies' war with Iraq improved its political standing in the west. The
increasing numbers of businessmen travelling profitably to Tehran helped
Iran to be seen again as an important regional economic centre. But the
positive swing of the pendulum has already been checked and, if anything, it
is again heading back in the opposite direction.
The history of the regime predisposes many people and governments to believe
the worst of it. Its record on human rights, its willingness to accept huge
casualties through frontal infantry assaults during the war with Iraq, and
its readiness to encourage the overthrow of governments it does not like
will not quickly be forgotten.
So when it appears to behave aggressively over the island of Abu Musa in the
Gulf, purchases a submarine from Russia and expresses a desire to acquire
nuclear technology, this can be translated all too easily into the picture
of a nation bent on exporting its revolution, threatening its wealthy Arab
neighbours and posing a long-term military challenge to the US.
One sure thing is that for the foreseeable future Iran will continue to
provide ammunition for those who see the country in that light. The most
virulent revolutionary rhetoric is available for those who wish to hear it
and there is always a ready domestic audience for accusations of duplicity
and subversion by Iran's enemies. The hardcore supporters of the revolution
will be rallied more effectively by invoking anti-Americanism than by
pragmatism and conciliation.
The skill of President Rafsanjani during the past three years has been to
consolidate his own position domestically while edging the country back
towards the international mainstream. How much further he can carry that
process may well depend on his ability to extricate the government from the
consequences of economic mismanagement during the past two years.
It was understandable that any improvement in oil prices would be used as an
opportunity to relax imports and provide some of the consumer goods which
had been absent for so long. But what could not be foreseen was that the
import boom would gain such momentum and that precious hard currency
earnings would be dissipated with such little supervision.
The import brakes have now been applied but not before the country has run
up many billions of dollars in short-term debt and seriously damaged its
reputation with foreign banks and the world's leading export credit
guarantee agencies. Delays on letters of credit extend up to four months and
involve Dollars 2bn-Dollars 3bn, with substantially more in the pipeline.
Oil revenues ensure that Iran will eventually meet its obligations, but all
foreign creditors will be looking far more sceptically at becoming further
involved in a country where political risk factors need to be offset by an
exemplary record on financial obligations.
It also raises other basic questions about the competence of government in
Iran which have implications for the rest of the Islamic world. The
constitution was designed under the tutelage of Ayatollah Khomeini to ensure
a number of parallel and overlapping areas of authority, all of which are
subservient to the country's spiritual leader. His death confirmed the
vacuum that such a system always seemed likely to create. Ayatollah Ali
Sayed Khamenei was not Ayatollah Khomeini's first choice as his successor
and will never enjoy the same religious and political authority.
This flaw at the very centre of constitutional power persists throughout the
machinery of administration and is made worse by the widespread weakness in
basic management skills. Incentives for capable people to enter government
service are few, with low salaries and a time-consuming politicisation of
departments. One of the consequences has been additional layers of
bureaucracy and a growing requirement for extra payments to help oil the
wheels of government.
Powerful individuals have shown ways of cutting through the layers of
administration, but they are few. Mr Gholamhossain Karbaschi, the mayor of
Tehran and close associate of President Rafsanjani, has made a notable
impact on the appearance and administration of the capital. He has also
raised revenue through controversial business taxes and admits to having
acquired enemies. The system permits the emergence of such people, but few
are willing to take the risk, or feel sufficiently confident of their
patron.
The danger for Iran is that the drive for economic modernisation initiated
by President Rafsanjani will suffer further losses of momentum and
eventually be broken on the inertia of the system, the incompetence of local
management and the deep conservatism of the senior clergy. Also pushing it
in that direction is the manner in which much of the industrialised world
reacts to Iran. If, as expected, Islamic fundamentalism further establishes
itself as the main perceived threat to western interests in the Middle East,
Iran is bound to suffer the backlash, however ill or well-deserved.
Certainly, nothing will be made easy for the republic. The failure of
Islamic government in Iran would be a blow to fundamentalist groups
throughout the Middle East. But an Iran rebuffed and blocked in its efforts
to make modest improvements in its international relations could make an
even more uncomfortable neighbour. The clergy and their allies have
demonstrated a political durability that many people doubted a few years
ago. Setbacks in running a modern economy will only intensify the
determination to protect the revolution, by whatever means.
