FT  28 JUN 93 / Foreign banks join Ferruzzi creditor committee
REPRESENTATIVES of Societe Generale of France and Union Bank of Switzerland,
believed to be two of the biggest foreign bank creditors to Italy's
deeply-troubled Ferruzzi group, have joined the five-member committee of
Italian creditor banks now guiding the group.
A UBS official noted the two foreign banks, also representing the 110-odd
foreign institutions which lent around L6,500bn (Pounds 2.8bn) to Ferruzzi,
were not strictly speaking members of the five-bank committee.
Rather, they had an 'advisory mandate' towards the five Italian creditor
banks and Ferruzzi itself.
Participating in the committee's activities 'doesn't imply anything about
the two banks' own exposures', the official claimed.
The official declined to give any indication of how much UBS had lent, as
such disclosures were forbidden under Swiss law.
Last week, Credit Lyonnais, the big French bank, indicated its exposure was
somewhat less than L300bn.
Shareholders gear up for the annual general meetings of Ferruzzi Finanziaria
(Ferfin), the holding company and its Montedison industrial arm.
Montedison shareholders will gather today at its Milan headquarters for the
first of this week's meetings.
The annual meeting, traditionally an endurance test because of frequent
interventions by environmentalists opposed to the company's chemicals
activities, promises to be an even greater challenge this year.
On Wednesday, the focus will shift to the sleepy town of Ravenna, where
Ferfin is based. Its annual meeting promises to be a particularly memorable
event.
The two meetings will give minority shareholders the first chance to air
their views on the fate of Ferruzzi after the five-bank committee stepped in
at the Ferruzzi family's request earlier this month.
The meetings, which will approve new boards greatly influenced by the banks,
will also give small shareholders their first chance to see Mr Guido Rossi,
the new bank-appointed chairman of Ferfin and Montedison, and Mr Enrico
Bondi, new managing director of Ferfin and Montedison.
