FT  30 OCT 93 / Minister for a Day: Digging out of little England - Edwina
Currie, a former junior health minister, picks up the European portfolio
IF I were minister for a day I'd probably waste most of it recovering from
the shock. I spent much of my first day last time on the phone to my mother,
trying to explain what a minister really does. I still don't know, but at
least now, were I Minister for Europe for a day and properly equipped with a
magic wand, I'd make one hell of an impact. They would still be talking
about it years later.
For a start I would order the commencement of the next channel tunnel, at
once. The first one is nearly finished and will be packed out from day one,
at least as soon as the French can get their trains running. Our side will
take a bit longer. But already 24m Britons a year stream abroad and the
ferry companies are busy buying bigger boats, convinced that the tunnel
won't pinch business but encourage it. The moment the new hole is packed
solid with sweating weekend commuters we will start demanding a second one
alongside: and that will take years. So I would get digging right away, and
lay the plans for the third tunnel in due course.
While we are at it, I'd make the French TGV compulsory throughout the
continent. It will be anyhow, sooner or later, its silver snakes hissing
through long tracts of countryside carrying passengers at 300kph, so I'm
going to take the credit for it. I said this in Germany recently - after my
train from Leipzig to Frankfurt left an infuriating 20 minutes late without
explanation, which produced some long faces, for the French have just beaten
the Germans for a lucrative contract in Korea.
What is good enough for the Koreans should be fine for us, especially if we
add British Rail's posh grey and pink velour, cheerful Asian ticket
collectors and splendid habit of running lots of only slightly slower trains
all over the place.
And now you can see what I'm planning. The Romans did it first: create
communications links between all your centres, and you foster a feeling of
wholeness, where nowhere is too far away, and everywhere counts. Trade,
commerce, tourism, and friendship all increase with ease of access: nothing
would be a greater unifying element, or bring more pleasure to more people.
I'd add fibre optic cables alongside the rail track and satellite dishes (or
whatever is needed) at suitable points, so that I could use my car phone
throughout Europe cheaply, instead of being held to ransom on a bad line.
And I'd insist that all post be delivered in a day, with no excuses, even
across frontiers: if it takes only 90 minutes to fly from Birmingham to
Berlin, why on earth did it take my postcard four days to get back?
Now I am getting into my stride. Danish teachers would find themselves
herded on to boats headed for all parts of Britain and refused home leave
for five years, until they had taught the British how to speak several
languages at once, fluently and with comprehensible accents. In return,
20,000 British teachers, chosen for their courage in standing up to the
education secretary would be rewarded by equally long-term trips to the
former east Germany, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and points east,
with a brief to stay put until the good souls of those countries had grasped
basic English.
Then, when the European Community has grown to 20 countries with 16
languages - at which point the cost of translation will have overwhelmed the
Brussels administrative budget - the nations will plump for the most obvious
language, which (if I am successful) will, of course, be English.
I liked the idea of a member of the staff of the British Embassy in Bonn:
that the news should be compiled nightly not from the unadulterated
offerings of the BBC or ITN, but from all the main news stations in Europe,
with sub-titles. Most of the time the different reports might be from
separate planets. It would give us all a rude shock, and much to think
about, if we realised how wide the gaps in perception still are between
supposedly friendly countries. Then maybe we would all be driven to
understand before we criticise quite so freely.
One pet project is probably already bubbling in some Brussels bureaucrat's
fevered mind. Gazing at the superb restored buildings emerging from
scaffolding in Leipzig in former east Germany, I understood why Berlin is
still such a derelict mess.
There just isn't enough money to go around, even in the richest nation in
Europe. Heaven knows how they're managing in Prague or Budapest; meanwhile
the villages of Romania crumble from neglect and fine old churches up and
down France and England appeal without hope for funds.
Can't we have a Heritage Fund, a substantial sum year by year, to help save
the architecture and artifice of a bygone age which made Europe great? No
one country can afford to do even their own, yet the citizens of all can
enjoy the results. An International National Trust, if you like.
It could be paid for easily by scrapping the Common Agricultural Policy,
though the French would have to be allocated more than their fair share for
a while. However once they realised that far more people could be employed
renovating Tours Cathedral and the like than looking after subsidised cows,
they would be happy.
Churchill got it right, in The Hague at the first Congress of Europe in May
1948 when he spoke of 'progressively effacing (the) frontiers and barriers
which aggravate and congeal our divisions, and . . . rejoicing together in
that glorious treasure of literature, of romance, of ethics, of thought and
toleration, which is the true inheritance of Europe.'
Yes, that's it. If I get my way, in my one special day, that is what we will
do.
