FT  16 JUN 93 / Protest against ICI claim is backed
THE Advertising Standards Authority yesterday upheld four out of five
complaints brought by Greenpeace, the environmental group, against Imperial
Chemical Industries.
The complaints related to ICI's claims about the environmental impact of
Klea 134a, its substitute for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The rulings are a significant embarrassment for the British group. It has
invested more than Pounds 250m developing the substitute for CFCs, which are
believed to be a significant factor in the depletion of the ozone layer
surrounding the earth and will be banned by the end of 1995.
Greenpeace alleged that ICI had underplayed the extent to which Klea 134a
would contribute to global warming. ICI's claims about Klea 134a were
published last October in The House magazine, distributed to MPs and
parliamentary staff.
In spite of the ASA rulings, ICI yesterday rejected Greenpeace's demand for
publication of an apology. It said that the advertisement had been factually
correct, that any changes required were essentially semantic and that the
ASA had agreed the company had not intended to mislead.
The ASA had consulted the Meteorological Office for independent advice on
the accuracy of ICI's claims.
The ASA, an independent watchdog on printed advertising standards, supported
ICI's claim that the direct impact of Klea 134a on global warning was 90 per
cent less than that of the CFCs it replaces.
But it upheld Greenpeace's challenge to the group's claim that Klea 134a
would never contribute more than 1 per cent of the total man-made greenhouse
effect. Greenpeace maintained that Klea 134a would contribute at least 6 per
cent. ICI argued yesterday that its figures were accurate and supported by a
German parliamentary commission.
The ASA said it had discounted a report from one independent body which was
found to have contained some errors. The same source said a general problem
with the advertisement was that ICI had selected from several equally
possible scenarios the one most favourable to its own case. The ASA
described ICI as 'extremely co-operative' in the case.
The ASA also ruled that ICI's claim that 'Klea 134a is at least as
energy-efficient as any other alternative likely to be commercially
available in the foreseeable future' was insufficiently supported by
independent evidence.
ICI said yesterday the ASA had acknowledged that the technical report it had
used to make this particular adjudication was out of date. The company
argued that a recent German consumer-testing agency had shown that Klea 134a
consumed three times less energy than the most efficient propane or butane
refrigerators.
The ASA also upheld the complaint against ICI's claim that 98 per cent of
global warming comes from electricity used by refrigeration equipment. This
is true of domestic refrigerators, but not retail equipment which accounts
for more than half of CFC use.
The body also said ICI's claim that recycling programmes could prevent any
emissions was unsubstantiated.
