FT  09 AUG 93 / Leading Article: War and peace in Bosnia
TWO MEETINGS today in two west European cities are supposed to decide the
fate of Bosnia. In Geneva peace negotiations are to resume under EC and UN
auspices, while in Brussels the North Atlantic Council (Nato's governing
body) is to finalise plans for intervention in the war.
Is there a contradiction? Lord Owen, the EC mediator, appears to think so.
At a press conference on Friday he blamed the threat of Nato air strikes for
causing, or at least contributing to, a breakdown in the peace talks last
week. He did not spell it out, but the reasoning is clear. The proposed
peace is no longer based on any principle other than recognition of the
relative strengths of the different parties to the war. Therefore anything
that leads one side to believe its military situation may improve can only
delay the peace. Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Moslem president, hoped that Nato
air strikes against the Serbs, or the threat of them, would improve his
chances in the war. Therefore he left Geneva, to put off the moment of
decision on peace.
Yet Lord Owen admits that the negotiations were already deadlocked on the
future status and division of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital; and there it
was the Serbs who hoped to improve their negotiating position through
military success. He also says that he needs air power 'in reserve to
prevent flouting' of agreements after they have been reached. It is as
though he had forgotten the sad history of his earlier 'Vance-Owen' peace
plan. A great deal of time was spent discussing the forces to be put in
place 'to prevent flouting' of that plan once it was agreed. But it never
was agreed, because the Serbs realised that so long as they did not agree to
it no force would be used, and that so long as no external force was used
their own forces could win them a more favourable settlement on the ground.
Divided city
Now the Serbs have got most of what they want, except in Sarajevo. They are
determined, it seems, to incorporate at least a substantial part of the
capital into their new ethnic state, although before the war the population
was mixed, with a Moslem majority in every municipality. They were quite
prepared to go on talking in Geneva while their artillery finished the job
of breaking the city's resistance. Thus the logic of Lord Owen's position
would lead him, in a few weeks, to put pressure on Mr Izetbegovic to accept
the partition of Sarajevo, with presumably some kind of Berlin Wall cutting
through the middle of it, while in the city itself thousands more people
would be killed in house-to-house fighting and the UN would be helping
evacuate tens of thousands of new refugees.
Use of force
For all the criticism of the Clinton administration's sometimes erratic
policy on Bosnia, it is at least trying to prevent that outcome by pressing
for the use of force. In the last few days Serb leaders have signalled a
willingness to withdraw from recently taken positions overlooking Sarajevo.
This is probably bluff or ruse, but it does suggest they take the threat of
air strikes more seriously than they admit in public - and, one might add,
more seriously than the threat deserves, given the well publicised
reservations of Nato governments with forces on the ground.
The latter's anxiety is understandable, but the assiduity of British
ministers in publicly proclaiming their fears is unpardonable. As it
happens, British forces are the least vulnerable to any Serb retaliation,
being in a sector where the main fighting is between Moslems and Croats. But
Mr John Major and Mr Malcolm Rifkind do those forces no service by
advertising their supposed vulnerability. They should simply say that
British forces have the full power of the British state behind them, and
that anyone who attacks them does so at his peril. Deterrence is more
effective if the potential adversary is kept guessing about the scale and
nature of the reprisal he should expect.
Nato's aim today should be to draw up a list of specific actions, by Serb or
other parties in Bosnia, which would provoke military reprisal. By setting
clear limits to the further use of force Nato would help, not hinder, a
peace settlement which force has already done far too much to shape.
