FT  21 OCT 93 / Arts: Grigorovich's young dancers - Ballet
The evening could not have had a more unpromising start. Yury Grigorovich's
Ballet of the Bolshoi Theatre, a troupe of young dancers chosen from schools
and companies across Russia, was embarking upon a brief regional tour. The
Corn Exchange Hall in Cambridge is un-raked, so that even from my privileged
placing, feet were often invisible. The curtain rose - after a false start -
and there we were at the court of King Lurex XIV. The programme book
(coloured pictures; no details as to casting: price Pounds 4) alleged that
this was a 'suite' from The Sleeping Beauty. What we saw was the first act
garland waltz, most of the wedding scene (with a couple of vicious musical
cuts: the score is taped), and a stage flimsily decorated, not least by
pudding-faces in tinsel crowns, uneasy expressions, and costumes which I
think I recognise from Grigorovich's Swan Lake, who must deck the edges of
the action and pretend to be regal or courtly in their Mary Pickford wigs
and reach-me-down robes.
I would venture that in no other theatre art are performances of the staple
repertory so brightly and unwarrantedly optimistic as in ballet.
Incompetents trip about, gulling a public into supposing they are seeing
Swan Lake, or similar lures for the unwary, in productions of miserable
ineptitude. These grand ballets are opera house fare, demanding dancers of
the most serious accomplishment, and stagings respectful and imaginative.
Anything else is an insult to the work, to the audience, and to the art of
ballet itself.
This Beauty was, shall we say, unlikely. Yury Grigorovich, whom I admire
tremendously for what he has achieved during three decades as master of the
Bolshoi Ballet - through periods of political and artistic stagnation and
uncertainty he has kept the company vital - loves and honours the classics,
as we know from his productions. His young troupe does not possess artists
able as yet to make sense of Beauty's massive demands, in technique or
style.
The Aurora (Elena Kniazkova) was a soubrette; the Bluebird was a
spindle-shanked youth who looked as if he should have been in bed hours
before - in a few years time he may indeed become a Bluebird, but at the
moment he is physically immature. The other dancers marked time (if corps de
ballet) or dashed off their solos as if eager to get them over with. Only
the Lilac Fairy (Natalia Bashkatova) suggested something radiant and apt for
the ballet.
By the interval I wondered if flight were not the most honourable critical
response. Duty prevailed. I stayed, and I was glad I stayed. The second part
of the evening brought divertissements from the traditional repertory which
made sense of Grigorovich's idea of a 'young' ballet, and of the subtext of
the evening, which is the Russian heritage of classical training and
performance. The dancers suddenly looked like dancers, at ease with their
art. Interpretations were, in the main, rewarding. The repertory was
predictable - Black Swan; Don Quixote of course, - but offered one gem in
The Naiad and the Fisherman which is a not wholly suspect survivor from the
1850s. It was made by Jules Perrot in St. Petersburg. How it has survived
(and how much has survived) can be debated: but its steps, like its Pugni
music, are pretty and credible without being egregiously quaint, as six
girls and two boys surround a principal couple with bright, buoyant dances.
I liked Maria Mosina and Andrey Evdokimov as they sparkled through it, just
as I admired Tatiana Ledovskikh in the third act duet from Swan Lake, to
which she brought mature understanding and a sense of theatre. Some of the
bravura tricks fell apart. This did not matter: she gave us a true and
distinguished interpretation.
The young also romped through the tango from The Golden Age - kittens
playing at being naughty tigers - and a couple of other numbers. More
enthusiasm than polish at times, and some dubious playing to the public, but
performances were life-size. So much of the ballet we see in Britain looks
polite, pinched, scaled down to fit into notions about the niceness of
classical dancing as an activity for little girls. Yury Grigorovich's young
show us that it is an art to which you must give yourself without reserve,
and with joy.
The Grigorovich Ballet can been seen in Eastbourne on October 20; then in
Jersey on October 22, 23, and in Cork on October 28,29,30.
