FT  10 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Daily Mail advances to Pounds 21m
A STRONG performance from its national newspapers helped the Daily Mail &amp;
General Trust to a pre-tax profit of Pounds 21.2m for the six months to
April 4.
This represented an 11 per cent increase against the restated figure of
Pounds 19.1m for the same period of 1992.
'The Daily Mail and the Mail on Sunday have both produced an exceptional
circulation performance and this has contributed to improved display and
classified advertising revenues,' the company said yesterday.
Against the overall downward trend in the industry, the Daily Mail increased
its circulation by 5.5 per cent to 1.77m between November and April and the
Mail on Sunday, which has been running regular 96 page issues, had a 3.8 per
cent increase to 2.07m.
The Evening Standard circulation suffered from disruption caused by train
strikes and security scares and classified advertising volumes were down on
the previous year.
Overall the company said its main businesses had performed well, with little
benefit from any general improvement in the economy.
Northcliffe Newspapers, the local and regional group, maintained
profitability, despite a small revenue fall.
Euromoney has already announced a 29 per cent increase in pre-tax profits.
Whittle Communications in the US 'continued to meet difficult trading
conditions.'
Group net borrowings totalled Pounds 209m, a decrease of Pounds 102m, but
Pounds 3.9m was charged to the profit and loss account because the sterling
value of dollar debt liability had increased.
The company warned that the outcome for the full year might be effected by
non-trading items, such as the sterling-dollar rate and the impact of
year-end revaluation of investment properties.
Only a slow improvement in advertising volumes was expected.
The interim dividend is raised 4p to 36p. Earnings per share came to 121.9p
(102.7p).
Mr Guy Lamming, media analyst at stockbroker James Capel, yesterday praised
'a really good performance' by the Mail and Mail and Sunday and said the
result was slightly ahead of forecasts.
He is looking for pre-tax profits of Pounds 66m for the year, although this
could depend on the extent to which currency movement go against the
company.
The A shares rose Pounds 3.25 to Pounds 94.50.
