FT  28 MAY 93 / Brittan calls for closer EC union
SIR Leon Brittan, the EC Commissioner for external economic affairs,
yesterday threw in his lot with the supporters of deeper European
integration and issued a stirring call for a single European currency.
In a speech likely to enrage British opponents of the Maastricht treaty,
including many in his own Conservative party, Sir Leon dismissed the idea
that the EC should develop into a loose, free-trade area extending into
eastern Europe.
'Widening must not mean less deepening,' he told an audience of the Konrad
Adenauer Foundation in Bonn, which included Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Sir Leon's speech offered a comprehensive view of the future development of
the EC, and reflects a growing confidence inside the European Commission
that Maastricht ratification is within reach.
Turning to the post-Maastricht agenda, Sir Leon called for streamlining and
modernising EC institutions such as the Commission and the European
Parliament, as well as tighter policing of the EC's external frontiers to
control illegal immigration, organised crime and drug trafficking.
But the striking aspect of the speech was its enthusiasm for European
monetary union and the 'undeniable' benefits of a single European currency
to cover exchange rate risks and the commitment to stable prices and fiscal
prudence.
'Neither the turbulence in the markets in recent months, nor the
recessionary conditions now prevalent in much of Europe in any way weaken
the essential long-term case for Emu,' he said.
Sir Leon left open the precise timing of Emu which could be by 1997 at the
earliest, or 1999 at the latest according to the Maastricht treaty.
He also hinted that stronger EC economies may proceed earlier than others;
but this did not matter as long as the objective of Emu was a shared one.
Chancellor Kohl also used the conference to restate his commitment to
European monetary union, in spite of the fact that only Luxembourg, of the
12 member states, currently fulfils all the economic preconditions.
He rejected any suggestion that the so-called convergence criteria should be
watered down, saying that they represented a necessary and healthy challenge
for all the EC members - including Germany - to bring their public finances
under control.
