FT  20 FEB 93 / Truth of the matter: Caring for the carers - Euthanasia
IN THE current debate on how far doctors may go to relieve the sufferings of
the terminally ill, I believe the advances in palliative medicine have often
been underestimated, particularly by those who say mercy killing can be
justified.
The UK is a world leader in this branch of medicine (the science of
treatments to relieve symptoms created by disease, rather than curing the
disease itself). It started when Dame Cicely Sanders founded the Modern
Hospice Movement in 1959. A new concept at the time, it unfortunately
continues to be an alien concept today.
Palliative medicine is now a recognised postgraduate speciality in the
National Health Service. It is, however, unique, in that it started in
people's homes and in the charitable sector.
The health service recognised the enormous value of charitable hospices and
has therefore incorporated and accredited some hospices in which doctors can
train in the speciality.
It is well-known that most people wish to die at home. The reality is that
most people die in hospitals. This can be changed. The answer is to support
patients and their relatives in the home. In 1911, 27-year-old Douglas
Macmillan looked on helplessly as his father suffered from, and eventually
died from, cancer of the oesophagus. Later that same year he set up Cancer
Relief. Today there are nearly 1,000 Macmillan nurses throughout the United
Kingdom, most of whom are community-based.
Recently, the role of the Macmillan nurses has extended into helping improve
care for patients in hospitals as well. Their main role is support and
advice about alleviation of symptoms.
Ask yourself, what is the role of a hospice? Many will answer: it is a
refuge for the dying. No, I say, it is a place to control symptoms that
cannot be managed at home. The symptoms may be those of the patients or the
carer.
The reasons for admission to a hospice are numerous. They include physical
symptoms such as pain, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, loss of mobility and
many others. There are emotional factors such as fear, anxiety, panic or
depression. The list is endless. Then there is the question of a carer, or
lack of a carer at home. Respite admissions, offering a period of rest for
the patient and the family, is also common.
Pain control is, of course, essential to the running of a good Palliative
Medicine Unit. Pain has many components to it. It is influenced by disease,
anxiety, previous experiences and fear. It is rare that pain cannot be
controlled, although each patient has a different pain threshold.
The greatest fear of dying patients, and indeed, the public at large, is
pain. The cry of 'I would rather die than be in pain' is heard all too
often. The reality is that the vast majority of patients' pain is well
controlled by specialists in this field. In an extremely small minority, if
pain control is inadequate, sedation is an alternative. This is effectively
increasing the patient's sleep. It is not taking life. It is kind. It is
compassionate. It is merciful to both the patient and his or her family and
loved ones.
Dealing with dying patients every day, I have yet to come across a patient
to whom we were not able to bring comfort in the last phases of life. The
most important question is therefore one of education, not euthanasia. If
patients and doctors know where to turn for help, cases such as that of Dr
Alan Cox, the Winchester doctor who was found guilty of killing a terminally
ill patient, will be history.
The health service has recognised the need. The speciality is growing and
new posts are being created by the NHS annually. Ultimately, we should have
palliative medicine physicians in all hospitals caring for those that are
terminally ill.
In a column on this page, Hugh Dickinson, the Dean of Salisbury, said that
if we do not 'address it (euthanasia) and find and acceptable legal
protection for it, I believe we will find people taking their own lives and
the lives of their dear ones into their own hands'. May I contradict him and
say that euthanasia is the removal of life and is not acceptable, and if the
law changes to make it in any way acceptable, then we most certainly will
run the risk of people taking the lives of their dear ones. Taking one's own
life is a different matter altogether.
So let us not change the law about euthanasia, but rather change our
attitudes to dying.
Dr Julia Riley is senior registrar, The Princess Alice Hospice, Esher.
