FT  28 AUG 93 / World Bank approves greater transparency
WORLD Bank executive directors have approved a new information policy that
will make many more of its documents available to the public.
Project appraisal reports, summaries of internal evaluations, country
economic reports and sectoral policy papers will in most cases be published,
usually only with the consent of the country involved and after the bank's
board has acted on them.
Critics of the Washington-based international development bank, especially
environmental groups which have long criticised it for financing projects
such as dams and power stations in the developing world, still have vigorous
complaints about the new policy, especially as it steps back in some regards
from a draft circulated a few weeks earlier. 'It's totally inadequate,' said
Ms Lori Udall, of the Environmental Defence Fund.
Bank officials insist, however, that the policy is a genuine attempt to
achieve greater transparency. A senior official said: 'We are doing more
than any international organisation has ever done to open up. We asked the
question, not what can we get away with, but what should be properly do.'
Many environmentalists agree that it will, in fact, take transparency a step
further. 'It is clearly better than nothing,' acknowledged one persistent
critic.
Intentionally and unintentionally, the World Bank is already far less
secretive than the International Monetary Fund, its sister institution; even
supposedly confidential documents circulate widely in Washington.
One significant step in the new policy is the creation of a public
information centre, to open next January, which will greatly ease public
access in the borrowing countries, where information is most scarce.
Critics of the new policy say too many documents will only be published
after the bank has taken its decision, too late for the public to influence
the debate.
Environmentalists are particularly harsh about the Project Information
Document, a new summary intended to give early information on loans the Bank
is considering. A sample PID circulated this month did not even disclose
where the shrimp fisheries it discussed were to be located, although this
was rectified in an embarrassed addendum last week.
It will not be clear for several weeks whether the new policy will go far
enough to forestall the US Congress's threat to withhold approval for some
of the US's Dollars 3.75bn (Pounds 2.5bn) contribution to the International
Development Association, the World Bank unit which makes low-interest loans
to the poorest countries.
