FT  05 MAY 93 / Survey of Bulgaria (1): Re-emerging - if slowly - The
private sector is re-emerging from the rubble of the planned economy, but
already the government is being criticised for slow progress on reforms. The
country's importance in the Balkans has been underestimated
Bulgaria's importance as a stable, reforming country in the heart of the
Balkans has tended to be undervalued. This may be about to change as it
builds the political and economic institutions needed to consolidate the
progress made to date in transforming what used to be one of the most
orthodox of the Soviet satellite states.
As in Bosnia, the legacy of Ottoman rule includes several Moslem minorities,
including Pomaks, who are ethnic Bulgars converted to Islam, and ethnic
Turks. But Bulgaria has managed to avoid the ethnic conflicts of
neighbouring Yugoslavia. Nor has its economy been engulfed by
hyper-inflation, even though, before the collapse of Comecon, Bulgaria was
the most closely linked to the former Soviet market. Its currency, the leva,
has also been stable for the past two years, and a private sector is
re-emerging from the rubble of the planned economy.
It would be a mistake, however, to take Bulgaria's contribution to
maintaining the stability of a historically fractious region for granted.
Bulgaria and Serbia have fought three wars over Macedonia in the last
century and a spill-over of the current Bosnian war into Kosovo or the newly
recognised former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia would almost inevitably
involve Bulgaria and the two historic rivals on its southern flank, Greece
and Turkey.
That could lead to a tragedy of incalculable dimensions which, Bulgarians
are convinced, would not only inflame the Balkans but have repercussions
throughout the continent. That is why President Zhelu Zhelyev, while calling
on the UN, the EC, Nato and other institutions to intervene militarily if
necessary to stop the fighting in Bosnia, insists that neither Bulgaria nor
any other Balkan state should get involved in the Yugoslav imbroglio. 'To do
so would risk claims and counter-claims of irredentism,' he says in
recognition of the conflicting historical claims to territory and peoples
which bedevil the region.
External risks aside, however, Bulgaria's strenuous efforts to rebuild on
market principles an economy gravely distorted by decades of reliance on
cheap Soviet energy and raw materials for its industry and on Comecon
markets for 80 per cent of its foreign trade, are stretching the capacity of
the country's inexperienced politicians and the patience of an electorate
confused by five governments in three years.
Since the end of last year Bulgaria has been ruled by a government of
technocrats. It is headed by Mr Lyuben Berov and supported by an odd
coalition of former communists, ethnic Turks and breakaway rebels from the
anti-communist Union of Democratic Forces.
Mr Berov, a 67-year-old former university professor, took up the reins
dropped by Mr Filip Dimitrov after the UDF government, elected with a small
majority at the October 1991 general elections, collapsed. The UDF, a
broad-ranging umbrella movement united by anti-communism but little else,
was riven by internal dissension. Its last months were accompanied by
growing differences between President Zhelyev, one of the UDF's founders,
and Mr Dimitrov, whom he accused of incompetence and insensitivity to the
pain which the government's economic and social policies were causing the
majority of the country's 8.5m people.
In practice, the margin for alleviating pain is small. Bulgaria was saddled
with an Dollars 11bn foreign debt by the previous communist regime led by
Todor Zhivkov and is required by the International Monetary Fund to keep
this year's budget deficit to 7.9 per cent of GDP to qualify for a new
standby agreement. This, in turn, is needed if Bulgaria is successfully to
renegotiate its Dollars 8.5bn debt to the London Club of commercial bank
creditors. Negotiations are due to resume in Frankfurt later this month.
Faced with unemployment expected to rise to 17 per cent by the end of the
year, an ageing population with 2.4m pensioners and a brain drain of the
economically active, the government has been able to do little more than
increase credit subsidies for newly privatised small farmers and allocate
funds for badly needed safety improvements on the railways. Later this year
it hopes to introduce VAT and other tax reforms to raise revenue and target
more effectively the emerging private sector.
Its main problems are the government's lack of a solid political base and
popular disillusionment after three very tough years in which most people
have lost the security but also the predictability of a communist regime.
Regained freedoms and wider choices are still cherished. But ordinary
Bulgarians are finding it increasingly hard to get visas from western
embassies to travel and falling incomes have kept newly available imported
goods out of reach, except for a minority of new entrepreneurs, many of them
closely connected with the former regime.
'It is not enough to be offered a form of economic Darwinism', says Mr
Georgy Pirinski, a former communist who is now a leading figure in the
social democratic wing of the Bulgarian Socialist party. 'We need an
industrial policy which will help us to restructure and save our
shipbuilding or engineering companies like Balkancar, as well as developing
the service industries and the private sector.'
As part of the coalition sustaining the government, the BSP, successor to
the communist party, is again able to influence policies from within. For
UDF politicians, such as Mr Ivan Kostov, the former finance minister, and
many ordinary Bulgarians, the continuing influence of the former communist
nomenklatura is one of the main reasons for the slow progress of structural
reforms and privatisation.
Although only in power for 100 days, the government is already being
criticised for failing to improve on the slow progress towards privatisation
and the delayed introduction of vital banking and other legislation of
previous governments. Old habits and the power of old connections
undoubtedly play a part in holding up reforms. But the delay also reflects
the difficulty of recruiting and keeping skilled and experienced personnel
in the face of competition from the private sector and the exodus of many of
Bulgaria's better educated younger people.
Bulgaria had been losing competitiveness for 15 years before the communist
regime collapsed and industrial output has dropped by 50 per cent over the
last three years alone. Without more foreign investment and freer access to
EC markets in particular, it will be virtually impossible for Bulgaria to
modernise its economy and develop a stabilising middle class by its own
efforts alone.
Whether such assistance is forthcoming depends as much on western Europe's
ability to re-assess the importance of maintaining stability in the Balkans,
as on Bulgaria's own continuing efforts to throw off the legacy of the last
four decades and establish itself as a modern, moderately prosperous
democracy.
