FT  30 JAN 93 / Private funds likely for Pounds 300m second Forth toll
bridge
PLANS FOR a Pounds 300m privately-financed road toll bridge crossing the
Firth of Forth near Edinburgh are expected to be announced by the government
next week.
The crossing, which will be adjacent to the existing toll bridge, will form
part of a package of public and private sector measures to ease traffic
congestion in the region and improve connections between the north and south
of Scotland.
The proposals are expected to include the construction of a dedicated bus
route between Edinburgh airport and the city centre involving private and
public money. It will be the first large investment in infrastructure to
take advantage of the easing of rules, announced in the Autumn Statement,
restricting the use of public subsidies to support commercial projects.
Companies and investors prepared to finance, build and operate a new bridge
across the Forth will be asked, as a first step, to register an interest
with the Scottish Office.
The crossing, together with approach roads costing an additional Pounds
100m, is likely to be funded entirely by the private sector. The total cost
of the bridge and roads, including finance charges, could rise as high as
Pounds 800m. In return, the private company would take over the Forth road
bridge at Queensferry, where cars at present are charged 40p to cross. This
would enable the operators to generate income while the new crossing was
being built.
The capacity of the existing bridge, built in 1964 to carry 14,000 vehicles
a day, is expected to be exhausted by the beginning of the next century.
More than 50,000 vehicles a day crossed it on more than 100 days last year.
The crossing, which is operated by Lothian and Fife regional councils, is
due to repay its capital debt next year although tolls had been expected to
continue on the bridge to pay for maintaining and strengthening it.
The scheme for a new bridge is the latest in a growing number of private
sector infrastructure projects promoted by the government. These have
attracted considerable interest from continental European toll road
operators and construction companies as well as British groups.
Privately-financed schemes completed or underway include a toll bridge
across the River Thames at Dartford, a bridge across the River Severn
between England and Wales, the Birmingham Northern Relief Road and a toll
bridge connecting the island of Skye with the mainland. All, apart from the
Dartford crossing, involve British companies in partnership with continental
European groups.
