FT  16 JUL 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (22): The last lap
is the toughest - Eventually everyone who has contributed for a personal
pension must make the crucial decision: where, on the open market, to buy
the annuity that will provide them with the best possible income / Options
at retirement
THE CRUCIAL time for an investor saving for retirement through a personal
pension comes not at the outset or during the savings period, but when the
benefits are due.
For it is then that he or she must decide in what form to take them. And
since flexibility is one of the key features of personal pensions, a variety
of choices is available.
There are two types of personal pension which investors may hold: the
new-style personal pensions; and the old-style retirement annuity contracts
(also known as Section 226 contracts).
Retirement annuity contracts ceased to be marketed in 1988, when the new
personal pensions came on the market. But investors holding them can still
pay contributions into the contract and take the benefits. And it is
important for holders to understand the differences in benefit between the
old- and new-style personal pensions.
Basically, with new-style personal pensions, benefits can be taken at any
time between the investor's 50th and 75th birthdays (both dates inclusive).
Up to 25 per cent of the value of the benefits can be taken as a tax-free
cash sum; the remainder must be used to buy a pension annuity from a life
company.
With a retirement annuity contract, the benefits can be taken between the
investor's 60th and 75th birthdays (again, both dates inclusive). The
maximum that can be taken as a tax-free cash sum is based on a complicated
formula - it must not exceed three times the remaining annual amount of the
annuity. If a represents the annuity rate per unit of investment, then the
maximum proportion of the benefits that can be taken as a cash sum (c) may
be expressed algebraically as c = 3a/(1+3a).
Thus, the higher the value of the annuity, the greater the proportion of the
benefits that can be taken as a tax-free cash sum. Since annuity rates
increase with the age of the investor, the later the investor takes the
benefits, the greater the proportion that can be taken in cash.
On the current annuity rates from Equitable Life, for a Pounds 100,000
value, the proportions that can be taken in cash by a man are: 26 per cent
at age 60; 28 per cent at age 65; 31 per cent at age 70; and 35 per cent at
age 75. These are higher than the 25 per cent available under a personal
pension, and investors have every incentive to defer cashing-in as long as
possible.
For women, the proportions are lower. Indeed, for a women aged 60, the
proportion is 23.8 per cent - below that for a personal pension. In such
cases, the investor converts from a retirement annuity contract to a
personal pension, and then cashes in.
Also, if investors wish to take their benefits before their 60th birthday,
they can always switch their retirement annuity contract into a personal
pension. But the switch cannot be reversed.
This leads to the next choice for investors, known as the 'open market
option'. When the investor cashes in his contract, he can take the value and
buy his annuity from any life company he wishes. He does not have to buy it
from the life company with which he originally took out the personal
pension.
As may be seen from the annuity tables published regularly in the FT, the
amount of annuity secured by a given cash sum varies considerably between
life companies.
Since every investor, in theory at least, wishes to secure as much income as
possible from the accumulated value of his personal pension, one would
expect the open-market option to be exercised every time an investor
cashes-in the contract. In practice, it is exercised in only a minority of
cases, despite the fact that it is comparatively easy to find out which life
companies are currently offering the highest annuity rates.
One reason is ignorance of the option's existence. Tied agents, representing
just one life company, cannot deal in any product of another life company,
so they cannot help their clients to exercise the option, only point out
that it exists.
But even when investors are made aware of the option, all too often they are
too apathetic to exercise it. They want to deal with the life company with
which they have been saving for years, and are wary of dealing with another,
even if it may be financially advantageous.
But there is a more practical reason why so many investors are not
exercising the open-market option.
With new-style personal pensions, there is no problem in exercising it
However, most investors currently taking benefits are doing so from
retirement annuity contracts, and the Inland Revenue has made it
impracticable for most of them to exercise the option.
If the investor takes the value on a retirement annuity contract and buys an
annuity from a life company other than the one which issued the contract,
the Revenue deems that the investor has transferred his retirement annuity
contract to a new-style personal pension with the other life company, and so
the tax free cash sum is limited to 25 per cent.
