FT  22 APR 93 / Red Cross urges control of 'callous' landmines
THE International Committee of the Red Cross yesterday launched a campaign
to focus arms control efforts on one of the most common and callous of
weapons, the anti-personnel landmine.
A symposium aimed at increasing awareness about the effects of mines,
reckoned to cause 800 deaths and 450 injuries every month, is being held
this week in Montreux, Switzerland.
The initiative has come from Red Cross and Red Crescent medical staff who
see mines being used increasingly to terrorise civilian populations.
Dr Robin Coupland, a British surgeon with the Geneva-based organisation,
said records from five ICRC hospitals in Asia and Africa showed that, out of
more than 17,000 war-wounded patients, 24 per cent were mine victims. A
third of these needed one or both legs amputated.
The aim is to build up pressure on governments ahead of a review of the 1981
United Nations convention covering 'inhumane' weapons. A conference, which
France's President Francois Mitterrand called for while visiting Cambodia in
February, could be held at the end of the year.
The convention restricts the indiscriminate use of mines. But it applies
only to international conflicts, and many countries including Britain and
the US have yet to ratify it. Although the ICRC is not tabling specific
proposals, suggestions for strengthening control include the prohibition of
certain kinds of mine, regulation of manufacture and an export ban.
Mr Ed Cairns, a policy adviser to Oxfam, the British overseas aid
organisation, said: 'The onus is on governments that oppose such measures to
come up with alternative solutions to protect civilian populations.'
The US Congress last October introduced a one-year moratorium on exports of
anti-personnel mines.
The former Soviet Union and China are the biggest supp-liers among more than
35 countries making mines. Italy's role as leading western European supplier
was highlighted in early 1991 when seven executives of the company Valsella
Meccanotecnica were convicted for illegally exporting 9m mines to Iraq in
the 1980s.
Anti-personnel mines come in two main categories: blast mines, detonated
just beneath the surface, and fragmentation mines, which explode above
ground, hurling metal fragments or ball bearings.
Types range from the pocket-sized Russian 'butterfly' mine, widely found in
Afghanistan, to the Italian Valmara 69 used by the Iraqis, which bounces
into the air and fires 1,000 metal splinters over about 25 metres.
Small mines known as 'toe-poppers' are designed to maim rather than kill,
with the idea that a wounded soldier will require assistance from several
others.
Detection and clearance is made much harder by modern plastic mines with
only tiny metal components.
The number of uncleared mines across the world is estimated at more than
100m. In the Falkland Islands, for example, 11 years after the UK-Argentine
conflict there are reckoned still to be about 15 mines per head of
population. In former Yugoslavia mines are expected to pose a threat for
decades.
