FT  12 OCT 93 / Survey of Four Cities Partnership (2): The patient is on the
mend - Nottingham
THE RECESSION in Britain wounded Nottingham. But the economic injuries
inflicted on the city have not scarred it permanently.
Unlike other cities, where dependence on a single industry or employer has
left large sections of the workforce facing unemployment, the
self-proclaimed capital of the East Midlands has been protected by a
diversified economy.
The full impact of the recession was defused because the shock waves were
spread across a large number of employers.
While the collapse of Swan Hunter devastated parts of Tyneside, or the loss
of British Aerospace cast a pall over Hatfield, Nottingham was able to fall
back on a mixed economy based on textiles and a clutch of large companies
such as Boots and Raleigh and a host of small manufacturers.
But Nottingham did not emerge unscathed. British Coal's decision to close
the nearby pits of Cotgrave and Silverhill has dealt a serious blow to the
mining workforce. Nottingham County Council estimates that the full effect
of pit closures could lead to a 15 per cent shrinkage in the area's gross
domestic product.
The knock-on effect of the closure programme has yet to be felt, but the
county council claims that for every two jobs which disappear from the
mines, another goes outside. There could be serious implications for an
economy where spending by mines on goods and services has been estimated at
Pounds 210m a year.
Redundancies among miners are likely to exacerbate high levels of
unemployment in parts of Nottingham. Although unemployment of 11.6 per cent
in the Nottingham travel-to-work area is only 1.2 per cent above the
national average, some inner city wards have suffered disproportionately.
Unemployment in Radford is estimated at 44 per cent; 39.2 per cent in
Lenton; and 35.2 per cent in Forest.
These pockets of high unemployment reflect small business failures and the
shake-out of jobs by companies introducing labour-saving technology.
Overseas inward investment, a big priority for the city council, has not yet
produced the results to offset such deprivation. Five inward investment
projects last year created just 117 jobs in the city, according to Invest in
Britain, the department of trade and industry's development agency. By
contrast, unemployment in Nottingham's 10 worst-hit wards exceeded 10,800 in
the year to July 1993.
In its determination to counter the decline, the city council has launched
an economic development strategy aiming to deal with the effects of social
deprivation. The goals include capitalising on the strong growth in the
service sector, protecting the diverse industrial base and emphasising the
role of the excellent higher education facilities in helping new companies.
The ideas are ambitious but attaining them is another matter. Any of the
1,340 miners facing redundancy at Cotgrave or Silverhill would probably be
sceptical; Mr Jim Taylor, director of development at the city council, is
not.
Mr Taylor, a leading advocate of the Four Cities Partnership, claims
Nottingham already has the strength to become the economic powerhouse of the
East Midlands. He points to the success of companies such as Boots, whose
pharmaceuticals division is headquartered there; GEC Plessey
Telecommunications; ZF Gears; and Central Television as examples of how the
city is moving away from traditional industry.
While acknowledging there are problems of deprivation, Mr Taylor says:
'We've got the best city centre management scheme in the country. There is
Pounds 37.5m of City Challenge money going into rundown areas, and we've
cleaned up 3,500 buildings in 10 years.'
His optimism is echoed, albeit cautiously, by Nottingham Development
Enterprise, the local business promotion agency. Mr Malcolm Reece, the
agency's chief executive, believes the recession has changed the culture
among companies seeking outside investment. 'Companies now realise our
future lies in Europe. It would have been good if that had been recognised
five years ago, and the Four Cities Partnership is a response to that,' he
says.
The move toward Europe reflects the need to refocus on new markets,
according to the enterprise agency, and, if successful, should soften the
blow of pit closures.
The city aims to lure inward investors with attractive incentives such as
its stable and low wage workforce. The average gross weekly pay for male
workers is Pounds 270, compared with a national average of Pounds 300; while
the average number of days lost to strikes is the second lowest in the
country.
The accountancy firm of Price Waterhouse, meanwhile, claims the region's
prospects have been increased by a recent survey showing that 81 per cent of
businesses thought they had now experienced the worst of the recession,
against 59 per cent in 1992.
Aware of the need to capitalise on signs of increasing confidence,
Nottingham has taken on some ideas pioneered by its sisters in the Four
Cities Partnership. These include setting up a technology region offering
low cost sites to innovative design companies modelled on a similar scheme
in Karlsruhe; a rapid transit system, on which the developers have sought
German advice; and putting increased emphasis on international links between
academic institutions.
The Four Cities Partnership, however, is not responsible solely for these
initiatives. It is a useful arena for exchanging expertise and development
proposals but it does not have the muscle to force through change. That is
up to the partners themselves, and Nottingham would have to develop plans to
safeguard its economy whether the partnership existed or not.
For the city, therefore, inward investment means not only attracting
continental companies but also wooing business from elsewhere in the UK.
Citing some success in this strategy, the city council says it has persuaded
the Inland Revenue and English Heritage to move to Nottingham as part of a
Pounds 90m relocation package. It also hopes to site a Channel tunnel
freight village at Toton sidings on the city fringes.
Mr Taylor is certain that this mixed response to the recession is the right
way to cure Nottingham's economic ills.
The prospects for a recovery have been boosted by the presence of finance
houses in Nottingham with venture capital to aid expanding companies.
Mr Roger Cole, director of 3i in Nottingham, says companies that survived
the recession now need to raise new equity. 'It's helpful to be close to
your financiers. All the major firms of accountants have offices here, as do
most of the clearers.'
Assessing the local economy, he adds that fewer 'distressed' parent
companies are selling off subsidiaries and most employers are happier with
domestic orders and export growth than a year ago.
By his analysis, if Nottingham was characterised as a patient recovering
from a trauma then it would be out of intensive care. The prognosis is
hopeful: stable and getting better, but not able to get out of bed yet.
