FT  19 NOV 93 / World Bank economists give warning on Brazil
INSTABILITY in Brazil threatens the deregulation of the economy achieved
since 1990, two World Bank economists warn in a report published today. The
report, The State and Private Sector in Brazil, by Geoffrey Shepherd and
Paul Holden, argues that experience in other countries suggests
microeconomic reforms rarely survive for long in unstable conditions.
'If instability remains at current levels or worsens, the deregulation
achieved since 1990 will be threatened,' it says. Inflation in Brazil is
running at about 35 per cent a month and mostly above an annual 800 per cent
since 1987.
The economists point to dangers of using the exchange rate as an
inflation-fighting tool. 'The danger is that in these circumstances,
governments may lower the cost of foreign exchange to cheapen imports and
provide some short-term inflation relief.'
This could lead to a balance of payments deficit and consequent import
controls to preserve foreign exchange reserves. Instability would make it
difficult for companies to restructure to compete with new imports. Reform
in this context would therefore be viewed as a failure.
Brazil's stock market has risen this week on reports that the government
would create a new inflation index, to be adjusted in line with the exchange
rate. Such an index, to replace existing indexes for taxation, public sector
tariff and interest rate purposes, would be interpreted as a first step to
some kind of exchange-rate anchor.
The report, to be presented to a conference organised by the World Bank in
Sao Paulo today , views the prospects for stabilising the economy as poor,
in the short-term at least, because of political uncertainty.
The report concludes that economic instability, and in particular the
repeated attempts since 1986 to tackle inflation through shock programmes,
is severely impeding the private sector.
Brazil's foreign debt negotiator Mr Andre Lara Resende is expected to leave
the post in the coming weeks, Angus Foster reports from Brasilia.
Mr Resende wants to return to the private sector, and has told finance
minister Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso that he will resign once initial
agreement is reached with the country's creditor banks.
Mr Resende is thought to be frustrated with political opposition to reforms
needed to combat inflation, now close to 2,000 per cent a year.
