FT  22 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Personnel helps Hays rise 20% - Warning
that the climb out of recession will be long and slow
HAYS, the business services group, reported a 20 per cent increase in annual
profits, but warned that 'the climb out of recession looks as if it will be
long and slow'.
Mr Ronnie Frost, executive chairman, said many Hays businesses had seen
trading conditions improve over the past few months, but the experience had
not been universal.
He added: 'The recent turmoil within the ERM and the consequential effective
devaluation of a number of European currencies, will make it harder for the
UK to continue its improving economic performance.'
Pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 55.6m to Pounds 66.6m in the year to June
30, on sales that grew from Pounds 380m to Pounds 477m.
Hays said both its distribution and commercial businesses had continued
their steady growth. The personnel division increased profits by 40 per
cent, as activity in the recruitment market increased during the second
half, especially for temporary placements of accountancy and technical
staff.
Although personnel operating profits jumped from Pounds 4.8m to Pounds 6.7m,
they still only accounted for 10 per cent of the total.
Distribution increased operating profits by 13 per cent to Pounds 38m.
Profits from Hays Network Distribution, which provides multi-user
warehousing mainly for the drinks industry, were well down. The group said
management had been changed and the business had been set on the road to
recovery.
Hays Chemical Distribution's profits were flat, with a drop in margins from
bulk chemicals being offset by growth in packaged products.
Hays Fril, the French distribution company that the group bought for Pounds
37.5m in June last year, performed ahead of expectations. Together with
Mordhorst, the German distributor, of which Hays bought control for an
initial Pounds 32m in July, Mr Frost said he now had the basis of a
pan-European distribution business.
Profits from the commercial, or office support, businesses rose by 16 per
cent to Pounds 24.2m. Britdoc, which send letters and documents, won many
new customers, including four clearing banks.
Earnings per share rose by 15 per cent to 11.5p (10p). The interim dividend
was increased by 15 per cent from 4.6p to 5.3p.
COMMENT
Hays shares rose 5p to 255p on the strength of these figures, which were at
the top end of the analysts' range. Mr Frost remains as ebullient as ever
about the medium to long-term growth outlook but clearly does not want to
inflate expectations. The group had problems in bulk chemicals, but has
moved swiftly to sort out the network distribution to bonded warehouses. The
personnel business is at last benefiting from recovery and Britdoc continues
to shine on the commercial side. Forecasts of Pounds 84m put the shares on a
prospective multiple of 18.2. That 20 per cent premium to the market does
not look unjustified for a company that should be able to grow earnings by
more than 20 per cent, and claims to have management capable of doubling the
size of the business.
