FT  22 MAR 93 / Economics: Europe looks for some cheer from recovery in US
data
A CLUTCH of economic statistics from the US will underline to what degree
the recovery in North America is getting under way, while in Europe
economists will be watching out for new inflation data from Germany.
With the US likely to provide the main engine for what little growth is
likely in the European and Japanese economies over the next year, relatively
high figures for output growth in the US will raise a cheer in a number of
countries.
Attention will be especially focused on the revised data for growth of US
gross domestic product in the final quarter, due for release on Friday.
In Germany, statisticians are due to announce inflation figures for several
individual states. The Bundesbank will be especially interested in the data,
to determine whether further easing in monetary policy is appropriate after
last week's cut of 0.5 percentage points in the German discount rate.
In the UK, economists will be forced to turn their attention to
non-statistical indicators since few data will be available to illustrate to
what degree the British economy is recovering.
There will be some interest in the answers given by Treasury officials on
Wednesday when they are quizzed in public by the House of Commons' treasury
and civil service select committee. The MPs' questions - expected to be
directed mainly at Mr Alan Budd, the Treasury's chief economic adviser -
will focus on the strategy behind last week's Budget. The Confederation of
British Industry is bringing out its latest economic forecasts on Thursday.
On foreign exchange markets, observers will be watching out for any signs of
weakness on the part of the French franc ahead of next Sunday's second leg
in the French parliamentary elections.
The main statistical releases and events are as follows. The figures in
brackets gives an average of what financial markets expect, according to
figures provided by economics consultancy MMS International.
Today: UK, Visible trade deficit for countries outside European Community
(Pounds 1.2bn); Japan, March wholesale prices index; Canada, January
seasonally adjusted retail sales (down 0.3 per cent on month).
Tomorrow: Germany, tender for first 5-year Treuhand bond; US, Federal Open
Markets Committee meets in Washington; Canada, January wholesale trade (up
0.4 per cent on month).
Wednesday: Germany, auction of 5-year Treuhand bond; US, February durable
goods orders, durable goods shipments, car sales March 11-20, truck sales
March 11-20, February house sales
Thursday: US, initial claims for week ending March 20, state benefits for
week ending March 13, monetary data for week ending March 15; Canada,
building permits in January (down 4.5 per cent month on month).
Friday: US, release of FOMC minutes of meeting of February 2-3, gross
domestic product growth and deflator in fourth quarter of last year (4.8 per
cent and 2.0 per cent, both at an annual rate), after-tax corporation
profits in fourth quarter (up 6.1 per cent), February bank credit,
export/import price indices; Canada, February industrial and raw materials
production; Australia, February vehicle registrations; Japan, March consumer
prices index (for Tokyo up 1.1 per cent on year, excluding perishable items
up 1.4 per cent; for whole country up 1.4 per cent on year, excluding
perishable items up 1.7 per cent on year), workers' income in January;
February retail sales (down 5.1 per cent on year), February industrial
production (up 0.5 per cent).
During the week: Italy, January industrial production (down 2.6 per cent on
year), February bank lending (up 8 per cent); Germany, March cost of living
indices for different federal states (up 0.3 per cent on month), February
import prices (up 0.4 per cent on month, down 2.3 per cent on year), March
preliminary cost of living index for whole nation (up 0.3 per cent on month,
4.1 per cent on year).
