FT  25 NOV 93 / Survey of Turkish Finance and Industry (2): Action needed on
financing problems - Public sector borrowing is too high, and the balance of
payments is under strain
The crunch is coming; on that point government and private sector economists
seem agreed. The only question is when. For no one believes the fiscal
profligacy currently practised can be sustained while annual inflation is
nudging 70 per cent.
Recent turbulence in the foreign exchange markets suggests that traders
remain unconvinced of the government's commitment to address the structural
issues on the budget. Domestic interest rates also appear to be edging up,
adding to the government's short-term financing problems and further
delaying the recovery in private sector investment.
The root cause remains the government's failure to address the problem of
its own finances, with the public sector borrowing requirement officially
set to rise to 16 per cent of gross national product in 1993 against a 9 per
cent target. The situation is exacerbated by the deteriorating picture on
the trade account, which is putting the balance of payments under strain for
the first time since the early 1980s when Turkey last rescheduled its
foreign debt.
But if the impression sometimes given is that Turkey is heading towards the
brink, the business community is confident that with a firm hand on the helm
the situation can be turned round.
Prudent management of the reserves should give the authorities a comfortable
cushion to withstand external shocks. Indeed, the long-term health of the
economy is not in doubt. The historical trend of foreign investment
approvals, the best indicator of confidence, continues to rise. The UK, for
example, seems to be preparing for its second coming in Turkey.
The first wave of UK investment in the mid-1980s was led by Polly Peck
International, the fruit-to-electronics group, run by Mr Asil Nadir, the
Turkish Cypriot businessman. After the group's collapse, the Department of
Trade and Industry is trusting that the next investment generation will
prove more robust.
As if to underline the point, the DTI has just opened a Turkish investment
office. The British Chamber of Commerce in Turkey is hosting a series of
workshops in London in April in a bid to attract investment.
In the past decade, the country has come a long way. This is underlined by
the recent resurgence of the Istanbul stock exchange, and the ability of the
Turkish private sector to tap international debt markets. But Turkey's real
problems are short-term. Every day the authorities baulk at the need for
reform, the problems deepen.
The policy challenge is to curb inflation while sustaining sufficient growth
to create jobs for a population that is approaching 60m. It is a difficult
trade-off and the task has become much harder since the liberalisation of
exchange controls in the mid-1980s. Turkey's economy is now more vulnerable
to policy error. For a coalition, divided on some of the basic tenets of
economic policy, the balancing act is that much more perilous.
The government has made some progress in lengthening its debt maturities,
through tax changes encouraging investors to hold longer-term paper,
nine-month or one-year bills rather than three-month paper. The profile of
Turkey's foreign debt has also improved slightly, shifting attention from
the syndicated loans to bond issues.
Progress on both privatisation and tax reform has been more disappointing.
Both policies have been stymied by political wrangling. The possibility that
the proposed new tax law may be passed by the end of the year looks remote.
Recent increases in value added tax may raise some revenues but could also
encourage the already widespread problem of tax avoidance.
One area where the government has had some success is in the reform of
agricultural subsidies, a continuing burden on the budget. Cotton prices
have been partly deregulated. Attention has now turned to tobacco. And for
the first time the subsidies are to be consolidated into the central
government budget.
For all that, recent indicators suggest the policy dilemma is still
unresolved. In the second quarter growth exceeded 12 per cent, as imports
surged and domestic consumption continued to be fuelled by easy credit. Some
economists explain the latest figures as evidence of pent-up demand held
back during the period of the Gulf War. However, few believe such a
performance is sustainable, without serious implications on the fiscal and
monetary side.
The trade deficit by August had reached Dollars 9.4bn with imports rising to
almost Dollars 19bn, much of the increase being in consumer goods. While
remittances from workers overseas have remained steady, tourism - the other
main invisible trade item - is down following terrorist attacks by PKK, the
Kurdish Workers' Party.
The current account is expected to be in deficit to the tune of Dollars 5bn
by the year-end, compared with just under Dollars 1bn in 1992. On the
capital account of the balance of payments, Turkish stocks have attracted
increasing foreign portfolio investment. Changes in the rules on foreign
funds should hasten the trend.
However, actual direct fixed capital inflows have slowed down, partly as a
result of the contraction of government project work. Companies also seem
hesitant to commit themselves before Turkey's expected move to a customs
union with the European Community when trade barriers will be reduced to
zero and imports are likely to surge further.
To make up the shortfall on the capital account, the government this year
has gone to the bond markets for Dollars 3.8bn. Turkish foreign debt - both
public and private sector - is now a dizzy Dollars 59bn, up from Dollars
54bn at the start of the year.
The increase in the debt is also explained by the number of Turkish banks
resorting to offshore borrowing to fund their lira loan book, a strategy
which will remain attractive as long as the central bank continues its
strong lira policy. There is also a growing appetite among Turkish
depositors to keep their savings in foreign exchange.
The increased capital flows have strengthened the reserve position. At the
end of September, total international reserves of the central bank and
commercial banks stood at Dollars 18bn, equivalent to about eight months of
imports.
However, the government's latest rush to the international markets was
prompted more by concern over the announcement that Moody's, the US rating
agency, is reviewing Turkey's credit standing. Any move to downgrade Turkey
from investment to speculative category could cut off a whole of range of
institutional investors, at least in US markets. It could also upset
Turkey's debt strategy which has been heavily dependent on bond issues in
the last two years, helping to lengthen the maturity of government and
spreading the investor base.
The worst prospect is that the government could be forced to return to the
syndicated loan markets. Such an outcome would produce a crowding out effect
for the Turkish private sector banks. They would then be forced back to
domestic borrowing, pushing up interest rates as they seek to attract
depositors and move to close their foreign exchange open positions.
When she succeeded as prime minister in June, Mrs Tansu Ciller warned that
1994 would be a difficult year, with the growth rate falling to 4-5 per
cent. Many governments would welcome such a prospect. but in Turkey, after a
decade averaging closer to 6 per cent and in the wake of this year's likely
figure of 8 per cent, the decline is hard to accept.
The new budget presented to parliament envisages a deficit of TL192,000bn.
Personnel expenditures remain the largest item at TL265,000bn, while
interest payment on the government's debt is projected at TL217,000bn. The
budget deficit is around 8.5 per cent of GNP. However, when the losses of
state enterprises, municipalities and other funds are taken into account,
the PSBR is targeted to reach around 14 per cent of GNP. Many banks in
Istanbul believe the figure could be closer to 20 per cent.
The size of the deficit, while worrying, is not itself a problem. The main
issue is how to finance it. The treasury is hoping to raise around Dollars
1.5bn in privatisation revenues and to go to the international debt markets
for another Dollars 1.5bn.
But given the narrowness of domestic capital markets and signs that
international demand for Turkish paper may be cooling off, the temptation
will be for the government to resort to monetary financing. The central bank
law currently allows the government to go to the bank for up to 15 per cent
of budgetary outlays. In 1994 this would result in a 50 per cent increase in
broad money M2, with all that means for inflation.
Hitherto, the bank has intervened in the market, selling dollars to absorb
the excess lira liquidity, in effect 'sterilising' the monetary expansion.
But with Turkey's external account under some strain, the bank is likely to
have less room to manoeuvre.
Apparent indecision on the correct level for the lira is creating additional
uncertainty. Since June, the monthly devaluation has averaged 5 per cent
against the basket of currencies, compared with 3 per cent for the first
half year.
The more rapid depreciation may help exporters who have been losing market
share because of the overvalued lira. But as the pace of depreciation speeds
up, so the lira cost of the government's foreign debt repayments rises. The
competitive advantage gained by exporters is very quickly eroded by
increases in inflation. Sooner rather than later, Turkey will have to break
out of this vicious circle.
