FT  19 MAR 93 / Money Markets: French cash rates rise
INTEREST rates in the French franc cash market rose sharply yesterday in
spite of the Bundesbank's lowering of its discount rate by 50 basis points,
writes James Blitz.
The German central bank's decision to cut its effective rate floor to 7.50
per cent from 8.00 per cent had been well anticipated by interest rate
markets in most currencies. Indeed, the June Euromark contract was barely
changed on the day, losing one basis point to close at 93.18.
However, there appeared to be disappointment in both currency and interest
rate markets over the Bundesbank's decision. One London-based analyst said
there was concern that the Bundesbank had not also reduced its emergency
funding, or Lombard, rate, which remains at 9.00 per cent. Others felt that
in an environment in which rates are coming down this was relatively
unimportant.
Activity was mainly concentrated in the French franc cash market, where
rates appeared to be pushed upwards by heavy borrowing of the franc,
possibly for speculative purposes on currency markets.
The cost of borrowing one-month French francs rose from 11.30 per cent to
12.00 per cent during the day, while the cost of borrowing three-month
French francs increased from 10.9 per cent to 11.10 per cent.
French franc futures were also under pressure, with the March contract
falling 7 basis points to finish at 91.18 and the September contract
dropping 8 basis points to close at 92.54.
According to one dealer, the immediate prospects for French rates depend on
whether the Bundesbank now reduces the rate at which it lends funds to
commercial banks, currently at 8.25 per cent.
Both sterling cash and futures markets were relatively unaffected by
sterling's sharp rise against the D-Mark and the dollar on the currency
markets.
In his Budget this week, Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor, said the
current level of base rates was consistent with the prospect of economic
growth in the UK. Yesterday's fall in the unemployment figures only
confirmed the view that another easing in monetary policy is not needed for
now.
Three-month sterling cash remained unchanged at 6 per cent. The June short
sterling contract ended at 94.27, down 4 basis points on the day.
