FT  08 JUN 93 / Survey of Aerospace (28): Eurofighter goes ahead - David
White on the advantages of collaboration
THE EUROFIGHTER will have taken at least 15 years to come into service from
the time Britain, Germany, Spain and Italy agreed in 1985 on the basic
characteristics of a joint aircraft.
The most broadly based collaborative fighter project ever attempted in
Europe, it will have been through several changes of identity in the
process.
The European Fighter Aircraft programme was relaunched last December,
briefly as the New EFA and then as the Eurofighter 2000, but the partners
are still looking for a more inspired name. The rechristening was mainly a
way of enabling Mr Volker Ruhe, Germany's defence minister, to save face
after campaigning to stop the Pounds 32bn project and replace it with a
cheaper and less sophisticated aircraft.
Although revised and subjected to a cost overhaul, the fighter is
essentially the same that aerospace companies in the four nations have been
developing for the past six years, with allowance for different versions to
take into account the partners' different visions of what they want the
aircraft to do.
Details of the changed programme have taken longer than expected to sort
out. The December agreement in Brussels, in which Germany in effect rejoined
the project, was heavily publicised. But when junior ministers met in Bonn
in April to agree on the new programme outlines, the event went unannounced.
Although new military requirements are now set and a new schedule is in
place - leaving production decisions until after the next German elections
in 1994 - many questions have still to be resolved.
These include Germany's share in production. It has so far taken 33 per cent
of development work, based on an original expectation that it would buy 250
of the aircraft. The current working assumption is that it will buy 140.
Together, the number due to be produced for the four partners has shrunk to
about 600 from the initial figure of 765.
New memorandums of understanding and industrial contracts have still to be
signed. Further problems could emerge if, for instance, Germany decides to
instal a cheaper radar of its own choice, instead of the GEC Ferranti-led
ECR90, which is half-way through development, industry experts say the
implications of having to integrate two different radars into the aircraft
'could be horrendous'.
Technical problems, including the generator and the flight control system,
have already caused serious delays. The first prototype, assembled in
Germany, is not due to fly until September at the earliest  - two years
late.
Last year's crisis over German participation blew up after the industrial
consortium, Eurofighter, submitted its price quotation for the production
phase. In their review of the programme, the partners identified potential
savings of between 12 and 23 per cent on the cost of producing the aircraft
and setting up logistic support. Nevertheless, costs are substantially
higher than originally expected.
The UK has confirmed that its estimated total share of the programme stands
at Pounds 13bn at today's prices compared to the 'Pounds 6bn to Pounds 7bn'
stated by the government in 1988, a difference which can be partly but not
wholly attributed to inflation.
The Ministry of Defence says that its projected cost in 1987 was in fact
Pounds 7.8bn and that it was then planning, unbeknown to anyone, to buy 200
aircraft rather than the officially-declared 250. It has now reaffirmed its
intention to buy 250. Allowing for this difference and inflation, it says,
the cost overrun is Pounds 1.1bn. Programme managers add that these
estimates are no more than an indication, in the absence of any production
contracts.
However, the cost of development has also increased in real terms, despite a
regime of fixed, inflation-adjustable prices. The UK share, 33 per cent of
the total, was stated in 1988 as Pounds 1.7bn. It is now put by British
Aerospace, the UK partner in Eurofighter, at roughly double that figure.
One example of how prices can escalate is the flight control system, where
costs are reckoned to have gone up 60 per cent because of contract changes.
The system comes under the overall charge of Deutsche Aerospace, the German
Eurofighter partner. GEC-Marconi of the UK, responsible for the critical
software input, found that the processing power provided for was inadequate.
Some of the functions of the system are due to be dropped to enable the
first flight to place and to be incorporated at a later stage.
Development costs will also rise as a result of the rescheduling of the
programme, with the first aircraft not due to enter service with the British
and Italian air forces until 2000, two years later than previously
envisaged, and the Germans and Spanish not scheduled to take delivery of
theirs before 2002.
The partner governments have accepted in principle that terms should be
revised upwards for Eurojet, the engine grouping of Rolls-Royce, Fiat, MTU
of Germany and ITP of Spain, recognising that the consortium will now have
to support a longer test programme.
Eurofighter, responsible for the aircraft itself, is held to be in a
different position since it is behind schedule on the programme. But it has
also sought an increase, with Mr John Vincent, its managing director,
insisting that 'if you are going to stretch a given programme, it is going
to cost you money.'
On the German side, it has not been clear where payment for the current
development work will come from. The funding requirement for this year,
including outstanding bills left from last year, was about DM1bn, but barely
half of this has been forthcoming. The expected outcome is that Dasa itself
will provide the interim finance, since the other partner countries were not
ready to bridge the gap.
Hopes that some had vested in the project as the foundation of a new
European military aircraft venture have been set back by the arguments of
the last 12 months. Dasa has actively promoted the idea, hoping to draw the
French into a Europe-wide enterprise. 'As a vision we really see it,' says
Mr Harmut Mehdorn, new head of Dasa's aircraft group.
The first step was to be a merger between the programme's administration and
that of its European forerunner, the Anglo-German-Italian Tornado. This
involves joining Eurofighter with the Tornado company Panavia and fusing the
two intergovernmental management agencies, known respectively as NEFMA and
NAMMA.
A merger was to take place last year, but Mr Vincent says he advised
delaying it when the political difficulties surrounding Germany's
participation in Eurofighter erupted.
For all the problems and tensions, however, the partners are firmly
committed to the programme. Even before it takes off, Eurofighter provides a
clear demonstration of at least one advantage of collaborative projects:
that they are extremely resistant to attempts to kill them off.
