FT  19 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Clydesdale advances 51%
CLYDESDALE BANK, the Scottish bank owned by National Australia Bank,
increased pre-tax profits by 51 per cent to a record Pounds 89.2m in the
year ended September 30.
Sir David Nickson, chairman, attributed the improvement on last year's
outcome of Pounds 59m to a combination of improved trading volume and
reduced costs.
Operating profit was Pounds 127.4m (Pounds 96.3m) before a record charge for
bad debts of Pounds 38.3m (Pounds 37.4m).
The charge, which the bank said reflected the depth of the recession,
represented 0.9 per cent of total lending assets and the trend improved in
the second half.
Sir David said pre-tax profits would have exceeded Pounds 100m but for a
Pounds 12.3m restructuring provision relating to expected redundancies in
connection with the project to centralise back-office processing in two
centres, and to the opening of a single centre for dealing with telephone
inquiries.
The project, announced in September, entails the loss of 1,400 jobs, mostly
in branches, and the creation of 600 new jobs.
Mr Charles Love, chief executive, said net interest income had risen by 10
per cent, despite the fall in base rates, while commissions and other income
had expanded by 11 per cent.
The bank's mortgage lending grew by 16 per cent.
The cost/income ratio fell from 64.6 per cent to 57 per cent before taking
account of restructuring costs.
Clydesdale said the fall was mainly because of the coming through of savings
from the restructuring of the headquarters operations from 1991, which had
also involved job losses.
Overheads before restructuring costs fell by 3 per cent, comprising a fall
in staff costs of 5 per cent and a reduction in other overheads of 1 per
cent.
Mr Love, a former senior TSB executive who took over last year, has brought
in a number of new senior staff, including Mr Peter Aslet, finance director,
who came from British Petroleum.
He said the trend of business in Scotland was 'more positive than negative'
but the Scottish economy would improve more slowly than that of the south of
England.
Total assets were down 3.3 per cent at Pounds 5.56bn, reflecting lower
treasury activity in money markets.
