FT  08 SEP 93 / Lure of profits tempts corporate Names: Attracting
institutional capital to Lloyd's may be easier than expected
CORPORATE finance teams at more than half a dozen banks and securities
houses are increasingly confident about their ability to attract corporate
capital to the Lloyd's of London insurance market, which prepares to publish
its rulebook for 'incorporated Names' in the next few days.
Many organisations are well-advanced with plans to raise several hundred
million pounds for the Lloyd's market. They include UK merchant banks which
are aiming to float investment companies or trusts on the Stock Exchange, US
investment banks which generally favour private placements among US
institutions, and venture capitalists and the 'super-rich'.
They say that the lure of significant profits as insurance rates increase is
proving attractive to institutional investors.
'Our optimism is rising quite a lot. The mood in the markets has swung,'
says one British corporate finance executive, who adds that even cautious
Scottish investment houses are becoming interested.
Insiders at Lloyd's believe it could be able to attract between Pounds 500m
and Pounds 1bn in fresh capital next year, offsetting a decline in funding
provided by Names, the individuals whose assets currently support the
market.
Lloyd's announced its plans to seek corporate investment last April in a bid
to shore up its capital base. This followed the loss of more than 10,000
Names and some Pounds 3bn in capacity during the past four years.
The new rulebook for corporate investors effectively amounts to a
'prospectus' and will detail the terms on which new investors will be able
to participate at Lloyd's. Accounting, regulatory and other rules are
spelled out in detail in the document, which will provide a comprehensive
picture of how the Lloyd's market works.
Final approval is still dependent on existing Names, who must vote on the
plans at an extraordinary general meeting in October. Their approval is far
from guaranteed.
Two months ago financiers were worried about the scale of liabilities faced
by Lloyd's from US pollution and asbestos claims. But they now believe plans
to 'ring-fence' old claims by setting up a new reinsurance company will
work.
Even where doubts still exist, bankers are playing down the dangers. One
financier is telling potential clients that while the 'ring-fence' scheme
may not be entirely successful, it will still provide an extra layer of
protection not enjoyed by investors in a number of UK and US insurance
companies, which are also exposed to US liabilities.
Similarly, concerns that allegations of mismanagement and regulatory failure
would make it difficult to sell investments seem to have evaporated. 'I
sense that Lloyd's has passed its absolute crisis point,' said one banker,
who only three months ago put the chances of success of his own bank's
scheme at only '50:50'.
Bankers are placing more emphasis on the prospects of profits, as premium
rates in the specialised commercial insurance and reinsurance markets reach
new highs.
Prices in the marine, aviation and other specialised markets in which
Lloyd's specialises have also risen strongly.
'The opportunities for profit are now very real in the London market, as the
rating structures in many of the major classes of business have been
corrected and there is a commitment to manage capacity far more
professionally than has been possible in the past,' says Mr Michael Wade, a
backer of Corporate Lloyd's Membership. This group is a subsidiary of
Sedgwick, the insurance broker, which aims to launch a quoted investment
company later this year.
Whether investors will eventually prove receptive to these arguments remains
open to question. The timetable is tight - flotations would need to take
place in November.
Moreover, market sentiment about Lloyd's has proved to be notoriously
volatile. Although loss-making Names and their action groups have been quiet
recently, they have been remarkably successful in affecting perceptions in
the past. Lloyd's appears to have a good chance of raising much-needed
capital, but its leadership can take nothing for granted.
