FT  06 MAY 93 / Japan shocked over death in Cambodia
JAPAN'S commitment to play a wider role in United Nations operations is
facing its stiffest test as the nation reacted with shock to the killing of
a Japanese policeman on peacekeeping duty in Cambodia.
Mr Haruyuki Takata, a 33-year-old civilian policeman, was killed on Tuesday
in an ambush on a six-vehicle convoy of peacekeepers. Nine other personnel
with the UN transitional authority in Cambodia (Untac) were wounded in the
ambush, four of them Japanese. The ambush is being blamed on the Khmer
Rouge, which is boycotting elections to be held on May 23-27.
Japan's involvement in Cambodia followed a painful political debate over the
conditions in which it would join UN peacekeeping operations. The killing
threatens to reopen that debate.
Leaders of the governing Liberal Democratic party tried to calm alarm about
the risks to unarmed peacekeepers. Tele-vision news programmes were
specially extended to discuss the killing, which dominated coverage in most
newspapers.
Mr Yohei Kono, chief cabinet secretary, tried to head off calls for the
government to consider withdrawing Japan's personnel, a move which the
leadership recognises could cause political embarrassment with Japan's
international partners.
Mr Kono said the 1991 Paris peace accord for Cambodia was still in force
even although it had been violated by the incident. The peace accord is the
basis for Japan's involvement in peacekeeping operations in Cambodia.
Mr Kono, speaking after the first meeting of a government task force set up
to decide Japan's response to the killing, said the government was calling
on Untac to strengthen security for Japanese personnel, relocate civilian
police officers to safer areas and gather all Japanese volunteers in Phom
Penh, the capital, to discuss security.
However, the government announced that more than 50 Japanese monitors for
the election would be sent as planned next week.
Japan is also sending an 11-strong team to investigate the killing. It is
likely to press the UN to review the character of the peacekeeping operation
in Cambodia in the light of increasing Khmer Rouge violence in rural areas.
Japan has 600 military personnel in southern Cambodia, mainly building
roads, and 70 civilian police volunteers.
