FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Analysis): Fresh look but on a small scale -
Employment
THE BUDGET measures for the unemployed were small-scale but innovative. The
trade unions and employment lobbyists were quick to point out that the net
cost of the five measures is just Pounds 125m and they will help 100,000
people, only one in 16 of those unemployed for more than six months.
But they also reflect an unusual openness to new ideas, especially in
relation to helping the long-term unemployed back into jobs. The most
radical departure from the past is the acceptance of the principle of job
subsidies to employers who take on the unemployed, an idea long resisted by
the Treasury.
The idea is only being tested out, in slightly differing formats, in four
Workstart Pilot areas at a cost of Pounds 2.6m and will involve just 1,000
people.
The plan is based on the Benefits Transfer Programme idea recently floated
by Professor Dennis Snower, of Birkbeck College, London University, who
suggested the unemployed should have the option of transfering all their
benefits - unemployment benefit, income support, and the associated rebates,
and provisions in kind - to an employer.
In the government's version the option will only be open to those unemployed
for more than two years, about 450,000 people in total. It will allow a
one-year subsidy to the employer of Pounds 60 a week taken from benefits
which would have been paid. The unemployed person gets a normal wage. The
subsidy will taper off as the period of employment progresses.
The traditional objection to employment subsidies is that they create new
employment only at the margin. Observers say that while subsidies may tip
the balance for employers who were already thinking of employing people, the
subsidy 'bribe' otherwise comes a long way down the list as a reason for
employing someone.
Employers are always hiring, even in the middle of a recession. Last year 7m
people found new jobs. Many employers will simply pocket the subsidy for
people they would have hired in any case. There is also the problem of
policing subsidies so that employers do not replace existing workers with
those carrying subsidy.
The Snower-government scheme will specifically prevent employers displacing
existing staff. It has the additional advantage of being targeted at the
very long-term unemployed and, by drawing the subsidy from benefit which
would otherwise have been paid, of being cheap.
Employment lobbyists, such as Mr Peter Ashby of Full Employment UK, also see
new thinking behind the lauch of the new Community Action programme which
will provide benefit plus Pounds 10 for 60,000 people who want to work
part-time and receive help with job-hunting the rest of the time.
Apart from the fact that it is part-time, Community Action is very similar
to Employment Action. But Mr Ashby believes it is significant that Community
Action will be administered by the Employment Service, with individual
projects run by voluntary organisations. That means that unlike the TEC-run
Employment Action it could become the testing ground for a system of
'workfare' in which benefit recipients, or possibly just those aged 18 to
24, would have to do some community work in return for those benefits.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary, yesterday denied that
Community Action was a testing ground for workfare.
One of the other schemes, Learning for Work, funds 30,000 unemployed people
to pursue full-time vocationally relevant education. However, one of the
surprise omissions from the unemployment package is that there has been no
general loosening of the rules which restrict those unemployed people
receiving income support from spending longer in education or working for
voluntary organisations, rather than being available for work. That,
however, trespasses on broader questions of what income support, received by
many people who are not unemployed, is for.
Finally, the chancellor had some good news for the disabled unemployed,
stressing that they would be given priority in most of the schemes. He also
said that in the first nine months of 1992-93 the Employment Service found
jobs for 31,000 unemployed people, 25 per cent more than the same period
last year.
