FT  21 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Gerrard &amp; National rises 61% - EC directive
requires disclosure of hidden reserves for the first time
GERRARD &amp; National, the financial group which owns one of the City of
London's leading discount houses, yesterday made a full disclosure of its
profits and reserves for the first time in its 137-year history.
Following the implementation of the European Community's second banking
directive, Gerrard has ended the practice of making transfers of undisclosed
sums to and from hidden reserves.
On the new accounting basis of making full disclosure, Gerrard made pre-tax
profits of Pounds 25.2m in the year to April 5, a rise of 61 per cent on a
restated Pounds 15.7m.
It also disclosed that it had Pounds 6.1m in hidden inner reserves, which
have now been transferred to published reserves. On this new basis,
published shareholders' funds totalled Pounds 109m at the year end.
Gerrard's business is divided into two parts, a trading division, which acts
as a principal in securities and money markets, and a broking division,
which is an agent in the same markets.
The trading division made pre-tax profits of Pounds 11.3m, a rise of 74 per
cent, while the broking division made Pounds 13.9m, 53 per cent higher.
Mr Brian Williamson, chairman, said the group was a substantial beneficiary
from the trading activity generated by the UK's withdrawal from the Exchange
Rate Mechanism last autumn and the subsequent falls in UK interest rates.
Gerrard &amp; National Limited, the group's discount house which is part of the
trading division, made pre-tax profits of Pounds 8m, up from Pounds 3m.
Discount houses are traders in short-term money market instruments such as
bills of exchange, and have the privilege of being able to trade directly
with the Bank of England.
The dividend for the year is being increased from 21p to 21.5p, an increase
of 2.4 per cent on 1992. Earnings per share were 38p, up from 24.3p.
Mr Williamson said the small dividend increase was justified by Gerrard's
record of always increasing the dividend, even during more difficult trading
conditions, ever since the group took its modern form in 1969 with the
merger of two discount houses, Gerrard &amp; Reid and the National Discount
Company.
He pointed out that the group had diversified its interests substantially
over the past few years. As a result, earnings from non-discount interests
last year contributed 90 per cent of the cost of the group's dividend,
compared with 20 per cent four years ago.
King &amp; Shaxson, another discount house group, also disclosed yesterday that
it more than doubled profits in the year to April 30. Profits before
exceptional items but after providing for rebate and taxation were Pounds
2.21m, up from Pounds 920,000.
The full year dividend proposed by the group is 9p, up from 5p.
The consolidated profit and loss account for the year includes the results
of Smith St Aubyn, a discount house owned by King &amp; Shaxson.
