FT  25 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: India slackens reins on coffee
trade - Liberalisation has improved growers' returns
THE PROCESS of liberalising the tightly controlled Indian coffee trade has
started, with growers being allowed to sell 30 per cent of their production
in the domestic market. But they are now demanding that be given the freedom
to export coffee directly as well.
The federal government is well disposed to the idea of privatising coffee
export, but the growers' participation in the trade will have to await
amendments to the Indian Coffee Act of 1942.
Liberalising foreign trade in coffee will lead to further dilution of the
role of the Coffee Board, which now controls exports through direct sales
and auctions. To start with, the government will perhaps allow the growers
to export certain grades of coffee subject to minimum price regulations.
Having realised better prices in the domestic market since the introduction
of the internal sale quota last season, the growers are confident that they
will do well in the export market too. The government, however, will push
through the amendments to the Coffee Act only when a consensus on gradually
privatising the export trade has been reached among the merchant exporters,
local traders, growers and Coffee Board employees' unions.
The All India Pool Sale Coffee Dealers Association fears that the domestic
market may be starved of the beverage if free exports are allowed. According
to an association official: 'Even under the ISQ, the domestic market is
facing a shortage of supplies, thanks to the big planters holding back
stocks.' The trade thinks that there is a domestic market for 60,000 tonnes
of coffee - the market might have been bigger had the Coffee Board given due
attention to the promotion of the beverage - but the quantity provided under
ISQ falls far short of that.
The trade has served notice that it will seek 'legal redress' if it is
denied 'supplies in right quantity and grades'. The growers have set their
sights on export because export prices are higher than domestic prices.
What, according to the trade, is forgotten, however, is that there will be a
'serious problem' of disposal of the crop in years of high production
because of the limited domestic market. The problem may arise this year as
India is expecting a bumper crop of 225,380 tonnes - including 101,470
tonnes of arabica and 123,910 tonnes of robusta. Nearly 75 per cent of the
area under coffee in Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, the principal growing
areas, has received good blossom-time showers followed by backing showers.
Last year, India produced 161,500 tonnes of coffee and exported 113,078
tonnes, worth Rs3.79bn (Pounds 80m).
The pace of liberalisation of the coffee export trade will be slow till such
time the government has come to a decision about the future of the Coffee
Board and its nearly 4,000 employees. The growers, who believe that the
Board has largely outlived its utility, are ready to provide funds for the
voluntary retirement scheme for the Board employees.
There is a growing consensus that the Board should give up its marketing
role in phases and concentrate on research and development, farm extension
work and promotion.
