FT  17 MAR 93 / Beijing unleashes fury on Patten
HONG KONG'S governor Chris Patten came under vituperative attack yesterday
in the People's Daily, newspaper of the Chinese Communist party.
Singling out Mr Patten's observation that it 'takes two to tango' in
reference to stalled negotiations on Hong Kong's future, the party newspaper
charged that 'tango dancing has made Chris Patten's head dizzy and speech
incoherent'.
'Just as Hong Kong was going on a road of peaceful transition, God knows
how, there comes a Chris Patten,' the paper said. 'We'd like to warn this
shameless politician to stop his clumsy show. Mr Patten, the tango dancer,
come back to your senses.'
Beijing has been infuriated by Mr Patten's gazetting last Friday of proposed
legislation aimed at extending Hong Kong's democratic reforms. It has
charged that this marks a betrayal of earlier agreements reached with
Britain on a smooth transition to Chinese rule in 1997.
British officials in Beijing said they were waiting for the dust to settle
on almost constant attacks levelled against Mr Patten since last Friday
before making judgments about possible diplomatic moves to quieten the
tempest.
In Hong Kong a senior official of Bank of China warned that the colony's
economy would suffer from 'the instability' Mr Patten's reforms would bring
to Hong Kong. Mr Lin Gunagzhao, the bank's deputy director, said Hong Kong's
real growth rate could be cut by up to 1 percentage point this year from the
5.5 per cent the Hong Kong government forecast in its budget.
Mr Lin said he feared the stock and property markets would be affected by
the current political uncertainty. 'The knock-on effects caused by the
influence on the property sector will spread to even wider areas.'
Mr Patten was, however, unbowed yesterday. After a meeting of his Executive
Council, or quasi-cabinet, he said the government planned to continue
working for the interests of ordinary people in Hong Kong. He said he would
continue to discuss the future of Hong Kong 'positively and constructively'.
In an implicit criticism of Mr Li Peng, China's prime minister, who on
Monday launched a vehement attack on the government, Mr Patten said: 'I
don't intend to use the sort of language which is very often being used
about Hong Kong by others.'
The stock market has seen steep falls in share prices over recent days as
investors took fright at China's criticism of Mr Patten's reforms. Stock
market analysts said that in the absence of these attacks there would
probably have been a rise in share prices.
Yesterday the market recovered some of the losses sustained in trading last
Friday and on Monday. The Hang Seng Index rose 125.43 points, or more than 2
per cent, to end at 5,980.04.
Government figures also showed a strong rebound in property market
transactions in February when turnover rose 105.6 per cent from January's
exceptionally low level. Property transactions in the first two months of
1993 were 5.3 per cent up on that same period last year.
