FT  04 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tories face further Maastricht
wrangle
THE threat of fresh internal wrangling within the Conservative party over
Maastricht looms over the government today when the committee stage debate
on the treaty returns to the Commons.
As the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties tabled fresh amendments on
Maastricht's social chapter, the government yesterday faced pressure to get
tough with rebel backbenchers amid mounting frustration among pro-treaty
ministers and MPs at the slow progress of the bill.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, again tried to rally the party by
warning that Britain's influence in the Community would 'go down the
plughole' if the treaty was not ratified.
Pro-European Tories are divided on how to tackle the rebels. Some believe
the ever-present danger of ambush by a combined Labour, Liberal Democrat and
Tory rebel opposition means party managers have no option but to tread
softly or face defeat.
Others argue that it is time to threaten sanctions against the rebels,
possibly including withdrawing the whip.
Evidence of the schism is set to surface when the 18-strong executive of the
1922 committee meets to discuss last week's confrontation in which loyalists
launched a fierce and probably pre-planned verbal barrage against those
seeking to frustrate the bill.
However, Sir Marcus Fox, 1922 chairman, has indicated to colleagues he is
highly reluctant to polarise the back benches when the number of rebels
appears to be rising.
Meanwhile, Mr Michael Morris, the deputy speaker, is expected to rule today
on whether a Labour backbencher's wrecking amendment can be heard.
He will also have to rule soon on the new Labour and Liberal Democrat
amendments which would, if passed, require the government to sign up to the
social chapter within 30 days of the Maastricht legislation coming into
effect.
It is unclear if the amendments will be ruled 'in order' by Mr Morris - and
whether Tory Euro-sceptics would support them if they are not seen as
'wrecking' amendments.
Manoeuvrings over the bill will resume tonight. Government whips must decide
whether to risk a vote for a late sitting to accelerate the bill or retreat
in the face of possible defeat. Last week, the whips had to use the
procedural device of refusing to supply tellers for a vote to minimise the
impact of a defeat after their numbers failed to add up.
