FT  07 OCT 93 / International Company News: Berlusconi appoints Fininvest
chief
MR Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian media mogul, has carried out a management
reshuffle in his family-controlled Fininvest group.
He has brought in Mr Franco Tato, from the Mondadori publishing subsidiary,
to take on the new job of group managing director.
Mr Tato, aged 61, has a reputation as a tough manager with broad experience
having worked for long spells at Olivetti as well as in Germany's Triumph
Adler.
This is the first time Mr Berlusconi has sought to bring in a manager with
wide overall responsibilities in an organisation which has reflected Mr
Berlusconi's personality.
The move has been prompted by plans to raise about L550bn (Dollars 348m)
through the flotation of a minority stake in Mr Berlusconi's publishing
interests. These are being regrouped in Silvio Berlusconi Editore
(Sbe)-Mondadori via a reverse takeover of Mondadori.
The Sbe flotation will take place within a matter of weeks, Fininvest said.
Mr Berlusconi's bankers have been pressing for firmer executive control as
the group's debt rises and interest charges eat into profits.
The group's published borrowings at the end of last year stood at L3,333bn
while profits totalled L21bn.
Rising debts come at a time of flat television advertising revenues while
the structure of Italy's commercial television networks, dominated by
Fininvest, is under discussion.
First-half results for 1993 show a turnover up 14 per cent to L6,268bn with
an end-year figure likely to be in the range of L12,000bn. But this, in
part, reflects acquisitions and consolidations to the balance sheet.
The cost of debt service at about L550bn is hampering any increase in
profits.
Candy, the white goods producer, is to take over the domestic refrigerator
and freezer division of Iberna, a small specialist producer based near
Milan.
The deal is expected to add half a percentage point to Candy's 6 per cent
share of the European white goods market. Although Iberna only produces
about 250,000 domestic freezers/refrigerators, it has an important
specialist market niche.
Candy, controlled by the Fumagalli family, will be able to use its
distribution network and exploit its brand name.
Iberna, controlled by the Valesei family, is understood to have had a 1992
turnover of L200bn. It will retain its industrial refrigerator division.
