FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (8): A
helping hand for hard-up parents - Scholarships and bursaries can ease the
financial burden
but remember you may well not be asked to pay them in full.
Last year, for the first time, more than a quarter of independent school
pupils received some assistance towards paying their school fees  - a total
of 123,750 children. This was a rise of 2.9 per cent on the previous year
and reflected schools' use of bursary funds to nurse parents through the
recession.
Both scholarships (awarded for academic merit or for specific abilities) and
bursaries (awarded in cases of need) allow parents to pay less than the
standard fees. The government's assisted places scheme also helped.
Schools are understandably cagey about announcing their use of bursaries to
parents, as they do not want to raise hopes. However, the Headmasters'
Conference, which includes most of the best known boys' schools, has
recently moved towards a policy of allowing more means-tested awards.
With a few exceptions, HMC schools now award scholarships of a maximum of
half standard fees on academic merit. This allows them more lee-way to help
boys from disadvantaged backgrounds - and means that schools can still pay
full fees to academically able pupils from poor backgrounds.
Many headteachers felt that awarding full-fees scholarships to children
whose parents could have afforded to pay anyway effectively reduced access
to their schools.
Some schools are required under the terms of their endowments to offer a
specific number of scholarships on merit. For example, St Paul's in London
has 153 'foundation scholars' at any one time, in accord with the wishes of
its founder, John Colet. Each scholar is entitled to wear a silver fish on
his lapel, as 153 is the number of fish caught by Jesus in the 'miraculous
draught'.
Eton, one of the richest schools, has 70 King's Scholars and will even pay
for four 10-year-olds to go through three years of prep school, before
taking the exams for the King's Scholarship.
Pupils entering for scholarships usually need to sit the school's own exams,
which will often include Latin, and then endure a round of interviews.
Others are prepared to take the common entrance exam as evidence.
Many schools also award scholarships for specific abilities, particularly
art, drama, music and sport. This practice is controversial, but it allows
schools to improve their extra-curricular activities without allowing rivals
to 'scoop the pool' of gifted youngsters.
Bursaries are commonly awarded during a pupil's career when parental
circumstances change for the worse. Typically, schools produce a form asking
parents about their circumstances, which must then be verified using tax
returns or other reliable documents. Decisions will then be taken normally
by bursars and governors.
Some schools have bursaries for children of families in the armed forces,
the clergy, or teachers.
The government's assisted places scheme also pays a large block of fees,
accounting for 31,582 children last year. The amount of government help will
depend on the family's 'relevant income', which includes the total pre-tax
income of both parents, and any unearned income from dependent children. It
does not include social security benefits and an allowance of Pounds 1,105
is deducted for each child in the family who is not applying for an assisted
place.
On this basis, families with income up to Pounds 9,226 are eligible to have
their fees paid in full. Assistance for families on higher incomes is
available on a declining scale, up to a maximum income of Pounds 25,000.
Parents interested in the scheme should contact the Department for Education
Assisted Places team, Mowden Hall, Darlington, Durham DL3 9BG (tel:
0325-392163). For details of schools in Wales, telephone 0222-761456,
extension 5362.
These sources of funds add up. Haberdashers' Aske's, an academic powerhouse
in Elstree, west London, offers 35 assisted places to 11-year-olds each year
and a further five for pupils joining in the sixth form. Side by side with
this is the school's bursary scheme, which currently pays (without any
academic threshold) towards the fees of around 100 boys.
It also awards five half-fee scholarships per year on academic merit,
meaning that more than a third of its intake receives some help with fees.
Statistics like that should shake parents out of discounting an independent
education just because published fees are high. They would be foolish not to
investigate the state sector. But it would be similarly a mistake not to ask
for help with fees.
Details on specialist scholarships, and on bursaries, are printed in
Choosing Your Independent School 1993/1994, published by the Independent
Schools Information Service, 56 Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6AG. 071-630
8793. Pounds 6.95. ISIS also publishes a list of recommended financial
advisers.
