FT  25 OCT 93 / US bank forced to cut further 3,000 jobs
A RENEWED round of cost-cutting at some of the US's largest commercial banks
was presaged last week as BankAmerica, the country's second biggest, said it
would shed between 3,000 and 3,750 jobs by the end of next year.
Other banks, while not pointing to specific plans to cut jobs, also
signalled they were putting renewed efforts into reducing their expenses.
The latest squeeze comes in the wake of results last week which showed that
some banks failing to maintain the momentum in reducing costs they
established at the start of the 1990s.
BankAmerica has already shed 20,000 jobs in the past 18 months as part of
efforts to rationalise its operations following its takeover of Security
Pacific. The next round of job cuts, on the other hand, are part of an
effort to bring the bank's costs more into line with competitors. The job
losses will be spread across the bank, which currently employs 98,000.
The California-based bank was reacting to a rise in its cost/ income ratio,
one of the key measures of a bank's operating performance, in the face of
only a negligible growth in its income over the previous year. Third-quarter
results released last week showed the ratio had crept up to 64.1 per cent,
from 63.4 per cent the previous quarter, and 61 per cent a year before.
While US banks owe much of their turnround in recent years to a favourable
interest-rate environment, they have also succeeded in bringing down their
operating costs sharply. Last week Mr Gerald Corrigan, who as chairman of
the New York Fed until last summer had been the US's top bank regulator,
pointed to the improvements in the banks' cost/income ratios as one of the
main factors behind the recovery.
Citicorp, the US's largest bank, also said it would concentrate more on
cutting costs, though it said it could not forecast how many jobs may be
lost.
Citicorp achieved one of the most drastic reductions in costs when it cut
its cost/income ratio from over 70 per cent to around 55 per cent by last
year. In the latest three months, though, the figure climbed back to 57 per
cent. Mr Tom Jones, in charge of financial reporting at Citi, said the bank
was making renewed efforts to bring costs down.
