FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Rhone-Alpes (6): Sponsorship thinks big
EUROPOLE, Grenoble's biggest property development since the town hosted the
1968 winter Olympics, is an example of how it has used decentralisation to
seize the initiative in its own affairs.
Mr Alain Carignon, Grenoble's young Gaullist mayor, launched the project
four years ago, making use of the new planning permission powers granted to
town councils - powers which were previously the domain of central
government. At the time, the Europole site was a wasteland of redundant
industrial buildings and railway goods yards; a blight at the heart of one
of France's fastest growing towns.
Today the site boasts a business school, a hotel and more than 25,000 square
metres of prime office space. Next month will see the opening of another
hotel, to be followed by a conference and exhibition centre grouped round
the Place Robert Schuman - aptly named, after a founding father of the
European Community.
Europole is typical of the many hundreds of prestige property development
sponsored by town councils across France in the wake of decentralisation.
However, unlike some of the others, it has not brought its city sponsor to
near-bankruptcy.
Grenoble has carefully limited its part in the project, set up as a city
hall majority-controlled joint venture with French banks and construction
companies.
City funds have put up FFr340m for the cost of acquiring land from the SNCF
railway board and providing the supporting infrastructure. It has been up to
the private sector partners to pay for the construction - and find tenants.
Despite the property market crisis, Europole has found tenants for 90 per
cent of the space so far completed in the scheme. This is well above the
average occupancy rate for office property in Grenoble, says Mr Christian
Abel, who is the deputy managing director for the Europole project.
The decline in demand for property, however, has brought one potential cloud
to Europole's horizon. No firm tenants have yet been found for a 13,000
square metre office block, part of the project which is due for completion
in September of this year. 'For the moment, Europole has escaped the
property crisis. But we are worried because our potential clients are
worried,' admits Mr Abel.
