FT  20 OCT 93 / Government Bonds: Gilts stage rally in wake of auction
announcement
UK GILTS rallied across the curve after the Bank of England announced it
would not hold a gilts auction in November because of the timing of the
November 30 budget.
This sparked a squeeze in the futures market, where the long gilt future on
Liffe hit a new contract high at 114.26. It ended at 114.25, up 0.21 point
on the day.
The Bank also announced the details of this month's auction of Pounds 3.5bn
6 per cent Treasury Stock due 1999, next year's new five-year benchmark.
While this is the largest auction amount to date, the news failed to dampen
prices in the intermediate maturities.
According to analysts at Merrill Lynch, 'the size of the issue will have
been influenced by the Bank's intention to create a liquid five-year
benchmark for 1994, as well as their willingness to take advantage of
speculation on rate cuts feeding short end demand.'
BELGIAN bond prices rallied late in the day on news of proposals for the
social pact agreement between the government, employers and unions.
The yield on 10-year bonds dropped from 7.12 per cent to 7.09 in late
trading. However, the proposal was only starting to emerge as the market
closed. Dealers said they had not had time to examine the details.
There were two key items, according to Mr John Hall, European economist at
Swiss Bank Corporation: a complete freeze in real wage costs from 1994 to
1996; abandonment of wage indexation; and cuts to public expenditure rather
than tax increases.
'What we need to see is the agreement of the unions on the whole accord,'
said Mr Hall, 'and there are a number of areas which still haven't been
clarified.' However, assuming agreement is reached, the market should rally
further.
GERMAN bund prices rallied slightly late in the day. Dealers said the
Bundesbank report's positive attitude on the trend for lowering inflation
had encouraged speculation that rates would ease.
AFTER posting early declines in the wake of a stronger-than-expected
September housing starts report, longer-dated US Treasury prices rallied to
stand slightly firmer late yesterday afternoon.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  3/16 at 105
25/32 , yielding 5.834 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note was unchanged at 100 1/16 , to yield 3.824 per cent.
Prices eased at the long end in early trading after the commerce department
announced that housing starts rose 2.8 per cent in September to a 1.35m
annual rate. The data was stronger than analysts expected - the average of
forecasts was for an annual rate of 1.3m.
Although the data spurred some early selling, observers said it was mostly
confined to dealers and speculators taking profits after the market's recent
big rally. Consequently, prices were able to recover their lost ground, and
amid reports of new buying by municipal authorities, the long end inched
into positive territory around mid-afternoon.
