FT  27 AUG 93 / International Capital Markets: Indian groups return to tap
global investors
INDIAN companies are returning to international capital markets following an
easing of investors' concerns about last year's financial scandal in Bombay
and this year's sectarian disturbances.
Indian businesses see international capital issues as a vital source of
funds for modernising industry, in the wake of the economic reforms started
two years ago by Mr P V Narasimha Rao, the prime minister.
Two companies tapped the Euromarkets last month for a combined total of
about Dollars 150m. At least six further companies plan to raise more than
Dollars 400m by the end of the year.
The offerings come amid signs of growing interest in India among
international fund managers. Foreign investors have put about Dollars 450m
into the Indian stock market in the past six weeks, contributing to a strong
surge in share prices.
Mr Udayan Bose, chairman of Creditcapital Finance Corporation, a merchant
bank part-owned by Lazard Brothers, the UK investment bank, said yesterday
international investors were becoming interested in India because the rush
to invest in Latin America and China was slowing.
The first Indian issuer to tap the international markets was Reliance
Industries, the flagship company of Reliance, a chemicals and textiles
group. It raised Dollars 150m in May 1992. Other companies wanting to follow
Reliance were forced to postpone their plans because of the securities
market scandal among banks and brokers in the Bombay bond market.
It was not until November that the second issue was launched - by Grasim
Industries, a textiles maker belonging to a grouping headed by Mr Aditya
Birla, a leading entrepreneur. The destruction of the Ayodhya mosque on
December 6, which sparked riots and concern about India's stability, forced
other issuers to shelve plans once more.
Indian companies finally returned to the market last month. They were led by
Hindalco, an aluminium maker also controlled by Mr Aditya Birla, and Essar
Gujarat, a diversified group with interests in steel, shipping and trading.
Each raised about Dollars 75m.
Next in line is Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation, a
Madras-based petrochemicals group, with a Dollars 60m to Dollars 75m issue
of global depository receipts next month. This will be followed by a Dollars
100m convertible bond issue from the Shipping Credit and Investment
Corporation of India, a shipping finance group, and a Dollars 75m to Dollars
100m convertible bond issue from ITC, a tobacco and hotels company in which
BAT of the UK has a stake.
This week Mahindra &amp; Mahindra, a vehicle maker, announced plans for a
Dollars 75m bond offering.
