FT  01 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Disclosure row clouds arms-to-Iraq
inquiry
LORD JUSTICE Scott yesterday gave a forthright 50-minute briefing in his
inquiry into the export of arms and dual-use equipment to iraq.
But with wrangling over the disclosure of sensitive information, it was
uncertain whether he might be prevented from getting to the bottom of the
affair.
A published exchange of letters between Lord Justice Scott and Sir Robin
Butler, head of the civil service, showed that Sir Robin - with the backing
of Mr John Major - had tried to persuade Lord Justice Scott to agree to
ground rules covering circumstances under which official information should
be disclosed in public hearings and those where it should be heard in
camera.
Lord Justice Scott's response makes clear that the test he will use in
deciding whether to conduct a hearing in closed session is whether
disclosure would 'cause serious injury to the interests of the nation'. The
robustness of his response should at least ease fears that private hearings
might be used to suppress material which was merely embarrassing.
Lord Justice Scott is thus adopting a similar position to Judge Brian
Smedley QC, who in the Matrix-Churchill trial overruled 'public interest
immunity certificates' which stated there was no need for confidential
information to be given to the courts. The government is also encouraging
openness by effectively giving witnesses immunity from prosecution.
A disclosure which served to feed doubts yesterday was that an obscure
158-year-old Act would prevent Lord Justice Scott from taking evidence on
oath.
The judge shrugged this off - he found it 'a little laughable' to be
circumscribed in this way and he thought it 'highly unlikely' he was going
to be told a series of lies.
But some thought the admission significant. The lack of power to give
evidence on oath was cited by Lord Denning as one of the main disadvantages
of the inquiry into the Profumo affair in 1963.
Also, Lord Justice Scott did not deny yesterday that he might not get access
to all the papers he wanted, although he said he was not aware of any
difficulty so far presented by the absence of documents he had requested but
not yet received.
Last week Mr Jonathan Aitken, minister for defence procurement, admitted
that the Ministry of Defence might have destroyed some of the documents the
inquiry had requested.
Witnesses are to be invited - rather than compelled - to give oral evidence.
Most of the main figures, including Mr Major and Mr Alan Clark, the former
defence minister, have indicated their willingness to appear. Baroness
Thatcher, the former prime minister, was not available for comment
yesterday, but is believed to be likely to consent.
Lord Justice Scott said yesterday Sir Hal Miller, the former Conservative MP
who refused to give evidence to the cross-party trade and industry select
committee's Supergun inquiry, had given 'every indication' that he would
assist the inquiry if invited.
The inquiry is only likely to cause serious discomfort to the government if
it uncovers evidence of transgressions by current ministers. Some people
argue that the present administration could derive positive benefit from any
discrediting of the Thatcher regime.
Labour last year tried systematically and unsuccessfully to pin blame on Mr
Major for the extent of British exports of dual - use equipment to Iraq
after the release of previously - secret government documents in the
Matrix-Churchill trial.
