FT  13 MAR 93 / Sport: After Mansell - The new F1 season starts tomorrow /
Martin Jacques asks which driver will win
THE first grand prix of the Formula One season at Kyalami, South Africa,
tomorrow will provide some light relief from the politics that have
dominated the closed season. As the racing starts, F1 is afflicted by doubt
and uncertainty.
During the 1980s, F1 was in expansive mood. Attendances at races mushroomed,
television audiences grew apace, sponsorship brought unprecedented resources
to the teams, and the big car-makers entered the fray on a greater scale
than ever before. F1 enjoyed its own version of the boom years. Last season,
however, the recession began to bite. Three teams withdrew, and rumours in
the paddock suggested that all but the top ones were feeling the pinch.
The downturn coincided with a more existential crisis. The season proved to
be one of the most processional ever. Nigel Mansell in his Williams-Renault
dominated from beginning to end. He won more grands prix in the course of
the season than anyone had ever achieved previously.
Crowds dropped and, most seriously of all, so did television audiences. The
powers-that-be began to worry that the television companies might lower F1's
credit rating, with potentially dire consequences for the financial health
of the sport.
The secret of Mansell's domination was the remarkable technical advantage
achieved by Patrick Head and Adrian Newey, the Williams designers, over
their rivals. But this proved expensive and F1 was threatened by a pincer
movement: poor entertainment value and escalating costs.
To compound matters, negotiations between Williams and Mansell over a new
contract broke down and F1 finds itself facing the new season without the
world champion and, by common consent, the most exciting driver.
Worse, Mansell signed for one of the top teams in the US Indycar series, a
long-standing rival of F1 and the main reason why it has never become a
serious force in north America. Mansell's charisma saw European television
companies, including Britain's ITV, queuing to buy the rights to broadcast
the Indycar events.
But as the 1993 season prepares for the lights to turn green, there are some
encouraging signs on the track. The fear has been that there would be a
repeat of last year, with Williams - and Alain Prost, in particular -
disappearing into the blue yonder.
Pre-season predictions are, however, always notoriously difficult and
unreliable. They are based on close-season testing involving many different
circuits and conditions and, often, wilful attempts by one team or another
to conceal their true performance.
Last season, the majority of pundits failed to predict Mansell's
extraordinary domination: instead, most of them backed Ayrton Senna to
become world champion again. This season, needless to say, they have gone
overwhelmingly for Prost in the Williams.
In recent testing, though, the Benetton - fitted with all the latest
technology and driven by Michael Schumacher, the talented young German - has
gone well. So, too, has the new McLaren which, in the hands of Senna,
managed to break the lap record at Silverstone last week.
The McLaren's performance persuaded the three-time world champion to race in
South Africa: previously, he had left his intentions for the new season
suitably vague, even considering giving it a miss altogether should the new
McLaren not be competitive.
Meanwhile, many eyes will be cast westward as Mansell wends his round the US
(and, occasionally, Canada and Australia) in his Indycar. The F1 authorities
will no doubt be monitoring his progress with more than a little
nervousness: motor racing fans, however, are promised a double whammy. For
most of the season, F1 and Indycar will be on UK television screens on
alternate Sundays.
