FT  19 APR 93 / A difficult test for the new boy: The educational challenge
facing Sir Ron Dearing
SIR RON Dearing, a former chairman of the Post Office, today takes over what
promises to be the most difficult job in British education. He has been
entrusted by Mr John Patten, the education secretary, with reviewing the
entire national curriculum for England and Wales.
The increasingly confrontational tactics used this weekend by the government
and by the unions threatening to boycott national curriculum tests make his
position awkward.
Sir Ron wants the tests to go ahead, saying he needs them as evidence if the
system is to be improved. He said: 'I really do need that information. That
would enable me to make proposals for changes. I have views, but views
aren't as convincing, with respect, as hands-on experience and true
independent evaluation.'
He could not do an 'honest job' of serving teachers without completed tests,
evaluated by the Office for Standards in Education, he said. He has already
arranged meetings with all six teachers' unions, a move which Mr Patten has
consistently refused to make.
This moderate stance could, however, be undercut by the legal action brought
against the teachers by Wandsworth Borough Council. This reaches the Appeal
Court tomorrow. Letters Mr Patten will send to governors and head teachers
this week, telling them they are legally obliged to enforce the tests, add
to the atmosphere of confrontation.
Sir Ron's potential influence over what children are taught is
unprecedented. He takes over today as chairman of both the National
Curriculum Council, responsible for setting the curriculum, and the School
Examinations and Assessment Council, which decides on testing the
curriculum. In October these two bodies will merge into the School
Curriculum and Assessment Authority, under his chairmanship.
He wants the SCAA to be autonomous, saying: 'I've never had any political
affiliation. I'm working first and foremost for the future of our
youngsters. I regard myself as having an obligation to parents, and very
much to teachers, who are out there in the front line doing a very demanding
job, and finally to parliament.'
Previous incumbents at the NCC and the SEAC were hampered by a close
identification with government education policy.
His efforts to win over teachers appeared to make some headway after his
meeting with Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of
Teachers and Lecturers, which is not affiliated to the TUC.
Mr Smith said: 'It was a very constructive meeting and I went away confident
that he understands the reality of the immediate problems, and that he was
in the business of attempting to solve problems rather than aggravate them.'
The ATL is still, however, calling for the tests to be abandoned. Mr Smith
said: 'To put a lot of time and effort into something which everyone accepts
isn't working and is not likely to work doesn't make a great deal of sense.'
Sir Ron could yet play a crucial role in reforming the education system if
the political row abates. Whether he has the chance to play it seems to
depend on Mr Patten, and on the teachers' unions.
