FT  19 OCT 93 / Handling of fraud cases for review
A REVIEW of the handling of fraud prosecutions by the Serious Fraud Office
and the Crown Prosecution Service was announced yesterday by Sir Nicholas
Lyell, the attorney-general.
It will examine the distribution of case work between the two agencies which
between them are currently responsible for bringing the overwhelming
majority of fraud cases before the courts.
Sir Nicholas tacitly acknowledged the severe embarrassment recently suffered
by the prosecuting authorities through the collapse of indictments involving
substantial sums and prominent defendants.
The review has been prompted by the recommendation of the recent Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice that a feasibility study into merging the two
agencies should be carried out.
It was made against a background of continuing concern over both the way
prosecutions are brought and the differences in the powers enjoyed by the
SFO and the Fraud Investigation Group (FIG) within the CPS.
Only the SFO has the section 2 powers to remove the right to silence and
compel suspects to answer questions. It also assumes the role of
investigator far earlier than FIG, which relies more upon the police to
carry out initial investigations.
These differences in powers have attracted criticism in legal circles since
the only differences in the offences investigated by the two agencies are
the amounts of money involved in the fraud. The SFO only takes cases
involving at least Pounds 5m. Those involving smaller sums are handled by
FIG.
The attorney-general, in a Commons written reply, said the review will look
at the distribution of case work between the two agencies, the way
differences in their powers affect the handling of cases and the powers of
the SFO.
Sir Nicholas said it would also cover the organisation and management of
investigation and prosecution work, taking into account the role of the
police in fraud investigations and the Department of Trade and Industry in
company matters generally.
Official sources stressed last night that there was no hidden agenda behind
the review and that no decisions had been taken at this point on issues such
as extending the section 2 powers of the SFO to FIG.
However, the section 2 powers are credited by the SFO and others as having
proved to be a successful means of persuading an increasing number of
suspects to plead guilty before a trial, a trend which has boosted the SFO's
conviction rate.
