FT  24 JUL 93 / Finance and The Family: Bankruptcy poses threat to pensions
INDIVIDUAL bankruptcies increased by 44 per cent last year compared with
1991, according to figures published by the Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI). This means that, last year, almost 37,000 people met financial ruin.
They may feel that their retirement provision at least is protected securely
through their pension. But some pension specialists believe the law
surrounding pension rights in bankruptcy is unclear and that, in certain
cases, the Official Receiver (the liquidator) or Trustee in Bankruptcy can
gain access to your pension fund.
If you are declared bankrupt, an Official Receiver or Trustee in Bankruptcy
is appointed to investigate your financial affairs.
The DTI says: 'Bankruptcy will almost certainly involve the closure of any
business you run and the dismissal of your employees. You will have to give
up any possessions of value and your interest in your house.'
The Official Receiver will take control of your assets, and either he or the
Trustee will dispose of them to pay your creditors. Perhaps most
devastating, your family home could be sold to help pay your debts.
Next to the family home, a pension is usually a person's most valuable
possession. Under the Insolvency Act, pensions are classed as assets and
can, in theory, be used to help pay the bankrupt's debts.
The treatment of the pension will depend, however, on whether the person
actually has retired (and, therefore, has a tangible asset in his hands) or
is still working and has only 'future rights' to the benefits. By law,
employees with personal pensions cannot gain access to their fund until at
least age 50. In most occupational schemes, they must wait until company
pension age - usually, between 60 and 65.
Once the pension is due, it becomes an asset. But those nearing retirement
and facing potential bankruptcy should take advice before requesting that
part of their benefits are paid as a tax-free cash lump sum (known as
commutation).
Lesley Browning, a solicitor with Nabarro Nathanson, says: 'Although the
Trustee in Bankruptcy does not automatically take possession of the lump
sum, he can serve notice on the bankrupt so that the lump sum becomes his
property. The bankrupt must notify the Trustee in Bankruptcy within 21 days
of receipt of the lump sum. Clearly, in these circumstances it makes sense
not to elect to take a lump sum but to take the entire benefit as pension
instead.'
Of course, the Trustee also can gain access to the bankrupt's income from
the occupational scheme. Browning says: 'The Trustee can apply to the courts
for an income payments order under the Insolvency Act under which part of
the pension payments are redirected to him. However, the court will always
assess the pensioner's needs and will not reduce the pension to an amount
upon which it would be difficult to live.'
With personal pensions, employees could face problems if they are over 50
but still working. David Holland, managing director of financial adviser RK
Harrison, warns: 'The Trustee in Bankruptcy 'stands in the shoes' of the
bankrupt and in the case of a personal pension, where the bankrupt has the
option of taking benefits at age-50, the Trustee can take the benefits in
the same way.' Holland added, however, that there was little evidence that
liquidators were doing this.
The situation regarding individuals who are still working when they become
bankrupt is more complex. Robin Ellison, a partner with pensions solicitor
Ellison Westhorp, says that though your pension is classed as an asset, it
does not really become so until it is realised.
The same is true of preserved (or 'frozen') pensions. These are the benefits
you leave behind in a company scheme when you change jobs.
Rather worryingly, the Social Security Act 1973 states that 'scheme rules
can permit forfeiture of short service benefits (ie, preserved pensions)
when an individual becomes bankrupt.' But Ellison says the vast majority of
occupational schemes include a Catch-22 clause in their trust deed. This has
the effect of changing the individual's right to a benefit into a
discretion. Once the benefits can be paid only by the discretion of the
scheme's trustees, the pension is no longer an asset and cannot be seized by
the liquidators.
One exception to this rule is where a company or individual on the brink of
insolvency pays large contributions into a pension scheme in an attempt to
shelter assets from creditors. Lloyd's Names, for example, might be tempted
particularly by this device, given their present plight.
In these circumstances, the Trustee could have a strong case for gaining
access to the funds, although experts believe the law is unclear.
Paul Newman, a barrister at Wilberforce Chambers, says: 'It seems on balance
that it would actually be very difficult for the Trustee to stop a potential
bankrupt from putting money into a pension scheme to shelter it from
creditors.'
Newman explains that part of the problem lies in the fact that the money is
not being passed on to a third party but is being set aside for the
bankrupt.
Bankruptcy generally lasts for three years and then the debt is discharged
so there is also the practical problem for the Trustee in Bankruptcy to gain
access to the future rights of a scheme if they are not available to the
bankrupt until the three years is up.'
It would seem that the law almost goes out of its way to protect the pension
rights of bankrupts, although test cases may force legislative changes in
the case of individuals who use their scheme or plan deliberately as a way
to shelter funds from creditors.
