FT  07 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Shephard to seek co-operation
on 'fragile' south Atlantic fisheries
MRS GILLIAN Shephard, the UK agriculture minister, yesterday stressed the
need for co-operation in protecting 'fragile' South Atlantic fish stocks as
she prepared to become only the third British cabinet minister to visit
Argentina since the Falklands conflict 11 years ago.
Relations between the two countries were soured again last May when Britain
decided to extend territorial waters to 200 miles around South Georgia and
the South Sandwich Islands, neighbours of the Falklands, and to introduce a
fishing licence system there to halt overfishing by third countries.
Argentina claims sovereignty over the two islands, as well as the Falklands,
where Britain has operated similar restrictions since 1987. Last year
Argentina introduced a cut-price licensing system for vessels operating in
its waters which has poached many of the Falklands' best customers.
Mrs Shephard said yesterday, on the eve of a week-long trade promotion trip
to three south American countries, that there had been discussions on the
issue of fishing limits at European Community level, with Spain particularly
interested in fishing for squid and hake in the South Atlantic. 'We need
agreement between the respective authorities to conserve fish for the mutual
benefit of all parties,' she said. 'Fish stocks there are fragile and
limited.'
She will also urge Argentina to lift its ban on imports of British cattle
for breeding purposes. Argentina is one of the 17 countries that still ban
cattle imports because of the 'mad cow disease' outbreak in the 1980s.
Mrs Shephard said the Paris-based Office International des Epizooties, the
international animal health organisation, had agreed there was no longer any
problem with British cattle exports.
Her visit to Argentina, accompanied by a team of British businessmen and
agricultural experts, follows separate trips by Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign
secretary, and Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade,
earlier this year.
Her first stop today will be Paraguay, where she expects to meet Mr Juan
Carlos Wasmosy, the first freely elected civilian president. She will then
visit Uruguay and lastly Argentina.
The objectives of the trip are to promote British food and drink, as well as
agricultural expertise and machinery.
