FT  09 JUN 93 / Britain behind in R&amp;D: Foreign companies spend more on
research, DTI study says
BRITISH companies increased spending on research and development by 6 per
cent last year, although the recession reduced their profits by 11 per cent,
the annual R&amp;D Scoreboard, published today by the Department of Trade and
Industry, shows.
The DTI report points out that UK industry carries out much less R&amp;D than
its international competitors on any comparative measure - and that the UK
slipped further behind last year. The world's 200 largest companies
increased spending on R&amp;D by 8 per cent while their profits declined by 9
per cent.
This year's R&amp;D Scoreboard includes more extensive international comparisons
than its two predecessors. They show that UK companies devoted 1.55 per cent
of aggregate sales revenue to R&amp;D last year, compared with a world average
of 4.59 per cent, and only 19.7 per cent of profits compared with 94.3 per
cent internationally.
The report also shows for the first time the 'inexorable decline in the
contribution of British companies to the patent register in the USA' (see
chart). The UK share of all US patents fell from 10 per cent in 1980 to 6
per cent in 1991.
The sector in which the UK performs best - both in R&amp;D spending and in
output of patents - is pharmaceuticals. Among individual companies, Glaxo,
the largest British drugs manufacturer, stood out with a 25 per cent jump in
R&amp;D last year from Pounds 475m to Pounds 595m, although it was still second
to Johnson &amp; Johnson of the US in the world healthcare league.
The two Anglo-Dutch giants, Unilever and Shell, both headed the spending
tables for their respective sectors. In food, Unilever's turnover was very
close to Nestle's but its Pounds 461m R&amp;D budget far exceeded the Swiss
group's Pounds 302m. In fuels, Shell came just ahead of Exxon of the US.
Aerospace suffered the steepest relative decline of any UK sector last year.
It cut R&amp;D by 8 per cent while the international industry increased spending
by 11 per cent. The main factor was the financial retrenchment at British
Aerospace, which led to a 23 per cent slide in R&amp;D outlays.
The R&amp;D Scoreboard was prepared for the DTI by Company Reporting of
Edinburgh, on the basis of R&amp;D expenditure published in the annual accounts
of 340 UK companies. Company Reporting said such disclosures should now be
standard practice, yet 25 per cent of companies that mentioned R&amp;D in their
annual reports for last year did not say how much they spent. They included
Associated British Foods, BET, J. Bibby, Eastern Electricity, Guinness, J.
Sainsbury and Tate &amp; Lyle.
Company Reporting said: 'A number of companies describe in glowing terms
their R&amp;D activity but when it comes to disclosing the amount of R&amp;D spend
they are strangely silent.
'Such practices make a mockery of serious attempts to use the R&amp;D data
currently being disclosed.'
The 1993 UK R&amp;D Scoreboard. DTI Innovation Unit, 151 Buckingham Palace Road,
London SW1W 9SS.
