FT  03 JUL 93 / Arts: Fellini on films - Video
AT THE end of the screening of Fellini's Intervista at Cannes six years ago,
the audience all but levitated in rapture. After that split-second silence
that follows the viewing of a masterpiece, the cheers rang out so loud that
the absent Signor F could have heard them in Rome. His film about
film-making - a 50th birthday tribute to Cinecitta Studios starring all the
old Fellini hands (Mastroianni, Ekberg, himself) plus helpings of comedy,
fantasy and satire - would surely hasten straight from the Cote d'Azur to UK
cinemas?
It never came to Britain at all. The old maestro or his producers asked for
too much money, and the initially frantic bidders fell away as the years
passed. Now Intervista (Western Connection) appears on cassette, the year's
most distinguished video premiere and the best late Fellini after Ginger And
Fred.
As there, Marcello Mastroianni is our radiantly rueful hero. First seen in
blue topper and tails rising on a smoke-swathed movie crane outside
Fellini's studio office window, he later escorts us on the film's surreal
sorties beyond the Cinecitta gates: a trip to Anita Ekberg's villa plus
nostalgic home screening of La Dolce Vita - watch for the marvellous comic
punctation of a shot of three dogs - and a tram journey through Rome's
outskirts on a road terrorised by Red Indians, bordered by waterfalls and
thronged with old-world peasants selling grapes. What price theme parks when
you have Federico Fellini's runaway imagination?
Realism is an early casualty in this film. But what would you expect from a
director whose theme is the punchdrunk poetry of the picture business; and
whose portrait of Cinecitta itself is a delicious chaos of giant elephants,
cut-out Rolls Royce cars, lipstick-shaped cannons and passionate love scenes
cut short by the cry of 'Stop] Lunch]'
Video distributors are pulling a mean trick this summer. While Britain's big
screens groan under the weight of silly-season dross, with only Jurassic
Park promising glitter if not gold, the nation's VCRs are being wooed with
major treasures ancient and modern.
Tartan Video, the latest art-movie entrant, offers Fritz Lang's haunting
silent classic Dr Mabuse, The Gambler, Gillo Pontecorvo's searing docudrama
The Battle Of Algiers and Bergman's mid-period masterpiece Through A Glass
Darkly. Curzon bring you Nikita Mikalkov's Venice Golden Lion-winning Urga,
that spry East-meets-West pastoral set in Mongolia. And other July gems
include a Carl Dreyer (Vampyr, Redemption Video), a Zhang Yimou (Ju Dou, ICA
Projects) and a brace of Billy Wilders (The Apartment, Warner, and The
Fortune Cookie, MGM/UA).
Among more recent commercial movies transferred to video, there are also
riches aplenty. Pick of the month are Woody Allen's Husbands And Wives (20:
20), Roman Polanski's Bitter Moon (Columbia TriStar) and Brian DePalma's
Raising Cain (CIC), followed by Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon chewing up the
scenery in the film of David Mamet's Glengarry Glen Ross (20: 20).
Indeed scenery-consumption is a feature in all four films. Allen's picture
of a dissolving romance - himself and Mia Farrow as the spitting, hating
couple - turns life into art with a scarifying comic passion. Polanski's
shipboard black comedy lets Peter Coyote loose as a sort of randy Ancient
Mariner, bombarding a prim English couple with his (startlingly explicit)
sexual history. And star John Lithgow has a high time as a multiple-identity
psychopath in DePalma's glossy, tongue-in-cheek murder thriller: the tongue
not so far in cheek that it cannot shoot forth snake-like at surprise
moments to shock us.
Finally, and strictly for curio collectors, there is JFK: The Director's Cut
(Warner). This adds 17 extra minutes to Oliver Stone's already gargantuan
three-hour Kennedy epic and I am dashed if I can tell what difference they
make to the thesis or the dramatic effect, except to make a long film seem
even longer. When will the 'director's cut' actually mean a cut?
