FT  22 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Few trade disputes are hard as steel -
Nancy Dunne finds that one company's protection could be another's ruin
THE WORK stations in the factory's tool and die room are decorated with
American flags. One also bears a slogan: 'Don't mess with the USA. Defend
firearms.'
This apparent fount of US chauvinism produces millions of tiny steel motor
vehicle fixtures a year, some so precise that they have a permissible error
margin less than half the width of a human hair. The star of the shop's many
production lines - a spark plug gasket - is judged so superior that it has
captured nearly 100 per cent of the US market and 15 per cent of Europe's.
The shell of H K Metalcraft of Lodi, New Jersey, is as meticulously crafted
as its products. It is cavernous, dazzlingly white with a single blue stripe
like a belt around its middle.
Safety and quality awards hang in the factory's reception area along with a
large photograph of its 52 beaming employees.
In the US there are thousands of small parts producers such as Metalcraft,
employing some 6m-8m workers. Mr Raymond Hopp, the president, is one of
those entrepreneurs President Bill Clinton wants to encourage with tax
breaks, manufacturing centres and other government aid.
But Mr Hopp is discouraged and dreading next year when the imported steel he
uses may be either unavailable or more expensive. He is one of the 1,200
members of the Precision Metal Association, which represents the US
metal-forming industry and uses half the flat-rolled steel in the country.
Flat-rolled prices have been rising since the US Commerce Department last
year began to investigate complaints from domestic steel producers that
imports from 19 countries have been subsidised or dumped - sold at 'less
than fair market value'.
If on July 27 the International Trade Commission of the US finds that the
imports have damaged American steel companies, then tariffs of up to 109 per
cent will be made permanent, and domestic prices will climb still higher.
Small steel users claim they employ more than 30 workers for every worker
employed by the giant steel companies, whose job may be saved by the dumping
and countervailing duties. But the small companies have little presence in
Washington, where massive layoffs from the giant steel companies have
attracted the most attention.
In an attempt to raise the profile of small companies such as Mr Hopp's,
1,400 small steel using companies have joined with steel traders of the
American Institute for International Steel; Nucor Corporation, the
successful mini-mill steel producer; and Rockwell International, the
aircraft manufacturer, to form the Coalition of American Businesses for
Stable Steel Supplies.
Mr Jon Jensen, the coalition spokesman, insists that steel imports are
bought for quality rather than price and are, in fact, purchased at prices
higher than those charged by domestic producers.
'Almost all imported steel purchased by PMA members is high precision
product not manufactured by US steelmakers,' he says.
He cites one example after another of companies injured by the steel
tariffs: an east coast manufacturer of baseball cleats (grip studs under
baseball shoes) forced to rely on lower quality American steel; a Midwestern
maker of electric wares whose steel prices have risen 10 per cent; a
California car parts manufacturer who says that the US steel he must buy to
replace imports is often rusty on arrival.
Because he has contracts with a steel service centre, Mr Hopp has yet to
suffer extensively from the new tariffs and duties but next year those
contracts will expire. If imports are less accessible, his business could
suffer. For one product he uses a high quality Japanese steel required by
the customer - a Japanese 'transplant' vehicle supplier.
For another he uses an imported high carbon steel, manufactured by only two
companies in Europe. It too is specified by his customer, a domestic vehicle
producer. And US car companies are now 'fussy, intolerant of error because
their customers are intolerant of poor quality'.
He is sceptical about the dumping and countervailing duty regime, observing
that every country subsidises in one form or another, and companies must
adapt.
'The product that made 50 per cent of our business in 1974 makes up 2 per
cent of our business today. We were making standard washers, and the
Japanese put us out of business. Then the Koreans put them out of business,
and the Taiwanese put them out of business and the People's Republic of
China put them out of business.
'That was a low-tech item. We have had to develop products which require
intellectual property. We have had to price the products aggressively. We
have had to compete, stay up to date, and continuously adapt to new
processes and conditions,' says Mr Hopp.
The only way he can adapt to the tariffs, he says, is to lay off two or
three workers. These are the good, high paying jobs Mr Clinton promises to
create. Highly trained by the company, most Metalcraft workers can perform
at least three jobs, when needed.
The average worker has been with the company for 10.5 years, receiving
bonuses at the end of profitable years.
Mr Hopp believes that if steel prices continue to rise he will lose the
European market share he struggled to gain over six years as well as some of
his American customers. Sales last year were Dollars 8m (Pounds 5.3m) and
could rise to Dollars 9.5m-Dollars 10m this year. Mr Hopp says he could add
jobs if he were not 'constrained in an artificial way'.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
US UNIT STEEL PRICES (Dollars per tonne)*
 ---------------------------------------------------------
                                 1989   1990   1991   1992
Hot-rolled products
Imports                           424    373    356    344
Domestic sources                  369    342    324    322
Cold-rolled products
Imports                           542    503    485    479
Domestic sources                  485    470    456    450
Corrosion-resistant products
Imports                           680    686    643    756
Domestic sources                  604    603    589    580
 ---------------------------------------------------------
*Unit values Source: ITC
 ---------------------------------------------------------
