FT  28 JUL 93 / GM accused of trying to destroy Volkswagen: Computer
'hacking' charges described as absurd
MR Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen chairman, has launched a ferocious
counter-attack on General Motors, accusing the US group of trying to destroy
his company and undermine the German economy.
Goaded into action by legal setbacks and continued harassment by GM lawyers,
Mr Piech suggested that agents of the US group or disaffected VW employees
might have 'hacked' into Volkswagen's computer system to plant GM secrets in
the German group's network.
He also implied that GM could have put confidential information in boxes
found in a house formerly occupied by two VW employees who moved from Adam
Opel, GM's German subsidiary, in late March.
Opel described the charges, to be published tomorrow in Stern, an
illustrated weekly, as 'absurd'.
Mr Piech's attack is expected to continue at a hurriedly called press
conference in Wolfsburg today. After weeks of restricting its statements to
flat denials of all charges and allegations of industrial espionage against
former GM employees now at VW, the German group has swung on to the
offensive.
'This is mud-slinging,' Mr Piech told Stern. 'And if we are to be attacked
with dirt, we must defend ourselves accordingly.'
He accepted that if Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, former global
purchasing chief at GM and now VW production director, was proved to have
spied on the US company, then he himself would suffer 'grave consequences'.
'But this will not happen,' he claimed. If he and Mr Lopez went, then the
'English disease' - the collapse of industry and Japanese domination - would
break out . . . and not only at VW. Our opponents would have achieved what
they wanted. They would have won a war.'
Mr Piech told the magazine that an internal audit of VW computer programmes
was under way to see if 'anything has been foisted on us'. If anything was
found, then VW would go to state prosecutors and make charges.
Referring to four boxes containing secret GM data, allegedly left in a
Wiesbaden house by Mr Jorge Alvarez Aguirre and Mr Rosario Piazza, two
former Opel managers now at VW, he said there was 'a striking conflict
between my colleagues' affidavits and the items found in Wiesbaden'.
The boxes 'could have been at the disposal of our opponents and then handed
to the police,' Mr Piech stated. The issue of what was in the boxes
originally and what they contained now was an open question.
VW last week failed in a court attempt to stop Der Spiegel, the weely news
magazine, continuing to report damaging allegations against Mr Lopez and VW.
It later suffered a further blow when prosecutors investigating spying
charges established links between Mr Lopez and the Wiesbaden boxes.
On Monday Opel lawyers 'suggested' that Hamburg prosecutors should examine
the contradictions between GM employees' testimony and affidavits from Mr
Piech, Mr Lopez and others.
