FT  30 OCT 93 / Markets: Wellcome gears up for war - The Bottom Line
EVEN FOR hardened observers of the stock market, the behaviour of the
Wellcome share price in the past couple of days has been slightly odd. On
Thursday morning, the company, one of Britain's leading drug manufacturers,
announced an almost two-thirds rise in earnings and a one-third increase in
the dividend. The shares fell 11 per cent on the day and another 3 per cent
yesterday. This puts them on a historic multiple of 14, compared with a UK
market average of 23.
The market had its reasons, though. Before the results, Wellcome had risen
30 per cent since mid-August. This was part of a general re-rating of drug
stocks which had been walloped since the start of last year as investors
realised that, in the penny-pinching 1990s, governments finally were serious
about controlling their health bills.
The reason for the re-rating was simple enough. Falling interest rates have
caused a stampede into equities around the world.
As a result, many stocks and sectors have started to look worryingly
expensive. In a rising market, this causes the phenomenon known in the trade
as rotation, whereby any sector that seems to have been left behind goes
through a catch-up phase.
The snag about Thursday's figures was that they reminded the market of what
it had been worried about in the first place. Although Wellcome's earnings,
margins and cash were still rising sharply, sales growth was slowing.
This was particularly true of the second half of the year. After stripping
out the effects of sterling's devaluation, sales in the first half were up
11 per cent - but by only 3 per cent in the second.
Worse, the effect was marked strongly in the two drugs on which Wellcome
relies most heavily for its profits. Its best-known drug, the AIDS treatment
AZT (or Retrovir), showed sales growth - again, at constant exchange rates -
of only 3 per cent in the year compared with 22 per cent the year before.
More worrying in fundamental terms, the herpes treatment Zovirax, which
analysts reckon could account for half Wellcome's profits, grew by only 11
per cent on the same basis compared with 24 per cent the year before.
The slow-down in Zovirax, especially, reminded the market of a more
fundamental question: how good is Wellcome at operating in competitive
markets?
Until now, Zovirax has been the only treatment available for herpes or
shingles. Next year, SmithKline Beecham is bringing in a rival. The chances
are that it will pitch its price much lower.
If so, Wellcome must follow suit. John Robb, the chief executive, put the
point bluntly on Thursday. 'SmithKline has cornered a healthy slice of the
anti-depressant market on price already,' he said.
'We're not going to see our herpes market go out the window on price.
Wellcome has to take on board a more aggressive marketing strategy.'
With luck, lower prices can be offset by higher volume. But it is hard to
see this being true for the industry as a whole. And the slowdown in the
industry's sales cannot be matched by reductions in spending on marketing or
research. Indeed, Wellcome's R &amp; D costs rose faster than sales last year.
As Robb put it on Thursday: 'The two principal areas for the long-term
health of the company are R &amp; D and marketing. We've tried to protect
spending in those two areas.'
R&amp;D consumed 16 per cent of Wellcome's revenues last year, and marketing
probably at least as much again. It is easy to see why the market is worried
about price wars.
In one sense, Wellcome could ask what on earth the fuss is about. The
company is justly proud of having pushed operating margins from 21 per cent
in 1990 to 31 per cent three years later, and in pushing its net cash from
Pounds 17m to Pounds 567m in the same period. It is this hard-won financial
strength, says Mr Robb, that gives it the muscle to act tough on prices.
But this is an industry of giants, many of which also have fat margins and
big cash mountains. If there is to be a war of attrition, it could prove a
long one.
