FT  11 AUG 93 / Business and the Environment: Linking cash with conservation
 -A wildlife scheme in Zimbabwe which is encouraging rural economic
development
When the elephant was voted the world's most popular animal, you can bet the
people of Hurungwe district in northern Zimbabwe were not consulted.
Every year, they live in fear of elephants trampling through fields of maize
that took months to prepare and tend. One night's feast for an elephant can
wipe out an entire year's harvest. Homes might be wrecked if situated in the
animals' paths. Children and adults are injured and sometimes killed.
Why, then, are villagers thinking of constructing water dams and putting
down salt to encourage elephants into their area? Why are they discouraging
illegal settlers so that their land might be used instead by elephants? The
answer lies in a novel programme which is giving economic value to elephants
and other wildlife on Zimbabwe's communal lands.
Under Campfire (Communal Areas Management Programme for Indigenous
Resources), rural communities are managing to make money from animals which
until recently were poached as pests. The programme is simultaneously
encouraging economic development and a conservation ethos in rural areas.
Campfire works by linking cash with conservation. Until recently, rural
communities were not allowed to make any use of wildlife on their lands  -
poaching was common, either for food or to stop animals destroying crops and
endangering people. Now, districts accepted into the programme are allowed
to shoot a certain number of animals every year, for sale either as meat or
safari trophies.
The programme - run by the government and conservation organisations - gives
rural communities a choice. They can shoot an animal that is damaging crops
and sell its meat, earning, for example, about Pounds 1,600 for an elephant;
or they can save the quota for safari hunting, where an elephant will earn
the community Pounds 4,000-Pounds 6,000. A typical annual wildlife quota per
district might include a variety of wildlife, such as seven elephants, 20
buffalo and 20 baboons.
Campfire is creating an additional source of income for subsistence farmers.
Last year, eight districts earned about Pounds 350,000 from safari hunting -
mostly from Americans keen to collect an elephant trophy.
Participating communities decide whether to invest the money in community
projects - such as schools, dams or grinding mills - or divide it among
households for personal use. In one ward, households earned Pounds 60 each
from Campfire last year - a welcome addition to the average annual income of
about Pounds 80.
The programme is also encouraging the spread of business skills. Local
Campfire committees are going into partnership with well-established safari
operators to market their quotas; community investments are creating
small-scale industries such as the grinding mills and bee-keeping; other
tourist ventures are under way, such as hiking and photographic safaris.
Cash and conservation are an attractive couple, says Lovemore Katena, a ward
councillor in Hurungwe district. 'The best thing about Campfire is that we
are learning to manage our resources and we benefit from them.'
The conservation benefits are becoming clear. Villagers involved are
actively discouraging wildlife poaching, confiscating snares, reporting
poaching incidents and guarding against bush fires which are used to flush
out animals but also destroy vegetation. They discourage illegal settlement
and illegal gold panning, which contribute to the destruction of the land,
rivers and vegetation.
Only firm evidence of the link between conservation and economic development
can maintain people's commitment to Campfire, says Cherry Bird, wildlife
co-ordinator for Hurungwe district. 'Everybody has to feel they are
benefiting tangibly from this programme so they'll be involved in management
decisions. It sounds idealistic, but the alternative is to have no
wildlife.'
The nomadic nature of wildlife is proving a problem. The community where an
animal is shot is the community that earns money - although several areas
may have suffered crop damage en route. There is, therefore, no guarantee of
a stable income from year to year. Some villagers argue they are being
bribed to put up with wildlife. Others want their quotas increased so they
can shoot more animals and earn more.
Nevertheless, districts are queueing up to be accepted into Campfire. By the
end of the year, 24 will have Campfire status and by 2000 more than half the
country is expected to be devoted to wildlife conservation under the
programme.
Elephants - which are not an endangered species in Zimbabwe - remain the
biggest earners under Campfire because of their status symbol to safari
hunters. The hope is that other community businesses will become equally
important to the local economies over time, says Ivan Bond, Campfire
research fellow at the World Wide Fund for Nature.
'In the long-term, Campfire principles will have to be applied holistically
to the whole range of natural resources. If the institutions exist for the
management of one common property resource, it should not be too difficult
to extend these to other resources.'
