FT  27 MAY 93 / School tests backed by parents in poll
MOST PARENTS want this year's national curriculum tests in England and Wales
to go ahead, according to a poll released yesterday by the Department for
Education.
The poll of 1,000 parents by Bulmershe Research, a division of MAI
Information, contradicts one earlier this month by NOP which found that 52
per cent of parents supported the boycott of the tests by three teachers'
unions, while only 27 per cent opposed it.
The department said its survey had a sample twice as big as NOP's, and was
carried out after the announcement by Mr John Patten, education secretary,
that some of the tests for next year will be abandoned.
The survey found that 75 per cent of parents agreed with simplifying the
tests and restricting them to the basic subjects of English, maths and
science. But 37 per cent were against their children being tested this year.
The National Confederation of Parent Teacher Associations, which has a
membership of 10,000 schools, will announce the results of its ballot on
withdrawing children from the tests today.
Mr Patten said the poll showed 'strong support' for this year's tests. He
said 4,295 primary and 1,254 secondary schools had asked for additional
copies of the department's leaflet on the tests.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers, which is boycotting the tests, said: 'Parental views will differ
in just the same way that polls move up and down before a general election.
I have some difficulty in accepting that major policy decisions for young
people should effectively be argued out on the basis of competing opinion
poll results.'
Business in the Community yesterday announced that it had enlisted the
support of 77 companies in a new initiative to build links with schools.
Its Aim High campaign intends to improve on previous education-business
partnerships by using national education and training targets to monitor
their impact. It also hopes to encourage children to aim higher in their
careers and qualifications.
Mr Michael Heron, chairman of the Post Office and deputy chairman of
Business in the Community, launched the campaign at a primary school in
King's Cross, London, where volunteers from local businesses are used
extensively in classrooms. He hopes to enlist 500 companies during the next
12 months.
A survey of the 77 companies launching the initiative found that only 20 per
cent measured the effect of their involvement on children, and that less
than half had reviewed their education policy in the light of the national
targets.
Companies were found to provide strong support for work experience and in
providing material for the curriculum. However, almost 80 per cent of the
founder companies provided no support for out-of-school activities and few
helped with programmes involving direct personnel involvement such as
mentoring.
