FT  23 MAR 93 / French alliance parties vie for influence in government
FRANCE'S two conservative alliance parties yesterday opened tense
negotiations over the share-out of seats for the second round of the general
election next Sunday - a foretaste of the rivalries likely in the powerful
new government.
The outcome of the bargaining between the Gaullist RPR and centre-right UDF
parties will decide which could provide France's next prime minister,
traditionally chosen by the president from the party with most seats. This
will also influence the distribution of top cabinet jobs.
If last weekend's first round of voting is confirmed in the final poll, the
new administration will gain a near-record parliamentary majority, with well
over three quarters of the seats in the 577-member national assembly,
After the first round, the Union pour la France (UPF) alliance of RPR and
UDF won nearly 39.5 per cent of the vote. The Gaullists were slightly more
than 1 percentage point ahead of their partners, while the ruling Socialists
polled a humiliating 17.6 per cent. The first round gives the coalition 78
seats outright, 42 for the RPR and 36 for the UDF, while the Socialists
failed to win a single seat.
Under their pre-election pact, the alliance agreed to field a joint
candidate in all but 70 seats, where the best-placed of the UDF and RPR
runners would go through to the second round. Yet the UDF appeared unhappy
with the fact that RPR candidates had done best in 52 of the contested
seats, indicating that the centre-right, leading in only 18 of the 70
UDF-RPR contests, could end up as the junior coalition partner.
The pair were at loggerheads yesterday, with the RPR advocating a single
candidate in all constituencies and the UDF calling for a run-off between
the two conservative candidates in constituencies where there was no chance
of a Socialist winning.
Several Socialist heavyweights will be fighting to save their seats next
weekend. They include Mr Michel Rocard, former prime minister, Mr Raymond
Dumas, foreign minister, and Mr Michel Delebarre, civil service minister.
The French right does appear to have assuaged earlier market fears that it
will be less rigorous in its support for the franc than the outgoing
socialists.
However, Mr Jean-Francois Mercier, chief French economist at Salomon
Brothers, said the franc would remain vulnerable until the future prime
minister and finance minister had given a clear indication on policy.
Right seeks Louis XVI presidency, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 21
