FT  28 OCT 93 / Airline talks set for next week
MR CHRISTIAN BLANC, officially appointed chairman of Air France yesterday,
will meet union leaders at the beginning of next week to try to resolve the
industrial dispute which has brought the state-owned airline to a virtual
standstill for the past nine days.
In a statement to employees, Mr Blanc said he had been given 'carte blanche'
by the government to negotiate a new recovery plan for the loss- making
airline. Nothing would be decided on the plan before discussions with
employees.
A previous recovery plan, which envisaged 4,000 job cuts by the end of next
year, was withdrawn by the government last weekend after it triggered the
strikes at Air France and raised fears of broader unrest in the public
sector. The scrapping of the plan prompted the resignation of Mr Bernard
Attali as head of the national carrier.
Mr Blanc's comments came amid signs of an easing in the strike at some of
the airline's services and continued divisions among union groups about
whether to continue their protest.
At Orly airport, aircraft maintenance staff and baggage handlers were
returning to work, although bus drivers and freight workers stayed out.
At Charles de Gaulle, the other main Paris airport, ground staff and freight
workers voted to maintain their protest.
Force Ouvriere, representing about 35 per cent of Air France's ground staff,
has called on workers to return to work. But the left-wing Confederation
Generale du Travail (CGT) and the CFDT, which both represent just over 20
per cent of ground staff, continued to demand a written guarantee that Mr
Attali's austerity plan would be withdrawn and that strikers would be paid
for the period of their action.
Air France services, which were paralysed on Tuesday, saw some improvement.
A total of 20 Air France flights left from Charles de Gaulle and Orly
airports and the airline said it expected 36 would be operated today.
Foreign airlines were largely unaffected.
French unions continued to threaten strike action at other public-sector
groups. A spokesman for the CGT said it would target some of the 21 publicly
owned groups that the government is seeking to privatise.
