FT  27 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC farm ministers close to new
price package accord
AFTER THREE days of negotiations, EC agriculture ministers were last night
close to agreeing a farm price package for this year, which in the view of
the European Commission maintains the integrity of the radical reform of the
Common Agricultural Policy decided last May.
Ministers were still battling, however, over the regime for 'set-aside'  -
land to be taken out of production as one of the main means of reining in
over-production.
A compromise devised by the Danish presidency of the EC and the European
Commission retains what Brussels regards as essential to safeguard the CAP
reform, Commission officials claimed.
France had sought significant changes to the set-aside rules. It wanted a 50
per cent increase in compensation to cereal and oilseed farmers.
A more likely outcome last night seemed between 25 and 30 per cent - an
increase of Ecu12 per tonne rather than Ecu20, the rise sought by Paris.
France linked this demand to the EC-US agreement on oilseeds reached last
November, which staved off a trans-Atlantic trade war and in principle
settled most of the farm chapter of the long-stalled Uruguay Round to reform
world trade rules.
France, along with Ireland, also wants to raise the weight limits on beef
carcasses eligible for subsidised stockpiling, reduced under CAP reform to
help cut back the EC's 1.1m tonnes beef mountain.
The Commission was still holding the line last night on this demand, arguing
that what had been agreed under last year's reform was already manifestly
insufficient to rein in beef overproduction.
The UK was also resisting a Commission proposal to increase the standard 15
per cent set-aside requirement, on a five year rotational basis, to 20 per
cent in the case of land which is not rotated.
Brussels yesterday agreed to reduce the fixed set-aside requirement to 18
per cent, but only in areas where less nitrate fertilizer is used, under a
regime agreed in 1991.
The Commission reckons the net result in production terms would be the same.
Mr John Gummer, UK agriculture minister, argues that the increased fertility
resulting from rotational fallowing of land reduces output by less than
fixed set-aside.
'Both systems have disadvantages but the Commission dwells on one of them,'
he said, referring to Brussels' concern about farmers setting aside their
most marginal land.
'All our experience shows that these two systems net off,' Mr Gummer added.
The Commission maintains that while this has traditionally been the case,
advances in fertilizer and pesticide technology, along with genetic
improvements in seeds, have all but elimnated the yield differences between
continuously planted areas and land revitalised by fallowing.
True to their tradition of all-week, all-night negoitation on
micro-adjustment of CAP rules to bolster national farm interests, the
agriculture ministers looked set to reach a denouement late last night or in
the early hours of this morning.
After last May's epic negotiations of the CAP reform, it had been fondly
thought that no more than management and tinkering would be needed. The
Commission now realises that it has a battle on its hands to make the reform
work. Bulgaria expects to lose tens of millions of dollars as a result of a
ban on meat and livestock exports imposed by the government after an
outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, Reuter reports from Sofia.
