FT  22 JUN 93 / French cut interest rates below Bundesbank levels: Move
questions D-Mark's anchor role in ERM
FRANCE'S official short-term interest rates fell below German levels
yesterday for the first time in 26 years, in the strongest indication yet
that European central banks are decoupling their monetary policies from the
Bundesbank's.
The Bank of France cut its intervention rate, which sets the floor for the
country's money market rates, by  1/4 of a percentage point, to 7 per cent.
This pushed it  1/4 of a percentage point below the Bundesbank's discount
rate, which serves a similar function in Germany.
Yesterday's move raises new questions about the D-Mark's anchor role in the
European exchange rate mechanism. The French cut was made possible by the
D-Mark's recent weakness against the franc and other ERM currencies.
Currency investors have become increasingly concerned by the deterioration
in the German economy and the country's growing budget deficit, and have
sold D-Marks for dollars and other European currencies.
Four other central banks also took advantage of the D-Mark's weakness to
trim their key interest rates yesterday. Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium
and Austria all eased monetary policy, in spite of the Bundesbank's
determination to keep German interest rates unchanged over the past six
weeks.
The Bank of France's move pushed its official interest rates below Germany's
for the first time since May 1967, when Germany's discount rate stood at 4.5
per cent and its French equivalent was at 3.5 per cent.
Some dealers in financial markets expect the Bundesbank to cut its official
rates soon, after the latest figure for German M3 money supply growth,
published yesterday, came close to meeting the Bundesbank's targets. The
annualised figure for M3 money supply growth for May was 6.7 per cent,
narrowly outside the central bank's target range of 4.5 per cent to 6.5 per
cent.
Yesterday's European rate cuts did not help to strengthen the D-Mark on the
currency markets. The dollar consolidated last Friday's rally against the
D-Mark and closed in London at DM1.689, up nearly a pfennig on the day. The
French franc shrugged off the rate cut and appreciated marginally against
the D-Mark, closing at FFr3.36. There was little change in New York.
The differential between 10-year government bond yields in Germany and
France narrowed to 0.1 percentage points as dealers took the view that
inflation prospects in France were rosier than those in Germany.
'That narrowing in yields is the strongest possible statement of the
market's confidence in French fundamentals,' said Mr Brian Hilliard of
French-owned UK securities house Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Bonds, Page 32
Currencies, Page 35
