FT  14 DEC 93 / International Company News: US moves one step nearer the
'information highway'
US vice-president Mr Al Gore yesterday praised the formation of a
'cross-industry' collaborative group to accelerate development of
'information superhighways' - high-speed digital networks that will link
businesses and homes throughout the US.
Twentyeight companies, including AT&amp;T, Apple Computer, Citicorp, BellSouth,
Digital Equipment, IBM, Intel, Hewlett-Packard, and Cable Laboratories, the
research arm of the cable industry, yesterday announced the formation of the
Cross Industry Working Team (XIWT), to 'promote and accelerate the
deployment' of an advanced National Information Infrastructure (NII).
The NII is a major initiative supported by the Clinton administration and a
broad range of US industries.
'The NII will provide the foundation for a national transformation to an
information-based society, a key element for the US to sustain leadership in
the world economy,' said Mr Gore, a long-time proponent of information
superhighways.
'It is gratifying to see the XIWT bringing together many of the most
knowledgeable technologists in the country to help create a technical vision
for the NII.'
Mr Gore is to outline the administration's proposals for regulation of the
NII later this month and, with industry groups, is developing a new
'competition model' that will define how telecommunications, cable
television and other industry groups can participate in creating and
operating information superhighways.
The focus of the XIWT group, however, will be on technicalities that enable
different types of computers and networks to share information.
'The XIWT is an important complement to other policy-related efforts,' said
Robert Kahn, president of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives,
a non-profit-making, technology think-tank that organised the group.
'By fostering technologies that cross traditional industry boundaries, XIWT
hopes to contribute significantly to the development and deployment of a
world-class NII,' he said.
Among the activities planned by XIWT are development of common technological
approaches, pilot projects and technology forums.
'The XIWT is building a framework for a truly co-operative approach by
industry, academia and government to developing the information
infrastructure,' said George Fisher, chairman of the Council on
Competitiveness and chairman of Eastman Kodak.
Bellcore, the telecommunications industry-supported research laboratory,
yesterday announced that it will work separately with several companies to
develop and demonstrate prototype technologies for the NII.
Bellcore has created a 'Collaboratory on Information Infrastructure' to
develop prototype software that will make it practical for all people to
navigate these networks.
The companies involved in Bellcore's Collaboratory include television
broadcasters, computer manufacturers and the telephone industry.
Lanny Smoot, executive director of the Collaboratory, said it hoped to
contribute to the development of technologies that will make the NII
practical.
He said: 'The technologies we will explore could one day lead to the
availability of a vast array of services - electronic shopping malls,
collaborative electronic education and distance learning, access to
multimedia information, electronic libraries, multimedia messaging,
multimedia games, and interactive multimedia entertainment.'
Bellcore demonstrated several potential applications of the information
superhighway. These included systems that let people 'virtually' attend
meetings via desk-top computers; a computer-aided three-dimensional medical
imaging system; life-size video conferencing and a 'video visiting' system.
