FT  22 FEB 93 / Inter-religious forgiveness is just not cricket: Sectarian
intolerance which has swept through India is echoed on Bombay's playing
fields
THE recent inter-religious violence which tore through Bombay seemed to be
forgotten at the weekend as Hindu and Moslem cricket fans flocked to the
city's Wankhede stadium and united to support India against England.
But even in the brilliant sunshine, dark reminders of the anger simmering in
Bombay were never far away. Like the city itself, cricket in Bombay is
falling prey to intolerance.
Shiv Sena, the local militant Hindu party whose supporters were among the
bloodiest participants in the recent riots, rules the roost at the cricket
ground. Mr Manohar Joshi, president of the Bombay Cricket Association and
host for the test match, is also a deputy leader of Shiv Sena. Mr Bal
Thackeray, the Shiv Sena leader who has often expressed his appreciation for
Adolf Hitler's 'patriotism', is a frequent guest in the committee box.
The city bore the brunt of the violence which hit India after Hindu
militants, including many from Bombay, destroyed the Ayodhya mosque in early
December.
Today, a month after the unrest reached its bloody climax, much of India's
commercial capital has returned to normal life. But the fears fanned by Shiv
Sena and other Hindu and Moslem extremist organisations persist.
Mr Joshi, a life-long cricket fan, was elected president last year after
Shiv Sena supporters broke into the Wankhede stadium and vandalised the
wicket to force the cancellation of a match between India and Pakistan.
Pakistan drew Shiv Sena's ire both because it is Moslem and because of the
support it gives to rebel movements in the north Indian state of Kashmir.
Mr Joshi shows no remorse for the attack on the pitch, nor is he in any mood
to let Pakistan play in the future.
Even though India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka have just won the right jointly to
stage the next cricket World Cup, Mr Joshi will not promise to let Pakistan
play in Bombay. 'It will all depend on the political situation,' he says
with a thin smile.
The soft-spoken Mr Joshi has an unsettling way with words. At one moment he
praises Mohammed Azharuddin, India's Moslem cricket captain, and says: 'I
love my (Indian) Moslem brothers.' At another he says India's Moslems should
be shorn of their privileges, such as the right to their own family law.
The widely held belief that Shiv Sena organised anti-Moslem violence is
dismissed as 'propaganda'.
There are Moslem extremist groups as virulent as Shiv Sena, such as
Jamaat-e-Islami, but outside Kashmir they attract little support and carry
virtually no political weight. Shiv Sena matters; together with the
Bharatiya Janata party, the national Hindu militant grouping, it controls
100 of 252 seats in the state assembly of Maharashtra, which includes
Bombay.
The ruling Congress (I) party is struggling to keep its majority intact.
A few liberal Bombay citizens are prepared to stand up publicly to Mr Joshi
and Shiv Sena, among them Mr P. Sainath, a local magazine editor who has
organised a support fund for journalists who suffered losses in the
violence. 'We must fight Shiv Sena. Look what it has done to our city,' he
says.
Many more prefer to express their condemnations of Shiv Sena in private  -
for fear of reprisals. In public they limit themselves to decrying violence
and to contributing to charities aiding the victims.
Bombay's political leaders have failed to orchestrate any campaign against
Shiv Sena. Since the riots ended the Congress (I) party has been locked in
an internal dispute in which Mr Sudhakarrao Naik, the chief minister, is
pitted against Mr Sharad Pawar, the national defence minister, whose power
base is in Bombay. Each is trying to push responsibility for the riots on to
the other.
The absence of any strong political call for the defence of the city's
cosmopolitan traditions has left many Bombay residents confused.
Among the elite there is a reluctant but growing willingness to side with
Shiv Sena and the BJP, if only because their views are clear. 'People say:
'At least we know where we stand with them',' says one retired Hindu
academic. 'Congress offers no alternative.'
Some liberals are close to despair.
One leading industrialist says: 'I see parallels with Germany in the 1930s.
People who say the BJP is not so bad are like the Jews who said they were
too rich and powerful for Hitler to hurt them.'
But others see such fears as exaggerated. 'To make comparisons with Germany
is complete rubbish,' another industrialist says. But he, like the first,
prefers not to have his name appear in print.
'It's difficult. These people (militants such as Shiv Sena) are so
unpredictable.'
