FT  12 MAY 93 / Survey of North American Free Trade (4): Companies gear up
for implications - Mexican Corporate Strategy
The prospect of Nafta is changing Mexican corporate strategy. When Modelo,
Mexico's largest brewery responsible for Corona beer, announced last March
it was selling 18 per cent of its company to Anheuser-Busch for Dollars 477m
and then going public, history was made.
Mexico's best-known private company - which did not believe in debt and
seldom disclosed information about itself - was going to have three
Americans on its board, hire expensive foreign investment bankers to arrange
an international offering, and bare all to the world.
Modelo, like practically all Mexican companies these days, buckled under the
pressure of free trade, and the imminent North American Free Trade
Agreement. As Mr Don Juan Sanchez Navarro, Modelo's vice-president, said,
the tie-in with Anheuser-Busch 'is an example of a strategic association
that will be increasingly seen in other sectors' as companies gear up for
the business implications of Nafta.
When Mexico was a protected economy, companies did not have to worry much
about strategic alliances and other mechanisms to achieve international
competitiveness because they had a captive market. But since the late 1980s,
when Mexico tore down most of its trade barriers, and then in 1990 when it
announced its intention to sign the Nafta, Mexican companies have though
about little else.
Some Mexican companies - those in global industries - have aspired to be
internationally competitive by becoming international companies. Others have
signed joint ventures with world leaders so as to acquire the best
technology and eliminate potential competition. But all are striving to
improve productivity by seeking cheap capital, economies of scale, flexible
labour contracts and new technology.
Cementos Mexicanos (Cemex) and Vitro, Mexico's two largest industrial
conglomerates, have paved the way in turning themselves from strictly
Mexican companies into global cement and glass producers respectively. In
1989, Vitro bought the US glass company Anchor Glass for Dollars 900m
(including debt), making it North America's largest glass producer. Last
year, Cemex bought the two Spanish cement companies, Valenciana and Sanson,
for Dollars 1.85bn, to add to cement companies it already has in the US.
Cemex's acquisition was harshly criticised by foreign investors who had
bought the company because of the fast-growing Mexican construction market.
But Mr Lorenzo Zambrano, president of Cemex, said after the transaction: 'If
you stay small you become vulnerable. The global cement business is becoming
increasingly concentrated and we need to stay with the leaders.'
Cemex's fear was that if it stayed in Mexico, the large European cement
companies (headed by Holderbank whose subsidiary, Apasco, is Cemex's rival
in Mexico) would eventually move in for the kill - just as they did to US
cement companies in the 1980s.
Such a strategy is likely to be followed by other Mexican companies in
global businesses as Nafta comes into effect, says Mr Gustavo Cabellero,
Cemex's finance director. 'It is unsustainable in the long term to survive
as a purely Mexican company in an open economy. What Cemex did will be
followed by an increasing number of Mexican companies as they try to compete
in international markets.'
Indeed, soon after Cemex's acquisitions, a group of investors from the
south-east of Mexico paid Dollars 499m for the US company Del Monte Fresh
Produce, the fresh fruit side of Polly Peck International, the fruit and
electronics conglomerate which collapsed in October 1990. Likewise, Mexican
banks have bought stakes in financial companies in Latin America and are
seeking to increase their presence in the US.
Most Mexican companies are still so far from acquiring global or regional
leadership, or the cost of so doing is so prohibitively large, that the
purchase of foreign companies makes little sense. Instead, they have sought
to form joint ventures with world leaders. That way they can acquire
technology, capital, access to the US and other markets, and eliminate
potential competition.
Modelo will be using Anheuser-Busch technology and money in the construction
of its eighth brewery, and inter-changing personnel as a way of learning
from its huge American rival. Femsa, Modelo's rival in the beer business and
Mexico's largest beverage company, has just sold 30 per cent of its
soft-drinks division to Coca-Cola and hopes to benefit from Coke's expertise
in marketing and technology. Femsa is now looking for a partner in its beer
division to compete with Modelo.
Vitro, as well as buying up Anchor Glass, has signed joint ventures with
Corning, the US glassware producer and Whirlpool, the white goods maker,
enabling it to use these companies' distribution outlets to increase exports
to the US, and sharing technology to lower costs.
Best-known have been the alliances in the retail sector, with practically
all the big US chains - Wal-Mart, Fleming, Price Club and K-Mart - forming
joint ventures with Mexican counterparts in the past 18 months.
The proposed Nafta will likely intensify this trend, by reducing trade
barriers to the US for Mexico, and by making American companies more
comfortable with signing joint ventures with smaller, less well-known
Mexican companies. Foreign investment bankers are now eagerly examining the
consumer goods market, the vehicle parts sector, textiles, and other
industries, to see which foreign partners they can team up with willing
Mexican companies.
Mr Jacob Zaidenweber, head of the American Textile Group, says of his
sector: 'The first stage of Nafta is the most important. Those textile
companies that are going to survive will have to establish niches and low
financing. Some are not going to, but those that do, will then be ready to
form alliances with US companies. Production will move from Asia to North
America.'
The joint venture itself is no panacea under Nafta. Unless Mexican
businesses improve productivity, many will be unable to compete in the wider
North American economy. For most, this means divesting or eliminating areas
where they are not competitive, and specialising production.
General Electric Mexico has, for example, stopped making light bulbs in
Mexico because it is more efficient to import them from plants in the US
which enjoy much greater economies of scale. Cemex has divested itself of
all non-cement holdings except tourism. Desc is reducing, selling off, or
closing petrochemical divisions where it cannot compete, concentrating more
on consumer goods such as glue. As the Nafta is implemented more will follow
suit.
To remain competitive, Mexican companies will have to increase substantially
investment in the divisions they retain, making the cost of capital critical
to competitiveness. With Mexican borrowing rates at about 35 per cent,
increasing numbers of Mexican companies are attempting to borrow cheaply in
dollars, or raise money through equity in international offerings.
This has important implications for the way businesses are run. As Mr Don
Sanchez Navarro recently put it at the annual stock market convention: 'The
relationship with highly sophisticated and demanding foreign investors has
led to pressure for results, better information, a more efficient business,
to open new markets, to improve quality, and to obtain the desired
international competitiveness.'
Mr Gilberto Borja, the head of ICA, Mexico and Latin America's largest
construction group which went public last year, told the same convention:
'We accepted (in 1991) that given new expectations, the internal generation
of resources, based on an aggressive policy of re-investing profits, with
which we had built up our capital, would be insufficient. In consequence, we
took the decision to go to the capital markets.
'Internally, this signified a profound change in the policies that we had
maintained throughout our history. From being a closed company - the
exclusive property of the active partners in the company, with capital 100
per cent a result of our work, that did not require giving out information
bar the essential - we turned into an open business.'
In the past couple of years Videovisa, Gigante, Televisa, ICA, Dina, Grupo
Herdez, and others have gone public, 18 banks and the telephone company have
been privatised, and practically every leading company has issued new
equity. Other private companies, such as Modelo, Gutsa, or GMD, are
intending to go public.
Mr Roland Wojewodski, head of Latin America for JP Morgan says: 'What is
happening in Mexico is that a lot of privately owned companies are looking
two or three years down the line. They are going public to raise financing;
they are looking at joint ventures; and they are increasing financial
capabilities to take advantage of new opportunities.'
As part of the process of increasing productivity, Mexican companies are
also having to change their relations with labour. In the past, labour
contracts were usually negotiated sector by sector and were affected as much
by the political importance of a union to Mexico's ruling party as by the
demands and needs of individual businesses.
Last year, important strikes were broken - such as one in the textiles
industry - and this will allow negotiations to be conducted company by
company. Other strikes were - probably illegally - overcome, enabling
companies to introduce more flexible working practices.
