FT  30 APR 93 / Four BZW traders suspended: Liffe to hold disciplinary
hearing
BZW FUTURES, the futures broking arm of Barclays de Zoete Wedd, has
suspended four of its floor traders on full pay pending disciplinary
hearings by the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange
(Liffe).
They are alleged to have violated Liffe's rules on the priority given to
customer orders in the exchange's futures trading pits.
The rules are designed to prevent the practice of 'front-running', which
involves changing the order of trades to take advantage of price movements
caused by the execution of large orders. Front-running, once a frequent
problem in futures markets, has become less common in recent years as a
result of stricter surveillance.
The four traders involved are not alleged to have benefited personally from
any of the near-100 trades in question, conducted in the Italian bond
futures pit of Liffe in May 1992. It is understood that the 'profits' on the
trades, amounting to less than Pounds 5,000, would have been credited to
BZW. BZW futures traders cannot hold personal accounts. The trades were
executed through BZW Futures' 'error account', which is designed to handle
failed trades.
It is understood that the alleged rule violations would not form the basis
of any criminal charges.
The suspensions are an embarrassment for Liffe chairman Mr Nick Durlacher,
who is also the chairman of BZW Futures. He said yesterday that it was in
the best interests of Liffe and BZW to clear the matter up as quickly as
possible.
The suspension came within 48 hours of Liffe's report on the allegations of
trading malpractice. The formal hearings by Liffe's disciplinary committee
are expected to take place in the next month.
BZW has 37 traders and support staff on the floor of Liffe. In 1991, BZW
Futures contributed Pounds 3.3m to BZW's Pounds 60m profits. BZW's Pounds
243m profits in 1992 will not be broken down until October, but the futures
unit's contribution is expected to have fallen as a proportion of the total,
though not as a net amount.
Although dubious practices in the futures markets have become less common,
such cases do not help improve the image of the futures business, which is
still seeking to recover from a case of illegal trading in the US which
culminated in a Federal Bureau of Investigation sting operation at the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 1989.
Federal indictments were brought against 48 traders, alleged to have
illegally benefited from trades done on their personal accounts.
As a result, 46 have been convicted at trial or through plea agreements.
They had illegally benefitted from these trades done on their personal
accounts. The last 12 were sentenced on Wednesday, with sentences ranging
from small fines to short prison sentences.
