FT  13 NOV 93 / Gardening: London's last flower show - Robin Lane Fox enjoys
a final riot of colour and finds inspiration for the winter
I HAVE just heard the last bell of the season; from now until the early
crocuses, London's flower shows will be hibernating. Their year ended with a
memorable burst of colour. But it emphasised, once again, that keen
gardeners miss most of the possibilities if they go only to the Chelsea show
and miss its lesser relations.
When the signal sounded, the exhibitors scrambled to pull their stands to
bits. Ladies with small shopping bags made off with the last of the cut
flowers and nurserypersons dragged their exhibits out of the peat and
hustled them off to the Transit van. It all reminded me of end of term at a
boarding school. During the term, nonetheless, the British lead the world in
staging a flower show. And over the past fortnight, we have all enjoyed the
most spectacular autumn colour for a decade. The evening greyness was
gathering round Westminster but, inside the Royal Horticultural Society
hall, you could only wonder why our gardens have started to look dreary.
There was more to the occasion than Korean chrysanthemums and cotoneasters
with red berries. There were blue Chinese gentians, hardy winter cyclamen
from Cos, pink Kaffir lilies, and the brilliant red leaves on azalea Nancy
Waterer. Shows raise our notions of the possible; the weather and whitefly
do otheir best to dash them. My winter ambitions have been rising as the sap
has been falling: this final fling at a flower show has given them a new
impetus.
In November, many front gardens have seen the light already, but the shining
example for the rest of us is the family of winter-flowering viburnums. We
all know the tall, white pink forms but I am always on the look-out for the
small Viburnum farreri namum because it is only 3 ft high. It would be
excellent in a front garden or a confined space in the town if only it was
predictable.
Sometimes, this lovely Chinese shrub is covered in scented white flowers; at
others, it is nothing but leaves. I have now found the answer: apparently,
there are two forms of this small shrub in the trade and one of them is
shy-flowering. You discover the facts behind the news if you ask questions
at shows: I asked Starborough Nurseries, Marsh Green, Edenbridge, Kent,
which has seen both forms but lists only the performing one at Pounds 6.80
each.
Starborough also tantalised me with its liquidambars. These trees are much
on keen gardeners' minds because they have just finished colouring
beautifully. They have fingered leaves, like maples, and the best of the
well-known forms grow to a manageable width and turn to an unusually deep
shade of brown-red. I would always want one in a small area of rough grass
or natural shrubbery, but there are problems. Sometimes, the plants do not
colour properly, and many people say that they will grow only on acid soil.
Once again, I have better information. The colour is much more reliable if
you buy a correctly named form. Starborough sells the true deep red-brown
Worplesdon, whereas other nurseries may sometimes be supplying seedlings of
unproven merit instead. On a lime soil, there is still hope for some of us.
We should dig out a square hole about 3 ft wide and deep and fill it with
lime-free compost. Liquidambars will establish themselves in this lair and
will then tolerate a lower layer of lime or chalk.
I wait to see if this treatment will suit some of the newly-found and
unfamiliar species which Starborough is about to distribute. Two varieties,
acalycina and formosa, are trees with a promising future and planners of
collections and arboretums should check them out as soon as possible.
Acers turned up in their usual quantity from Mallet Court Nurseries, and one
of the main displays of semi-hardy chrysanthemums came from Home Meadows
Nursery. Among their bright leaves and colours, though, my eye kept lighting
instead on evergreeen skimmias. These plants will certainly grow on lime,
although not so luxuriantly as on lime-free soil. They are winners in
semi-shade, along drives or in spaces which link a house to its garden. They
also thrive in towns.
Not that skimmias had everything their own way. Wild gladioli soon drew the
attention away from their muted white; Carol Klein had plants of the
newly-found Corydalis flexuosa in full china-blue flower. We all made a
bee-line for her hardy pink chrysanthemums when the bell rang, and I added
in a rusty-brown one with small button flowers called Dr Tom Parr. Seeing is
believing with these unusually-named varieties of familiar families: a show
is the moment to decide, especially while most of the public are queuing to
dismantle the more over-sized Korean varieties which will not survive a cold
or wet winter outdoors.
The British may know how to run the best show - but they also know how to
dismantle it in 20 minutes flat. I left into the grey, high-rise concrete of
London's Victoria wondering if it had really been true - a haze of
late-berrying sorbus and pink-flowered lilies in the dark twilight of the
year. At the bus stop, somebody bumped into my newly-bought schizostylis and
bent its last flower buds. The evidence was there in my hand, although
looking rather more battered than it had only half an hour before.
