FT  02 OCT 93 / UK Company News: FKI expands in US with Dollars 103m buy -
First big acquisition since demerging from Babcock in 1989
FKI, the electrical engineering group, yesterday announced its first big
acquisition since it demerged from Babcock International in the summer of
1989.
It is paying Dollars 102.5m (Pounds 66.5m) cash for the Truth hardware
division of SPX Corporation of the US.
Mr Bob Beeston, chief executive, described Truth as 'a perfect fit' with
FKI's hardware business.
Truth makes the hinges, operating and locking mechanisms for windows, doors
and skylights. It supplies more than 1,400 manufacturers and has almost 50
per cent of the North American market, which Mr Beeston estimated at some
Dollars 200m a year.
'It has good modern manufacturing facilities, and it is a business we are
very familiar with,' he said.
Truth, which has a warranted net asset value of not less than Dollars 35.4m,
made net operating profits of Dollars 10.2m on sales of Dollars 83.8m in
1992. FKI said the trading performance for the first eight months of this
year was well ahead of last year - a trend it expected to continue.
FKI will pay Dollars 95m on completion, with up to Dollars 7.5m of deferred
consideration payable over a period of up to five years, dependent on sales.
Mr Beeston said the group had committed borrowing available in US dollars at
interest of less than 4 per cent. He estimated net borrowings at the end of
the year would be Pounds 96m, giving the group gearing of 50 per cent,
compared with 30 per cent at the end of last year. Without the acquisition,
FKI would have ended the year with gearing of about 15 per cent.
FKI now operates five divisions - hardware, materials handling, automotive,
engineering and process control. The first three operate primarily in the
US.
Mr Beeston said the group had been looking for acquisitions in the
automotive division, but had not found the right company yet. His strategy
was to look for businesses with real strength in the markets they served so
that the group could improve margins through reduced costs and higher
purchasing power.
Earlier this week FKI bought VSI Fortress Security Hardware from VSI Donner
for Dollars 2.6m. This will add annual sales of Dollars 4m to FKI's US
hardware distribution company Belwith.
