FT  13 NOV 93 / Arts: Massenet plays the tune - At last this composer is
being taken seriously
FOR BRITISH lovers of French opera in general and Massenet in particular,
the prospect looks exceptionally fair at the moment and over the next few
months. Three rarities from the last period of his astonishingly fruitful
40-plus years of operatic production are being revived: the 'lyric tale'
Griselidis (1901) on the medieval legend of patient Griselda and her trials,
just opened in an absolutely smashing student production at the London
Guildhall School; the 'fairy-tale' Cendrillon (1899), one of the best of all
the many operas on the Cinderella story, by Welsh National Opera from next
weekend; and the 'sung play' Cherubin (1905), a fizzing Figaro sequel, at
Covent Garden next February. To add to the tally, an important new recording
of the 'heroic play' Don Quichotte (1910) has just come out, with the
leading Francophone singer of the day, Jose van Dam, in the title role.
To Massenites this is all bounty, though entirely their due and, indeed, not
before time (for budgetary reasons Covent Garden's 1990 staging of Don
Quichotte was cancelled). But to others? I sense that the larger Massenet
battle is not yet finally won: that there remains a body of otherwise
open-minded British opera-devotees suspicious and/or patronising of the
composer and his works - even of Manon and Werther, the two Massenet operas
that, in the long years after his death (in 1912) when his reputation sank
low, managed to keep a toe-hold on the repertory.
The image of a purveyor of Palm Court fodder, bonbons succulent but
nutritionally valueless, lasted long. The smart phrases of Debussy and
D'Indy (who defined Massenet's principal working device as the regular
supply of 'discreet and quasi-religious eroticism') were regularly rolled
out. The ultimate put-down came in the Fifth (1954) Edition of Grove's
Dictionary, whose Massenet entry concluded by indicting him for
'(ingratiating) himself with that large section of the public which . . .
regards music as an agreeable after-dinner entertainment'.
Critical evaluation has changed. (In this regard, Rodney Milnes's Massenet
entry in the 1993 New Grove Dictionary of Opera, a brilliant piece of
missionary polemic, is required reading.) But in case the prejudice still
lingers against this example of a successful artist who did not set out to
be a mould breaker - who was not, in other words, the Mozart, Wagner, Verdi
or Schoenberg of his age - these four particular later-Massenet works might
have been specially chosen to mount the most telling argument for the
defence.
On the simplest level, they show how wide was his range: far from repeating
a handful of well-routined tricks, he developed after Werther a broad
spectrum of dramatic styles, comic, fantastic, legendary-romantic. He was
never a 'modern' in the sense that Debussy, creator of Pelleas et Melisande,
undoubtedly was; but examined from a vantage point in the late 20th century
where the whole modernist adventure has already been seen to have been
stringently reassessed, Massenet's retention of a 'popular' operatic manner
in which to clothe his own continual experiments with operatic form and
content does not seem so negligible an achievement after all.
And what he has to say about the human condition, in particular about the
weaknesses and strengths of the human heart, reveals through those
experiments a remarkably broad compassion. After Werther (and a couple of
minor adventures with the vogue of operatic verismo) comedy enters
Massenet's artistic range - a use of comedy poised to balance well-tried
elements of romance, sentimentality, and in certain cases supernatural
fantasy and religious effusion.
This may well be because in this later period Massenet forged his
partnership with Lucien Fugere, great comic baritone of the Paris
Opera-Comique, a stage-artist of wonderful verve, urbanity and polish. He
was the first Pandolphe (the weak father-figure) of Cendrillon, the first
Philosophe in Cherubin, the first Devil in Griselidis, the first Paris
Sancho Panza (and dedicatee) of Don Quichotte.
Whatever the reason, these later Massenet operas are all extraordinary
samples of high craftsmanship finding new, bold ways of re-inventing itself.
Application of orchestral colour becomes ever more exact. Comedy seems to be
particularly expressed through rhythmic vitality - the Devil's scenes in
Griselidis and the Windmill scene in Quichotte make wonderfully supple use
of sharp-pointed rhythmic underpinnings. This composer, one of the masters
of French word-setting, found myriad ways of extending that mastery; and in
key utterances - Cendrillon's plaintive 'Reste au foyer', say, or Don
Quixote's serenade 'Quand apparaissent les etoiles' - the economy and
aptness of the vocal-verbal union are a key part of their ineffably quiet
eloquence.
The Massenet London season begins superbly with the Guildhall Griselidis
(first British staging): any reader able to attend one of the three
remaining performances is urged to do so. In Caroline Gawn's witty, stylish,
beautifully fresh production, and in David Lloyd-Jones's excellently fluid
direction of an excellent student orchestra, the peculiar charm of the work,
part pastoral, part boulevard comedy, part romantic legend, comes across at
full strength.
In the title role the first of the school's two alternating casts introduced
to us a young soprano of star potential, Catrin Wyn Davies, with the clean,
limpid, deeply affecting manner and tone of a young Ileana Cotrubas. She and
the two leading baritones - Matthew Hargreaves light and skilful in the
Fugere part, Gwyn Hughes Jones sturdy and handsome-voiced as the crusader
knight who leaves Griselidis's virtue to be tested by the Devil - exemplify
the unusually degree of preparatory effort (particularly over sung French)
that is a feature of the show.
A brief word on the new Don Quichotte recording, only the third in the
work's history. Van Dam's subtle declamation and the close-knit partnership
he forges with the equally understated Sancho of Fondary give continuous
pleasure. Berganza as Dulcinea (in this post-Cervantes treatment not a
village whore but a sparkling, sophisticated courtesan) retains much of her
unique vocal velour, if at times too little verbal punch.
Under Plasson the flow of the marvellously picaresque score is effortlessly
judged. And yet, on returning to Decca's 1978 Quichotte, with Ghiaurov,
Bacquier and Crespin, I found a more telling recorded ambience and a more
various, vigorous, account of the whole work. As, in addition, this new
recording is full-price and the older one a medium-price reissue in Decca's
'Grand Opera' series, the advice to the consumer seems pretty clear.
Griselidis.
Guildhall School of Music, London, performances tonight, Monday,
Wednesday
Cendrillon.
Welsh National Opera, Cardiff, from November 20, then on tour in
Birmingham, Oxford, Bristol
Cherubin.
E Royal Opera, Covent Garden, London, from February 14
Don Quichotte.
With Jose van Dam, Alain Fondary, Teresa Berganza etc./ Orch. and Chorus
of Capitole, Toulouse/Michel Plasson. EMI Classics CDS 7 54767 2 (two
CDs)
