FT  06 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Telecoms holding eastern Europe back
COMPANIES in eastern Europe and Russia see poor telecommunications as their
main infrastructure barrier to exports, according to a survey by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development published at an FT
conference yesterday.
Among 800 companies in six countries surveyed - Russia, Lithuania, Hungary,
Romania, Poland and Latvia - inadequate telecommunications were a more
frequent source of complaint than transport links or border crossings.
Among Polish companies, telecommunications were rated the single greatest
domestic barrier to exports, more significant than exchange rates, the
instability of financial regulation, and other infrastructure shortcomings.
Speakers at the FT conference on telecommunications in central and eastern
Europe, held in Berlin, claimed that investment was falling far short of
that required to provide a basic service.
Mr Andres Bande, president of Ameritech International, the US operator, was
highly critical of the World Bank in its support for telecommunications
investment in the region. He estimated that Dollars 18.6bn (Pounds 12.4bn) a
year was needed over the next decade to take the number of phone lines from
12 per 100 people to the current level in Spain - 35 lines per 100. However,
in 1991 only Dollars 2.6bn was invested, and his projections for the rest of
the decade were 'way short' of the target.
Mr Alexander Aleshin, Russia's first deputy minister for telecommunications,
said Russia wanted to double its number of exchange lines by the year 2000.
He stressed the problems created by inadequate revenue from fees, despite
the deregulation of prices.
Mr Krzysztof Kilian, Poland's minister of telecommunications, said his
government wanted to reform Poland's telecommunication law to encourage
foreign investment. But he ruled out the introduction of competition in
trunk lines, and stressed the political problems of privatisation and
revised tariff structures needed to make investment more attractive.
Mr Wolfgang Botsch, Germany's minister of posts and telecommunications, said
privatisation of Deutsche Telekom, legislation for which is to be introduced
in the German parliament later this year, was necessary in part to leave
Telekom 'completely free in the international sphere'.
The OECD research also highlighted the high costs and financial insecurity
faced by operators in the former eastern bloc.
It found an average of nearly 18 employees per 1,000 main lines in eastern
Europe, compared with an OECD average of 7 per 1,000. Privatisation of
Deutsche Telekom is likely to take place in 'four or five steps' beginning
in late 1995 or 1996, Mr Botsch told the conference. He wanted network
modernisation to be a prime beneficiary of receipts from the sale, but he
had not yet discussed this with Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister.
