FT  13 SEP 93 / Probe into truth's darker corners: Whitehall's workings are
receiving their severest scrutiny
When, if ever, is it justifiable for ministers and civil servants to lie 'in
the public interest'? That thorny question is at the heart of an inquiry,
which resumes today, into UK sales of arms to Iraq.
Never before have the workings of Whitehall been subjected to such detailed
scrutiny - nor senior civil servants so discomfited by the glare of
publicity.
The inquiry, headed by Lord Justice Scott, was launched last November by
John Major, the prime minister, after it was disclosed that the government
had tried to withhold vital evidence from the trial last year of three
executives of Matrix Churchill, a Midlands-based machine tools company. The
findings will be published around mid-1994.
Lord Justice Scott, who unlike civil service officials agreed to be
interviewed 'on the record', says that when he first started the inquiry it
was like 'looking into a very murky and inaccurate crystal ball'. While some
civil servants accept that it occasionally makes sense to be 'economical
with the truth', in the phrase of Lord Armstrong, the former civil service
head, they also recognise how difficult it is to convince the public that
this is justifiable.
One senior official said: 'Scott does not seem to understand what I would
call a principle of government . . . This is that you don't tell a lie, but
you don't have to open up completely . . . There have been occasions when
ministers have felt honestly that it is wrong to open up the 'dossier'.'
Another civil servant, who has appeared as a witness before the inquiry,
said of the cross-examination he had received: 'It was a most uncomfortable
experience, a clear clash of cultures . . . We are not used to having to
answer for our actions in public, but the judge seems unable to understand
the political, diplomatic and commercial realities existing in the 1980s.'
Lord Justice Scott is making life equally uncomfortable for past and present
ministers. He has asked Sir Patrick Mayhew, the former attorney-general and
current Northern Ireland secretary, whether he was part of an alleged
cover-up to prevent evidence coming to court about UK involvement in the
building of an Iraqi Supergun. In coming weeks, Scott is scheduled to
interrogate Lady Thatcher and Mr Major on what they knew of UK sales of arms
to Iraq in the 1980s.
In the trial of the Matrix Churchill executives, the defendants might have
been convicted of illegally supplying arms to Iraq without the evidence the
government tried to withhold. The prosecution abandoned the case, however,
after the judge refused the government's request to withhold classified
documents in the public interest.
These documents disclosed that the departments of trade and industry,
defence and the Foreign Office had known about Matrix Churchill's business
with Iraq in the mid-1980s, in apparent contravention of stated government
policy that the UK would not export equipment that 'would significantly
enhance' the conflict at that time between Iran and Iraq.
The Matrix-Churchill prosecutions have become an important part of Lord
Justice Scott's inquiry, which is being conducted in the Department of
Energy's former headquarters in Buckingham Gate, central London.
Since the public hearings began in May, the Scott team has grilled 23
Whitehall officials and ministers. It has also pressed government
departments into providing thousands of documents, some classified, and
taken behind-doors testimony from senior intelligence officers.
In theory, Lord Justice Scott's powers are limited. He cannot compel
witnesses to appear. Although the government has promised to give full
co-operation, at least one potentially crucial witness, Mr Alan Clarke,
former defence minister, has said he might not give evidence.
The inquiry is now focusing on questions such as:
Did the government deliberately lie to parliament by saying that there was
an embargo on the sale of lethal arms to Iraq while secretly encouraging
such sales from the mid-1980s until shortly before the invasion of Kuwait in
1990?
Who among ministers and Whitehall officials was responsible for the alleged
deception?
If the government did lie to Parliament, was that justified? On the other
hand, was the alleged misleading of Parliament the consequence of a culture
of dishonesty within the highest reaches of Whitehall?
Not since 1983, when senior diplomat Lord Franks probed the UK's handling of
the Falklands crisis, has the machinery of government and the process of
formulating foreign and defence policy been examined so publicly.
Franks's report largely exonerated the government of any direct blame.
Senior officials fear the outcome of the Scott inquiry could be more
far-reaching. One senior civil servant commented: 'There has been an attempt
to pass it (the handling of Iraqi policy) off as a 'cock-up', but I'm
dubious about this . . . It does seem to me that we were keen to sell arms
to Iraq and there was a certain amount of bending of the rules.'
Officials' nervousness has been caused partly by the negative view some have
of Lord Justice Scott. While Lord Franks was regarded as an insider, Lord
Justice Scott has a reputation as a liberal judge and is not so obviously
clubbable. In 1987 he refused to grant government injunctions banning
newspapers from publishing extracts of a book by the former intelligence
officer, Mr Peter Wright.
He has said he believes government is often surrounded by an unjustified
veil of secrecy. 'I think the government should be prepared to share with
the public, on whose behalf it governs, its concerns and aims and the
reasons why important decisions are taken.'
But some fear that his findings will not be understood by the public. One
official, a former permanent undersecretary of state at the Ministry of
Defence, said: 'An inquiry by a High Court judge is not the best way of
doing this . . . He may bring out the facts but my doubt is whether he
really understands about the day-to-day business of government where things,
if not quite murky, are not clear cut.'
While Lord Justice Scott refuses to pre-empt the outcome of the inquiry,
observers like Alex Danchev, professor of international relations at Keele
University, who wrote an analysis of the Franks report, claim the
cross-examination of witnesses in public is proving a healthy corrective of
what he believes is the abuse of power. 'Civil servants after Scott are
going to find it much more difficult to behave simply like handmaidens of
government.'
His view finds support from a senior Foreign Office official, who has
appeared before the inquiry. He said: 'I think what Scott is pointing out is
a Whitehall culture which, because of its inherent secrecy, is prone to make
mistakes . . . We have tended to confuse service to ministers with the
national interest. I would welcome a new code of conduct.'
Whitehall could become more open and accountable after the inquiry. But
whether there will be disclosures in coming months that could lead to the
resignation of ministers and officials is uncertain.
A defence minister said he had scrutinised all the government documents made
available to Scott, and had found nothing to suggest a sinister
Machiavellian conspiracy.
Scott himself has said that expectations about the outcome of the inquiry
should not be exaggerated: 'I do not see myself as holding a gun at the
heart of government.'
