FT  30 MAR 93 / India to drop World Bank dam loans: Government refuses to
meet stiff conditions on Dollars 3bn project
THE Indian government is to ask the World Bank to cancel its remaining loans
for a half-finished Dollars 3bn (Pounds 2.1bn) scheme to dam the Narmada
River in north-western India, following intense criticism of the project's
impact on the environment and on villagers who will lose their land.
But the Indian authorities are likely to press ahead with the project which
would generate hydroelectricity and bring irrigation and drinking water to
about 30m people.
The Indian government is expected to disclose today that it will not meet
tough conditions laid down by the World Bank six months ago for its
continued participation in the scheme. India was asked by the bank to
improve detailed plans for resettling displaced villagers and to prepare a
full study of the project's environmental effects. The deadline set by the
bank expires tomorrow.
The bank's withdrawal will highlight the growing power of international
environmental campaigners and raise doubts about the value of projects such
as dams in developing countries. It could also prompt questions about future
relations between aid agencies and Third World governments.
Much of the Dollars 450m loan the World Bank committed to the project has
already been spent. The bank will now block the release of the remaining
Dollars 170m and could persuade the project's other foreign backers,
including the Japanese government which has promised loans worth Y25bn
(Pounds 146.2m), to withdraw.
The Narmada project, first mooted in 1946, was delayed by disputes between
the three states which share the Narmada's waters - Gujarat, Maharashtra and
Madhya Pradesh. The arguments were resolved only in 1979 and it was not
until 1985 that the World Bank approved its loan.
By then, environmental lobbyists' power in India and overseas was growing.
Economists were starting to question the merits of big dams, in that they
rarely delivered the full benefits expected and caused environmental damage.
But the Indian government and the World Bank saw the Narmada scheme as a
chance to learn from past mistakes. So the scheme went ahead with stringent
conditions for resettling and paying compensation to displaced villagers and
for an environmental master plan.
The conditions were not met, however. Pressure from activist groups forced
the World Bank in 1991 to commission an unprecedented independent review by
Mr Bradford Morse, a former senior US development aid administrator, and Mr
Thomas Berger, a former Canadian Supreme Court judge.
The report, delivered last summer, condemned the alleged failure to protect
the environment or the interests of displaced villagers.
While World Bank officials continued to back the project, the bank's
directors, representing member countries, began to voice doubts. The US,
Japan and Germany, among others, last autumn raised the possibil ity of
dropping the scheme. But a bank board meeting in October agreed to give
India until March 31 to meet new conditions.
India has been unable to forge a consensus on the bank's conditions between
the central government and three interested states, not least because New
Delhi has been preoccupied with the recent wave of inter-religious violence.
Some Indian officials will be relieved they can continue with the scheme
without time-consuming monitoring from the World Bank. They claim the bank
has exercised inordinate influence, given it was contributing only some 15
per cent of the funds.
But the World Bank's pullout could well boost the efforts of Indian
anti-Narmada campaigners, who have won national attention by staging
demonstrations on the banks of the reservoir which is steadily filling up
behind the Sardar Sarovar Dam, the biggest of several being built across the
Narmada and its tributaries.
