FT  20 FEB 93 / Briefcase, Q&amp;A: Unhappy returns
FOR SEVERAL years, I have submitted my tax return through an accountant. I
decided that as my 1992/93 return should be less complicated than previous
ones, and accountants' fees had soared, I would submit it myself.
In the past, I have always received notification of my tax code well before
the start of the next tax year. This year, though, I got no communication.
I made enquiries by phone and was told the Revenue had received my return,
it appeared all right, and my code would be unaltered. They said they could
not afford to reply to people in my situation.
Under the circumstances, do I have a right to receive official notification
of my code and, equally important, that the details of my return are in
order and have been approved?
Regulation 9 of the Income Tax (Employments) Regulations 1973, as amended,
says: 'After the inspector has determined the appropriate code for any year,
he shall, if the code so determined is different from the code for the
preceding year, give notice of his determination to the employee; provided
that no such notice need be given when the change in the code is due to an
alteration or alterations in the rates of any of the personal reliefs
allowable under section 257 or section 259 of the Income and Corporation
Taxes Act 1988 or in the tax tables, but the other matters referred-to in
regulation 7 are not different from those for the preceding year.'
You have the right to require a formal schedule E assessment to be made for
each year, by virtue of section 205(3) of the Taxes Act: ' . . . an
assessment shall be made in respect of the income of a person so assessable
for any year of assessment if the person assessable requires an assessment
to be made by notice given to the inspector within five years from the end
of the year of assessment.'
This is not a right which you should exercise without forethought: it could,
for example, provoke a demand for a modest amount of underpaid tax which
would otherwise have been written off as not justifying the expense of
making a formal assessment.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns.  All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
