FT  14 AUG 93 / Money Markets: French rates up
FRENCH franc interest rate futures fell back sharply yesterday amid new sign
that the Bank of France intends to keep its short term money market rates
high, writes James Blitz.
On Thursday night, Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister,
reaffirmed the French government's policy of keeping France's short term
interest rates at their current levels to support the franc's value against
the D-Mark.
Asked if he would cut interest rates, Mr Balladur said: 'They have started
to come down, but what counts first and above all is to fight inflation,
fight the budget deficit, ensure growth ..Lower interest rates will come to
us as a bonus.'
That view led to a sharp rise in French cash market rates yesterday, while
the futures fell back in the belief that 3-month interest rates will still
be around the 7 per cent level in a month's time.
The September French franc contract dropped 42 basis points to close at
93.46 while the December contract dropped 26 basis points to close at 94.42.
French 3-month money rose sharply as the franc came under pressure against
the D-Mark, closing at 8 per cent, having been at 7.80 per cent earlier in
the day. The overnight rate of lending was at about 9.75 per cent towards
the end of the day.
In Germany, by contrast, events were thinner on the ground. The September
shot sterling contract rose only 1 basis point on the day to close at 93.53.
German call money was slightly easier at between 6.65 and 6.80 per cent in
the wake of the Bundesbank's injection of liquidity earlier this week.
Sterling interest rate futures continued to reflect some bullishness about a
near term cut in UK rates, despite the pound's sharp fall against the D-Mark
on the foreign exchanges.
The September contract was up 1 basis point at 9.28, while the December
contract was unchanged at 94.73. One London dealer found it extraordinary
that the market was sticking to established levels for the September
contract while the pound was under pressure. 'he chances of a rate cut now,
with European rates high and the pound sinking is zero,' he said.
Three month money, by contrast, rose from 5.75 per cent to about 5.87 per
cent on the bid side yesterday. A Pounds 1.6bn daily shortage was easily
despatched.
