FT  20 MAR 93 / Markets: ACT: winners and losers - The Bottom Line / The
Budget and You
THE chancellor's changes to the advance corporation tax (ACT) regime do not
necessarily spell good news for companies. Although there are obvious
winners, there are also losers. The reduction in the rate of ACT, from 25 to
20 per cent over two years, appears good news for business. Companies will
get a cash-flow benefit, as ACT is payable in advance but corporation tax is
paid in arrears. The changes pose two potential problems: a higher tax
charge and institutional demand for higher dividends.
First, companies which have suffered from surplus ACT in past years can
offset it against UK corporation tax as long as their profits recover. But
the amount of surplus ACT which they can offset against Pounds 33 of
corporation tax will reduce from Pounds 25 to Pounds 20. As a result, their
marginal tax rate will rise from 8 to 13 per cent.
Second, tax-exempt investors, such as the pension funds, may want companies
to pass on any benefits accrued from the changes in the form of increased
dividends. One senior fund manger said: 'We will obviously look at each case
separately. But I do not think that a company which stands to gain
significantly from the changes should think twice about not increasing its
dividends proportionately.'
Andrew Jones, the senior partner at Ernst &amp; Young, believes the reduction in
the ACT rate will be of most help to companies which have lots of UK taxable
profit and no ACT problem. They will have a reduced cash flow cost because
they pay less ACT in absolute terms. Stephen Boddice, finance director of T
&amp; S Stores, believes his company is a typical example of gaining from the
reduced cash flow, although the amount is not big.
Another class of companies which could benefit, according to Jones, is that
which has a minority of its British taxable income from UK sources. 'In
those cases,' he says, 'ACT is close to being an irretrievable problem and,
again, the reduced absolute cash cost will afford them some relief, though
far less that they would immediately expect.' Colin Hope, chairman and chief
executive of T &amp; N, the motor components and engineering group, concurs:
'The changes will unquestionably be of use to us over the next few years.
But they will of less hope than one might think.'
Another winner in this category is BBA, the automotive, aviation and
industrial component maker which generates most of its revenue overseas.
Peter Clappison, finance director, said the changes should save it around
Pounds 1m in tax. But the bulk of companies which have a surplus ACT problem
will be no better off. Those companies which have curtailed dividends to
utilise past ACT may be substantially worse off.
Most analysts believe Trafalgar House, the construction, engineering and
shipping conglomerate, fits into this category. The group believes, however,
that the effects of the changes will be neutral because of its increased
overseas earnings.
Hoare Govett has identified a number of FT-SE 100 winners from the changes.
These include the industrial conglomerates BTR and Williams Holdings; RTZ
Corporation, the world's largest mining company; HSBC Holdings, which last
year acquired Midland Bank; Standard Chartered; Smith &amp; Nephew, the
international health-care and consumer group; and Ladbroke, which owns
Hilton International hotels and various betting businesses. But the only
clear winners are those which are able to raise the dividend or pay
dividends that are sufficiently generous to keep tax-exempt shareholders
happy.
Ladbroke, is an obvious example of such a winner. Cyril Stein, the chairman,
said: 'Given our high yield, I am confident that pension funds will not be
pressing us for for higher dividends.' But Forte, the hotels group, seen as
an overall winner because its tax charge is expected to fall by around
Pounds 2m to Pounds 3m, might not have much scope to raise its dividends.
Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate, has also been classified as a partial
winner. Derek Bonham, the chief executive, believes its tax charge will fall
by about Pounds 35m. He also believes that the pension funds are strong
enough to withstand the changes without necessarily demanding a bigger
dividend.
Matters could prove awkward for Hanson if it takes a different line, though.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd believes the group's ability to increase dividends is
constrained by the low level of cover and the growing cyclicality of earning
due to the move into natural resources.
The Treasury has gained from this change in the tax system because of the
lower tax credit. On the chancellor's own figures, retaining the present
offset rate would still produce Pounds 1bn of revenue saved by reducing tax
credit payments.
As the changes stand, many companies fear that what seemed like a positive
move might not achieve its aim.
