FT  11 SEP 93 / Independent asks OFT to review Times price cut
THE Independent newspaper yesterday called on the Office of Fair Trading to
investigate the 15p cut in the cover price of its rival, The Times.
The submission came at the end of the first week of the 30p Times. Newspaper
wholesalers were last night reporting results of surveys showing The Times
may have increased its sales by just under 40 per cent, although News
International claimed a more modest 22 per cent rise.
In its submission to the OFT, The Independent accused Mr Rupert Murdoch,
chairman of News Corporation, of deliberately accepting short-term losses at
The Times to try to force The Independent out of the market.
Such 'predatory pricing' - lowering prices to uneconomic levels in the short
term with the intention of eliminating competition - amounts to an unlawful
anti-competitive practice under the 1980 Competition Act.
Mr Andreas Whittam Smith, editor-in-chief of The Independent, said: 'Our
best estimates suggest The Times would need to increase circulation by over
60 per cent - an additional 200,000 copies - to break even at 30p. This is
simply impossible.'
The formal complaint came even though The Independent conceded that a survey
of 1,000 outlets covering the first three days of this week showed the
paper's circulation had risen by 3 per cent.
The Times price cut seems to have increased the overall broadsheet market by
about 3 per cent, with the circulation of the Financial Times and The
Guardian unaffected but The Daily Telegraph down some 3 per cent.
In July The Times sold an average 359,822 copies daily, The Independent
334,993 and The Daily Telegraph 1.017m. A Times spokesman said yesterday:
'We believe we have nothing to fear from an open investigation by the OFT.'
If an investigation found The Times guilty of unlawful predatory pricing,
the OFT could seek undertakings on future pricing policy. A refusal to give
such undertakings could lead to a referral to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
Mirror hangs on, Page 10
