FT  19 JUN 93 / Arts: Intimate opera thrives in St Louis
OPERA Theatre of St Louis remains, in its 18th year of existence, a
youthfully exuberant, adventurous, significant enterprise. In terms of care
for both the main and the marginal matters of opera performance, there was
plenty in the 1993 season to renew admiration for this most serious and
purposeful of American artistic institutions.
Regular readers of this page will recall that Opera Theatre is an annual,
month-long late-spring mounting of four operas in the agreeable (and, by US
standards, tiny) Loretto-Hilton auditorium, on the campus of Webster
University, in the St Louis suburbs. Colin Graham, one of the world's most
experienced opera producers, is artistic director. Singers are drawn very
largely from the rich reservoir of young Americans. Vinson Cole, Jerry
Hadley, Dawn Upshaw, Susanne Mentzer, Sylvia McNair and Thomas Hampson are
but a few of the internationally-known names given early prominence by Opera
Theatre.
Stars of the future may be made here, yet superstar-itis and gigantomania,
those two Deadly Sins of American opera, are vigilantly opposed. The
Loretto-Hilton thrust stage and three-sided audience disposition promotes
intimacy. The St Louis Symphony, a leading US orchestra, plays for all
performances. Repertory has ranged widely; popular favourites, while not
excluded, are set amidst rarer blooms. This year was a typical St Louis
mixture: Don Giovanni, Massenet's Cendrillon, Billy Budd and the world
premiere of David Carlson's Midnight Angel.
Everything is sung in English. Since throughout the English-speaking world
the parrotting of the so-called original language to the accompaniment of
surtitles is fast becoming the rule, the St Louis insistence on making
immediate, meaningful theatre out of opera seems correspondingly the more
precious.
The attractively tree-covered and tented grounds of the Loretto-Hilton
invite picnicking and, afterwards, the kind of civilised sociability in
which artists and audience mingle late into the night to prolong the
pleasures of the occasion. A visitor's daytime hours can be wonderfully well
filled in St Louis, in which two great rivers, much fine architecture, many
noble monuments and one of the most important American art galleries are
there for the enjoying.
The Budd was of special interest - for the fact that Graham, a Britten
devotee and interpreter of high repute, was staging the work for the first
time in his long career, and for the revival of the Ur-text. At its 1951
Covent Garden premiere the opera was presented in four acts, with a
big-scale ensemble closing the first. Finding it too long, Britten later
re-formed the four acts into two, in the process removing the ensemble.
He was, I think, right to do so: while the Muster is excitingly built up,
with bold contrasts of solo and chorus and an early entrance for Captain
Vere, the patriotic sentiments it expresses are already more effectively
characterised later on in the opera. This first version - at least as shown
in St Louis - takes a dangerous amount of time to get going. I make the
parenthetical proviso only because, by the light of recent British Budd
productions, fiercely searching, even 'critical' in their analysis of words
and situations, Graham's approach seemed oddly old-fashioned.
In particular, the principal-boy quality - all dewy charm and radiant smiles
 -he drew from the greatly talented, inexperienced young baritone Steven
Combs reminded one how difficult the title role can be to place as a
three-dimensional character. Issues of class, of social and sexual politics,
were lightly treated. Peter Kazaras's Captain Vere, sung with exceptional
refinement, and Jeffrey Wells's powerful Claggart, too consistently
full-voiced, seemed to leave in their wake the wrong sort of question-marks.
The strength, and indeed the triumph, of the experience was the thrillingly
uninhibited singing of the St Louis male chorus, packed with singers of
'solo' calibre drilled to electrifyingly responsive ensemble by
chorus-master, Cary John Franklin, and conductor, Robert Spano. Last year
Graham set up a permanent wall (made of fibre-glass with a handsome
faux-brick finish) to fill the stage back, for the purposes of acoustical
focussing and production economy. Derek McLane's set worked well against it,
once one had got over the inevitable absence of marine atmosphere in the
scenic complement. The audience, new to Britten's Melville opera, was
tightly gripped.
Cendrillon, a blend of formal savoir-faire, wit, icing-sugar fairy-music and
tender sentiment, is best Massenet. I loved Graham's light-fingered account
of it. Stepmother (Josepha Gayer) and stepsisters (Connie-lin Chmura and
Jill Grove) were broadly but not crudely handled. The travesty Prince (Mary
Ann McCormick, a rich-voiced mezzo) was stylish. The duets for
Lucette-Cendrillon (Susan Rosenbaum, a light, precise soprano) and her weak,
loving father Pandolphe (David Evitts) injected the right amount of pathos.
Perhaps the last degrees of elegance were missing in the playing, and in the
conducting of Carol Crawford. The beneficence of the experience survived
unscathed.
Giovanni, in a weakly 'inventive' staging by Giles Havergal (of the Glasgow
Citizen's), and The Midnight Angel, a toshy, sploshy decoction of
'accessible' (ie 1940s film-musical) manners and lame-brained romantic
fantasy, gave one less to write home about. Of both shows, though, the
introduction to notable American singers new to me proved the saving grace.
Christine Brewer (a generous-toned, at times generalised Donna Anna) comes
this season to Covent Garden, Patricia Racette (a passionate, colourful
Donna Elvira) to Welsh National Opera. I look forward to hearing both again,
and no less - from the Midnight Angel cast - the excellent young lyric tenor
Tracey Welborn and light mezzo Christine Abraham.
