FT  23 APR 93 / Amato hands in his resignation
THE search began last night for a new Italian government based on a broader
political consensus to reform the electoral system, following last Sunday's
referendum.
This followed a visit to the Quirinale Palace by Mr Giuliano Amato during
which he handed in the resignation of his four-party coalition to President
Oscar Luigi Scalfaro.
President Scalfaro reserved the right to decide whether to accept the
resignation of the coalition, composed of Christian Democrats, Socialists,
Social Democrats and Liberals, formed last June .
Mr Scalfaro has thus kept his options open in finding a replacement and
ensured that the outgoing government will remain in a caretaker capacity.
The search promises to be tortuous in the absence of any prior agreement
either on a suitable candidate or on the type of coalition feasible in a
fractured parliament with the traditional parties discredited by corruption
scandals.
The Socialist premier foreshadowed the end of his government, Italy's 51st
since the war, in a statement to parliament on Wednesday. However, he waited
until the end of yesterday's one-day parliamentary debate on the impact of
the referendum result before informing parliament. This was to observe a
constitutional nicety - the debate could not have been held if the
announcement had preceded it.
President Scalfaro is expected to play a key role in brokering an agreement.
It is the first time a president has found himself in such a pivotal
position, with the main parties having such reduced power.
The president is anxious to see a new government formed as soon as possible.
But as yesterday's debate showed, forging a consensus round a government
with broad parliamentary support could prove difficult.
During the debate Mr Mario Segni, the leader of the referendum movement
whose political position has been boosted by the overwhelming endorsement of
his referendum proposal to reform Senate electoral law, avoided any
suggestion he might be willing to head a new government. This contrasted
with his offer to head a government after last April's general election.
However, Mr Umberto Bossi, leader of the Lombard League which controls
nearly one-third of the vote in northern Italy, backed the idea of a Segni
government.
Mr Amato has not excluded his own candidature at the head of a reshaped
government. This was advocated yesterday by Mr Marco Panella, leader of the
Radical party.
