FT  03 AUG 93 / General Motors chief in rebuff to Volkswagen
MR Jack Smith, chief executive of General Motors, last night ruled out a
'face-to-face meeting' with Mr Ferdinand Piech, chairman of the Volkswagen
management board, to discuss the bitter row between the two companies.
This has flared up over alleged industrial espionage by Mr Jose Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, VW's production and purchasing director and formerly
GM's global purchasing director.
In a statement last night GM said Mr Smith and Mr Piech had held only a
'brief' telephone conversation yesterday. 'No face-to-face meetings were
scheduled between the two executives.'
At the same time GM moved to force Mr Piech into a public climbdown over his
implied allegations last week that the US company might have tampered with
evidence and might have planted secret information in VW's computer system.
Mr David Herman, chairman and managing director of Adam Opel, GM's German
subsidiary, called last night for Mr Piech to 'retract in detail the false
public accusations' he made last week, only a day before contacting GM to
seek discussions with Mr Smith.
Mr Herman said he was prepared to 'communicate in writing with Volkswagen
executives', but only on condition that such contact did not bias the public
prosecutor's investigation of the alleged industrial espionage by Mr Lopez
and other former GM employees, and provided Mr Piech issued his retraction.
Mr Herman said that, last week, 'without presenting evidence of any kind',
Mr Piech had 'implied that Opel/GM could have tampered with evidentiary
material in the Lopez case; that Opel/GM were abusing the public
prosecutor's office to the defamation of Volkswagen; and that Opel/GM or
their agents might have gained access to the VW computer system in order to
place secret information there that could implicate Volkswagen.'
Mr Herman said all of the charges were 'absolutely false, and if Mr Piech
believed otherwise his simple remedy would have been to present evidence. .
. to the prosecutor's office'.
The Opel chairman called on Volkswagen to co-operate with the criminal
investigation 'by making all material VW witnesses immediately available for
interview by the prosecutors'.
The extreme language used by Mr Piech last week against General Motors has
caused unease in Bonn. Calls from German government ministers for moderation
appeared to trigger Mr Piech's initiative to make direct contact with Mr
Smith.
Mr Herman expressed astonishment last night that VW had announced the
initiative without prior knowledge or approval by Opel or GM in the US.
He said 'such unilateral action could be interpreted as a mere tactical
manoeuvre'.
