FT  12 OCT 93 / International Company News: East European buy for KJS
KRAFT Jacobs Suchard (KJS), part of Philip Morris of the US, this week took
a further step into the eastern European food market by acquiring 67 per
cent of Lithuania's Kaunas Confectionery Company for Dollars 16m.
Mr Bernard Huber, KJS vice-president for central and eastern Europe, called
the deal 'an important part of our east European confectionery strategy'.
The purchase price includes a commitment to invest Dollars 12.5m in the
business, which employs 800 people.
KJS, which expects total revenues of Dollars 9bn this year and is the
third-largest food manufacturer in Europe, has made similar acquisitions in
Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Poland.
The deal marks the second foray into Lithuania by Philip Morris, which in
April beat British American Tobacco to acquire the Klaipeda Tobacco Company
for Dollars 40m - the biggest western investment in the Baltic states so
far.
The Kaunas deal repeats a pattern which has marked Philip Morris' entry into
other east European markets. Shortly after it bought a majority stake in the
Czech Tabak cigarette factory last year, Jacobs Suchard bought Figaro, a
confectionery company in the Slovak Republic.
Last summer Jacobs Suchard, a confectionery and coffee business which is in
the process of merging with Kraft, acquired Dadak, a Czech spice producer.
Inexpensive western consumer products, such as cigarettes and chocolates,
are in strong demand in the former Soviet bloc. It is estimated that 700bn
cigarettes are sold in the region every year.
In Lithuania, Philip Morris and KJS have inherited a virtual monopoly
propped up by high import duties. Kaunas, the country's largest sweets
company with Dollars 10m in total sales, sells 90 per cent of its output on
the domestic market.
But KJS may want to tap the export potential. Though Lithuania is a small
country of 3.7m people, it is often seen as a stepping stone to larger
neighbouring markets. By buying local companies, Philip Morris and its
subsidiary inherit informal trade contacts cultivated under Soviet rule that
may help to smooth any future moves east.
Estonia, Latvia and Belarus are the markets closest to Lithuania. But Russia
remains the most lucrative - in particular the St Petersburg region, which
includes northern Europe's largest city and a population approaching 9m.
