FT  29 MAY 93 / BA staff on brink of strike
BRITISH AIRWAYS cabin crews and ground staff will strike next week if the
company fails to resolve its differences with them over pay and conditions.
Such a stoppage would ground BA's fleet in the UK and abroad, severely
disrupting schedules.
Informal talks will be held during the weekend between BA and the Transport
and General Workers union that represents the employees. Formal negotiations
are expected on Wednesday.
Mr Bill Morris, TGWU general secretary, said the union had decided not to
disrupt BA's holiday traffic because it wished to minimise inconvenience to
passengers and provide 'a breathing space' for BA to resolve long-standing
problems with its staff.
BA last night welcomed the decision not to call a strike during the bank
holiday weekend and said it was 'confident that talks with the TGWU will
avoid any disruption'.
An immediate and indefinite staff travel embargo will be imposed on all BA
flights if industrial disruption occurs, and wide-ranging contingency plans
are ready to try to limit the effects of a strike.
Mr Morris said: 'Should BA fail then strike action will be taken next week
at a time and in a form to be determined.' He made it clear that all the
TGWU's 17,000 members at BA would be involved in any strike.
Union officials are demanding that the airline stop using any more contract
labour in its operations without the agreement of the TGWU. Staff also do
not want inferior terms and conditions imposed on them by newly created
subsidiary companies.
BA says it has no plans to create more subsidiaries without consultation
with the unions, and it will not reduce pay or conditions unless the only
alternative is closure or disposal of parts of the business because of
unsustainable losses.
Mr Morris said he had written to BA chairman Sir Colin Marshall urging
serious talks. He hoped management would 'at long last' seek agreement with
the TGWU in the light of the union's ballot. This had a 51 per cent turnout
of which 62 per cent backed a strike call and 84 per cent supported
industrial disruption short of a strike.
Further pressure can be expected on BA at the end of next week from its
pilots, who are being ballotted on strike action and other forms of
disruption in protest at the alleged imposition of inferior terms and
conditions. The result of that ballot will be announced on Friday.
