FT  03 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian grain debt solution
'very close'
DISCUSSIONS IN Washington this week between a high-level Russian delegation
and Clinton administration officials aimed at resuming US grain shipments to
Russia have come down to the issue of who is going to pay for freight.
Mr Mike Espy, the US agriculture secretary, said before his final meeting
with the Russians yesterday that his department was 'very close' to an
agreement on the issue, and that he hoped to have a package to offer
President Clinton soon. Mr Bill Clinton and Russia's President Boris Yelstin
will meet for a summit on April 4 and trade groups believe Mr Clinton will
offer a solution to Russia's grain credits problems at that meeting.
Mr Glenn Whiteman, deputy assistant administrator of the US Department of
Agriculture's export credit programmes, said the solution would not include
the resumption of commercial credits, which is what Russian officials have
requested.
Russia has defaulted on Dollars 415.5m in US-backed commercial grain loans,
with Dollars 240.3m more due this month. US grain sales to Russia have
stalled because of the credit problems. While Russia objects to the stigma
attached to receiving food aid, Mr Whiteman said those were the programmes
under consideration. However, any food donation programme tapped for Russia
will require legislation to lift the Dollars 30m cap on what the USDA can
pay to ship donated commodities in a single fiscal year. US humanitarian
shipments of food to Africa and eastern Europe this year have already
reached that level. Russia will either have to come up with hard currency to
pay the freight for grain shipments, or the USDA will have to seek and
exemption.
Since US law requires 75 per cent of US food aid to be shipped on
US-registered vessels, Russia would have to pay higher freight rates than on
commercial shipments.
Mr Dan Basse, a commodities analyst for the consulting group AgResouces,
estimates that the cargo preference requirement would bring freight costs
for shipping Dollars 1bn of US-donated grain to about Dollars 400m.
Money to buy donated commodities is also running short. Two of the three
funding sources for the 'food for progress' programme were nearly exhausted,
Mr Whiteman said. 'Right now we're discussing a variety of programmes.'
