FT  13 OCT 93 / Clash of style behind Guinness departure
MR CRISPIN DAVIS, managing director of United Distillers, the Guinness
spirits division, yesterday resigned from the group by mutual agreement.
The surprise move comes during a troubled period for Guinness. It is under
pressure from declining profits and from questions about its marketing
strategy and partnership with LVMH, the embattled French group.
Mr Davis's departure, after little more than a year as head of UD, was said
to be due to a personality clash with Mr Tony Greener, Guinness's chairman
and chief executive.
Their relationship was affected by differences in management style and
approach. It is understood Mr Davis's outgoing manner contrasted strongly
with Mr Greener's reticence.
Industry observers, including some of UD's competitors, suggest that the
differences were reflected in marketing strategy. While Mr Greener, with his
background at Dunhill, maintained absolute faith in building premium brands,
competitors were bewildered to find UD cutting the prices of some products.
Its decision to reduce the strength of Gordon's gin was widely seen as a
serious marketing error.
Such tactics were attributed to Mr Davis's marketing experience with Procter
&amp; Gamble. 'He was basically a commodity marketer,' said one rival.
At a recent City presentation, a slide showing a hand grasping a bottle of
UD's Scotch on a supermarket shelf was followed by a slide in which the hand
clutched a bottle of P&amp;G shampoo.
Mr Davis took over as head of UD in July last year. He was recruited from
P&amp;G in 1990 as managing director of UD's European operations.
He had a successful career at P&amp;G, joining as an assistant brand manager and
rising rapidly to become UK marketing director. He ran the German operation
before becoming US vice-president of the food division.
He was paid about Pounds 250,000 a year at UD, where he was on a three-year
rolling contract. Compensation is being negotiated.
While Guinness searches for a successor from outside the group, UD's
executives will report to Mr Greener. The group reiterated yesterday that
there would be no change in strategy.
But the pressures persist. Market disappointment at a decline of 9 per cent
in first-half profits was compounded by Mr Greener's forecast of flat
profits for the full year and only modest improvements in 1994.
Mr Greener asserted that there was no intention of abandoning its
international premium pricing policy. 'To move our brands downwards would
put us on a slippery slope from which we would never recover.'
Guinness's difficulties have not been helped by the battering taken recently
by shares in LVMH, whose profits have been hit by depressed champagne and
cognac markets. Speculation persists, in spite of Guinness's constant
denials, that the alliance is crumbling. Lex, Page 18
