FT  05 JUN 93 / Leading Article: The shock of the old
THE STOCK market's instant reaction to this week's depressed set of money
supply figures was to assume that a cut in interest rates was moving
inexorably closer. Certainly a cut is the kind of gesture that might be
expected of a populist chancellor; and in some moods, that is what the
market hopes that the new incumbent at Number 11 Downing Street, Mr Kenneth
Clarke, will turn out to be. But in the absence of appropriate reassurance
on fiscal policy, the cheer might very quickly turn to alarm. The folk
memory of the roaring 1980s remains strong, giving rise to the inevitable
question: could it all happen again?
For those in the housing market whose mortgages now exceed the value of
their homes, the equally inevitable answer is: yes please. But lightning in
the financial markets never strikes in the same place twice. Indeed, the
danger after a particularly extreme economic cycle is that policymakers
react to the old problems instead of the new. As the conflicting signals
emerging from the housing market suggested this week, a dramatic surge in
house prices, which was at the heart of asset price inflation in the 1980s,
is not in the offing for a long time yet.
That said, the most savage downturn in the UK housing market since the
second world war is probably at an end. The signs are apparent in
housebuilding, in mortgage-lending and in turnover in the housing market.
The fact that the Halifax Building Society reports that average prices fell
in May by 1.2 per cent, whereas Nationwide had earlier reported a 1 per cent
increase, merely tells us that what ought to be happening is happening. In a
recession driven by debt, where between 1 1/2 m and 2m home-owners have
negative equity and repossessions are running at record levels, the
restraining influence on house prices is considerable.
Psychological turn
The reason why the British became so enamoured of housing in the post-war
period was largely to do with gearing. Because so much of the purchase price
was financed by borrowing, a small rise in house prices led to a much bigger
rise in the equity in the home. The fact that gearing exaggerates the impact
of downward price movements on equity, as well as upward movements, was
obscured until the 1990s by high inflation. The big question now is whether
the first sharp fall in nominal house prices since the war has broken that
psychology.
Research revealed by the Building Societies Association this week showed a
significant fall in the number of people aged between 16 and 34 wanting to
own a home within two years. Taken together with the looming squeeze on real
incomes implied by the current Finance Bill, that amounts to a very powerful
damper. So, too, does the expected decline in the size of the first-time
buying age group in the second half of the decade.
The constraint on demand will be further reinforced by the retreat from
lending at absurdly high percentages of value. Increased prudence, more
expensive insurance premiums and tougher prudential rules have already
forced people to save more and longer before buying. This week the chairman
of the Building Societies Commission, Mrs Rosalind Gilmore, announced that
the risk weighting she applies to building society assets will be changed to
encourage a further reduction in the percentage of value on which societies
lend.
Future shocks
All this tends to confirm that the risk of another house price spiral is
remote. But that does not mean that further financial shocks can be ruled
out. Where depositors exercise no discipline over bank and building society
management, growth-hungry lenders find themselves engaged, when the economy
turns up, in a constant battle with the regulators. And while the
authorities can dictate the rate of growth in the reserve base of the
banking or building society system, it is the financial structure that
dictates the efficacy with which those reserves are deployed.
That is another way of saying that financial innovation tends to leap-frog
regulatory awareness. It happened in Britain in the 1980s, with financial
deregulation. And it is not inconceivable that it could happen again in the
1990s in the building society movement. There has, for example, been a
notable recent shift towards fixed rate mortgage-lending. But whereas, in
the past, a mismatch between short-term deposits and longer-term fixed rate
loans would have caused the societies to lend more cautiously, today the
risk in the mismatch is neutered by using interest rate swaps. In a more
speculative climate the temptation to hedge less, and to speculate more
might increase. Or, again, under-regulated counterparties in the swap market
might take aboard excessive risk.
Mrs Gilmore is acutely aware of such issues and has delivered the
appropriate warnings. But the pace of financial innovation makes it harder
to read each new twist and turn in the financial structure. The only
certainty is that when the next shock comes, it will take a different form
from the last one. And come, it will. Only the timing is in question.
