FT  12 OCT 93 / BR freight unit sale deplored
PLANS to privatise British Rail's freight business could inhibit the
development of a competitive market in rail freight, it was claimed
yesterday.
The Freight on Rail group, which represents the rail freight industry and
its customers, said government plans to create three companies to handle
bulk freight would create powerful regional monopolies and deter the entry
of private-sector operators.
The government wants to sell off Trainload Freight, BR's bulk freight
subsidiary, as three regionally-based companies which would be able to
compete with each other.
Freight on Rail said the contracts these companies would inherit and their
control over locomotives and other assets would give them a dominant market
position.
'The government has been concerned to make the companies profitable for
sale,' said Mr Mike Harvey, chairman of the Private Wagon Federation. 'To
us, they look to be unassailable.'
Freight on Rail also criticised the government's decision to retain
Railfreight Distribution (RfD), BR's freight distribution company, in public
ownership until services through the Channel tunnel are established. This
would leave RfD with preferential access to the limited number of Channel
tunnel slots allocated to freight trains, squeezing out new private-sector
operators, the group said.
It would also allow RfD to take business from private-sector companies which
already carry some rail freight. Freight on Rail said a new joint venture
involving RfD is already bidding for car distribution business traditionally
carried on private-sector wagons.
The group wants BR's rolling stock to be handed over to the leasing
companies that will take over passenger wagons, so that they can be leased
to all potential operators.
'The government cannot assume that the private sector will automatically
throw itself into expanding rail freight,' said Mr Harvey. 'If it sells off
the companies with monopoly rights, the customer will not get the benefits
of choice and competition.'
