FT  23 JUL 93 / Victory may not heal shattered authority
He will win today. But at what cost?
As MPs poured from the Commons chamber after last night's government defeat
Mr John Major's cabinet colleagues spoke as one. It was not the prime
minister's future on the line in today's confidence vote. It was the
government's.
The ever-gregarious chancellor, Mr Kenneth Clarke, held forth to
journalists, explaining again and again that the only alternative to victory
was a general election. The strategy had been agreed by the whole cabinet.
Mr Clarke, the heir apparent to the leadership, was ready to go down in
flames with his neighbour.
The warning to the Tory Eurosceptics who have fought beyond all expectation
to wreck the treaty was crystal clear. Defy Mr Major again and you will get
a Labour government. You will get also a treaty with, not without, the
socialist social chapter. In the clamour someone even suggested that
September 2 had been pencilled in as the election date.
The sceptics took the point. An MP who had just defied his party for the
umpteenth time admitted defeat. He would back Mr Major. Maastricht would be
ratified.
Others die-hards who have forged a party within a party - the Conservatives'
very own Militant Tendency - agreed. A handful might fight to the end - up
to a half a dozen might conceivably court expulsion from their own party -
but not enough to topple the government.
But there was another, reluctant, consensus among many of those who gathered
to vilify the Tory rebels and reflect on their government's future. A
victory today will not be enough to restore Mr Major's shattered authority.
It may in the end prove impossible to repair.
Nor will the ultimate sanction heal the deep schism opened up by more than a
year of civil war over Europe. Some Tories wondered whether the party is now
ungovernable.
More than 20 backbenchers voted against Mr Major despite the fiercest
campaign in recent political history to force them into line. Another 20
would have liked to join them. Thirty or 40 more would refuse privately to
condemn the rebels.
A confidence motion can be used once, but Mr Major cannot threaten to take
his party beyond the brink again. Next time, he would be forced to stand
down.
It will take more than today's vote to restore the Conservative party's will
to govern and to rebuild Mr Major's leadership. Fair or not, he does not
command enough respect in his party to be certain of his future.
Mr Major thinks otherwise. He insists the breathing space provided by the
summer parliamentary recess might provide time for the economic recovery and
the feel-good factor to refloat his battered, stumbling administration.
Perhaps it will. But early today amid the anguish of defeat few Tories would
bet on it.
