FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (5): State oil goes private / Profile of
Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales
SEVENTY-ONE years after it became the first government oil company in the
world, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales is set to become the first state
oil company in Latin America to be privatised.
Through an enormous offering of shares nationally and internationally,
scheduled for early July, YPF will pass into private hands. The sale of the
state oil company will cap the Argentine privatisation programme, rendering
it almost complete except for the sales of minority stakes in some of the
country's already-privatised companies.
The sale will underline the extent of the transformation in the economic
role of the state since the Menem administration took office in July 1989.
YPF has already been radically restructured. Its workforce of 52,000 in 1990
has been reduced to fewer than 12,000, non-core assets are being sold off as
are oil and gas wells in order to dilute its monopoly position.
Yet, the sale of Argentina's largest company raises many political and other
questions. As in all privatisations, the government risks accusations that
it is selling off the family silver at too low a price. Yet if the
government tries to sell at too high a price, there are risks that the sale
might fail or that small shareholders are left with shares that fall sharply
in value soon afterwards. The Argentine stock market has yet fully to digest
the effect of the price collapse of the shares of Telecom of Argentina after
a public offering in March 1992.
The government has decided that, unlike in many previous privatisations, it
will not sell a controlling stake in YPF to foreign operating companies.
This immediately raises the question of who will control the company after
the sale of its shares. Even though it will still be the largest stakeholder
 -the state will retain at least 20 per cent of the shares after the sale
with a further 5-10 per cent reserved for the workforce - the government has
promised that control will pass to the private sector. The Argentine
government seems to have had in mind a British-style privatisation in which
the management installed by the state remains in place. However, it is
possible that the new shareholders will prefer management led by someone
other than Mr Jose Estenssoro, despite the widespread credit he is given for
turning round the former loss-making company.
It will also want to avoid making the oil company the subject of a bid by
speculators, either foreign or domestic, whose aim would be to split up the
company in order to make short-term gains. Maximum stakes are, thus, likely
to be limited, although if the maximum is set too low it could put off some
potential buyers. Mr Russell Herbert, managing director of British Gas's
Global Gas division, says his company is interested in a stake in YPF, but
points out that it can make no decisions before it knows the terms of the
sale.
While this may be the government's most important single privatisation,
there are some in Buenos Aires who believe that it has increased the risk of
failure by going for an earlier-than-anticipated privatisation.
The timetable appears to have been guided by political rather than market
considerations, since a third quarter sale was previously considered likely.
Congressional elections are due in October and the government has promised
to use the proceeds from YPF to pay off arrears owed to pensioners payments
in the past.
A sale in early July means a frantic timetable for flotation's global
co-ordinators, First Boston and Merrill Lynch. Global investment
institutions will over the coming few months also have to digest other large
issues including the sale by the UK government of its remaining stake in
British Telecom.
The company was scheduled to file full details of the sale, including two
years of audited results of YPF, with the US Securities and Exchange
Commission in early June.
The assets of the company have been put loosely at Dollars 6bn-8bn. A banker
close to the transaction said that although the eventual outcome would
depend on the process of 'book building' - under which underwriters
determine demand for the shares at a range of prices - it was thought likely
that perhaps half the shares offered would go to the United States market,
20 per cent to the Argentine market and 30 per cent to the rest of the
world, mainly to Europe.
The flotation of Yacimientos Petroliferoos Fiscales on to the private market
may raise Dollars 3bn.
