FT  07 DEC 93 / Technology: A shock to the system - The UK's electrical
plugs may lose a pin if plans for a European standard go ahead
Not everyone would associate the humdrum world of electrical accessories
with controversy and acrimony but sparks are flying in the debate about the
future of Europe's plugs and sockets - and the UK's big three-pin plugs in
particular.
Axes are being ground ever sharper in a propaganda battle that in recent
weeks has seen claims and counterclaims, 'doom and gloom' forecasts, and
dark allegations about Machiavellian tactics.
Behind it all, however, is a serious 'Euro-issue' that will strike a chord
with anyone who has ever moved domestic appliances across European borders,
or even tried to use an electric shaver or small hair-drier in a different
country.
Today, a working group of Cenelec, the European electrical standard-setting
committee, meets in Brussels for the first time to discuss how a new 'plug
for Europe' system can be implemented.
The plug will have two round pins - a three-pin version will be available
for appliances that need to be earthed - and will be much smaller, lighter
and cheaper than the British plug with its rectangular pins, which was
introduced in 1947.
If the system is approved by Cenelec next summer, it will eventually replace
some 20 European plug and socket systems and end decades of conflicting
standards.
The UK, one of 18 Cenelec member countries, would have to abandon its plug
and socket standard, BS 1363, and adopt the new one. This could relatively
quickly become a world standard for countries operating 220-250 volt
electrical systems - most of the world apart from North America, Japan and
parts of south-east Asia.
But the UK plug and socket manufacturing industry is fighting to kill the
proposal. David Dossett, director of the UK's Electrical Installation
Equipment Manufacturers Association (Eiema), says it could be dangerous for
UK consumers (who in any case have not asked for a change), would seriously
damage the UK industry, which employs 10,000 people, and could cost up to
Pounds 20bn to introduce.
His most vocal opponent, Simon Hossack, a Hertfordshire inventor, rejects
the safety concerns and says a common European plug system could hold big
benefits for UK consumers and industry. 'If the proposal is defeated it
could be 20 to 50 years before another attempt is made to harmonise Europe's
plugs and sockets,' he says.
The issue provokes strong views in the UK electrical industry, with
appliance and electronic equipment manufacturers generally in favour of the
proposal, but the plug and socket manufacturers and some safety experts
against it.
It comes as the UK is about to introduce new safety regulations which would
require appliance manufacturers to fit 13-amp plugs to their products rather
than leaving the consumer to do it. This, says Hossack, could lock the UK
into its current system while every other country in Europe standardises.
The Cenelec proposal is the latest of various schemes involving both
flat-pin and round-pin plugs which have been suggested, voted on, and
rejected, since the International Electrotechnical Commission, the worldwide
standardisation organisation, first discussed the issue in 1966.
It stems from the controversy following a Cenelec document in 1991, Live
with the Differences, which angered supporters of harmonisation and prompted
the European Commission to demand a fresh attempt to introduce a common
system.
The result is a revised version of a proposal first made in 1986 by the IEC
for round-pin plugs, the so-called 906-1 system. The pins have now been
widened from the original 4.5mm to 4.8mm so they can fit into most
Continental systems without being 'dangerously compatible', for example,
with Swiss plugs.
Dossett and the UK plug industry are unhappy with Cenelec's proposals for a
number of reasons:
Dangerous compatibility: Dossett says an existing two-pin plug widely used
in Europe for low-power appliances, the 2.5-amp two-pin 'Europlug', could be
inserted into a 13-amp UK three-pin socket with potentially lethal
consequences. He also claims that the new Cenelec plug could, in some cases,
be dangerously inserted into UK sockets. Some of these have holes wide
enough for the 4.8mm pins, he says.
But opponents say two-pin plugs could not be inserted by accident into UK
sockets and would require deliberate misuse by the consumer. David Latimer,
a consulting engineer who is chairman of IEC and Cenelec wiring committees,
says the danger is more apparent than real.
Other safety and technical issues: Eiema says the Cenelec proposal is for a
16-amp system, and passing 16 amps through a 13-amp plug would cause
dangerously high temperatures, increasing the risk of fire. It also warns
that the British 'ring main' system requires fused plugs, while the Cenelec
proposal is for unfused plugs, as used in the radial wiring networks on the
Continent. This could be potentially very dangerous, it says.
Supporters of harmonisation such as Alan Smith, a technical writer and
electrical expert, counter that the UK system is 'over-fused'. The fuse in
UK plugs is not intended to give personal protection but to protect the
appliance flex, he says, and to accommodate unfused plugs, a flex is fitted
that can be protected by a 20-amp circuit breaker at the fuse box.
Overall, Eiema says, the UK has a 'safe and technically excellent system'
with which electricians and consumers alike are familiar. The Royal Society
for the Prevention of Accidents even suggests that other member states of
the European Union should change to 'our proven, safer' system.
In reply, both Smith and Hossack point to the potential dangers caused by
the arrangement of the terminals under the UK plug cover, inefficient
clamping of the flexible cable in cheaper plugs, and all sorts of injuries
caused when the plug is left loose on the floor - and inevitably ends pins
up.
They also say the UK plug is not user-friendly, especially for arthritics
who have difficulty inserting and removing it from the socket, and say the
whole system has outlived its usefulness because it is not suited to modern
appliance use.
Economic arguments: Supporters of the Cenelec proposal reject the higher
estimates quoted by Eiema, and say costs could be minimal if the system were
phased in on new homes, and adaptors were used on appliances supplied with
the new plug.
Hossack has invented such an adaptor, now licensed to National Power.
But the plug manufacturers do win some sympathy from Latimer on the question
of manufacturing costs. Continental countries already use round pins so the
UK industry faces much heavier costs switching from the milling machines
used for producing rectangular pins to lathes. Dossett claims that adopting
the new plugs could make half the UK industry's Pounds 1.3bn capital
employed redundant.
Answers to many of these questions should come early next year with the
results of a cost-benefit study being conducted by the Department of Trade
and Industry.
When it comes to a vote, later in 1994, the UK could yet win with the
support of Germany, which is pushing an alternative proposal, and Belgium.
Alternatively, the UK could win a derogation, allowing it to continue with
the current system while the rest of Europe comes together. This would leave
the UK 'on the outside looking in', says Latimer, with a far weaker
influence on the electrical standards-setting process.
Dossett wants Cenelec to come up with a better proposal that would address
the UK industry's safety concerns. But some observers believe adoption of
the proposal is inevitable, and suggest that Germany will support it because
of the European Commission's strong wish for harmonisation.
Significantly, Ireland also predominantly uses the UK's 13-amp system, yet
supports the proposal. Dan O'Regan, a senior executive at the National
Standards Authority of Ireland, says he does not see a problem of dangerous
compatibility in Ireland.
'The changeover does not worry our manufacturers. They see a bigger market
than if they continue making the BS 1363 plugs, even though competition will
obviously be tougher,' he adds.
Letters, Page 16
