FT  07 MAY 93 / Survey of Canadian Forest Products (2): There may be no
simple answers - Is the industry doing too much or not enough to protect the
environment?
In the battle over forestry's impact on the environment, there are few
rights and wrongs - only a barrage of strongly-held opinions.
Mr John Cashore, environment minister in British Columbia's Social Democrat
government, compares the province's forests and waterways to Europe's
ancient cathedrals. 'A lot of us look on representative ecosystems as a
heritage which should be protected,' he says. Forestry companies and their
workers retort that enthusiasm to protect the environment has come to
threaten jobs, investment and even worker safety.
Noting plans by BC and Ontario to introduce the world's toughest pulp mill
effluent standards, Mr Patrick Moore, a director of the Forest Alliance of
BC, a joint industry-labour group, says: 'You could see it as leading the
world, or you could see it as going overboard.'
The issues seldom lend themselves to simple answers. For example: Is it
wrong to cut down old trees if they are replaced by new ones? Can trees in a
forest be felled selectively as an alternative to the clear-cuts which
denude entire mountainsides and valleys? Are tougher effluent curbs
justified when the technology to implement them has yet to be invented?
Both the industry and its critics, however, have to live with two
incontrovertible facts. First, Canada's trees will continue to be destroyed
in large numbers so long as society demands timber for houses and paper for
offices. Second, the forestry companies can no longer go about their
business without taking account of the impact on nature.
Environmental pressures vary from one part of the country to another. The
differences are evident in the performance of individual companies. All but
one of British Columbia's 22 pulp mills have pledged to comply with a
federal government rule which will require non-measurable levels of dioxins
and furans in pulp mill effluent by January 1994. By contrast, 37 of the 39
mills in Quebec have asked for an extension.
One reason for this discrepancy is the hodge-podge of federal and provincial
regulations.
West coast companies complain that they are subject to harsher public
scrutiny (and in some cases, tighter rules) than their counterparts in
Ontario and Quebec. While Alberta has expanded timber- cutting rights in
recent years for the benefit of new investors in pulp and paper mills,
neighbouring British Columbia is scaling back.
In addition, the demarcation between federal and provincial jurisdiction is
not always clear. While clean-water standards fall under the provinces,
Ottawa has responsibility for protecting fish habitats.
Federal regulations currently require pulp mills to cut the level of
chlorinated organic compounds in their effluent to 2.5kg per tonne by 1994.
But BC and Ontario have recently announced much more ambitious targets. BC
wants mills be down to 1.5kg per tonne by 1995 and zero by 2002; Ontario has
also proposed a zero limit within the next decade.
Mr Cashore says he is confident not only that west coast companies will
reach the targets, but that they will be pioneers in developing and selling
the necessary technology.
However, the industry's view is that the marginal benefits of a
'zero-tolerance' policy do not warrant the enormous financial cost which may
be involved. Noranda noted sardonically in its last annual report that 'as
technology is not currently available to meet these requirements, the
economic consequences of these laws cannot be determined'.
The same tone of exasperation is evident in the debate on logging practices.
Mr Moore notes the puzzling discrepancy between public concern about trees
before they reach a sawmill, and ready acceptance of processed timber
products.
He points to numerous initiatives taken by the industry in recent years to
improve its stewardship of the forests. These range from environmental
committees set up at worksites, to smaller clear-cuts, greater care in
building roads and educational trips for schoolchildren. The quintessential
Canadian image of logs floating a river is almost a thing of the past.
But these moves have failed to satisfy the environmental movement or some
politicians, especially in British Columbia. Ms Vicki Husband, director of
the Sierra Club of Western Canada, complains that the land set aside for
commercial logging 'is the most productive forest land, but it's also the
most productive for wildlife, fish habitats and often for tourism.'
About 90 per cent of British Columbia's forests are owned by the province.
Three years ago, the government directed the major companies to give up 5
per cent of their annual allowable cut in favour of smaller entrepreneurs
who were demanding access to more raw material.
The big companies are also likely to be the main victims of BC's plan to
double the area set aside for parks and wilderness areas from 6 to 12 per
cent in the next decade.
The province's chief forester is currently revising the annual allowable
harvest rate for 70 separate 'planning units' with a view to setting new
limits on the 'sustainable harvest'. This exercise is due to be completed by
the end of 1994, but significant rollbacks have already been proposed for
some areas.
Meanwhile, a tree-cutting moratorium has been imposed in several areas while
a Commission on Resources and the Environment develops a new land use
strategy, including a mechanism to settle disputes.
MacMillan Bloedel estimates that the province's efforts to expand protected
areas could affect up to 13 per cent of its land base in BC and 14 per cent
of its current timber quota (known as the annual allowable cut). More
stringent harvesting guidelines could result in another 5-10 per cent
shrinkage in volumes.
In an effort to chart policies acceptable to the industry as well as its
critics, the BC government earlier this year set up a strategy group on
forest issues. Mr Dan Miller, the forests minister, says that he has told
all participants 'to check your baggage at the door.'
Mr Miller says that everything will be on the table, including the size of
the annual allowable cut. 'The challenge is for government, labour and
industry to come together to ensure that we are competitive,' he says.
The companies have their doubts however, whether this initiative will be any
more successful than previous ones in addressing their concerns. MacMillan
Bloedel, the biggest west coast producer, noted in a recent report to
shareholders that previous workshops set up by regulatory authorities have
been ineffective, 'as constructive comments are largely being ignored'.
