FT  24 MAY 93 / For richer, not poorer: UK banks are trying to increase
revenues by devoting more time to selling services to high earners
Along Upper Grosvenor Street in London, near the chic hotels of Park Lane,
some familiar symbols have started to appear. A couple of brass plates
alongside the street's private banks now bear trademarks seen on suburban
high streets throughout the country. The British high street banks are
starting to treat richer customers differently.
Barclays has just joined Lloyds by opening a private bank for British
customers on Upper Grosvenor Street. The bank has started to make discreet
approaches to the richest individuals in its 2,200-branch network. It is
asking to manage the funds of those with Pounds 250,000 or more in liquid
assets. In return for substantial fees, it offers them an elite service.
Private banking services are one part of a much larger effort by British
banks to end a tradition of offering largely the same service to everyone.
For years, anyone who has walked into one of their 12,000 branches has been
given an account, the chance of an occasional chat with the manager and some
leaflets about other products.
This is now changing, as banks strive to sell more products and services.
Most believe they have wasted money by offering the same products through
the same delivery channels to all. They are trying to increase revenues by
allocating more management time to customers who are likely to repay the
effort, and devising new ranges of products to suit them.
Most banks think the most worthwhile customers are likely to be the
better-off. This does not mean just the wealthy who are enticed into private
banks. Banks such as Barclays and National Westminster have launched
experimental services for professional employees. They are being allocated
individual managers to deal with.
Few banks will admit this strategy of 'segmentation' means a reduced service
for mass market customer. Yet managers who now advise professionals will not
be advising others. 'Our more junior staff are being trained to a level
where they can deal with most customers' needs,' says Mr Geoff Ellerton,
Midland's planning director.
This drive is partly to cope with the spread of accounts in the 1980s. 'As a
colleague said the other day, 'Only posh people used to have bank accounts,'
' says Mr Larry Cattle, NatWest's head of customer relationships. But the
demise of weekly pay packets and competition to attract customers have
substantially widened access to accounts.
The democratisation of bank accounts did not matter much in the economic
expansion of the 1980s. Most people had disposable income for mortgages, and
banks could earn high levels of interest on their deposits. But with the
recession, many newer customers no longer have the surplus cash required for
profitable accounts.
Yet the drive is mainly an attempt to combat a basic problem with personal
customers: that they do not buy enough products. Most people are accustomed
to buying mortgages from building societies, and savings products from
insurers. They do not regard high street banks as retailers of a variety of
products in addition to money transmission services.
Thus Lloyds Bank sells life insurance products through its Black Horse
Financial Services to only 16 per cent of customers, although 61 per cent of
British people hold such policies. 'We are trying to ensure our customers do
not just spend a tiny amount of their disposable income with us,' says Mr
Brian Pitman, chief executive of Lloyds.
The first step is to identify customers who may buy other products. Not
surprisingly, the banks' first target has been the better-off. All of them
insist that is not the sole criterion. 'It would be far too crude just to
divide our customers into socio-economic groups. People are different ages,
and come from different places,' says Mr Pitman.
Nonetheless, income is a prime factor. NatWest has divided its customers
into segments based on age, family status and income. The list comprises
students and graduates; independent young people; families with young
children; and the retired and those near retirement age. But its hardest
marketing effort is aimed at professionals without children.
'Banks are now working very hard to satisfy what the person with a bob or
two more wants,' says Mr Cattle. There are two reasons. First, such
customers have money for mortgages, insurance, and savings products. Second,
although they may not have bought these from their bank in the past, many
have limited time outside working hours to shop around.
The second step is to devise products that such customers will buy. The
traditional way of doing so among retailers is to develop a product to suit
the desired market segment. The difficulty for banks is that Midland tried
this approach in the 1980s and has abandoned it. Midland found neither staff
nor customers really understood the services it combined in single brands.
The brands were accounts called Orchard, Meridian and Vector. Vector, for
example, was intended for professionals, offering linked current and savings
accounts, with a free overdraft in return for a monthly fee. Midland also
produced a proliferation of products intended for different market segments.
By the end of the 1980s, it had 25 different savings accounts alone.
'We began to differentiate what we offered, but in the end we also confused
people,' says Mr Ellerton, 'New customers do not want a huge choice, they
want something quite simple'. It found its own staff were unable to
understand the products well enough to advise customers on what suited them.
The lesson learned by Midland is emphasised by Mr Pitman at Lloyds: A bank
sells a mixture of financial products and advice. The more complex the
product, the more expert the advice must be. This means banks cannot sell
their products the way supermarkets sell theirs. They must disentangle
delivery mechanisms to allocate more expertise to more complex products.
This had led to the third step. Banks are trying to ensure that managers
spend their time with customers who will pay for it - either directly or
indirectly. Both Barclays and NatWest are now experimenting with new
services for professional and managerial customers. They are being allocated
a manager who will visit them and then supervise their account.
Barclays charges Pounds 40 a year for what it calls its Premier service,
which now covers 16,000 customers. NatWest does not charge the customers to
whom it allocated 'personal account executives', but instead relies on
raising the value of the accounts by selling its financial products. Each
executive has a target of about Pounds 80,000 of new business a year.
Mr Gordon Rankin, Barclays' deputy director of personal sector marketing,
says the bank is aiming at customers who earn at least Pounds 30,000 a year.
'Of course, we recognise that very few are going to put all their financial
eggs in one basket, but we want to get a greater share,' he says. It
believes personal managers will achieve this objective.
But there is limited evidence so far. NatWest says that the value of
accounts managed by personal account executives rises after 18 months,
partly through the selling of other products and partly because cash
balances increase. Yet there is reason to doubt whether such customers will
buy many products from their banks, despite having the money to do so.
The problem is that professionals and managers are likely to be more
discriminating about what they buy. The TSB, which has relatively few
highly-paid customers, has been far more successful than other banks in
selling insurance and other financial products. About 90 per cent of its
customers are from outside the highest AB social groups. Yet one-third of
its customers who have life insurance bought it from TSB, roughly double the
proportion at Lloyds.
Mr Peter Ellwood, TSB's chief executive, rejects the view that banks should
concentrate on higher paid customers. He argues they will continue to shop
around for financial products. 'People with that amount of discrimination
demand the most competitively priced products,' he says. Mr Ellwood argues
the average TSB customer is more likely than a richer consumer to buy its
own products.
If so, the banks that are expending increasing amounts of management time on
the better-off face a stiff task. But they are already concentrating their
efforts on carefully chosen customers. And whether they succeed or not, they
have started to withdraw their old welcome for all-comers.
 ----------------------------------------
    ADULTS HOLDING CURRENT ACCOUNTS
 ----------------------------------------
1981                          1992
60 per cent                   74 per cent
 ----------------------------------------
        CLASSIFICATION PROFILE
 ----------------------------------------
            1981              1992
 ----------------------------------------
          Per cent          Per cent
 ----------------------------------------
AB          88                91
C1          78                86
C2          57                77
D/E         34                54
 ----------------------------------------
Source: NOP/FRS
 ----------------------------------------
