FT  05 JAN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Intervention to support franc
BOTH the Bundesbank and the Bank of France intervened on the foreign
exchanges in support of the French franc yesterday, as dealers indicated
that they may be prepared to carry out the threatened new year speculation
against the French currency, writes James Blitz.
The intervention by both central banks was estimated to be on the modest
side, and by the close of European trading the franc was at FFr3.419 to the
D-Mark, still more than a centime above its floor against the German
currency in the exchange rate mechanism.
But the French franc's weakness was underlined by the fact that it fell by
nearly a centime on the very same day that the dollar enjoyed one of its
strongest rallies since the autumn currency crisis.
In the past, the dollar's strength has helped to ease ERM tensions. But,
yesterday, buoyed by a very good set of US economic indicators over the
Christmas and New Year period, the dollar peaked at DM1.6413. It closed at
DM1.6365, up nearly two pfennigs on the day. In New York the US currency
gained further ground to end at DM1.6389.
There was a feeling yesterday that the foreign exchange market was still not
operating at full speed. Not all dealers had returned from holiday, and Mr
Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International in London, said many
analysts were waiting to see whether the Bundesbank would ease rates at its
council meeting on Thursday. Mr Hannah admitted, however, that the prospect
of this was small.
The quietness of trading was not enough to stop a number of alarm bells
going off in the ERM, however. The first was a sharp rise in French money
market rates, with the overnight rate seen as high as 13 1/2 per cent
yesterday. The Bank of France did not raise its intervention rate, although
a sustained period of high market rates would make this unavoidable.
The Irish punt also came under renewed pressure on the first full day of
trading after the abolition of exchange controls on January 1. The one-week
rate in the Irish punt market rose to 45 per cent as the currency fell to
its ERM floor against the Belgian franc.
Outside the ERM, the Italian lira was a notable loser from D-Mark strength.
falling to L929.6 per D-Mark from a previous L909.5.
Mr Jim O'Neill, head of research at Swissbank in London, cautioned against
the belief that a dollar rally might ease ERM tensions and save the French
franc.
First, he believes that the dollar's rally may signify a flight out of
European currencies altogether, as ERM turbulence continues, rather than a
move out of the D-Mark.
He also believes that the Bundesbank will be increasingly concerned by the
prospect of imported inflation if the dollar continues to gain strength
against the German currency. 'Dollar strength could make an easing less
likely,' he said.
