FT  03 MAR 93 / Property deals bolstered Maxwell profits
INVESTIGATORS unravelling the affairs of Maxwell Communication Corporation
have discovered a series of complex property deals involving Liechtenstein
trust companies which were used by the late Mr Robert Maxwell to bolster
profits at the insolvent publishing company.
This shows for the first time that Mr Maxwell was under severe financial
pressure as early as 1990. He apparently resorted to bogus foreign exchange
transactions and inflated property deals to generate substantial paper
profits for MCC.
Previously it was thought that the pressure built up in 1991, forcing him to
raid company pension funds in the months before his death in November 1991
after which his business empire collapsed.
Investigators from the litigation and special investigation services unit at
Price Waterhouse, administrators to MCC, have discovered transactions in
which MCC sold property assets to a Liechtenstein trust company shortly
before the end of a financial reporting period, and then posted a profit on
the disposals, even though full payment was deferred. In a typical
transaction the Liechtenstein trust would subsequently transfer the property
to one of Mr Maxwell's private companies, which then used the assets as
security for new loans. On the basis of three transactions the investigators
believe MCC is still owed at least Pounds 62.5m.
The administrators have also submitted substantial insurance claims under
policies taken out by MCC. The biggest claims, 18 in total, have been made
under the group's 'Fidelity Policy' which provides an indemnity up to Pounds
50m for any one loss, subject to a limit of Pounds 50m per employee in the
1991 policy year. The underwriters are disputing all the claims.
Overall, the administrators estimate that after administration costs of
Pounds 43.2m, but excluding up to Dollars 300m (Pounds 211m) of further
claims, they will recover between Dollars 781m and Dollars 1.364bn. This
would provide creditors with between 22 per cent and 43 per cent of the more
than Dollars 3bn they are owed. If all recovery actions were successful the
payout could be lifted by up to a further 9 percentage points.
Mr Mark Homan, senior joint administrator, said yesterday the main area
where investigators may uncover further allegedly false transactions is in
MCC's foreign exchange dealings.
