FT  13 SEP 93 / Monday Interview: Designs on the detractors - Francis Duffy,
president of the Royal Institute of British Architects
Architects have never had it so bad. The recession has put a third of them
out of work. Clients have become more demanding in terms of both service and
price. The construction industry has hijacked some of their traditional
functions. The public, from Prince Charles down, has found good sport in
ridiculing their work.
The government has now joined the battle: not only is it threatening to cut
funding for architecture courses, it is considering tampering with the
profession's very name. In February it published a proposal that would allow
anyone to call himself or herself an architect, no matter how poorly trained
or inexperienced.
The profession is in dire need of a champion. Francis Duffy, chairman of
architectural firm DEGW, has taken on that role following his appointment as
president of the Royal Institute of British Architects. Duffy will get a
chance to fight for his fellow architects on Friday, when he attends a
meeting in Brussels of the Architects Council of Europe to discuss the
future of the profession over the next 20 years.
Initially, he might seem an unlikely champion for the profession. He has
seldom built anything, and has made his name as a theorist in the obscure
area of space management in office buildings. Yet his very distance may be
an asset: Duffy is going to be judged on his ability to convince the outside
world that, as he puts it, 'design matters and professionalism matters'.
The task is daunting. On one side is 'this wretched government and this
deal-saturated, unthinking, cheapo culture'. On the other are 'these poor,
kicked-around, disappointed architects'. He must find a way of convincing
the first of the worth of the second.
Speaking in his stylishly functional King's Cross office a few days before
his appointment, Duffy leaves no doubt as to his commitment to the cause. 'I
don't want to sound as if I'm whingeing, as I am extremely aggressive and
outgoing. But I am steamed up about the ways in which we are being kicked
around,' he says. His delivery is soft, rapid and uniform in tone.
Being steamed up is not enough. He must demonstrate that the title of
architect deserves legal protection.
'Would you applaud deregistration in medicine?' he asks. Yet architects are
not like doctors, who need medical qualifications in order to practise. By
contrast, there is no law to prevent anyone from designing buildings, yet
under legislation from the 1930s only those with Riba-approved training can
use the name architect.
Duffy experiments with another analogy: 'Take a bottle of champagne. It gets
that name not from a chemical analysis of its contents, but the process by
which it is made.' Likewise, he argues, the name 'architect' is 'an
important consumer marker. It has a built-in assumption of competence that
relates to the training and experience.'
But is he right to put so much into this fight over a name? Duffy starts to
get cross. 'God knows I'm not doing this for fun,' he says.
Surely architects could follow accountants, and call themselves chartered
architects if they had the qualifications approved of by the Riba? Duffy
pulls a face.
'I think of Blake: I wander thro' each charter'd street/Near where the
charter'd Thames does flow/And mark in every face I meet/Marks of weakness,
marks of woe. A thing is a thing. I don't want a qualifier. It's my name.'
Displaying an almost touching optimism, Duffy seems confident that
architects will win this battle. 'There is a resonance. It's quite
widespread.'
In any case, he says, the argument is not just about a name. It is a symbol
of the need for a debate about the future of design. Partly thanks to Prince
Charles, a public debate is under way, yet according to Duffy its substance
is banal. 'I like this, you like that, you're a fool - it does not strike me
as an elevated discussion.'
Getting an intelligent debate going may not be easy. Public enemy number one
is the government. A close second is what Duffy calls 'the supply side',
which means the construction and property companies. He argues that the
prevailing supply-side mentality is to get things built as quickly as
possible to ensure instant gratification for shareholders. 'Many on the
supply side say that design is a luxury, that you need one Richard Rogers a
century. That devalues design.'
On his list of villains, architects themselves do not escape without a
mention. He argues that most have got too far from their clients, and many
are inclined to dwell on past glories rather than defining a new mission. He
admits that the profession is 'an economic failure'. He diagnoses a 'lack of
commercial nous'.
But how have architects persisted in these uncommercial ways when other
professions have been forced to come to terms with market-mad Britain? Duffy
replies: 'We have not recovered from the trauma of having been so important
in the 1950s and 1960s as handmaidens of the welfare state. Until the 1970s
architects working for commerce were despised. We haven't found a comparable
commercial apparatus to get us into the 1980s and 1990s.'
Last year Duffy chaired a Riba committee which set out to find a new
strategic direction for the profession. Its conclusions were not dissimilar
to those reached by many underperforming British companies over the past
decade: architects must get closer to their clients, and understand better
what they want. They must strengthen their hold over their central function
 -design - and should also branch out into other design and management-based
services.
'If we know what our mission is, we should feel no threat,' he says.
Architecture is 'knowledge about invention, design and understanding
patterns of use'.
Above all, it is about defining the future. On this subject, Duffy gets
carried away. 'We ought to be thinking about what Britain is doing in 700
years,' he says.
In office design, the area which he has made his own, Duffy is looking
further ahead than most, even if he is not quite building offices for the
year 2693.
He believes that the nature of work, and the shape of organisations are
undergoing their most important change in 100 years. Office buildings, which
he says have not changed much since Frank Lloyd Wright designed the office
towers in Chicago at the beginning of the century, must be rethought too.
Under the old corporate hierarchies, the space allocated to each worker was
a reflection of how important they were. The new flat organisational
structures, with their team-working and flexi-time, call for a complete
redesign of office space. Duffy argues that, unless buildings change,
companies may find their plans to change their organisations frustrated.
Enthused, he talks of offices at IBM, Digital and Arthur Andersen, where the
basic unit of design is not the individual but the group, in which no one
has his or her own space. It might be cheaper but is it really better? Don't
people need to have their own desks?
He looks exasperated. 'These are conventions,' he says. 'It's like the club,
library or dining room. The space is yours, it belongs to you collectively.'
Duffy then gestures around his own office. 'We have no enclosed offices. We
have a street. The coffee place is designed so that people will bump into
each other.'
On inspection, the 'street' turns out to be an aisle separating two lines of
architects' desks. Challenged, he agrees that the metaphor is a little far
fetched. 'We are having to invent,' he says. 'For once the physical concept
is ahead of the words.'
Street or not, he may find his own offices more congenial than the splendid
Riba building in London's Portland Place. Ironically, it is just the sort of
building in which he argues change is impossible - a large open space in the
middle and a whole number of little offices scattered round the sides.
PERSONAL FILE
1940     Born in north of England.
1967-70  Harkness Fellow of the Commonwealth Fund.
1973     Co-founded DEGW partnership.
1989     DEGW incorporated, with Duffy as chairman.
1992     The Changing Workplace published.
1993     The Responsible Workplace published. President of the Royal
         Institute of British Architects.
