FT  19 MAY 93 / Survey of Chile (12): Long catalogue of woes - Environmental
laws are to be strengthened
CHILE'S constitution enshrines the right to live in an environment 'free
from pollution.' That is probably little consolation to Santiago's 4.5m
citizens, who are forced, particularly in the winter months, to live under a
pall of choking fumes.
In spite of the fine words of the constitution, Chile suffers from an array
of intractable environmental problems resulting from its natural-resource
intensive economy, inadequate government controls and sprawling
urbanisation.
Only now is the yawning gap between the constitution and everyday reality
being addressed. In the autumn of 1992, the government of President Patricio
Aylwin submitted a package of legislation to Congress to strengthen and
extend the country's patchwork of environmental laws and decrees.
Companies would for the first time be required to undertake environmental
impact studies of new projects, and a start would be made on the formulation
of environmental standards. The absence of a viable regulatory framework
leaves complainants against polluters little option but to embark on often
lengthy court actions.
The battle against pollution is still in its early stages. 'The country as a
whole has not confronted the environment as an issue,' says Mr Juan
Escudero, head of the Santiago anti-pollution commission. 'Only in the past
five or six years has there been any kind of awakening to environmental
problems.'
The commission's efforts to tackle the specific problems of Santiago are
similarly at an early stage. Air pollution has been measured and the worst
sources of emissions identified, according to Mr Escudero. But the hard part
 -implementing a pollution-control plan for metropolitan Santiago - is only
just beginning.
Chile's capital is not helped by its geography and climate. Santiago is at
33 degrees south and is ringed by mountains up to 3,200 metres high. From
April to August (autumn and winter) thermal inversions trap the city's
pollutants, mainly particulates and carbon monoxide from vehicle exhausts.
Under the plentiful summer sunlight, the main problem is photochemical smog.
Buses, particularly old and badly maintained ones, are the main culprits,
and some successes have already been scored against Santiago's vocal and
powerful bus operators.
The government has sought to reduce the number of buses, which account for
over half of all journeys undertaken in Santiago, and cut duplication by
putting some routes out to tender. There are now formal contracts between
operators and the ministry of transport in what was formerly a completely
unregulated system.
Some 4,000 old buses have been taken out of service in the past three years,
and the total bus fleet has been reduced from 13,000 to under 11,000
vehicles - 'still too many,' sighs Mr Escudero. Private vehicles face
controls, too. Car use is restricted for much of the year in central
Santiago on a rotating basis, and since September 1992 all new private
vehicles have had to be fitted with catalytic converters.
The catalogue of Santiago's environmental woes goes on. The city produces 10
cubic metres of untreated waste water every second. While the city is
finishing its first water-treatment plant, at a cost of Dollars 12m, it will
take hundreds of millions of dollars and at least a decade to create an
effective system for the city as a whole. How many plants to build - and
where to build them - is still being studied.
Outside the capital, the country's natural resource based industries have
only recently begun to clean up their act.
The state-owned copper corporation Codelco, for example, is committed to
spending between 15 and 20 per cent of its investment budget - about Dollars
90m a year - on environmental controls.
But the pace of the industrial clean-up and the government's gradualist
approach to environmental regulation, aimed at minimising the impact on
growth, is rejected by an increasingly vocal lobby.
'Chile's macro-economic indicators are quite spectacular, but also
dangerous,' says environmental campaigner Mr Manfred Max-Neef. 'Another
eight years of the same will leave the country devastated,' he says.
Mr Max-Neef is running for president in December's elections as an
independent candidate backed by a 'rainbow coalition', including
environmentalist and women's groups, and trade unions. He does not seriously
expect to win the presidency but aims to push environmental issues up the
political agenda.
He lambasts the government for allowing the 'devastation' of Chile's natural
resources. At the southern port of Puerto Montt, 'there are mountains of
wood chips waiting to be sent to Japan to be made into toilet paper. I don't
think that's a very noble destiny for our native forests,' he says.
Chile's nascent environmental activists have already notched up some
successes, including a legal campaign by olive growers in the Huasco Valley
for more environmental controls at an iron pellet plant, which they claim
blighted their crops.
As if its internally generated environmental difficulties were not enough,
Chile faces an as-yet unquantified threat in the form of ozone depletion.
Every spring, Antarctica loses much of its ozone cover, as a result of
photochemical reaction with the greenhouse gases produced by the
industrialised world, exposing neighbouring countries to increasing levels
of cancer-causing ultraviolet rays.
The ozone hole is getting bigger, appearing earlier and lasting longer every
year. The implications for southern Chile could be enormous. Whereas the
government has at least started to take stock and act on Chile's more
conventional environmental dilemmas, understanding of the ozone problem is
only in the earliest stages.
