FT  27 AUG 93 / London Stock Exchange: London shrugs off Bundesbank news
THE LONDON stock market benefited yesterday from its unwillingness to
believe the rumours that key interest rates would be cut in Germany. Share
prices fell sharply at first as optimism faded ahead of the Bundesbank's
decision to leave rates unchanged, but professional marketmakers were only
too happy to buy stock. The early fall of 20.6 on the FT-SE Index was
recaptured later and by the close the Index had regained its all-time
closing peak of 3,079.2 to show no change on the the session.
The US buyers who pushed the Footsie to its latest peak on Wednesday, when
the day's retail value soared to a 1993 peak of Pounds 2.3bn, were content
to leave the UK market to its own devices yesterday. However, Goldman Sachs,
the US investment bank, having already discounted suggestions of an
immediate cut in German discount rate, reiterated the optimistic view of the
UK market from the other side of the Atlantic.
Goldman, rejecting widespread fears that global stock markets are
overheated, maintained that the 'most likely' scenario is for global
equities to be the best-performing financial asset over the next 6 - 12
months.
At Panmure Gordon, Mr Robin Aspinall commented that; 'a wall of US money' is
driving UK equities ahead. Optimism is also high on the domestic front,
where Mr Michael Hicks of Strauss Turnbull said that UK markets evidently
believe that 'low inflation is here to stay'.
The recovery in UK stocks was boosted from the stock index futures sector
where the September contract on the Footsie moved above the 3,100 mark after
the close of official trading. However, a sizeable trading programme in the
equity market yesterday morning appeared to reflect genuine portfolio
investment rather than futures-hedging.
The fall in the US dollar after the Bundesbank's decision took the heart out
of the international stocks, although selling pressure was light. However,
the oil stocks, which have headed the US move into the UK market this week,
found buyers again after Wall Street opened.
Interest rate-orientated stocks, which were the most closely-linked to the
hints of a rate cut in Germany, held up well. Among the retail issues, Marks
&amp; Spencer, the high street jewel, closed firmly.
Banking stocks, which are expected to benefit strongly from early cuts in
interest rates because these would ease the pressures on loan books from
difficult, or underperforming loans, also recouped early falls. The sector
was boosted by hints that a large cross-border takeover move was in the
offing.
Overall, the UK market closed last night nearly 1 per cent higher than on
Friday, when the hopes for a cut in Bundesbank discount rate first began to
circulate in global markets. London remains convinced that interest rates
are on the way down throughout Europe, that UK rates will be trimmed this
autumn and that hopes of economic recovery will continue to bring overseas
investors to the UK stock market.
However, there are still worries for the near term over the high ratings now
standing on UK equities. SG Warburg remains relatively cautious and other
London securities firms appear reluctant to increase year-end forecasts.
