FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software &amp; Services
(16): Benefits beat drawbacks - A look at the trend towards outsourcing
THIRTY-FIVE per cent of UK companies now contract out the management of
their computers to a third party, compared with 25 per cent in 1992, says a
survey by CMG Computer Management Group.
Outsourcing may be on the increase, but just how safe and satisfactory is it
for the company's computers? Some consultants urge caution. Ms Judith
Wainwright, of management consultants Pagoda, says: 'While contracting out
information services has proved effective for some, there is a growing body
of experience showing that there are traps for the unwary.'
These traps can include:
Falling quality. The in-house IT department may provide services to the
business on an ad hoc basis, such as working late to help solve problems or
providing informal advice. Such services will be lost if they are not
covered by the outsourcing contract.
Rising costs. This can happen in two ways. First, numbers of in-house IT
staff may rise, perhaps to compensate for falling service levels. According
to Ms Wainwright, this can lead to a number of 'mini-IS departments'.
Second, the supplier may use changing requirements as an opportunity to
improve margins on a captive customer.
Loss of flexibility. Companies choose their outsourcing supplier according
to what their needs are today. Yet their future needs may be very different.
Moreover, there is no guarantee that the supplier's service will develop in
the way a particular customer wants - it has to consider all its customers'
needs, not just one.
Poor security. Many companies fear that their data will not be as secure if
their computers are managed by an outside supplier. However, Mr Paul
Hopkins, sales and marketing director at Sema Group Facilities Management,
says: 'Outsourcing can be just as secure as keeping data in-house, perhaps
more so. Audits, security software and confidentiality agreements all exist
to help here, and contracts can be written which specify financial penalties
if the supplier lets data fall into the wrong hands or security agreements
are breached. Most outsourcing organisations will also let their customers'
auditors check that their security arrangements are satisfactory.'
Lack of control. Some IT activities are critical to the business; if these
are badly managed a company can lose control of its future.
Vote of confidence from users. Despite the potential risks, those who
actually use outsourcing have far fewer doubts about it than non-users. For
example, 50 per cent of non-users surveyed by CMG felt that facilities
management would lead to a loss of control over IT. But only 14 per cent of
users expressed this concern.
Similarly, 48 per cent of non-users thought that the FM supplier would not
understand their business, while only 17 per cent of users identified this
as a concern.
Benefits. In fact, many companies which have opted for outsourcing are
experiencing a number of benefits:
Seventy-seven per cent of users who responded to the survey say that it has
enabled them to concentrate on their core business.
Seventy per cent say that it has helped them to reduce headcount. (The
proportion of outsourcing contracts which involve transferring assets and/or
IT staff to the supplier is increasing.)
Almost half said that it gave them greater financial control over their
operations.
Over half (56 per cent) reported cost savings, while 29 per cent reported no
change in costs. Only 15 per cent of users said their costs had risen as a
result of using FM.
Crossroads FM. Facilities management can also help companies which are
changing IT direction, but need someone to run their existing systems while
they plan the change. For example, when it decided to move away from its
centralised mainframe strategy to smaller IBM systems, Imperial Tobacco
signed a facilities management contract with Hoskyns, the UK computer
services and FM company owned by Cap Gemini Sogeti of France. Mr Robert
Dyrbus, finance director of Imperial Tobacco, reckons that the entire new
installation (completed in 1991) cost just over Pounds 2m, including the
fees paid to Hoskyns. This compares with Imperial Tobacco's 1987-88 DP
budget of Pounds 15m - with Pounds 10m allocated just to run the mainframe.
But Mr Peter Falconer, associate director of Hoskyns, says that as the
market matures, crossroads FM accounts for a smaller proportion of the
company's new business - down to 20 per cent from 60 per cent of new FM
contracts two years ago. He says most companies now sign three-year or
five-year FM contracts because they have made a strategic commitment to
changing the way they manage IT.
Looking for a partner. Another sign of a maturing market is that customers
are getting more demanding. Forty-five per cent told CMG that they would
like to see their outsourcing arrangements turn into a form of partnership.
This is starting to happen. For example, Electronic Data Systems, the
computer services subsidiary of General Motors of the US, has reached
agreement in principle to take over the management of IT at Sweden's KF
co-operative conglomerate. If the deal goes ahead in June, it will be worth
Dollars 1bn over 10 years and involve a form of partnership (or
'co-sourcing') between the two companies.
CMG's research shows that for existing users, the benefits of FM far
outweigh the drawbacks. Nevertheless there were complaints. Over a third of
users say there have been 'difficulties defining the boundaries of
responsibility' and slightly less than a third complain of 'poor management
by the supplier' and 'loss of in-house expertise'.
The writer is editor of Business Computing Brief, the FT newsletter.
