FT  25 SEP 93 / Mandela seeks lifting of S African sanctions
MR Nelson Mandela called yesterday for the lifting of all economic sanctions
against South Africa, declaring that victory against apartheid was in sight.
The US Senate later approved legislation lifting US sanctions and Canada and
the Commonwealth indicated that they would follow suit.
Addressing a specially convened meeting in New York of the United Nations
Special Committee Against Apartheid, which has spearheaded the sanctions
drive over the past three decades, Mr Mandela asked governments 'to take all
necessary measures to end the economic sanctions you imposed'.
Mr Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, called on the
international investment community to 'help regenerate the South African
economy', offering a gloomy assessment of a country 'threatened by a process
of disintegration'.
He said steps should be taken to prevent South Africa sliding towards
another Somalia or Bosnia. Sanctions had brought South Africa to the point
'where the transition to democracy has now been enshrined in the law of our
country'.
Parliament passed legislation on Thursday creating a multiracial
Transitional Executive Council which gives blacks a say in central
government for the first time.
The passage of the legislation has been welcomed by President Bill Clinton
as a 'historic step'. He said the US would launch 'initiatives to help
restore economic growth' to South Africa. These include supporting South
Africa's renewed access to the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Mr Mandela's call comes at the beginning of a crucial 10-day period for the
country in which senior officials of both government and the ANC will be
seeking to convince investors and donors that they should invest in South
Africa.
South African government officials and ANC representatives will attend the
annual meetings of the IMF and World Bank. Next week will also see two
important South African investment conferences in New York and Washington
DC.
The power behind sanctions; Investors wary, Page 4
