FT  07 JUN 93 / More arson attacks on Turkish homes in Germany
AT LEAST three arson attacks on Turkish homes in Germany were reported at
the weekend, in spite of protests against racism organised in many towns
across the country.
The main demonstration, in the town of Solingen, near Cologne, where two
Turkish women and three girls died in a fire last weekend, ended in violent
clashes between rival Turkish groups and the police on Saturday night.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl was greeted with jeers when he attended the
re-opening of the restored cathedral in Berlin, and cries of 'Where were you
in Solingen?'
The wave of protests since the latest killings have refuelled the political
debate on the status of foreigners in Germany, with growing demands for dual
nationality status to be granted to long-term residents.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, and Mr Otto Lambsdorff, the leader of his
Free Democratic party, have both lent their support for change in the
nationality law, in spite of strong resistance from the Christian Democratic
Union and the Christian Social Union, the other two parties in the governing
coalition.
The latest attacks took place in Hattingen on the Ruhr, only 30km from
Solingen, and in Konstanz on the southern border with Switzerland, where
both a Turkish restaurant and a private home shared by Turks and Germans
were attacked.
There was some disappointment at the weekend turnout of demonstrators
against the latest racist incidents. Some 12,000 people marched through the
centre of Solingen, in a peaceful weekend protest which only turned violent
at the end of the day, when rival Turkish groups began fighting. The police
barricaded some 200 Turkish youths into the city centre for eight hours,
before arresting more than 30 in the early hours of the morning.
Mr Alexander von Stahl, the federal prosecutor, confirmed on Saturday that
four suspects were being being held for the Solingen killings. The four are
said to have carried out the arson attack in a fit of drunken rage, after
being thrown out of a local bar, and are not known to have any links to
extreme right-wing political groups.
The head of Germany's internal security service, Mr Eckart Werthebach,
warned at the weekend that the latest incidents could see an upsurge in
violence between extreme Turkish and German nationalist groups.
