FT  27 JUL 93 / Arts: From grossness to great charm - Avignon Festival
DURING THE three weeks of the Avignon Summer Festival now in progress the
area by the Papal Palace - the Place du Palais - is best avoided. The
problem is how to avoid it, because the route to get to whatever spectacle
you want to see usually either starts or ends there, so you find yourself
plunging into a jostling mob of tourists in groups, demonstrators, jugglers,
strolling musicians, gruesome-looking mime artists, leaflet-distributors and
all the other hopefuls that pitch camp at this Festival.
At present the Square contains two alien artifacts conspicuous by their
modernity. One is a huge male torso towering above the mob; the other is a
bronze bird sculpted on the same gigantic scale. As the sunlight bounces off
their polished surfaces they seem to be on fire. They are the work of the
Colombian artist Fernando Botero - an exhibition of his work Botero en
Avignon is on view inside the Palace until September 5, after which it will
travel to Moscow and St Petersburg.
Let us go inside, where there are a dozen more Botero bronzes - of nudes,
horses, fruit - and 100 of his paintings, most of them dating from the past
10 years. How consistently Botero has stuck to his great theme - obesity.
Fat kings, fat queens, fat housewives with their fat husbands, fat children
with their fat pets - all are treated with the same stylish detachment as if
they were living dolls, the pale texture of the paint suggesting real flesh
and underlining the roundness and the grossness of the bodily forms.
As one moves from one canvas to the next a magical transformation occurs.
Grossness ceases to seem gross. It acquires, under Botero's witty gaze,
great charm and naturalness. Then, instead of painting a pear-shaped woman
he paints a single pear to the same scale, and we begin to see connections
between human and natural forms.
Exiting from the Palace one encounters a little side street - the rue du
Mons. It is here, tucked away inconspicuously, that the Festival Press
Office is to be found: it is run most efficiently under the direction of Mme
Marie-Helene Arbour. It has a spacious shady garden where every morning
open-air press conferences are held about forthcoming productions.
These offer a pleasantly informal opportunity for the media to question
those artists who are initiating productions at the Festival. French theatre
directors and choreographers tend to be highly articulate in public. None
more so than Jorge Lavelli, who is directing plays here by Steven Berkoff
and Edward Bond. Old hat to us, Bond's work has become a new cult in the
French theatre and his recent play performed here about a murder over a cup
of tea - known in French as Maison d'Arret - is one of the talking-points of
the Festival.
At the end of the rue du Mons we come out on the Place d'Horloge where both
the Theatre Municipal and the Hotel de Ville stand imposingly. This square
tends to be even more impassable during the Festival than the last one as it
is largely occupied by restaurants. But once past we have another safe haven
in which to retreat, the Maison Jean Vilar. This is a fine old Provencal
mansion that has now been made into an excellent museum of theatre and the
performing arts in honour of the founding father of the Festival. It is
currently showing an exhibition of the the stage designs of Georges Pitoeff,
the Russian-born actor-director.
Until his death in 1939 he was a figure of innovative importance in the
Parisian theatre. Among more than 100 premieres of contemporary French and
foreign plays, Pitoeff directed Cocteau's Orphee, Pirandello's Six
Characters and Anouilh's La Sauvage - the play that launched this playwright
in 1938. Pitoeff's production of Shaw's St Joan with his wife Ludmilla in
the title role gave Shaw his greatest success in France.
Mme Pitoeff was a diminutive woman of magical presence on stage, as I can
confirm - I once saw her as Charlotte Bronte. As one studies her husband's
designs for his Shaw production the influence of E. Gordon Craig on Pitoeff
clearly emerges. A video in which some of Pitoeff's colleagues in the
theatre and his son Sacha pay tribute to him accompanies the show.
Cocteau makes the point that all his productions were done on a shoe-string.
He was, says Cocteau, a saint of the theatre. However, there were wags such
as Yvonne Printemps who called the Pitoeffs les pitoyables. In the theatre
even a Pitoeff cannot avoid making enemies. This exhibition leaves one with
a renewed respect for his daring, sensitivity, and genius.
