FT  27 FEB 93 / Former Ferruzzi chief is drawn into corruption probe
ITALY'S business elite was dealt a further blow by the announcement
yesterday that Mr Raul Gardini, the high profile former head of
Ferruzzi-Montedison, was under investigation by Milan magistrates.
Mr Gardini is being investigated for his role in the controversial
reorganisation of Italy's chemicals industry at the end of the 1980s, when
the main chemical interests of ENI, the state oil concern, were pooled with
Montedison, the chemicals arm of the Ferruzzi group.
Mr Sergio Cragnotti, the financier and president of Lazio football club who
was a former managing director of Montedison, was also told yesterday that
he was under investigation. This means all key business participants in the
restructuring are being investigated.
No politicians have been implicated; but the investigation was this week
switched from Rome to Milan where inquiries are related to the alleged
involvement of politicians.
It also emerged yesterday that the magistrates' enquiries include the
establishment of Enimont in 1989. Previously the enquiry focused solely on
the purchase price of L2,805bn paid by ENI for Ferruzzi's 40 per cent stake
in Enimont in 1990.
News that Mr Gardini and Mr Cragnotti were under investigation followed a
week in which several prominent figures in the business world had been
caught up by the fast moving scandals.
Those arrested on charges of alleged illicit financing of political parties
included Mr Francesco Paolo Mattioli, Fiat's chief financial officer, and Mr
Giampiero Pesenti, the owner of Italy's biggest cement company.
Yesterday Mr Mattioli was still being detained in a Milan prison.
The uncertainties created by developments in the corruption investigations
continued to weaken the lira. The Bank of Italy is believed to have sold
D-Marks yesterday for the third time this week.
The Bank and the treasury took the unprecedented step of issuing a sharp
joint statement rebutting Moody's announcement on Thursday which placed the
Aa3 foreign currency debt rating of Italy under review for a possible
downgrade.
The Enimont enquiry already involves Mr Gabriele Cagliari, the current head
of ENI, and Mr Lorenzo Necci, the first president of Enimont and now head of
Italian railways, FS. Magistrates are also anxious to interview Mr Giuseppe
Garofano, a long-time director of Montedison.
Who's next in probe, Page 2
