FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (9): Doors opened to
foreign investment - China is aiming for an extra 100,000 megawatts in the
1990s
China's energy planners are confident they will be able to add nearly
100,000MW of power generating capacity to the grid system by the end of the
decade.
They are counting on accelerated inputs from foreign private sector
investors to help achieve this ambitious target.
According to energy officials, a total of 12,000-15,000MW of new capacity
are being planned for each year for at least the next decade, the major
proportion destined for the rapidly industrialising regions in southern and
eastern China.
Large power stations are also planned at coalfields in the interior.
These will require a major extension of transmission lines to shift
electricity to the industrial centres. But this adjustment in the location
of some new installations will also ease the burden on China's overtaxed
rail coal haulage system and gradually minimise coal supply problems at
far-distant power stations.
The growth, if attained, will bring China's installed capacity to 265,000MW,
against the current level of approximately 165,000MW.
According to Han Ying, China's vice-minister for coal, the mix will continue
to be dominated by coal - some 70 per cent of China's power capacity is
coal-fired. Annual coal production is expected to rise to 1.4bn tonnes per
year by 2000 compared with 1.1bn tonnes last year.
The closing of inefficient pits and the commercialisation of the coal-mining
industry could lead to some new thermal projects using other fuel sources.
Most of the balance is derived from hydroelectric power - China has Asia's
biggest rivers - and preliminary work is already under way on the world's
largest hydroelectric project, the 17,000MW Three Gorges scheme on the Upper
Yangtse.
The China Yangtse Three Gorges Project Development Corp. is now organising
the bidding, which will be open to domestic and foreign contractors. First
power from the complex could be on line early in the next decade.
A third factor in the generating mix is nuclear. Later this year, the first
half of the 1,900MW Daya Bay nuclear power project in Guangdong Province
near Hong Kong will go on line, to be followed a year later by phase two.
The complex is being built by a consortium of the Anglo-French GEC-Alsthom,
and the French companies, Framatome, Electricite de France and Campenon
Bernard.
The Daya Bay complex is expected to be succeeded by another of similar size
in southeast China, to be built by foreign companies, which have not yet
been designated.
China's first power generating reactor, a 300MW unit, went on line at
Qinshan, near Shanghai, last year. The Qinshan plant is largely home-grown.
A second is planned as part of a programme to add five new reactors with
3,300MW of capacity to the system by the early 2000s. All will be built in
the northeast or the southeast.
The long lead times for nuclear and hydroelectric mean that there are
growing opportunities for non-coal thermal projects, not a significant
factor at present. For example, the ABB Group recently announced a 300MW
combined cycle contract on behalf of Hong Kong interests for a plant to be
set up in southern China. 'The average installation time for combined cycle
is 18-24 months, whereas coal stations, which normally are much larger, take
36-48 months to install,' an ABB official said.
Given China's 1.1bn population and a birth rate of 17m births a year,
analysts say the major challenge will be on funding infrastructure projects.
The central and regional power authorities have partially dealt with this by
throwing open their doors to foreign investment, not just minority holdings
in joint ventures but full ownership.
They appear to have accepted in principle the need to establish a commercial
approach to tariff rates, without which private sector involvement in the
growth programme will dry up.
Mr RT Fox, vice-chairman, Kleinwort Benson merchant bank, said in Beijing
recently that he was encouraged by China's flexibility. 'Ownership of a
power project can vary from 100 per cent Chinese to 100 per cent foreign;
the life the venture can be 10 years, 20 years or with no transfer date
foreseen. . .'
The private sector phenomenon stems from the success of Hong Kong's Hopewell
Group, which formed two build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects in southern
China, the long-completed 700MW Shajiao B scheme and the new 1,980MW Shajiao
C scheme, now under construction.
Under these, Hopewell and partners build the plant and sell electricity at
commercial rates to the local grid, turning the project back to Chinese
ownership after a decade or so of ownership. Since then, BOT and other
schemes with indefinite ownership for foreign companies have flourished.
In fast-growing Guangdong province, virtually all the 68,000MW of power
stations to be installed over the longer term could, it is suggested, have
some private sector involvement.
The International Finance Corp., the private sector wing of the World Bank,
has opened an office in Beijing. Sir William Ryrie, IFC vice-president, said
the institution would provide Dollars 600m to help finance projects with a
total cost of Dollars 3bn over the next three years. The Asian Development
Bank says China's concessional rate borrowings could be as much as Dollars
1bn per year.
The World Energy Council has cautioned against over-optimism, suggesting the
realistic tariffs hurdle still remained formidable.
As of last year, electricity shortages were about 20 per cent of prospective
demand. 'A total of 32 counties remain without electricity supply, but the
average electricity price paid by urban consumers is only about 3 cents per
kilowatt hour, well below the cost of production.'
Frank Gray is the editor of Power in Asia
