FT  09 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Scotia looks for Pounds 30m from listing
SCOTIA Holdings, a pharm-aceutical company built on sales of evening
primrose oil, will be floated on the London stock market next month with an
expected capitalisation of about Pounds 160m.
The Scotia board yesterday approved final arrangements for the flotation,
which is co-ordinated by Kleinwort Benson. According to the pathfinder
prospectus, issued today, the company aims to raise about Pounds 30m based
on a share price between 260p and 290p.
Dr David Horrobin, chief executive, said most of the proceeds would be used
to fund the final development of six drugs now undergoing clinical trials.
They included treatments for cancer, arthritis, heart disease and
complications of diabetes.
Dr Horrobin, whose background is in academic medicine, has followed a clear
strategy ever since he founded the company - then known as Efamol - in 1979.
He quickly established a revenue stream by selling nutritional supplements
made of seed oil from the evening primrose plant; sales were promoted by
clinical studies showing the oil's health benefits over a wide range of
problems from alcoholism to arthritis.
This income financed research and development of prescription drugs based
mainly on 'essential fatty acids', the beneficial chemicals in evening
primrose oil.
Scotia's first drug, Epogam, received a UK license in 1988 for treating the
skin disorder eczema. The company has since received approval for Efamast
(for breast pain) and Efalith (for seborrhoeic dermatitis, another skin
disease).
The company has distribution agreements with international pharmaceutical
groups - notably Searle, a subsidiary of Monsanto, in the UK. Total sales of
Scotia's pharmaceutical products in the year to June 30 1993 exceeded Pounds
20m, of which the company received Pounds 7.4m. Over-the-counter sales were
worth a further Pounds 6.5m.
Scotia had made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 1.1m in 1991-92 mainly as a
result of an up-front distribution payment by Searle. In the following year
there was a pre-tax deficit of Pounds 4.4m and Dr Horrobin expected losses
of Pounds 6m to Pounds 8m a year over the next two or three years - a period
of heavy R&amp;D spending.
The three most advanced projects are: EF4 to treat the nerve damage
resulting from diabetes; EF13 to treat cancer; and EF27 to reduce the
side-effects of radiotherapy. If clinical trials go well, they should be
launched in 1996 or 1997.
Scotia is an unusual pharmaceutical company. It concentrates on a field  -
essential fatty acids derived from natural products - that has been
virtually ignored by the rest of the industry. And, instead of centralised
R&amp;D and manufacturing facilities, it has small units scattered around the
UK, from Surrey to the Outer Hebrides, and a basic research centre in Nova
Scotia, Canada.
