FT  24 MAY 93 / International Company News: Pioneering a path through a
legal minefield - After an 18 month wait MCC creditors have a dividend in
prospect
MR MARK HOMAN, head of insolvency at Price Waterhouse, gestures towards the
broad window-sill of his office in central London. A chart of more than 400
companies in Maxwell Communication Corporation spreads across its entire
length.
After a year and a half working on the case, the joint administrators to MCC
 -including Mr Homan - are reaching the point at which they be able to
squeeze some returns for creditors from these remnants of the late Mr Robert
Maxwell's empire. Creditors have in the last few days received three
documents which offer them the prospect of a first dividend towards the end
of the year. They have just over a month to respond.
On December 16, 1991 the directors of MCC filed a petition for protection
from creditors under Chapter 11 of the US bankruptcy code. The next day,
they petitioned the English courts for administration under insolvency law.
The frenetic activity in the months before the death of Mr Maxwell, its
chairman, was to take many months to untangle. It would involve not simply
trying to understand a series of highly complex and poorly documented
transactions from the past, but also negotiating a pioneering arrangement
through two separate and fiercely independent legal jurisdictions.
'It's just mind-boggling having two courts each seeking to assert its
authority over each other,' says Mr Homan. 'It had never been done. It could
have been a recipe for disaster.'
Initially the administrators considered applying to have control moved
solely into the UK courts. But the US judge made it clear she had no
intention of relinquishing power. Two entirely separate liquidations under
the different systems would have been costly, complex and lengthy.
Co-operation seemed the only answer, creating a series of logistical and
diplomatic demands. While the administrators at Price Waterhouse had
day-to-day control, the US court appointed an 'examiner' to scrutinise the
process.
Many actions left to the discretion of administrators in the UK required
court approval in the US. A series of procedures had to be drawn up
specifying who had power to make decisions. One of the administrators took
25 transAtlantic flights in nine months. 'You live your life on an
aeroplane,' says Mr Homan, who himself travelled across more than once a
month during 1992. 'It's absolutely shattering.'
The results of the negotiations are highlighted from the front cover onwards
of the three documents now circulating among creditors. The proposals are
called both an English 'scheme of arrangement' and a US 'plan of
reorganisation'. Mr Homan says: 'We have one concept and one exit plan with
two different wrappers.'
The text is the culmination of many months of delicate negotiations and
compromise between lawyers and accountants on both sides of the Atlantic.
There were five principal distinctions between Chapter 11 and administration
which needed to be overcome:
Barring of claims. Chapter 11 debars new creditors from coming forward and
claiming in an insolvency after a fixed date. English insolvency has no such
provision and allows new creditors to catch up with distributions from any
remaining proceeds. The MCC plan leans towards the US, but allows the
English courts to recognise new creditors at their discretion.
Currency conversion. Chapter 11 converts claims into dollars at the time of
filing. English law converts claims into sterling at the start of the
scheme. Under the plan, all claims will be held in whichever currency they
were denominated, and liquid assets already realised in MCC are currently
being held in a basket of currencies weighted according to these
denominations.
Rights to interest. In the US, interest-bearing claims stop paying interest
at the time of the Chapter 11 petition. In England, they would continue
until the start of the scheme. The proposal will follow the US rules and
stop paying on December 16 1991.
Preferential and priority creditors. US priority and English preferential
creditors - such as payroll costs - are defined differently under the two
laws. Rather than cause tensions, the widest definition has been used. That
gives all of these claimants first access to any distributions from
realisations of MCC assets.
Voting. In the US, creditors can vote by post and approval needs a
two-thirds majority by value. In England, they must vote in person and have
a three-quarters majority. Creditors will be required to vote under both
arrangements, but the English ruling will hold most importance since its
threshold is higher.
Mr Homan says: 'We had to come up with a solution which was legal in both
countries and didn't cause any creditor group any significant disadvantage.
We have done things which disadvantage most creditors a little, but don't
create a separate class of disgruntled creditors. We give the advantage to a
minority rather than creating a blocking majority against the proposals.'
His work was also helped by the fact that MCC had no secured creditors. More
than Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn) was loaned without any security against the
assets of the group. 'If we had lots of different classes of creditors, it
might not have been possible,' Mr Homan says.
Now the onus is on creditors. If they vote in favour, and the proposals are
sanctioned by the English and US courts, the scheme and plan could begin at
the end of July and there may be a first distribution as soon as November.
From unsecured liabilities in the range Dollars 3.2bn-Dollars 3.6bn, the
administrators estimate realisations of Dollars 781m-Dollars 1.36bn. That
gives a dividend of 22-43 per cent, to which could be added a further 9 per
cent in realisations from potential litigation with a value of up to Dollars
300m.
'It's taken a lot of effort to find the common ground,' says Mr Homan.
'Given these circumstances we would probably do the same again. But if
creditors vote this down I don't know where they will go. There would be a
clash of jurisdictions which would lead to an Armageddon scenario.'
