FT  25 JUN 93 / Bosnian leader urged to drop boycott of talks
MR Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnia's president, is under mounting pressure from
all sides, including his own, to abandon his boycott of peace talks in
Geneva, where the three Bosnian factions are discussing a Serb and Croat
plan to divide the country into three loosely connected ethnic republics.
The seven Bosnian presidency members in Geneva for the talks said yesterday
they were taking collective charge of the negotiations on Bosnia's future
and would not rule out any ideas that could lead to a durable and just
peace.
Lord Owen, the European Community mediator, said he had phoned Mr
Izetbegovic in Sarajevo, leaving no doubt he urged him to take part in the
talks. Warning that Bosnia could be 'literally dismembered and destroyed' if
the conflict continued, Lord Owen said crucial leaders of Bosnia's Moslems
must be involved in the negotiations.
The Bosnian presidency, minus Mr Izetbegovic and his deputy, Mr Ejup Ganic,
left for Zagreb yesterday and will meet the EC 'troika' of foreign ministers
in Brussels tomorrow. Members plan to return to Geneva for talks on Monday
with Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the United Nations mediator.
Mr Franjo Boras, a Croat and presidency head in Mr Izetbegovic's absence,
yesterday denied any 'coup d'etat', citing Bosnia's constitution which
stipulates a collective presidency with the rotating president only primus
inter pares. Mr Boras became 'acting president' after Mr Fikret Abdic, a
Moslem critic of Mr Izetbegovic, waived his rights under an alphabetical
order rule.
Presidency members said they were listening to all ideas and would consult
political groups in Bosnia before taking any decisions. Mr Abdic rejected
accusations that the presidency, which includes Serbs and Croats, was
involved in a 'sell-out' of Moslems.
Mr Boras said Wednesday's meeting with the Serbian and Croatian presidents
was largely concerned with nine constitutional principles on which a
confederal state would be based. These principles, already agreed between
the Serb and Croat sides and the international mediators, provide similar
guarantees for freedom of movement, human rights and demilitarisation to the
nine principles in the ill-fated Vance-Owen plan for 10 autonomous
provinces.
Unlike those provinces, the constituent republics could enter into separate
agreements with foreign states unless this could 'damage the interests of
other republics'. This would let Serbs and Croats have economic and
political links with their 'mother' countries.
