FT  20 MAR 93 / End of the lode for gold thieves: A British geologist in
Australia has found a way to 'fingerprint' the metal
THE GOLD thief could not believe his bad luck. Like nearly everyone else in
the business, he was convinced that the origins of what he had stolen were
untraceable once identification marks had been removed.
Yet, the expert prosecution witness was telling the court, with uncanny
accuracy, how the thief had gone about disguising them.
The witness said the metal had been melted and some 18-carat scrap gold
added before it was melted again. He even identified the mine from which the
gold had been taken. The accused man was so astounded that he changed his
plea to guilty - and then admitted he had indeed done everything claimed.
Dr John Watling, the expert witness, was so elated that he almost asked the
judge to let the thief go free. For the case was a crucial step in
establishing that gold 'finger-printing' really does work.
This technological breakthrough affects not just gold thieves: it will make
life much more difficult for fraudsters and drug barons the world over.
Before long, Watling's work will result in much of the world's gold being
finger-printed so that its origins can be pinpointed with certainty. In this
way, it will cease to be an untraceable international currency.
This will, for example, make laundering drug receipts more difficult. One
way in which drug rings move their money into the mainstream banking system
is to buy gold-mining land, or even old mines.
Stolen gold is bought with the illicit cash and is then mixed with dirt and
possibly some metal from the mine or mining area. The metal then goes to a
refinery, which has no way of knowing it is not newly-mined gold. When it
leaves there, it has become 'legal.'
Watling's system also will help to prove that mines have been 'salted,' a
confidence trick as old as the industry itself.
Watling, 42, is a British geologist and geo-chemist born at Helsden, near
Norwich. Educated at Imperial College, London, he has for the past two years
been in charge of the West Australian government's minerals science
laboratory in Perth. He started work on his finger-printing theory about 10
years ago when it occurred to him that the 70-80 elements in gold might be
brought together in a unique way whenever a specific deposit was formed.
It was only a short step from proving the theory to finding a practical
application. That came when he gave evidence in a case where the accused
claimed that gold in his possession came from South Africa. Watling showed
that it actually originated from a West Australian field.
How? Because, said Watling, South African gold has significant
concentrations of palladium, ruthenium, platinum, osmium and iridium;
Australian gold has none of these.
Watling needs only a very small trace of gold for his work. The sample is
cut by a laser linked with a plasma-mass spectrometer; this identifies the
trace elements present. The technique is similar to to traditional human
finger-printing in that a jury can simply be shown patterns on sheets of
paper to compare one gold sample with another.
Watling says the first case to use gold finger-printing was the most
difficult because his team had to go to great lengths to get the details
absolutely right. Today, defence lawyers in Western Australia no longer
question the validity of the technique, which has been used in 17 gold theft
cases. This is particularly important in a state where it is estimated that
at least 2 per cent of the gold mined is stolen - an annual loss worth about
ADollars 2.5bn.
Part of the reason for this is that, in the West Australian fields, stealing
gold is not considered a particularly serious crime. This attitude dates
back to the days when miners were paid a pittance for working underground in
difficult and dangerous conditions. When, occasionally, a miner found a gold
nugget among the ore, the temptation to pocket it often was irresistible.
Today, most of Western Australia's gold is spread in invisible specks
through the ore which is dug from open pits by construction equipment and
put through a chemical recovery process. Accidents are rare and pay is
reasonable.
But every one of the 29 pubs in Kalgoorlie, the town at the heart of the
state's eastern goldfields, still has its 'gold buyer' - someone willing to
give cash for the metal with no questions asked. And while it is unusual to
find a nugget, the new technology used in the goldfields does not deter
determined thieves.
A wire wool pad suspended discretely in a mine's carbon-in-leach tank will
collect about two troy ounces of gold a day, worth nearly ADollars 900.
Thieves take gold-impregnated carbon and use oxy-acetylene equipment to burn
away the charcoal to get at the gold.
They even take the so-called pregnant solution - a mixture of water, cyanide
and gold - and set up their own processing operations to extract the gold.
To combat all this, the West Australian Gold Producers' Association, working
through the Chamber of Mines and Energy, uses the services of the
Kalgoorlie-based Gold Stealing Detection Unit. This is part of the state's
police force but is hired out to the private sector. Its present head, Det
Senior Sgt Darryl Lockhart, says that unless it is obvious a gold theft case
can be resolved quickly in court, all samples and exhibits go to Watling's
laboratory for testing. 'It is an invaluable tool for us,' he adds.
So far, Watling has finger-printed 60 mines and 40 bullion samples from
Western Australia and is now finger-printing more than 200 samples from
South Africa and Russia. He and some colleagues are soon to publish a paper
making the technique available to other scientists.
