FT  24 MAY 93 / US Money and Credit: Investors seek guidance over interest
rate worries
INFLATION worries ebb and flow in the US bond markets at the moment, as
traders try to decide whether the Federal Reserve will take any action on
the interest rate front and the economic data provides disturbing, but not
conclusive, guidance.
Such volatility was particularly noticeable last week. On Monday, as
investors chewed over the previous week's inflation news, the benchmark long
bond sank by almost half a point; on Tuesday, as the Fed's policy-making
Open Market Committee held its monthly meeting, it plunged more
dramatically. The yield rose above 7 per cent for the first time in over a
month, to end at 7.01 per cent.
But a day later, a growing conviction that the Fed would not move on
interest rates, sent prices higher and the yield back below the 7 per cent
mark. Finally, in the last two sessions of the week, bond prices recommenced
their slide, leaving the yield on the 30-year long bond at 7.04 per cent by
Friday night - the highest figure seen for about seven weeks.
In all of this, there was precious little hard news for the market to
digest. The most meaningful information arrived late on Thursday afternoon,
when the Fed's weekly money supply numbers proved to be way above
expectations.
The M2 money supply measure, for example, surged by over Dollars 20bn in the
week ended May 10, following a Dollars 13.2bn advance in the previous week.
That said, analysts were quick to note that M2's growth - including this
late uptick - relative to the fourth quarter of 1992, is still below the
lower end of the Fed's target range.
Still, the inflation worries may have gained an extra boost from the
continued rise in the gold price; the metal is, after all, the traditional
hedge against inflation.
Moreover, on Friday, when minutes of the Fed's Open Market Committee meeting
on March 23 were released, it was revealed that two Fed governors were
pushing for higher interest rates at this stage. The majority of the group,
however, voted against a change.
Conversely, there was some more evidence of continued weakness in the
economy itself which, to a certain extent, mitigates against the inflation
fears. The latest University of Michigan index of consumer expectations
showed a sharp drop in May, reaching its lowest level since last Octo-ber.
The initial unemployment claims numbers for the week ended May 15 also
suggested that any improvement in the labour market is marginal, at best;
claims increased by 7,000 to 344,000, reversing the fairly modest declines
seen over the previous three weeks.
So will events in the coming week shed any more light? Again, the flow of
economic statistics will be fairly modest. The Conference Board's survey of
consumer confidence is due to be released on Tuesday, and - like other
surveys - is expected to show that consumers' morale dwindled during May. On
Friday, some analysts are looking for a downward revision to the first
quarter output growth numbers, from 1.8 per cent to perhaps 1 per cent.
But few think that these indications of a stalling economy will avert the
inflation concerns. The most that seems possible is that the interest rate
policy remains steady.
On expectations of a 2.5 to 3 per cent economic growth rate and inflation in
the 3 to 3.5 per cent range, 'the Fed would leave policy alone, as it would
perceive the economic recovery to be self-sustaining,' predict analysts at
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, for example. 'At the same time, the Fed would
view the inflation numbers as not warranting a firming of monetary policy.'
