FT  21 JUL 93 / N Korea-US nuclear accord hailed by Seoul: Many obstacles
remain
SOUTH KOREA said yesterday that the results of the US-North Korea talks in
Geneva represented 'major progress toward the resolution of the North Korean
nuclear issue'.
Officials in Seoul said the talks produced what amounted to a framework
agreement to dispel suspicions about Pyongyang's nuclear programme.
Although many obstacles remain before talks are completed, the ultimate goal
appears to be an improvement in US-North Korean relations in exchange for
Pyongyang's acceptance of full nuclear inspections.
North Korea has been seeking expanded ties with the US to break its
diplomatic isolation and encourage foreign investment that is needed to save
its troubled economy.
Pyongyang agreed in Geneva to begin talks with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on complete inspections of its nuclear facilities.
North Korea last year allowed the IAEA to conduct regular scheduled
inspections of declared facilities at the Yongbyon nuclear complex, but
barred access to two unreported nuclear waste sites. The IAEA wanted to
examine the sites to determine if North Korea is reprocessing more plutonium
than it has disclosed.
The 'special inspections' of the sites demanded by the IAEA prompted the
country in March to threaten to leave the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
Pyongyang accused the IAEA of not being impartial in its demand for the
special inspections, the first time it had requested them.
South Korean officials suggest that the IAEA may withdraw its demand for
special inspections in a face-saving gesture if North Korea allows the
agency access to the two facilities under another form of inspection.
North Korea also promised to resume talks with South Korea on mutual nuclear
inspections as stipulated in their 1991 non-nuclear pact.
If progress is made in Pyongyang's talks with the IAEA and South Korea, the
US will hold more talks to discuss improving ties with North Korea within
two months.
One initial step in developing ties would be US assistance in replacing
North Korea's graphite moderated reactors with light water reactors, which
are safer, easier to inspect and depend on imported enriched uranium for
fuel. North Korea has two small reactors at Yongbyon and is building two
bigger units there which are scheduled for completion by 1996.
One reason the north adopted gas-cooled reactor technology from the former
Soviet Union was that it uses natural uranium for fuel. This is produced in
North Korea, making it difficult to determine how much uranium the country
has consumed and reprocessed as plutonium.
Reliance on nuclear power would ease North Korea's energy shortage caused by
cessation of oil shipments from the former Soviet Union.
Pyongyang has tried to cover the shortage by selling Scud missiles to Iran
for oil.
However, South Korean officials cautioned that even if the US agrees to
provide Pyongyang with light water reactor technology, it would not
immediately solve North Korea's energy shortage.
The US is also demanding other concessions from North Korea in return for
improved relations, including ending human rights abuses, renouncing
terrorism and stopping the sale of Scud missiles to the Middle East.
Seoul is also offering to permit business contacts if progress is made in
the inter-Korean talks on the nuclear problem and other issues.
