FT  28 AUG 93 / New flights of fantasy: George Graham on Nasa's future after
the loss of Mars Observer
The Dollars 980m Mars Observer was supposed to bring back the first new
pictures in nearly 20 years of the planet Mars. Instead, it is lost in space
without a radio. At best, the spacecraft may have swerved automatically into
an orbit around Mars, and there is an outside chance it may re-establish
contact with earth. At worst, it may have exploded.
'I'm betting it blew up on Saturday,' said Mr John Pike, a space specialist
at the Federation of American Scientists. 'If it was a big explosion, it's
in little bitty pieces.'
Nasa scientists suspect a faulty transistor and acknowledge they probably
face a 'non-recoverable situation'.
Back on earth, the Mars Observer's problems translate easily into an
uncomfortable metaphor about the once-proud National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.
Nasa has suffered a series of mishaps on its programmes. Flawed mirrors have
hobbled the Hubble space telescope. Jammed antenna are hampering the Galileo
probe to Jupiter. And there have been delays and cancellations for space
shuttle launches - although these last-minute cancellations are preferable
to the kind of disaster that destroyed the Challenger shuttle in 1986.
Nasa officials say that even the glorious era of the Apollo moon missions
was not free of problems.
'We had glitches and failures back then in the heydays. We had engine
shutdowns on the pad - the very same kind of things that are happening
(today),' says Mr Wes Huntress, Nasa's associate administrator for space
science.
'We have established some very tough goals for ourselves in the space
programme. If they were easy to meet, anybody could meet them,' adds Mr
William Piotrowski, acting director of its solar system exploration
division.
But the space agency's reputation for being able to manage a budget
disappeared in smoke years ago. The General Accounting Office, the audit arm
of the US Congress, reported this year that Nasa underestimated costs on 25
out of 29 big projects. The recent technical setbacks have dealt further
blows to what remains of its image.
Mr John Logsdon, director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington
University in Washington, says Nasa's recent setbacks are not merely
problems of the kind that can afflict even the best-run organisation; they
reflect the reality that Nasa lost its technical and managerial excellence
in the 1970s and 1980s.
Not even Nasa's critics - and they are many and varied - are rubbing their
hands at the Mars Observer's apparent failure. From the protesters who claim
Nasa is hiding evidence of intelligent life on Mars to the space analysts
who say the agency spends too much money on the costly shuttle to the
detriment of unmanned missions that could bring more knowledge, all had high
hopes from Mars Observer.
The disappointment is acute for those who had hoped that breathtaking
photographs of the surface of the red planet, the first since Viking in
1976, could help to rekindle the public imagination in a way that the
shuttle astronauts, who have turned into little more than space hauliers,
have not.
After its days of glory, Nasa became overweight. Whereas in 1972, when the
Apollo era ended with the last manned moon landing, Nasa and its contractors
employed 138,800 people, today they employ 100,000 more.
Mr Timothy Ferris, a science writer at the University of California at
Berkeley and adviser to several Nasa space exploration missions, says many
employees have fallen into a attitude where their main concern is justifying
their jobs. In the old days, however, 'people at Nasa worried about getting
to the moon'.
Where once President John F Kennedy sparked Nasa to excellence by
challenging it to put a man on the moon, such political leadership as Nasa
received in the 1970s and 1980s degenerated into prodding from members of
Congress anxious to ensure that the agency diverted work to their
constituencies.
The agency became a master of the art of extracting money from congressional
appropriations committees, by distributing largesse to as many supporters as
possible. When lobbying last year to save the space station Freedom from the
budget axe, Nasa circulated maps showing that the station generated jobs in
37 of 50 states and 151 of 435 congressional districts.
'Nasa sees its primary mission as the securing of appropriations from
Congress. Congress in turn understands the importance of big aerospace
programmes in maintaining jobs in the aerospace industry,' says Mr Ferris.
But Mr Daniel Goldin, who became Nasa's administrator 18 months ago, has won
some acclaim outside the agency for beginning to change all this.
When appointed, Mr Goldin was viewed with some suspicion by Nasa and
Congress, who resented the ousting of his predecessor, the former astronaut
Admiral Richard Truly. Some saw Mr Goldin as a cat's paw for Vice-president
Dan Quayle, who took the lead on space issues for the Bush administration.
Mr Al Gore, who was chairman of the Senate Science, Technology and Space
Subcommittee before he replaced Mr Quayle as Vice-president, was one of the
most vocal in questioning Mr Goldin's independence.
After some hesitation, President Bill Clinton kept Mr Goldin, with 25 years
of private sector experience at the TRW engineering group's space division,
to spearhead the assault on Nasa's bureaucracy.
Mr Goldin won more favour with the president for the alacrity with which he
took up Mr Clinton's challenge to redesign the space station, a permanently
manned orbiter Nasa plans to launch by 2001, so that it would cost less and
do more.
The new scaled-down station will include elements from the original Freedom
design, but should cost Dollars 8bn to Dollars 9bn less to build than
Freedom by its projected launch date and perhaps Dollars 18bn less to
operate over a 10-year life span.
Mr Goldin has also drafted a budget that cuts Nasa's five-year spending plan
by Dollars 15bn to Dollars 80.4bn. Although he has fought hard to keep the
space station alive, he is Nasa's fiercest critic, lambasting its 'appalling
management structures'.
'I personally am tired of Apollo stories. It's time we started writing
history and not reading it,' he told a meeting of space scientists recently.
Mr Goldin himself may not write much history. His task is more to shape Nasa
into the kind of entrepreneurial organisation that will once again do so.
Outsiders in the scientific community believe Mr Goldin has already done
much to shake out Nasa's bureaucratic stuffiness, though much remains to be
done.
Writing history, however, will require more than managerial excellence. Nasa
needs a new sense of mission to replace the urge to compete with the Soviet
Union that spurred earlier space probes.
Mr Clinton and Mr Gore offer Nasa an opportunity, by seeking to swing the
pendulum back to civilian pursuits and away from the Star Wars and military
projects that dominated space programmes under Presidents Reagan and Bush.
But they also want Nasa to spend more time and money on aeronautics research
with practical dividends for civil aviation. Manned missions to explore the
planets, they have warned, are a long way in the future.
Practical dividends have recently come to dominate other considerations, to
the extent that supporters of the space station conduct their annual battle
to preserve its budget by inventing ever more farcical claims that
everything from Aids to arthritis could be cured if only scientists could
experiment in zero gravity.
But a vital part of Nasa has always been the dream of pushing back the
boundaries of space. That dream has also been important to public support
for the agency and its budget.
Nasa may not be lost in space without a radio. Without that dream, however,
it might turn into little more than an earthbound technology agency.
