FT  01 DEC 93 / Budget 93: Basic jobless allowance cut to six months -
Targetting the unemployed
Rationalisation of benefits for the unemployed around a new Jobseeker's
Allowance from 1996 formed the centrepiece of a series of employment-related
changes in the Budget.
In its basic form the allowance will last for only six months - compared
with 12 months for the present unemployment benefit - and recipients will
have to genuinely seek work. Claimants will be expected to enter into a
Jobseeker's Agreement setting out in advance the steps they intend to take
to find employment.
Other budget measures include replacement of invalidity benefit, which
ministers believe is being abused, with a new incapacity benefit for people
who are genuinely medically incapable of work. It will be subject to a
stricter medical test than invalidity benefit.
A new allowance of up to Pounds 28 a week will help people on family credit,
particularly single mothers, to meet childcare costs and find jobs.
Also, each of the lower rates of employers' National Insurance Contributions
will be reduced by 1 percentage point as an incentive to companies to create
more unskilled and semi-skilled jobs.
Unemployed people currently receive unemployment benefit, income support or
sometimes both. Mr Kenneth Clarke, Chancellor, said the replacement scheme
would draw a 'much closer link between the receipt of benefit and the
claimant's demonstrated willingness to look for work.'
It will do so by strengthening the principles of Restart - arrangements
introduced in the mid-1980s under which long-term unemployed people are
called to interviews on their efforts to find work. This can lead to offers
of help in developing job seeking skills or other assistance.
The decision to pay the new benefit for only six months was criticised by
the government's political opponents and anti-poverty campaigners. But Mr
David Hunt, Employment Secretary, stressed that two-thirds of people
eligible through their National Insurance Contributions for an allowance
were likely to have left unemployment within six months.
'Those who are still unemployed after six months will be eligible for the
allowance on a means-tested basis, as will people whose needs are not
covered by the contributory personal allowance.'
Three new pilot schemes aimed at long-term unemployed people seeking work
were also announced by the government yesterday. A Jobfinder's grant will
provide assistance for people who have been out of work for more than two
years when they start a job.
New job search and assessment courses will be available for 18-25 year olds
who have been unemployed for more than a year.
Another scheme, for 18-25 year olds, will test the value of giving
unemployed young people their own case workers to help them plan paths out
of unemployment.
Analysis, Page 26
