FT  18 SEP 93 / Sun still shines for big bucks tourism: Damian Fraser finds
Florida little shaken by murders among holiday-makers
THE MURDER of nine foreign visitors in a year is the stuff of public
relations nightmares for every tourist destination. Florida reached that
unenviable record on Tuesday, with the killing of the British holiday-maker
Mr Gary Colley. It is waiting anxiously for the full impact on its premier
industry.
Florida is the world's most popular tourist spot, having overtaken
California last year. A little more than 41m tourists - about 36m Americans
and 7m foreigners - came to the Sunshine State last year, some 2 per cent
more than the year before.
Tourism is also Florida's largest industry. Tourist spending was Dollars
31bn (Pounds 20.1bn) last year, or 22 per cent of the total in the state.
Florida authorities are the first to admit the negative publicity from the
killings will have some short-term impact. Mr Greg Farmer, commerce
secretary, says the industry might suffer a 15-25 per cent decline this
year. Of particular concern is the booming convention business, which
received 680,000 delegates last year. 'They look for safety,' says Mr
Crotts, 'and the perception is Florida is not safe'.
Travel agents expected the biggest impact in the overseas market, the
fastest-growing segment of the tourist industry. They spoke of the immediate
reduction in bookings from German-speaking countries, and expected the UK
tabloid newspaper coverage of the murder of Mr Colley to have its effect on
the UK market. With more than 1m tourists to Florida annually, the UK sends
the largest number of its citizens to the state after Canada.
The immediate problem is not cancellations. These are unlikely just now,
given the deposits tourists pay, but the winter season, for which bookings
are now being made, is another matter.
The overseas tourists will be further put off by the appreciation of the
dollar against European currencies. The Association of British Travel Agents
(Abta) expects growth of UK tourism to Florida to slow to single digits per
cent this year, from 22 per cent growth last year.
But the Abta doubts there will be a decline of UK tourism, since most
would-be tourists realise that the odds against them being subject to a
crime remain long.
Local economists likewise doubt the impact of recent murders will be
'catastrophic', as Mr Farmer put it. Florida has enormous advantages -
winter sun, beaches, the world's best theme parks in Orlando, and a huge
amount of repeat business from Americans with homes or relatives in the
state.
Florida has established a critical mass of highly competitive tourist
services that offer some of the cheapest and best-value accommodation in the
world.
The state boasts varied attractions. Miami, notwithstanding all its dangers,
has become a commercial hub of the Americas, with companies such as AT&amp;T and
General Motors setting up regional Latin American headquarters in the city.
Orlando brings in mainly US tourists, though Europeans are catching up
quickly (growing by 32 per cent last year). Much safer than Miami, Orlando
attracts families and increasingly businessmen at conventions.
As the state's most important industry, tourism enjoys privileges. Hundreds
of murders of locals barely raise an eyebrow in the state but the killing of
Mr Colley and, last week, that of the German Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, set
off a massive campaign to promote tourist safety, including 24-hour patrols
of highway rest areas, plain-clothes police searching for lost tourists, and
free telephone advice to tourists.
Fear is not yet deterring investors. This week, Universal Studios voted with
its cheque book on the future of Florida's tourism industry by announcing an
estimated Dollars 3bn expansion in Orlando, including a Jurassic Park theme
park, hotels, a convention centre and golf courses.
