FT  21 JUL 93 / Housing upturn remains muted
NEW COMMITMENTS by building societies to mortgages recovered in June from a
fall the previous month, figures released yesterday show. However, they
provided further evidence that the housing market recovery remains muted.
The Building Societies Association disclosed that net new mortgage
commitments rose to Pounds 3.18bn last month from Pounds 2.78bn in May. The
Pounds 9.14bn figure for the second quarter was marginally lower than the
Pounds 9.19bn in the same period last year. But this includes only building
society lending, and banks have been increasing their market share of
mortgage loans.
The association said societies suffered their first month of net outflow
this year, after a Pounds 700m inflow of retail funds in May.
However, net receipts of retail funds stood at Pounds 1.7bn in the second
quarter compared with Pounds 77m in the second quarter of last year.
Societies have been trying to attract more funds after a net inflow of only
Pounds 295m last year.
Mr Adrian Coles, association director-general, said the advances figures
confirmed that the housing market was recovering slowly. Lending was
'significantly higher' than in the first quarter.
Net new commitments to mortgages in the second quarter had risen 24 per cent
on the first quarter, he said, while figures for the second quarter of last
year had been boosted by the deadline to avoid stamp duty on house
purchases.
The outflow of retail funds following strong inflows in April and May was
'not unexpected', given the BT3 share offer which had 'undoubtedly had a
depressing effect on receipts last month'.
Mr John Wriglesworth, building society analyst at UBS Securities, said the
figures indicated that the housing market was still 'bumping along the
bottom' with little sign of a strong recovery in mortgage lending levels.
He said societies were facing strong competition from banks for mortgage
lending because it was more expensive to obtain new retail funds for
lending, compared with borrowing on wholesale money markets.
