FT  22 JUL 93 / Violence pervades path of progress: Patti Waldmeir says
western-style democracy may not solve South Africa's problems
THERE is a simple explanation for violence in South Africa: the African
National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom party are fighting for power ahead
of the first multi-racial elections, while the police either exacerbate or
at least fail to halt the killing.
If only the truth could be as simple as the explanation.
For the real causes of violence are manifold and baffling, to insider and
outsider alike, but certainly politics is only part of the problem.
Depending on the township, or hostel, or rural area where violence takes
place, 'the problem' can involve everything from a negligent or frightened
police force, to right-wing provocation, from commercial rivalry over taxi
routes to ethnic hostility.
At Port Shepstone, on Natal's palm-fringed Indian Ocean coast, where well
over 200 people have died since South African politics were liberalised four
years ago, the clash involves two centuries, two generations, two forms of
culture - every bit as much as the two standard political contestants, the
ANC and Inkatha.
While the white town of Port Shepstone, 100km south of the port of Durban,
looks like any other small rural town in the industrialised world, the
hinterland is Africa: traditional Zulu chiefs rule by a strict tribal
hierarchy inherited from the great Zulu kings of the 19th century - and the
standard of living recalls the last century, as much as the political
structure.
Everyone agrees that the trouble in Port Shepstone - which began with the
1989 killing of an 'induna' or village headman, by radical young men who
challenged his authority - did not begin as a political conflict.
Armstrong Zondi, one of the angry young men involved in the 1989 violence,
says the flashpoint was the local induna's decision to levy a R36 (Pounds 7)
annual charge on every youth over 16 - a crippling charge in an area with
little youth employment, viewed as simple extortion by the local community
which accused the induna of corruption.
Armstrong admits that the youths 'necklaced' the induna (he burnt to death
after having a flaming tyre placed over his head), causing the local 'nkosi'
(chief) to flee in terror. The community then elected a local council to
replace the banished tribal authority.
Since then, the chief, Nkosi Ndwalani has fought back with a vengeance,
returning to his seat with arms, and engaging in a conflict which has left
scores dead on both sides: radical youth, exposed to more modern ideas of
egalitarianism, have fought men like the chief, whose vested interests
incline them to protect the traditions of an ancient culture.
Inevitably, the political parties have weighed into the battle, with the
young 'comrades' supporting the ANC (and receiving its backing), and their
elders operating under the banner of the traditionalist Inkatha party (which
controls the government of the KwaZulu black homeland, the authority which
appoints the chiefs and pays their salaries).
The two sides called a truce late last year until the April assassination of
ANC leader Chris Hani raised temperatures once again. Now the murders have
started again.
Nkosi Ndwalani, holding court in his home atop a steep hill with fine sea
views, says the problem is simple. 'Where the people accept my role as
tribal authority, there is peace.' His indunas and councillors, who creep
with bent head and servile gesture into his presence, assent quietly.
In the valley nearby, Armstrong says the ANC is not fighting the chiefs:
'the chiefs stand for our customs and I don't think we should do away with
our customs.' But they must abandon their authoritarian ways and act
democratically; they will lose most of their traditional powers and be left
mainly as cultural figureheads (though ANC officials make the unlikely
promise that an ANC government will pay them more for this role than they
currently receive from KwaZulu).
This, like so many of South Africa's conflicts, is a battle which
western-style democracy will find hard to resolve. As other African
countries have discovered, tribal customs and values can become sources of
tension if ignored or overridden by governments. It is a lesson which any
new leader ignores at his peril.
