FT  22 OCT 93 / Israel agrees to phased release of Palestinians
ISRAEL and the Palestine Liberation Organisation confirmed last night that
there would be a phased release of Palestinians held in Israeli jails, but
gave no indication of how many people would be involved.
The announcement came after peace negotiators had clashed angrily over the
issue and on Israeli security proposals for the interim five-year period of
Palestinian self-rule.
At one point, the Palestinian delegation, led by Mr Nabil Shaath, walked out
of talks in the Egyptian Red Sea resort of Taba, saying they had hit a
crisis over the prisoners issue, but it later returned.
'The release of prisoners will be implemented gradually and continually,'
Palestinian delegate Jaber Fada said last night, reading a joint statement
to reporters.
'As a first step, it was decided that prisoners belonging to the following
categories (should be released) by the beginning of next week,' he added.
Those listed included the sick, those under 18, those over 50, and women.
A leading supporter of Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, was assassinated in
Gaza City yesterday, bringing the number of political killings to three
since the outline peace accord was signed.
The killing of Mr Asaad Saftawi, a moderate, has fuelled fears of mounting
assassinations and political conflict as various Palestinian factions
compete.
At the Taba talks, the Palestinians have been seeking immediate and
unconditional release of up to 14,000 prisoners and want speedy gestures of
goodwill by Israel to show to Palestinian opponents of the peace agreement.
The talks have also hit a snag on security. Israel has presented a
comprehensive security plan to the Palestinians calling for an Israeli
military presence of about 4,000 troops in the Gaza Strip after the Israelis
are supposed to have completed military withdrawal by April 13.
The Israelis are insisting on providing security for up to 5,000 Jewish
settlers in the Gaza Strip to give them freedom of movement and protect them
against external threats. They also insist Israeli police will have the
right to chase Palestinian assailants into the Palestinian-controlled areas
and establish buffer security zones.
Members of the Palestinian delegation were outraged by the Israeli security
plans. The Palestinians have proposed a complete Israeli withdrawal, with
only small numbers of Israeli troops to protect the settlers.
