FT  07 MAY 93 / Tory backbenchers attack ministers on Navy job cuts
THE GOVERNMENT is determined to ensure that as many as possible of those
laid off in the latest round of Royal Navy redundancies are volunteers, Mr
Jonathan Aitken, defence minister, told MPs last night as ministers came
under fire over the proposed job cuts from their own backbenchers.
Mr Aitken used a Commons debate on the Navy to defend lower staffing on the
grounds that new equipment was generally less labour intensive than what it
replaced. Application rates to leave the Navy were at a 10-year low, he
added.
Under its Options for Change review the government planned to reduce the
Navy staff to 55,000 by the mid 1990s. But it was announced last month that
a further cut of 5,000 was to be effected by the end of the century.
Mr Robert Hicks, MP for Cornwall South East, criticised government ministers
for announcing these further cuts in manpower requirements 'on the eve of
the Easter recess'.
Mr Winston Churchill, the MP for Davyhulme, called for an assurance that
staffing would not fall short of that set out in the review. If it did, it
would be 'a matter of the gravest concern'.
Mr John Wilkinson (C Ruislip-Northwood) warned: 'Unless our party reverts
more clearly to its traditional attachment to the importance of national
defence, I think we will lose much of the trust that has rightfully been
ours on the part of those who care about the security of our country.'
Mr Mark Wolfson (C Sevenoaks) said Britain had returned to a world role, but
with a smaller Navy and that there was 'a serious danger of overstretch'.
Mr Aitken told MPs during the debate last night that the government expects
to announce 'within the next few weeks' whether the long-awaited contract
for Trident nuclear submarine refitting work will be awarded to Devonport or
Rosyth.
Mr Aitken used the Royal Navy debate to announce one new order, worth an
estimated Pounds 30m, for five Type 23 frigate command systems to be placed
with British Aerospace Sema.
Britain is extending its maritime jurisdiction to protect fishing stocks
within a 200-mile radius of South Georgia, in the Falklands, and the South
Sandwich Islands, the government announced last night.
Baroness Chalker, overseas development minister, said the issue had been
discussed with the Argentine government, with which Britain now had
'excellent' relations, marked by a new openness and growing mutual
confidence.
