FT  10 MAR 93 / International Bonds: D-Mark sector helped by continued flood
of issues
The D-Mark sector became the centre of attention again yesterday as the
recent flood of new international bond issues continued unabated.
Syndicate managers said they expected new-issue activity to remain high for
the rest of the week, since most sectors of the international bond market
did not appear to be saturated.
Yesterday's heavy issuance in the D-Mark sector - just over DM2bn was raised
 -came in a variety of structures and maturities, which helped the market to
absorb a fair amount of the total. However, syndicate managers said that
although investor demand for D-Mark paper was still healthy, it would take
some time before yesterday's issues were fully placed.
They added that a widening of yield spreads in sovereign D-Mark-denominated
paper, caused by fears that Finland's credit rating might be downgraded,
could discourage borrowers from tapping this sector of the international
bond market.
On Monday, a senior Finnish finance ministry official said it was likely
that Standard &amp; Poor's would lower the credit rating of the Republic of
Finland in the near future. Finland is currently rated AA+ by the US credit
rating agency. S&amp;P declined to comment yesterday, but noted that it had a
negative outlook on Finland's rating.
Yesterday, the European Investment Bank launched DM500m-worth of seven-year
Eurobonds and, as usual, the pricing was tight.
The bonds were priced to yield eight basis points over comparable German
government bonds.
The spread tightened slightly by mid-afternoon, but an official at the lead
manager, WestLB, said this reflected weaker bund prices.
Deutsche Bank raised DM1bn for itself through an issue of four-year
Eurobonds. The bonds were priced at 15 basis points over the series 99 of
medium-term German government bonds, and later tightened to 13 basis points.
The D-Mark sector saw another wave of reverse floating rate notes (FRNs),
and investor demand for these instruments geared to falling interest rates
allowed some borrowers to increase the size of their issues.
The Republic of Austria increased its FRN issue to DM400m from DM300m and
Dresdner International Finance added another DM50m to the DM150m FRN issue
which it launched on Monday.
Goldman Sachs confirmed that it had won a mandate with Lehman Brothers to
arrange a dollar-denominated Eurobond issue for the African Development
Bank.
An official at Goldman Sachs said the issue would be launched within the
next two weeks but declined to comment on market talk that the bonds would
raise Dollars 500m and have a maturity of 10 years.
Meanwhile, Morgan Stanley is close to launching a Y50bn convertible Eurobond
issue for the Bank of Tokyo.
The Eurodollar sector was also active, with Ciba-Geigy Corporation, the US
arm of the Swiss drug company, raising Dollars 100m through an issue of
seven-year bonds.
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, the lead manager, said the issue was part of
Ciba-Geigy's current medium-term note programme.
The bonds were priced to yield 30 basis points over the 6 3/8 per cent US
Treasuries due 2000, but the spread later tightened by five basis points,
reflecting good demand, especially from Switzerland.
State-owned Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex) plans to issue up to Dollars
525m-worth of Eurobonds this year as part of its financing programme, Reuter
reports from Mexico City.
Pemex intends to launch four Eurobond issues in all, the first two in
dollars, with maturities of three to seven years and amounts of between
Dollars 125m and Dollars 200m.
The other two issues could be denominated in D-Marks, yen, sterling or Swiss
francs.
