FT  25 JUN 93 / Management: Secrets of the Semler effect - The man who set
corporate culture on its head
One somehow expects a brash, bizarre dresser, surrounded by public relations
people and assorted hangers on. One actually gets an engaging 34-year-old,
conservatively attired (even a touch preppy), calmly reflective,
conspicuously on his own.
Yet this is Ricardo Semler, Brazil's one-time enfant terrible and author of
an autobiographical book whose advance hype is extravagant even by the
standards of the UK publishing industry.
Subtitled 'the success story behind the world's most unusual workplace',
Maverick] describes a manufacturer of pumps, mixers and other industrial
equipment whose corporate hierarchy has been turned upside down, where
employees set their own hours and (in some cases) their own salaries, and
where everyone (managers, cleaners, messengers) has access to the company's
financial figures.
In the 13 years since young Ricardo was handed the reins by his
Austrian-born father, Semco has earned a reputation as one of Latin
America's fastest growing companies. Sales have increased six-fold and
profits have advanced by 500 per cent. But Semco has attracted international
attention much more for its refreshing - if sometimes quirky - ideas in
workplace organisation and employee democracy.
Executives from some of the biggest multinationals have sought to draw
inspiration from Semco's Sao Paulo well. MBA students have lined up to study
its restructuring techniques. And Semler himself says he received 6,600
letters from readers of
the Brazilian version of his book (and is proud of having had a personal
hand in answering all of them).
That the international edition to be published in September has been
translated into 11 languages - Semler penned the English version himself -
suggests a man eager to convert the world to his Semco model.
Not true, he insisted during an interview in London this week. 'The book is
not a mission statement. I wanted to get away from the Jesuitical approach
which you find in the US of going out and doing something yourself and then
telling others how to do it.'
Semler is naturally flattered that a company from Denver, Colorado, has been
set up on strict Semco lines, and he reports with obvious satisfaction that
he has had appeals for help from Norway and California. But he is adamant
that he is not about to take up consultancy. 'I've turned down numerous
offers,' he says. 'Semco is an ongoing project and we think we are only
half-way there. We need another 10 to 15 years to finish the job.'
Semler concedes that today's corporate giants could easily grow feet of
clay: 'Who would have guessed two years ago what was about to happen to
IBM?' But he is unperturbed by the prospect of economic change. 'I can't
imagine stronger downturns than we've already been through. We've closed
factories and had five to six redundancy programmes, that's everyone's risk.
The challenge for us is to show that the Semco model can be self-sustaining,
that it can carry on in the absence of a leader figure.'
To demonstrate the point Semco introduced the idea of a rotating chief
executive officer - five people do the job for six months at a time - and
Semler himself is increasingly taking a back
seat.
'The company now takes 30-40 per cent of my time. My next stint as CEO comes
up at the end of 1995. For the moment I don't have an office, or a desk, and
I don't sign cheques. I don't exist there from a job point of view.'
Semler is evidently not one to pore over the monthly cash-flow statements.
'Financial numbers are not an adequate indication of what is happening,' he
says. 'I feel closest to the company when I am talking to people in a hotel
about whether our dishwashers work, or talking to ship-owners about our
pumps.'
So does he subscribe to the latest cult of the customer? 'I read about them
(management fashions), but I don't take much notice. The main goal of a
company should be to create an entity which everyone involved in feels is
worthwhile. That
will then manifest itself in
good quality, good customer service.'
Asked about companies he admires, Semler cites the Delaware-based Gore-tex
manufacturer WL Gore. 'They work in a completely different field but there's
a philosophical identity,' he explains. 3M and the Mid-west furniture maker
Herman Miller have also earned his respect.
'We've picked the best from many systems - personal freedom, individualism
and competition from capitalism, the control of greed and sharing of
information and power from socialism, and the flexibility of the Japanese,
although we shrink from their family-like ties to the company and their
automatic veneration of elders.
'As far as we are concerned, problems like drug or alcohol abuse are not our
concern outside the company. This sort of paternalism is unacceptable. Nor
do we have a health club, which is the sort of thing that sometimes makes
people in the United States cross.'
As for the next 10 years, Semler aims to 'increase the depth' of Semco's
experience. 'At the moment, only about a quarter of our workforce set their
own salaries. I'd like to see everyone doing that. The same goes for our
balance sheet and financial analysis programmes.
'I also think people working from home is a good sign. At the moment only
about 20 per cent of our employees do so one to three days a week.'
