FT  19 FEB 93 / The Clinton Economic Plan: Mixed reactions to foreign tax
plans - Company Tax
FOREIGN COMPANIES with US operations reacted with a mixture of concern and
relief to President Clinton's proposed corporate tax changes.
Foreign companies have been particularly relieved to see a retreat from Mr
Clinton's strong campaign rhetoric to recoup up to an extra Dollars 45bn
over four years from overseas companies operating in the US. That figure has
now been revised down to just Dollars 3.8bn over six years.
But they have expressed worries about the Dollars 38m additional expenditure
to be made on hiring new investigators in the US Internal Revenue Service
and increasing their audits on foreign companies to ensure compliance.
That will mean extra expenditure by companies in ensuring adequate
documentation to prove that they have been filing accurate, fair tax
returns.
'Generally British companies are still very concerned and nervous,' said Mr
Peter Dickinson, head of international tax at accountants Coop-ers &amp;
Lybrand. 'It is going to be much more expensive to operate in the US now and
the economic case for investing there has clearly been reduced.'
'One company I have spoken to said this would be a frightful additional
burden,' said Mr Dickinson. 'The feeling is the IRS has had enough
ammunition in the past. Any more pressure will be intolerable.'
Companies would also take a direct hit to their earnings from the 2 per cent
basic increase in corporation tax to 36 per cent.
Mr Mike Wort, of Wellcome, the pharmaceutical company with US manufacturing
operations, said: 'In the short-term there is little we can do. We plan no
significant changes and we have no intention to pull out. The US is still a
profitable market for us.'
However, Japanese groups with US operations were more sanguine. In Tokyo,
Honda, with two US factories employing 15,000 workers, said of the
possibility of more auditing of their figures: 'This is nothing for us to
worry about. We have been following US law.'
Toyota, the leading Japanese car maker, which has four factories in the US
employing more than 10,000 employees said: 'We have contributed a lot to the
US economy, we are not worried about it at all.'
Sony, Sanyo and Matushita, the electronics groups, which together operate 20
factories in the US all said they were not concerned about the plans. All
the companies said the proposals would not affect plans for further
investment in the US.
Mr Edward Streator, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in London,
said: 'I think people are obviously concerned about how much of a ripple
effect these proposals will have. But my hunch is the effects will be
slight.'
