FT  24 AUG 93 / Letters to the Editor: Wind farms generate storm (2) - David
Lascelles' article on the future of wind energy, published on August 19,
provoked a large number of letters, both for and against the development of
wind power. Here is a selection
Sir, Anybody reading David Lascelles' article on wind farms can be in no
doubt about his personal views on the development of wind energy.
Regrettably, he rests his case largely on the basis of erroneous
information.
He claims that the recent decision to allow construction of a wind farm at
Four Burrows in Cornwall is the fourth instance where the environment
secretary has pushed through a wind farm against the wishes of people who
live nearby. This is quite wrong. The other three projects referred to the
secretary of state - Ovenden Moor, Kirby Moor and Cemmaes - were approved by
local planning committees. The government decided that a wider examination
in public should be undertaken.
At Four Burrows the inquiry ensued when the planning committee rejected the
advice of its professional planning officers to grant permission.
The technology is certainly not, as Mr Lascelles argues 'a long way from
commercial operation'. Let us be clear on energy costs. On sites having only
a modest wind speed, the cost of wind-generated electricity over a typical
20-year plant life is about 6.5p per unit, and is coming down. On windier
sites such as are found in parts of Scotland, the price can be substantially
lower. Comparing this, on the same accounting basis, with the prices for
electricity from new conventional power stations, we have coal at about
4.5p/unit, combined cycle gas at 2.6p/unit and nuclear at at least 7p/unit.
As things are at present, wind is not the cheapest. But the costs quoted
here for conventional power projects do not include the external
environmental and social costs that they incur. Evidence presented to the
Commons energy committee last year showed that external costs added about
0.75p/unit for combined cycle gas and 2p/unit for coal and nuclear. Wind,
which requires no fuel to be won or transported, produces no carbon dioxide
or other atmospheric pollution and has no legacy for future generations. It
does not suffer from the associated external costs. It is competitive with
coal and cheaper than nuclear.
Mr Lascelles seeks to belittle the significant contribution that wind energy
can make to our energy needs. The UK has vast wind assets, almost half
Europe's wind resource. This is equivalent to more than double our current
electricity demand. Taking account of its fluctuating nature, siting
constraints, and integrating it into a practical and flexible system it is
reasonable to expect that wind energy could supply 10-20 per cent of our
electricity early in the next century and provide valuable diversity of
supply.
And what of land usage? To generate 10 per cent of our electricity from the
wind would require wind farms extending over 1,200 sq km (not 4,000). This
is only 0.3 per cent of the UK land area and because wind turbines occupy
less than 1 per cent of the area in which they are sited, the actual land
usage would be only 12 sq km. In the other 1,188 sq km, cows could still
safely graze and crops ripen around and below the turbines.
Of course, the main environmental advantage of wind is that it is a clean
energy source. Were the policy, planning and regulatory frameworks to allow
us to achieve the 10 per cent tomorrow, the immedIate benefit would be to
avoid pumping 30m tonnes of carbon dioxide, 30,000 tonnes of sulphur dioxide
and 60,000 tonnes of nitrous oxide into the atmosphere each year and without
the long-term safety commitment the nuclear industry has yet to face.
Mr Lascelles might not like wind farms, but the evidence of independent
public opinion surveys shows that less than 10 per cent of the general
public, including those living around wind farms, do not like them. The
substantial majority are in favour.
What they are not is uneconomic or unnecessary.
I D Mays,
D Lindley,
M Trinnick,
British Wind Energy
Association,
Eaton Court,
Maylands Avenue,
Hemel Hempstead,
Herts HP2 7TR
