FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Personal and Portable Computers (18): Technology
shift - Operating Software
THE computer industry is preparing itself for one of its periodic technology
shifts. In the past these shifts were solely the result of fundamental
advances in hardware - the inventions of both the transistor and the
microprocessor are notable examples.
This time, however, the technology shift is the result of a fundamental
change in operating system software - the software which controls what goes
on 'under the covers' and provides the base for applications.
Improvements in user interface software and in telecommunications, and the
novel applications they can deliver, demand much more from operating systems
software than before. Nowadays they must not only control the internal
workings of the computer they dwell in, they must also take care of the
complexities of networks and be able to communicate with other systems.
The stability of the personal computer software industry is, therefore,
under threat. Microsoft's MS/DOS - with an estimated 150m users worldwide -
has dominated the PC industry for a decade and fought off every challenge.
But at the end of 1992 US networking software company Novell declared its
intent to take over the development of Unix, one of the two biggest
challengers to MS/DOS. Originally developed by AT&amp;T for minicomputers, Unix
has been widely adopted as the universal operating system for mid-range
computers - although it has, for some time, been touted as a possible
candidate to replace MS/DOS. Through the takeover of Unix Systems
Laboratories (USL), which was set up in 1991 to co-ordinate development of
Unix for the industry as a whole, Novell hopes to become the 'custodian' of
Unix and mount a serious challenge to Microsoft.
Novell hopes to do this by bringing Unix together with PC networks.
Novell is in a good position to achieve this. It has established itself as
the dominant supplier of networking software for personal computer local
area networks (LANS) with its Netware package. It claims to have about 70
per cent of this growing market and has itself beaten off a challenge from
Microsoft - which also has designs on this important market.
Novell's takeover has other implications - especially in the market for
corporate computer networks. USL also controls the development of an
important software product called Tuxedo - a package that can combine
traditional corporate transaction processing with personal computer
networking.
Novell's move has occurred at a time when the limitations of personal
computer software are becoming increasingly evident. Their lack, both of
system security and the robustness associated with operating software on
large computers, has led to close examination of operating system software
and what it might be required to do in the next decade.
If Novell combines its successful networking software with the virtues
offered by Unix and Tuxedo, it could outflank Microsoft.
It will certainly change the fate of Unix.
'We see Novell skewing development towards the integration of Unix with
networks,' says Paul McGuckin, a mid-range computing specialist at market
researchers Gartner Group.
'It will concentrate on the kernel, low-level operating software - at the
expense of the high-level stuff. This could mean that Unix vendors will have
to be more self-reliant as far as the high-end development is concerned,' Mr
McGuckin adds.
The technological intricacies of computer operating systems are generally
beyond most computer users. Unfortunately, the choice of an operating system
is as important as the choice of the computer hardware it runs on. Operating
systems organise the internal workings of a computer and, as a consequence,
they dictate what the computer can do and what applications software can be
used.
The MS/DOS PC launched by IBM a decade ago brought stability for the first
time and allowed the development of a wide range of applications.
The success of the graphical user interface (GUI) on the Apple Macintosh
prompted Microsoft to add the Windows GUI and make significant improvements
to the original software, but MS/DOS is still outdated and in need of
replacement.
Specifically, MS/DOS has failed to make any impact on the world of networked
systems - the area where Novell dominates.
The final result of the conflict is far from clear. Microsoft continues to
improve MS/DOS and is in the process of developing Windows/NT - an entirely
new contender. IBM continues to promote OS/2 with varying degrees of
success. And, the many versions of Unix - including AIX from IBM itself -
vie with each other for dominance.
Mr Brian McBride, IBM UK's AIX marketing director, sees Novell's takeover of
Unix as 'healthy' because it brings stability to Unix. 'We see it as a
different implementation that we can communicate with. None of use can
afford to lock each other out in a networked world and we are all being
driven to standards-based inter-operability.'
Mr McBride is confident about IBM's ability to integrate Unix, PC networks
and corporate computing - in addition to maintaining links with other
systems.
Where it could come into conflict with Novell, however, is in the area of
transaction processing and USL's Tuxedo - an increasingly important part of
the link between personal and corporate computing.
'You can link a DOS/PC into Unix systems with Tuxedo. It is an open
transaction processing system,' explains Ms Gillian Mogg Smith a consultant
at USL.
'Linking it with Novell is a separate issue. But we have already done much
work with Novell with the UnixWare development,' she adds.
Tuxedo dominates the open transaction processing market - but IBM is hot on
its heels. IBM's rival to USL's Tuxedo is a Unix-based version of its
25-year-old CICS teleprocessing package. Developed originally for
mainframe-based on-line processing, CICS is a well-established and mature
piece of software with about 33,000 principal sites across the world.
Last year IBM announced CICS/6000, a version which will run under AIX/Unix
and allow personal computers to act as 'client' terminals to an
enterprise-wide computer system. IBM has licensed CICS to Hewlett Packard,
which will build a 'reference' version to work on other manufacturers'
mid-range Unix systems.
According to the Gartner Group, this sector is set to expand rapidly in the
next three years. It says that the total market for mid-range transaction
processing was worth only Dollars 190m last year. By 1995 it will be worth
Dollars 3bn worldwide - with Tuxedo and CICS/6000 taking more than 50 per
cent of the market between them.
This is rich ground for a battle between IBM and Novell. It also seems
likely that Microsoft - while having no obvious plans to get into this area
 -will certainly be keeping an eye on it.
