FT  29 JUL 93 / International Capital Markets: Tokyo SE draws up stock-index
futures rules
THE Tokyo stock exchange has drafted new restrictions for the stock-index
futures market in an attempt to end criticism of the negative effects of
futures and options trading.
The measures are seen as the final round of reforms to end a long-standing
row over derivatives trading, which Japan's financial regulators believe to
be the leading cause of the weakness of the Tokyo stock market.
The ministry of finance last December called for a reform of the stock
futures market, including a review of trading restrictions. However, many
futures traders see such reforms as long overdue. The number of market
participants in Japan's derivatives market has declined sharply due to the
spate of restrictions already implemented over the past two years.
The TSE's draft includes the introduction of a circuit breaker mechanism to
suspend transactions when prices swing wildly, and more disclosure
requirements. Initial plans intended to prevent 'front running', or trading
of stocks by brokers ahead of clients' orders, were postponed.
A separate group of Osaka and Tokyo stock exchange members are currently
working on a new stock index for futures, which is expected to be announced
later this year. The ministry of finance called for a capitalisation
weighted average to replace the current Nikkei 225, which is a simple price
average of 225 stocks and is criticised as being easily manipulated.
Details and the timing of implementation have yet to be decided, but the
TSE's proposal includes the following measures:
Implementation of a circuit breaker mechanism, suspending futures and
options trading for 15 minutes when prices fluctuate beyond a designated
range;
Suspension of arbitrage linked cash trading if the futures index rises or
falls to the daily limit;
Disclosure of futures trading by brokers' own accounts and client orders;
Daily disclosure of outstanding arbitrage linked cash positions of brokers'
own account trading and client orders.
