FT  27 FEB 93 / Nan in the News: Corporate history in the unmaking - Sir
Denys Henderson, last chairman of the old ICI, explains his business
strategy
Sir Denys Henderson sits in his wood-panelled office, a glass of Famous
Grouse whisky in his hand, and reflects on tradition. He is the 11th
chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries and the last of the line. He has
been at ICI for more than half the company's history. He has just spent a
long day explaining to the press and the City why he intends to end that
history by carving the company in two. So how does it feel?
'I have to tell you that, if you're an ICI man through and through, you do
not take these decisions lightly. The sense of history is strong. If you've
spent 35 years with a company and made many friends, you'd be a very strange
guy if you didn't feel a power of nostalgia.'
Looking back, he compares his position with that of a fellow Scot and
predecessor: Lord McGowan, ICI's co-founder and autocratic second chairman
from 1930 to 1950. 'He had the marvellous good fortune to be there to build
the business up. That must have been an enviable time to be involved in the
chemical industry, when it was right at the beginning of its take-off.'
But though the Scots are a bit emotional, he says, they are also realists.
'It's worth remembering why ICI came about in the first place. All these
little companies in Britain had to get together because of the threat to the
British chemical industry from I G Farben, who dominated Europe, and du Pont
who dominated America.
'Right from the start, it was a tough struggle. We were Empire-driven, and
Canada, Australia, South Africa and India are not the world's greatest
chemical markets. Nor is the UK, come to that. That's why we had to spend
the 1980s building our position in Europe and America. If you believe the
tide of history is rolling that way, you have to do what is right for the
company, no matter how much you're running against tradition.'
But this is to make it sound too easy. Throughout its history, ICI has
resisted change. The idea of dividing the company is not new. As early as
1950, a committee of directors was asking itself whether the company should
not be split up. 'Perhaps,' they commented, 'one board might under future
conditions be unable to give sufficiently close and knowledgeable attention
to all (investment) schemes.'
After much dithering, the board came up with a single demerger idea: that of
the metals division, to be known as Imperial Metal Industries (now IMI).
That took a further 12 years to put in train: and even so, it constituted
less than a tenth of ICI by value.
Another case of resistance is more symbolic: Millbank, ICI's headquarters on
the Thames, with its huge bronze doors and the names of the founders carved
in the monumental facade. ICI tried to get away from Millbank a decade ago.
After much debate, however, it settled for an expensive and disruptive
refurbishment.
Contrast what Sir Denys is doing now. Zeneca, the new company which is being
spun off from ICI, is no tiddler like IMI. It is much the biggest part of
the business. It will also move out of Millbank fairly promptly. The rump of
the business - the new ICI - will probably follow after a couple of years.
It is natural to ask how Sir Denys squared up to all this. Who did he
discuss it with? His family, perhaps? Certainly not, he says. 'That's a very
complicated issue to lay on your family. I talked to my colleagues.'
Then again, he had some fairly formidable colleagues to turn to. 'I talked
it over a lot with my non-executives on a one-to-one basis. Being able to
talk it over with Paul Volcker (ex-chairman of the US Federal Reserve) or
Jeremy Morse (chairman of Lloyds Bank) or Anthony Pilkington (chairman of
Pilkington) is pretty helpful. These are objective people.'
All the same, he concedes, he had days of doubt. 'You're a pretty marvellous
guy if you think you're omniscient and you've got it 100 per cent right. You
recycle it over and over again. You read accounts in all sorts of places
that say you're mad, you're crazy. And we gave you guys in the press plenty
to write about: they should, they shouldn't, they will, they won't, it's the
wrong time if they do.'
And, he concedes, the world has changed since the plan was first mooted last
July. 'The chemical world has gone to hell in a handcart. So you're bound to
increasingly ask yourself whether you should put it off. There was all this
personalised stuff saying 'he's got himself in a box, if he doesn't do it
he's for the chop'. That might have been true - I don't know. It's never how
it appeared to me with my colleagues. They have been convinced, like me, of
the business logic.'
The business case for splitting the company remains slightly elusive to the
outsider, despite the efforts ICI has put into explaining itself. Sir
Denys's own account goes back as far as 1984, when ICI's profits burst
through the Pounds 1bn mark.
'Already, we were asking what kind of strategies we needed for the future.
We concluded that the UK economy was unlikely to thrive and that the UK
industrial base was declining. We came to two pretty simple conclusions:
that we had to increase our penetration of the big overseas markets, and we
had to move further out of commodity chemicals into specialities.'
He rattles off figures to demonstrate the working of the strategy. In the
early 1980s, the UK accounted for 40 per cent of ICI's sales. By 1990 it was
20 per per cent. In the early 1980s bulk chemicals were 60 per cent of
sales, specialities 40 per cent. By 1990 it was the other way round.
But in October 1990, Sir Denys had a 'flash of light'. In Phoenix, Arizona,
he took a phone call from his finance director, giving him ICI's
third-quarter results.
'They were OK, but they were Pounds 100m less than we had expected. And the
shortfall wasn't in basic chemicals, it was all in specialty chemicals and
materials. So I instantly thought hello, some bits of this strategy don't
seem to be working.'
So through 1990, he says, they went through the business again, tightening
up the capital, cutting costs, reducing staff. 'In September that year, I
came back from holiday feeling distinctly queasy. Despite all the things we
were doing, it might not be enough.'
So he set up task forces to examine ICI's strategy and structure. 'At the
end of the year they came back and said the structure wasn't right, and that
though the strategy was broadly in the right direction, we were
under-resourcing the businesses which had the real potential. We were trying
to run too many things at once.' Forty years on, ICI was once again asking
itself if it was too big to manage.
The committee looking at the structure had been given a broad brief. 'I told
them to look anywhere they liked: should we consider some form of demerger,
some association with other companies, anything. They looked at an enormous
number of different models, including breaking up the company.'
In May, Sir Denys was faced with what he terms 'a slight diversion'. With
what now looks like supremely ironic timing, Hanson, the break-up
specialist, took a stake in the company. 'Though that didn't distract the
businesses, it took a fair amount of time at headquarters, while we worked
out who was trying to do what to whom and what we should do.'
But by October, it looked as if the threat was not going to materialise. 'So
I got our general manager to dust off the plans on restructuring, because it
seemed to me that the recession was getting still deeper and wider.'
Then, at the end of 1991, he turned to Warburg, ICI's financial advisers. 'I
said to David Scholey (Warburg chairman): 'Lend me somebody who's lively and
intelligent, who doesn't think like us, who can look at our plans and apply
a bit of lateral thinking.' '
Warburg sent a young corporate financier, Mr John Mayo. 'I said to him:
'You're going to report to me personally. I don't want you going out and
about talking to people, because you'll get confused by everyone grinding
their own axes.' So he came back to see me three months later, and sat in
here one Friday afternoon with a book this thick and said: 'Demerger is
something you should consider very seriously.'
'As I went home that weekend, sitting in the car, I thought 'oh God, we've
just been through all the Hanson stuff. Do I really want to start all this
hassle again three years away from retirement?' '
The answer was plainly yes. In seeking a reason, Sir Denys turns again to
history. 'This country lost an empire and had a hell of a job finding a
role. Imperial Chemical Industries first had to move away from being
Empire-driven. Now it has to go the way the world is going in the next
century.'
