FT  07 JAN 93 / West targets Russia's tobacco plants
DONSKOI Tabak, the Russian cigarette plant at Rostov, is being wooed by the
west's tobacco multinationals.
The Interfax news agency reported earlier this week that BAT will 'take part
in a competition for the right to buy shares' in the plant, probably later
this month.
Interfax quotes Donskoi Tabak's general director, Mr Yevgeny Balala, as
saying that 'several Swiss and American companies' have now expressed
interest in the 4.5m cigarette-a-day plant.
BAT would not confirm the story, but did confirm that the three tobacco
majors - BAT, RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris - are 'head to head in
investment terms' in the former Soviet Union.
It is a potential bonanza: a market estimated at between 400 - 700bn
cigarettes a year and an unsatisfied craving for American tobacco has meant
that they, even more avidly than the energy companies and with greater
success so far, are scrambling to position themselves for future market
growth.
Furthermore, the Russian government's move to large-scale privatisation at
the end of last year - expected to be greatly extended later this month -
means that the foreign companies have a new way of buying in, other than
concluding joint ventures.
They can now bid for shares in the company at open auctions in competition
with Russians - a method which, according to Interfax, BAT has already
discussed with the Donskoi management at meetings last month.
Of the three, Philip Morris, with its Marlboro brand, is the best known. It
came in on the ground floor in Russia in 1990 (it had small production
agreements before) with the request by the then Soviet government to import
20bn cigarettes immediately to satisfy a cigarette famine which caused more
riots in that year than any other event.
Philip Morris had built on that entree and now has firm projects which
include a stake in a joint venture called Constellation in Samara involving
the city's main tobacco factory, where Marlboro will be produced under
licence.
It also has a prospective stake in the cigarette plant in Krasnodar, which
is about to be privatised.
This has a capacity of 6bn cigarettes a year and will produce Marlboro and
other Philip Morris and local brands; and an agreement to construct a
10bn-cigarettes-a-year capacity plant near St Petersburg, also for Marlboro.
The company says it has no overall figure for investment, but says that the
cost of the St Petersburg plant in the west would be around Dollars 100m
(Pounds 64.7m). 'We are in for the long term,' says Philip Morris's Michael
Parsons, 'and the investment will be significant'.
BAT has been the later runner of the big three: but towards the end of last
year, it signed a joint venture in Ukraine, with two plants at Priluki and
Cherkassy, both south of Kiev, and is in an advanced stage of negotiations
with the Java plant in Moscow. Sir Patrick Sheehy, chairman of BAT, said in
Moscow in November that 'the investments we are making are essentially long
term. . . we do not expect to be making profits for at least 10 years.'
RJ Reynolds, part of RJR Nabisco, last year acquired a controlling stake in
the largest cigarette plant in St Petersburg, AS Petro - now renamed
RJR-Petro.
The plant produces some 22bn cigarettes year - all local brands - the RJR
brand leader, Camel, nor any of its other brands, is not produced - allowing
it to claim the biggest output of the big three in Russia.
It also claims to dominate Ukraine, with majority stakes in plants in Lvov
and Kremenchug, with a combined capacity of around 20bn cigarettes a year -
again, all local brands.
This gives RJR around 25 per cent of the Ukraine cigarette market.
