FT  04 MAR 93 / Technology: More than a droplet in the ocean - Victoria
Griffith reports on a computerised technique that could revolutionise
manufacturing
Homogeneity may seem boring to some people, but for scientists and
manufacturers it can be a dream come true. Sectors as diverse as steel,
pharmaceuticals and ceramics are excited about a new technology known as
'droplet-based manufacturing', which uses computers to create and manipulate
minute drops of metals, glass and other substances - all of exactly the same
size.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology is at the forefront of research on
the new technique, and is receiving funding from established companies such
as Motorola. Jung-Hoon Chun, a professor at MIT, has developed a
computerised system for creating uniform droplets which he believes will
revolutionise the manufacturing process in many companies.
'With droplet-based manufacturing, we can control the microstructure of
materials and therefore improve their properties at a low cost,' he says.
Materials in liquid form are pushed through a tube with a microscopic hole
at a rate determined by the computer, which also controls the placing of the
drops.
One sector most interested in the new technique is steel. 'Our company may
be able to use this process for the galvanisation of steel parts for
construction,' says Peter Chesney, general manager of new technology at
Chaparral Steel in Texas. 'If you have different-sized droplets of metal,
that affects the quality of the product. You may have to repeat the process
several times, and you get a lot of waste from unusable materials.'
In metal production today, the slow cooling process also encourages the
separation of metal alloys. This means that companies are usually forced to
heat and cool the metal many times to get a uniform substance. With droplet
technology, though, reheating would be unnecessary. Droplets, since they are
small, cool quickly, and prevent the separation of alloys.
Because the droplet technique, which would replace mould and extrusion
processes, is faster, uses less energy and produces products of consistent
quality, companies using the process could save money. 'This could cut our
production costs by a significant amount,' said Chesney.
Another sector with a keen interest in the technology is pharmaceuticals.
Many oral medicines are made up of granules of a specific size so that the
medicine takes effect over a certain period of time. The long-lasting impact
of 24-hour cold medicine, for instance, is determined by the size of the
powder particles. Droplet-based manufacturing would ensure these minute
particles were the right size, preventing the trial-and-error process many
pharmaceutical groups use today.
'With the droplet technique, you can get almost 100 per cent accuracy for
powder production,' says Chun. The 3M Corporation is concerned with
producing uniform drops of a larger size. 'We may use the technology to
produce the glass beads that form reflectors on road signs,' says Kenneth
Smith, technology scout for the group. 'The process is novel because it
would allow you to make only the size of bead you want. In today's
manufacturing, the production of too many wrong sizes is costly and slows
down our output.'
Ain Sonin, also a professor at MIT, has taken the technique one step
further. He is using computers to control the size of the droplets and their
location in the production process. Using a normal computer printer head,
which is usually programmed to place drops of ink in a pre-determined,
letter-forming pattern on a piece of paper, Sonin is aiming to form
computer-controlled patterns in metal.
His goal is to be able to program the design, often so small that it can
only be seen with a microscope, on to a computer disk. The disk would then
be linked to an industrial robot, which would 'draw' the design with metal
or other materials. Sonin hopes this method would allow companies designing
electrical circuit boards, as well as other groups, to alter their
manufacturing process at the touch of a button. 'The technique would be akin
to making alterations on a word processor,' says Sonin. 'You just change a
word here a word there, press the print button and the computer does the
rest.'
It will probably be some time before these droplet techniques are taken up
by industry. 'It will take a few more years to perfect the technology, and
another few to conduct test trials,' says Peter Roberts, engineering manager
for special powders at Nuclear Metals, which makes artificial limbs and
joints. 'We're very excited about the possibilities.'
