FT  15 OCT 93 / Parliament and Politics: Councils support Sunday shopping
LOCAL authorities in England and Wales want Sunday shopping to be
deregulated, according to a survey published today.
The findings, in a report by the Institute of Public Finance, will add
impetus to calls for reform when Sunday trading is debated in the next
session of parliament.
About 90 per cent of local authorities have adopted a 'passive or inactive'
stance to enforcing the existing regulations, the survey says.
Most tend to allow a few authorities to make the running in testing
legislation in the courts. As prosecutions and injunctions are low, net
legal costs for authorities will probably not exceed Pounds 250,000 in
England and Wales this year, according to the report.
Councils therefore fear that any change in the law except total deregulation
would lead to heavy extra costs, because councils would need to take an
'active' stance.
Authorities were asked to pick one of five options, including maintenance of
the status quo. Total deregulation was the first or second preference of 93
per cent, while partial deregulation, which would limit larger shops to six
hours on a Sunday, was the first or second choice of 59 per cent.
The Shopping Hours Reform Council, which supports partial deregulation and
has the retailers Sainsbury, Tesco and Kingfisher among its members, said
total regulation was 'likely to fall at the first parliamentary hurdle'.
The IPF sent questionnaires to all local authorities in England and Wales,
and received responses from 45 per cent.
The president of the Law Society yesterday called for a public debate on the
abolition of English civil justice rules under which the loser of a legal
action must pay the winner's costs, Robert Rice writes.
Mr Rodger Pannone told the International Bar Association in New Orleans that
the rules were the last impediment to the introduction of 'no win, no pay'
contingency fee arrangements in England and Wales.
The rising cost of going to court - it now costs on average Pounds 1.25 to
recover Pounds 1 in damages - coupled with cuts in legal aid was
increasingly restrict-ing access to justice, he said.
Contingency fees offered the best hope of reversing that trend, but they
would not be greatly used if plaintiffs faced paying the costs of the other
side even though they would not have to pay their own.
Sunday Trading. IPF Ltd, PO Box 4, Croydon CR0 1PF. Pounds 12.50.
