FT  26 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Talks fail to resolve fishing
row between Iceland and Norway
EMERGENCY TALKS between Norway and Iceland aimed at defusing a bitter
fishing row centred on cod stocks in the Barents Sea have ended without
resolution.
The purpose of the meetings was to seek agreement on the principles of
management of resources with regard to the UN conference on stock management
outside coastal state's economic zones and to achieve bi-lateral agreement
between the two countries on fishing in the Barents Sea.
Iceland is now threatening to expand fishing operations to the Norwegian
economic zone off the Arctic island of Svalbard and still refuses to
acknowledge that Norway has any right to claim jurisdiction over resources
in the disputed area.
The week-old dispute involves Icelanders fishing in the 'loophole', a 62,400
sq km zone in the Barents Sea managed jointly by Norway and Russia, where
Arctic cod spawn before making their way into those two countries' waters.
Mr Johan Joergan Holst, Norway's foreign minister, failed to obtain
agreement from Mr Jon Baldvin Hannibalsson, his Icelandic counter-part, on
the UN principle that the authority of the coastal state to manage marine
resources outside its economic zone applies to the Norwegian-Russian Barents
Sea 'loophole' region.
At a UN conference earlier this month Iceland was one of the strongest
proponents of this principle but refused to agree to it in the dispute with
Norway over Barents Sea resources.
Norwegian foreign ministry officials said yesterday that the meetings, which
were held on neutral ground in Stockholm and also attended by the two
countries' fisheries ministers, were to have covered 'only' the issue of the
UN conference but that Iceland had demanded quotas from Norway for fishing
in the Barents Sea.
Iceland also threatened to fish in Norway's economic zone off Svalbard,
after having just a week ago asked their fisherman to avoid the area.
The Stockholm meetings ended bitterly with both country's four ministers
leaving hastily without giving a promised media briefing on the outcome of
the discussions. Norwegian officials said no new meetings on the dispute
were planned but that Norway would at any time welcome a reopening of the
discussions.
Norway refuses to yield to Iceland's demands for fishing quotas in the
Barents Sea - possibly influenced by the public opinion costs this would
entail in an election year - and will continue to step up surveillance of
the disputed 'loophole' area as long as Icelandic fisherman continue to defy
its demands.
