FT  20 NOV 93 / Apec offers tariff cuts in move to beat Gatt deadline
ASIAN and North American countries yesterday agreed to offer a series of
tariff cuts in an effort to force the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations to
a successful conclusion before the December 15 deadline.
In a declaration issued at the end of a two-day meeting in Seattle of the
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation group, trade and foreign ministers called
for 'urgent action' to complete the round and issued a challenge to other
participants to improve their market access offers at trade talks under way
in Geneva.
In an effort to 'jump-start' the Geneva talks, 12 of the 17 Apec members
agreed to reduce tariffs to zero in sectors in which they have significant
trade, including electronics, wood and paper, non-ferrous metals, scientific
equipment, toys and oilseeds.
The meeting, described by Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, as
'highly productive', came on the eve of an unprecedented informal summit of
Pacific leaders today to be hosted by President Bill Clinton at Blake
Island, near Seattle.
Mr Clinton was yesterday holding bilateral meetings with the Chinese
president, Mr Jiang Zemin, and with Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the Japanese prime
minister.
He promised that the US would press hard for completion of the Uruguay Round
but would not accept a 'flawed' agreement. A successful General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, he told Seattle business leaders, would create 1.4m US
jobs in the next 10 years and expand the world economy by Dollars 5,000bn.
Mr Christopher said the Blair House agreement between the US and the
European Union on agricultural subsidies would not be reopened for further
discussion.
Apec ministers said the Blair House accord had already weakened the draft
final Gatt agreement. 'Any further efforts to weaken that outcome would
jeop-ardise the ability to secure an overall acceptable result on
agriculture,' the declaration said.
Apec members, who account for 40 per cent of world trade, had been expected
to issue a strong call for completion of the Uruguay Round talks.
However, their willingness to offer additional moves went further than
expected and provided a powerful impetus to the Geneva talks. The initiative
is likely to put pressure on France, which has the most problems with the US
on farm trade issues.
As well as the tariff cut offers, the ministers said they were prepared to
eliminate, reduce or harmonise tariffs in sectors previously agreed by the
so-called 'Quad'  - Japan, Canada, the US and EU  - before the July Tokyo
summit. These sectors include pharmaceuticals, construction equipment,
medical equipment, steel and beer, and, with certain exemptions, furniture,
farm equipment and spirits.
Fresh attempt for Gatt, Page 4
Hitch on Japanese rice, Page 4
Gatt countdown, Page 9
