FT  17 MAY 93 / In the eye of a gathering storm: A look at the political and
economic challenges facing the new Turkish president
Until yesterday, when he was elected president of the Turkish republic,
Suleyman Demirel was head of a coalition government formed by his own True
Path party (DYP) and the Social-Democratic People's party (SHP), led by
deputy prime minister Erdal Inonu. The immediate questions now facing Turkey
are whether that coalition will continue, and who will replace Mr Demirel as
prime minister.
But behind those questions lie others of much greater importance, not only
for Turkey but for Europe, the western alliance, the Middle East and much of
the former Soviet Union. The mere enumeration of those regions shows how the
end of the cold war, far from robbing Turkey of its strategic importance as
once seemed likely, has promoted it to the very eye of the storm. Some
American strategists even argue that Turkey has replaced Germany as the US's
most important ally. That is an exaggeration, no doubt, but Turkey has
replaced Germany as Nato's most exposed member. It finds itself surrounded
by, and involved in, three zones of conflict - the Balkans, the Caucasus and
Iraq - while a fourth neighbour, Iran, is seen as threatening both by the
Turkish elite and by Turkey's Nato allies.
The kind of role Turkey can play in these multiple crises will depend mainly
on how, over the next year or two, it handles its domestic problems.
For it is not only the external environment that has changed. In what will
probably be known as the Ozal years (after President Turgut Ozal who died
last month), the country has experienced significant internal change as
well. Its economy has been largely deregulated and opened up to foreign
investment. The growth rate last year was the highest in the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (5.9 per cent), but inflation is
running at about 60 per cent and population, now nearly 60m, is growing at
some 2 per cent a year.
The birth rate is falling, though, and projections of 120m Turks by the year
2025 are certainly too high. But even more spectacular, and socially more
destabilising, is the process of urbanisation. In just five years, between
1985 and 1990, the proportion of people living in cities jumped from 53 to
59 per cent. It could well be 80 per cent by 2000. The flow of both capital
and population has been from east to west, accentuating the sharp gap in
income and living standards between different parts of the country.
To see that as an ethnic division is too simple. The mainly Turkish
north-east is as poor as the Kurdish south-east, and Kurds as much as Turks
have joined in the westward migration. But the insurgency in the
south-eastern part of the country since 1984 has forced the issue of Kurdish
identity on to the Turkish political agenda, after six decades of denial and
repression.
This has happened while Turks in the rest of the country have been feeling
their way back to democracy after the military coup of 1980 (the third in 20
years). Constitutional provisions banning politically-affiliated trade
unions and political parties based on class or religious ideologies have
been gradually lifted, and efforts have been made to improve respect for
human rights.
But the Demirel government's bill on judicial practices, passed last year
and intended to give defendants the same rights as in other western
countries, has yet to be extended to terrorist cases. Reports of human
rights violations continue to flow in from south-eastern Turkey, where a
state of emergency allows the security services a free hand in the struggle
against terrorism.
Economic freedom, Kurdish identity, political pluralism: all these mark
steps away from the legacy of the republic's founder Mustafa Kemal Ataturk,
at least as traditionally understood and jealously defended by the Turkish
armed forces. But the centrepiece of that legacy for most Turks is
secularism, and that too is seen by some as being under threat. Leading
secular journalists and academics have been the victims of assassination
squads, allegedly trained in Iran, while the legal but overtly Islamic
Welfare party (RP) did well in local elections last year, and appears to be
increasing its influence.
Turkey's present leaders, and most diplomatic observers, remain convinced
the RP can not win more than about 15 per cent of the national vote. Seventy
years of westernisation could not be easily reversed, and Turkey is used to
thinking of itself as a European country. Its secular middle class is
larger, more self-confident and more unashamedly western in outlook than the
corresponding group in most other Moslem countries. Only if real disaster
strikes could this class lose its hegemonic role in the country and anything
like an Islamic counter-revolution take place.
But disaster cannot be ruled out, because the political class faces more
immediate challenges than an ill-defined 'Islamic threat'. The crucial
question in the next two or three years will be the management of the
economy. Although Turkey's recent history is an economic success story, and
the income of most social groups has kept pace with inflation, few suppose
this happy state of affairs can be maintained unless the government regains
control over the public sector borrowing requirement, currently running at
about 13 per cent of gross national product a year.
It is hard to see how it can do so without closing uneconomic state
companies and causing a sharp increase in unemployment, in a country which
still lacks a social safety net.
Customs union with the European Community, promised by the end of 1995,
offers real hope to many small businesses in Turkey, especially if the
Community lives up to its promises on textile imports. But other sectors,
such as cars, are ill-prepared for foreign competition; and the phasing-out
of the 'mass housing fund', currently levied on imports, will deprive the
government of an important source of revenue.
Even more urgent is the situation in the south-east, where the ceasefire
declared by the separatist Kurdistan Workers' party in March offers a chance
to end the civil war, but only if bold decisions are taken quickly. If the
ceasefire holds, the state of emergency will probably soon be lifted, but
that will be very risky unless measures are also taken to canalise Kurdish
political aspirations into non-violent channels. Allowing the use of the
language in schools and broadcasts, and allowing political parties based
explicitly on Kurdish identity, are the most widely canvassed ways of doing
this.
Will Turkey have a government capable of taking such bold decisions? It is
far from certain. Mr Demirel himself, by nature a cautious man, will
probably favour a colourless successor as prime minister - for instance the
present interior minister, Mr Ismet Sezgin - rather than someone as radical
and novel as Mrs Tansu Ciller, the economy minister.
Nor does the party structure of Turkish politics, reflecting the legacy of
the 1980 coup, make for clear and decisive government. The present coalition
partners, DYP and SHP, were brought together by hostility to President Ozal
rather than by any ideological affinity.
A two-party system, uniting DYP with Ozal's Motherland party as the main
conservative force, and SHP with Mr Deniz Baykal's Republican People's party
on the left, would make a lot more sense following the death of Ozal and now
that a new generation is coming to the fore. But such a political shake-up,
threatening to the personal positions of most established leaders, would
take one or two years at least to come about. Those are not years that
Turkey can afford to waste.
