FT  24 JUN 93 / Brussels gurus raise old taboos to find mystery of job
creation: The search for radical and acceptable solutions to Europe's
growing levels of unemployment
A MIDDLE-RANKING manager in a Belgian company on a gross salary of
BFr100,000 (Pounds 1,953) a month will cost his or her employer about
BFr250,000 a month and will receive in take-home pay only about BFr50,000.
To dismiss the same manager will cost the employer about three times the
employee's annual salary.
The European Commission's post-Copenhagen investigation of competitiveness
and job creation - due to generate several reports by the end of the year -
will not shy away from examining whether such high payroll taxes and high
costs of sacking personnel have contributed to Europe's high unemployment
levels.
But it is already clear that the Commission's brain-storming will not
conclude that the Social Chapter is a bad idea or that European countries
should slash their welfare states and adopt the 'hire and fire' policies of
the US labour market, where two-thirds of all employees can be fired at
will.
That does not disturb Mr Zygmunt Tyszkiewicz, head of Unice, the European
employers' body. He says: 'It is a gross over-simplification to place all
the blame for competitiveness problems on the Social Chapter and labour
market rigidities. It may not even be the most important part of the
problem.' He does, however, believe that radical questions should be asked
of all the institutions that help or hinder employment creation.
That means not only the familiar questions about whether employment agencies
are matching supply and demand and whether the unemployed have the required
skills. It also means, he believes, looking at the price of labour, in
particular minimum wage legislation and payroll taxes; the costs and
inflexibilities imposed by labour legislation; and the disincentive to seek
lower-paid work created by some welfare regimes.
The Commission's own agenda is not identical with Unice's but Mr Tyszkiewicz
does believe that 'people are now starting the ask questions that have in
the past been taboo'. The intellectual challenge for the EC's labour market
experts is to come up with a strategy which creates sufficient labour market
flexibility to make the unemployed 'outsiders' more attractive to employ
without undermining the rights of the already securely employed 'insiders'.
The EC has very little direct authority over labour markets, except through
its own minimum standard employment directives, but it can analyse best
practice across the Community and act as a clearing house for good ideas on
job-creation.
The Commission is unlikely to start advising member states to start
dismantling minimum wage legislation, but it will be examining some parts of
the 'deregulatory' agenda, especially in relation to why the European
service sector is not more labour intensive.
Two particularly important areas of inquiry are likely to be the scope for
reducing or shifting payroll taxes and the room for increasing 'atypical'
work (part-time, fixed contract and temporary work), especially in the
southern European countries.
In many of these areas the Commission will be pushing on an open door. The
Spanish government is deeply concerned about the high cost of firing and the
Belgian government is currently considering a large reduction in payroll
social security contributions in exchange for higher energy taxes.
Indeed, throughout the 1980s there has been a slow movement towards greater
flexibility across almost all EC countries. In the UK that has been
accompanied by a reduction in employment rights, through, for example, a
significant increase in the qualifying period for employment protection.
Such deregulation in the UK has been associated with a large increase in
'atypical' jobs, usually taken by women - but in fact many more such jobs
were created in Britain in the more regulated 1970s than the deregulated
1980s and 1990s. Other EC countries have also seen a big increase in
'atypical' jobs in the 1980s, but usually without the accompanying
reductions in employment rights. In the 1980s, both Germany and Spain
significantly relaxed the rules surrounding fixed contract and temporary
work.
In other areas, too, there has been movement towards Euro-flexibility. Italy
has abandoned indexation of wages and several countries have increased
flexibility on working hours, including Spain, France and Italy. Even in
countries with relatively tight regulation of working time, such as Belgium
and Germany, there has been a trade-off between reduced hours and more
flexible use of machinery.
One area where the Commission could now make a reforming gesture at little
political cost would be to speed up moves to allow the operation of private
employment agencies - which are still banned or severely restricted in
Greece, Italy, Spain and Germany.
The International Confederation of Temporary Businesses has made a formal
complaint to the Commission about the restrictions in Italy, Spain and
Germany, but has had little response.
In view of the new unemployment initiative, the organisation is stepping up
its campaign. It claims, for example, that 25 per cent of temporary workers
get permanent jobs and that the restrictions on agencies is costing 800,000
jobs.
Whatever the validity of such figures it seems certain that the
confederation's complaint will attract new interest over the coming months
as the Commission strives to shape the jobs debate.
