FT  28 JUN 93 / Arts: A sigh of architectural relief - Colin Amery watches
an important public building rise on his doorstep
It is not often that a mere critic has the opportunity to watch a world
masterpiece of contemporary architecture being built on his own doorstep.
The excitement for me of being on the very threshold of a great creative
endeavour has sometimes been almost too much to bear. Every day I have been
able to check discreetly on the progress of the work, being careful not to
create too much interest by my presence. Each day when it has rained or when
the frosts have seemed particularly hard I have secretly walked to the
corner of the street to check on the welfare of the growing baby.
But I should go back to the beginning. When in London I occupy a flat in
Notting Hill. It is a curious part of the world, not especially renowned for
its distinguished public buildings or great monuments. The purlieus of
Portobello are best known for antique shops, crumbling stucco terraces and a
permanent parade of colourful street life. There have been noble efforts by
local groups to enhance the neighbourhood - it is a conservation area and
one that has a certain lively edge to it. The sense of la vie boheme lived
out according to the ancient canons of the 1960s continues in Notting Hill .
. . I suppose it is the London equivalent of New York's Upper West Side.
At the junction of my street with the Westbourne Grove there was an
important public building until the 1980s. It was a much frequented place in
spite of being underground. The local authority - the Royal Borough of
Kensington and Chelsea - in their wisdom decided to fill in this underground
facility with concrete and erect a temporary structure for continuing public
use. However useful this temporary structure was, it was a visual disaster.
Its replacement was the cause of great excitement. Local worthies expected
an important example of local authority patronage and awaited the new
designs with bated breath. It is hard to convey the sense of disappointment
that these locals (grandly known as the Pembridge Association) felt when the
Council unveiled its mediocre design. But not being a group that winges and
does nothing, they were galvanised by a certain Mr Scott to do something to
avert the proposed horror. It was a stroke of genius to appoint architect Mr
Piers Gough to produce a replacement design.
Mr Gough is a brilliantly original architect. His firm was founded by four
partners who all trained together in the 1960s at the Architectural
Association in London. They have always designed houses, shops and
exhibitions but I think this work for the Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea is their first major public building. In 1988 the practice,
Campbell, Zogolovitch, Wilkinson and Gough held an exhibition of their own
work at the Riba where they described themselves as 'English Extremists'.
It was hard to imagine what this exciting practice would produce for such a
key site in the Royal Borough. Like IM Pei confronted with the National
Gallery extension in Washington DC, Mr Gough was immediately struck by the
possibilities of a triangular island site. In fact Gough decided to
rearrange the car parking so that he could have a long and elegant triangle
as the site of his building. He ordered large and beautiful variegated trees
to be planted, beautiful public benches arrived from which the populace
could sit and admire the new building. An ancient monument in the form of a
drinking fountain was carefully restored to refresh the pilgrims who will
come from Tokyo and Texas to see the splendours of Kensington's newest
monument.
But what of the building itself? In plan it is a slender triangle. It rises
one floor to the elegant glazed canopy roof. The walls are clad in
remarkable glazed bricks in a distinctive shade of turquoise. Although this
is a public building there are no windows because the nature of the
activities conducted within demands a degree of privacy. Somehow this lack
of glazing does not matter as the silver doors etched with symbolic devices
catch the flashing light of the sun. Silver louvres allow the appropriate
degree of high level ventilation. The particular triumph is the roof, which
fans out like one of those remarkable Metro station entrances by Hector
Guimard in Paris. As in Paris, a flower seller will make a pitch here in a
sharply angled glazed kiosk that terminates the building to the east. There
is a large and handsome clock at the south west corner of the building which
is the generous gift of the local community association.
Another remarkable thing about this new addition to the splendours of
Kensington is the fact that unlike so many modern masterpieces it has not
been built for some elite clique of connoisseurs. No, it is available for
everyone to visit to pay their particular tribute to the architectural
muses. It will be a regular stopping place for taxi drivers, travellers and
itinerants of all kinds. Those seeking a momentary relief can with
confidence enter its high portals. London has gained a convenience of which
it can be proud. Your critic has a work of architecture on his doorstep that
he can truly say brings humour, elegance and utility to the most commonplace
of functions.
