FT  09 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Leaner EBRD
AFTER THIS year's criticism of its leadership style and finances, the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development needed a fresh start.
Changes announced yesterday by Mr Jacques de Larosiere, the new president,
will make the bank more effective in helping the economic regeneration of
eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Mr de Larosiere cuts a less dashing figure than Mr Jacques Attali, who
resigned in July. But while no less attached to the integration of east and
west Europe, he can also point to valuable experience and organisational
aptitude. Measures to streamline operations, cut out unnecessary duplication
and deploy more specialised bankers on direct project work are a useful
answer to complaints that the EBRD, in only two years, had become a wasteful
and cumbersome bureaucracy.
More controversial, though still on the whole sensible, is the abolition of
the merchant and development banking departments which previously handled
separately private and state sector projects. Some of the boundaries between
the bank's two new 'north' and 'south' geographical zones look a little
arbitrary. In some of the 25 countries in the bank's purview there are
severe limits on the private sector activities it was set up to nurture, so
the bank will need at times to place greater emphasis on public sector
projects. But Mr de Larosiere must ensure that the EBRD does not look ever
more like the European arm of the public sector-orientated World Bank. That
would raise afresh the question of why it was set up in the first place.
Mr de Larosiere will have to manage a new phase of both competition and
co-operation with other international development institutions active in the
same field. He is also launching an effort to discover from EBRD
shareholders and outside experts more precise answers on what the bank
should do and how it should do it. Vagueness over the EBRD's objectives,
coupled with lack of proper controls by member governments, contributed to
management failings. So Mr de Larosiere's spirit of inquiry, like his drive
for efficiency, is welcome. His task of firmly defining a role for the bank,
and then fulfilling it, is a difficult one. But his first steps are in the
right direction.
