FT  02 NOV 93 / Money Markets: Rate nerves hit shorts
A DOUBLE dose of official caution over the prospect for lower interest rates
in the UK unsettled the markets yesterday and short sterling fell sharply,
writes Peter John.
First, Mr Eddie George, the governor of the Bank of England, sought on
Friday to dampen speculation over an early cut in base rates, but the market
largely shrugged off his views.
Then on Sunday, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, voiced his support for Mr
George by saying that there was no need to cut interest rates 'as of now'.
The opinion of many economists and dealers was 'well, he would wouldn't he,'
but they were in no mood to take chances.
Although most dealers remained convinced that the chancellor will have to
reduce rates by at least  1/2 percentage point at or soon after the Budget,
the short sterling futures contract which expires on December 15 was marked
down by some 17 basis points to 94.38 at the outset of dealing.
In the event of a half-point reduction the December contract was looking
very cheap, and there was good buying at the lower levels which took it back
to 94.42 by the close on turnover of more than 50,000 contracts.
Meanwhile, interbank oper-ations were very tight, and an unwillingness by
commercial banks to provide bills in exchange for the Bank of England's
offer of assistance saw overnight rates pushed as high as 14 per cent at one
stage.
Traders discounted rumours that the central bank might be responding to the
governor's comments by sending signals that interest rates would not fall.
They pointed out that the Bank offered help at each opportunity and at the
established rates.
The Bank offered early assistance after forecasting a liquidity shortage of
around Pounds 950m, later revised to Pounds 1.1bn, but there were no takers.
More than half of the shortage represented bills for repurchase by the
market.
The Bank did not operate in the money market at midday and provided only
Pounds 55m of assistance in the afternoon.
The bulk of the shortage was dealt with via Pounds 930m of late assistance.
Dealers said that as late help is traditionally provided for a very short
period - usually one or two days - yesterday's help was likely to lead to
tight monetary conditions later in the week.
