FT  19 OCT 93 / Sri Lanka to speed up reforms
SRI LANKA is expected to announce a reform package aimed at further
liberalising the economy and measures to tighten monetary policy to combat
rising inflation.
In the budget, due to be announced early next month, the government is set
to announce a speeding-up of privatisation, a further reduction in import
tariffs and a cut in the basic rate of income tax of up to 10 percentage
points from the current rate of 45 per cent.
According to a senior government finance official the top rate of import
tariffs will probably be cut from 50 per cent to around 40 per cent, with
most tariffs cut by 10 points across the board.
Mr D B Wijetunga, the newly-appointed president and also the country's
finance minister, has described inflation as the 'monster' terrorising the
country's economy and has given finance officials the task of cutting
inflation from about 12 per cent to single digits by next year.
The budget therefore is expected to be an austere one with an attempt to
reduce the deficit from about 8 per cent of gross domestic product this year
to 7 per cent next. A strengthening of tax collection and an increase in
indirect taxation, coupled with expenditure cuts and more precise targeting
of welfare spending, is expected. In addition a number of measures,
including the possible retirement of outstanding debt, is likely to be
announced to soak up surplus liquidity.
On privatisation, the government is considering a more radical approach to
the private management of the country's plantations, private roads, a
build-operate-transfer power project and the partial privatisation of the
telecommunications sector.
The budget, due to be announced on November 12, comes at a time when the Sri
Lankan economy is growing fast, but still faces structural problems.
A strong recovery in agriculture, notably tea and rubber, after a severe
drought hit output last year has joined with a 9 per cent real growth in
industrial production to put the country on course for an overall growth
rate of over 5 per cent in 1993.
The country's balance of payments, however, is experiencing mixed fortunes
with a sharp deterioration in the balance of trade. Exports grew 33 per cent
in the first half of 1993 to SLR61.8bn (Dollars 1.26bn), compared with the
same period last year but imports grew even faster at 35 per cent to
SLR95.9bn. The country's trade deficit soared 38 per cent to SLR34.2bn.
The decline in the trade balance helped to increase the current account
deficit from SLR12.8bn in the first six months of last year to SLR17.5bn in
the first half of 1993. However, a sharp net increase in capital inflows
arising from a more liberal investment environment and increases in foreign
aid saw a surplus on the overall balance of payments of SLR9.8bn, up from
SLR3.9bn in the first half of 1992.
