FT  23 JAN 93 / Bank of England Governor: Two sides to gentleman farmer who
codified role
THERE are two Robin Leigh-Pembertons, the man who is giving way to Eddie
George.
There is the governor who is liked and admired by Bank of England executives
and his fellow directors on the Bank's court, the man who codified the
Bank's role, gave greater responsibilities to executives and made the Bank
less secretive.
The other Leigh-Pemberton is a man described by a City banker as 'the most
able gentleman farmer ver to be governor'. Mr Leigh-Pemberton has been
criticised in the City and Westminster for taking too long to
professionalise the Bank's supervision department, which monitors banks'
soundness and honesty.
He was an unlikely choice for governor. His previous job, from 1977 to 1983,
was chairman of National Westminster Bank, and no clearing banker had ever
before been chosen as governor. When prime minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher
chose him for the post and earlier in his career he had been set on becoming
a Conservative MP.
Nonetheless, on some of the main economic issues of the 1980s he took an
independent line.
He strongly, though vainly, supported the former chancellor, then Mr Nigel
Lawson, in his attempt in late 1985 to take the pound into the European
exchange rate mechanism and was delighted when the pound did finally join
the system in 1990.
The previous year he had alienated both Mr Lawson and Mrs Thatcher by
signing the Delors report on economic and monetary union, which paved the
way for the Maastricht treaty. His copy of the report is among his proudest
possessions and it sits in the top drawer of his magisterial desk at the
Bank.
However, his enthusiasm for the ERM may have clouded his judgment. The
humiliating circumstances of Black Wednesday could perhaps have been avoided
if the Bank had taken a less sanguine view of its ability to defend the
pound.
His record on banking supervision is also patchy. The need for more
professionalism in the supervision department was made clear by the collapse
of Johnson Matthey Bankers in 1984. The Bank had ignored a series of warning
signs. The Bank then succeeded in upsetting Mr Lawson by omitting to tell
him that it was injecting Bank funds into JMB, causing him inadvertently to
mislead the Commons.
The final chapter of the JMB affair was less unsatisfactory. The Bank
eventually recovered all funds put into JMB and the supervisory department
became more effective following the 1987 Banking Act.
Probably the supervision department's greatest achievement was during the
onset of the 1989 recession when it prevented the collapse of a string of
small and medium-sized banks, which were put at risk by an escalation in bad
debts.
However, it faced criticism for failing to detect the widespread fraud at
the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the corrupt international
bank, until early 1991. The recent government inquiry into BCCI by Lord
Bingham concluded that the Bank could have been more methodical and
aggressive.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton regards the attacks on him in the press and parliament
over the Bank's supervision of BCCI, which was closed in mid-1991, as the
most stressful period in his Bank career. On the other hand, he has played
an influential role in harmonising the bank regulations of different
countries.
In 1986, together with Mr Paul Volcker, then chairman of the US Federal
Reserve, he initiated the negotiations which led to the Basle international
standard on banks' capital adequacy ratios.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton was on the point of retiring after only eight years in
the post, but decided to wait until after the last election. He thus had to
contend with both BCCI and Black Wednesday. If he was hoping for a gentle
end to his career, he has been sorely disappointed.
