FT  23 MAR 93 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (18):
Bridge between east and west - The new Nordic-Russian telecommunications
joint venture
HUMANS may have pulled down the Berlin Wall but it is telecommunications
that is now building the bridge between east and west.
'We hope to overcome the communications barriers between east and west and
make it possible for companies in eastern Europe to work in the western
way,' explains Mr Tapio Paarma, head of an international project to build
and run advanced mobile telephone and data communications services in the
key commercial centre of St Petersburg and its surrounding area.
The service will open up international communications for the 200-300
western companies which have already moved into St Petersburg, such as
Barclays Bank, Credit Lyonnais, Deutsche Bank and Western hotel and
restaurant chains.
The service has gone live for voice but it will be two to three years before
the full data telecommunications network is complete. Mr Paarma expects to
have 100,000 subscribers by 1998.
Russia needs to catch up quickly in telecommunications: its services are
currently based on antiquated telephone exchanges with inadequate capacity.
ADVANCED western mobile technology is considered the quickest and most
cost-effective way of updating Russia's communications while maintaining
some level of service. Radio communications are regarded worldwide as the
natural successor to traditional fixed-link communications in the longer
term.
'The Russians are learning English very quickly and are extremely keen to
understand western telecom technology,' says Mr Carl-Fredrik Geust, Russia
area director of Telecom Finland, which is leading the consortium running
the St Petersburg project.
'They already have the western way of thinking about market economics: St
Petersburg is one big flea market with street-buying and selling. They just
need the telecommunications infrastructure to express it.'
The advanced technology being adopted is the Global System for Mobile
Communication. GSM is a 1980s Scandinavian vision of a pan-European mobile
telecommunications network based on digital technology which already
provides stable voice services and will handle data in the near future.
Data can already be sent on analogue mobile systems but such systems are not
reliable enough. The sender must be stationary and have a good radio path to
the receiving base station - small electrical cabinets which operate
unattended. The base station relays the data to the telephone exchange.
With digital GSM, data transmission will be much easier and safer. The
laptop computer of the future will have an inbuilt GSM mobile station and a
rod aerial at the side. The sender will dial the destination using the
keyboard. A computer-controlled digital exchange will identify the sender
from its database and route the call and its bill simultaneously.
St Petersburg is a key centre in the total Russian network. It has been the
gateway to Russia since the time of Peter the Great and is one of the most
advanced ex-communist cities in terms of western business development. Its
proximity to Russia's only north-west seaboard guarantees its future
commercial success if its telecommunications infrastructure can be
overhauled.
Telecom Finland's Nordic-Russian consortium that has been awarded the
licence to operate the telecom service in this area includes Swedish Telecom
International and Norwegian Telecom, plus the St Petersburg Trunk Line
Exchange and Leningrad Regional Posts and Telecommunications Administration
(which still prefers the old Communist name for the city).
The consortium won the contract in January against stiff opposition from US
and European telecom groups.
The total cost of the network has been estimated at USDollars 160m. Funding
is expected to come from international telecom operators and banks and from
aid organisations like the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Telecom equipment manufacturers around the world will hear shortly which of
them have been chosen to provide the bulk of the technology, while the
Russians will donate their local expertise and exchange equipment, masts and
antennae.
An optical fibre cable between Helsinki and St Petersburg will carry the GSM
and old analogue traffic when it passes tests now being carried out. It will
provide unlimited transmission capacity compared to the current 64 kilobits
which carries international telephone connections and packet switched data
services, thanks to another Finnish-Russian venture.
When the Russians elected last year to grant 12 GSM licences to companies to
develop GSM networks, Nordic operators were high on the list because they
have much experience of developing communications to remote and inaccessible
regions.
Finland is ideally situated next to its friendly Russian neighbours. The St
Petersburg GSM area is only 150 kilometres from the Finnish border. The
entire Finnish population of 5m is less than the 7.5m potential subscribers
in the St Petersburg area alone.
Some say this last factor - relative size - influenced the Russians not to
award the vital St Petersburg licence to US telecom giant US West
International, which won eight of the other licences and the responsibility
for GSM co-ordination across Russia. St Petersburg, they say, is 'too key a
commercial area to trust to the Americans.'
Such Cold War memories are mutual. Western security services are currently
scrutinising GSM networks to ensure that inbuilt encryption techniques are
not so good that they render the networks untappable. They have the
authority to ban the export of highly secure GSM equipment to 'enemy' states
if they choose.
But Mr Geust at Telecom Finland does not think the security issue will deter
business take-up of GSM: 'I'm sure that regardless of what encryption
algorithms are inherent in the system, organisations such as banks will
probably have their own encryption equipment at both ends of the network:
no-one trusts outside equipment anyway.'
ANOTHER unresolved issue shadowing the progress of GSM worldwide and
separating the US from the Europeans is the choice of digital technology.
For global mobile telephony and data transmission to work, clearly everyone
ought to agree on a standard technology. Wisely, equipment manufacturers are
developing systems to suit both camps. They already have their eye on the
GSM replacement, the futuristic Universal Mobile Telecommunications System.
Meanwhile the St Petersburg partners' first aim is to get the initial
service fully live. Even so, they are already looking to exploit the data
service to the full.
'There is now pressure from the international market and especially from the
Russians to have improved voice and high-speed data transmission,' says Mr
Geust. 'Database access, the transmission of high resolution pictures and
graphics - these are our next challenges.'
