FT  14 SEP 93 / Fears as Serb rebels shell Croat town
REBEL Serb forces in Croatia yesterday launched heavy artillery attacks on
the Croat town of Karlovac, fuelling fears that fighting could escalate in
the Serb-controlled Krajina region of Croatia.
The rocket and artillery attacks, 50km south west of the Croat capital,
Zagreb, came as rebel Serb forces threatened to launch an all-out assault in
response to a Croat offensive in Krajina last week.
UN officials in Zagreb yesterday confirmed that heavy artillery attacks were
continuing by both sides across Krajina, leaving the area more tense than at
any time since the ceasefire agreed by the rebel Serbs and Croat at the
beginning of 1992.
Mr Cedric Thornberry, UN special envoy in Yugoslavia, yesterday strongly
condemned the attacks and appealed to both sides to show restraint.
Some 6,000 rocket and artillery strikes on Croatian territory had been
recorded since the latest outbreak of fighting in Krajina - a figure which
is far heavier than the current level of fighting in Bosnia, UN officials
said.
Meanwhile, in another sign of the pressures now mounting on the Croat
leadership, the Croatian president, Mr Franjo Tudjman, is to meet his
Bosnian counterpart, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, today in Geneva to discuss access
to the sea for the Moslem republic proposed in the three-way division of
Bosnia.
The Bosnian Croats' refusal to concede Mr Izetbegovic's demand for territory
extending to the Adriatic sea was a prime cause of the breakdown of the
Bosnian peace talks a fortnight ago.
The meeting comes as the 30-strong steering committee for the international
conference on former Yugoslavia holds its own discussions in Geneva on the
state of the Bosnian negotiations, and separate mediation efforts between
the Croatian government and rebel Serbs in Croatia.
Although hopes remain that the negotiations will resume by the end of the
month, before the momentum in the peace plan has been lost, so far
negotiators have appeared to have made little headway in their attempts to
encourage the three sides to return to talks.
In recent days Mr Tudjman has come under strong international pressure to
make more concessions to the Bosnian government, although diplomats fear
that the latest fighting in Croatia will leave the Croat leadership in no
mood to cede extra land in Bosnia.
Diplomats in Geneva said Mr Tudjman, who exercises strong influence on the
Bosnian Croats, had the port issue 'more or less in his gift'.
The Croatian president has strongly opposed suggestions that the Moslems be
given land around or near the small fishing port of Neum, part of the
proposed Croat republic within Bosnia, to develop as a commercial port.
The present draft plan for Bosnia gives the Moslem republic guaranteed
access to the Croatian ports of Rijeka and Ploce.
In another development, Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister,
yesterday announced that a joint German and French mission would travel to
Neum to discuss the feasibility of building a port for the Bosnian
government in the region.
Although the Bosnians have demanded that Neum should be their port,
officials admit that the site is ill-suited to provide deep water access for
vessels.
French officials yesterday said that the project, which had been agreed last
week, was intended to provide greater momentum to the peace process.
The International Court of Justice in the Hague yesterday ordered Serbia and
Bosnia to stop acts of genocide in Bosnia, reaffirming an earlier ruling.
