FT  09 FEB 93 / Argentina putting privatisation in train: John Barham
explains how the country is preparing its railway system to be sold off
ARGENTINA'S taxpayers pay Dollars 1.6m (Pounds 1.05m) a day for their
filthy, overcrowded, crime-ridden, unreliable and dilapidated rail system,
which is not greatly different from what it was when it was nationalised in
1946-47.
But in less than three months, it will be all change.
When private operators start running the trains in May, the government hopes
that fares will stay low and service will improve, with more trains carrying
more passengers and freight in greater safety and comfort. It also hopes
subsidies will fall to Dollars 100m-150m a year.
Mr Jorge Kogan, an Argentine transport consultant retained by the World Bank
to design and carry out the privatisation, began by splitting up the rail
network, which was built by mainly British companies in the 19th century.
He is axing intercity passenger services, which will only survive if local
governments subsidise them. He split the long-distance freight service into
six lines and sold each as a separate 30-year concession that includes lines
and rolling stock.
But he realised he could hardly shut down the Buenos Aires commuter system,
which includes the underground network. Its 899km of track, 267 stations,
and more than 1m daily passengers costs Dollars 150-200m a year in
subsidies.
So Mr Kogan divided the network into seven lines, one of them including the
underground, to be sold as 10-year concessions. He established investment
and service targets and attracted seven contenders, which first had to
qualify on technical grounds, allowing him to weed out undesirables.
Remaining candidates then presented a business plan and finally bid against
one another, with the concession going to bidders requiring the lowest
subsidy.
Three groups won the bidding by demanding subsidies estimated at Dollars
993m over the concessions' 10-year lives. The Dollars 753.3m investment
subsidy will peak in the third and fourth years of the concession.
The Dollars 239.7m operating subsidy will disappear in the eighth year, when
the government will start charging Dollars 10m-worth of fees a year.
The government hopes to develop property along rail lines and revitalise the
rail terminals - which will all remain under its control - generating cash
to pay for the rail subsidies.
Mr Kogan says operators should find it easy to meet their targets by
'organising a system where people get what they want'. This means increasing
traffic - which fell to 4.5m journeys in 1991 from 6m in 1990 - by raising
the number of trains, and making them safer and more reliable.
This will lift revenues, which operators can also improve by halting the
estimated 30-50 per cent fare evasion.
The concession containing the underground is for 20 years and should be
profitable. The government will subsidise investments worth almost Dollars
400m, but will take in about the same amount in fees.
Meanwhile, the government has spent about Dollars 400m in severance pay to
sack half the system's 91,000 employees, with more job cuts still to come.
The World Bank lent Dollars 300m towards this. Mr Kogan said once-militant
unions 'realised it would be better to keep 25-30 per cent of their jobs
than losing all their jobs. Those remaining will be better paid and have
better working conditions.'
The government is setting up a regional authority to establish transport
policy and regulate the companies. Curiously, one the three consortia
includes Buenos Aires' independent bus operators - who should be the last
people to be interested in improving rail services.
However, Mr Kogan says they will reorganise their networks to feed the
trains, rather than competing with them. He insisted all operators should
have an established reputation, so the operators are all are foreign, such
as San Francisco's BART and Chicago's Burlington Northern Railroad.
Critics say the consortium's local members fail to inspire confidence. They
include little-known construction, consulting and electronics companies as
well as bus operators.
And unlike most of Argentina's recent sell-offs, the Buenos Aires commuter
privatisation has been mired in accusations of double-crossing and
corruption. One of the four losing consortia - which included British Rail -
claims the absence of effective World Bank oversight allowed winners to get
away with irresponsible underbidding. One loser doubts the undercapitalised
winners can comply with their targets, and predicts the network will
eventually return to the government.
