FT  19 JAN 93 / Letter: No climb down by Prince Sihanouk over Cambodia
development
Sir, The heading of the news item 'Sihanouk climbs down' (January 11) is
used in a derogatory manner, which means 'he withdrew attention from a
previously held position by admitting that he was wrong'. This is not only
inaccurate, but there is also absolutely no basis for such a conclusion.
The facts are that, under section III, article 6, of the Paris Peace
Agreement, the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (Untac) had to take
direct control of the ministries of foreign affairs, defence, public
security, finance and information, as well as other administrative agencies,
bodies and offices, which could directly influence the outcome of the
elections. Besides, all the civil police were to operate under Untac's
direct control or supervision in order to ensure that law and order are
maintained effectively and impartially, and that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are fully protected. Unfortunately Untac failed to
implement it properly, with the result that the Vietnamese installed a
communist regime in Phnom-Penh (though less brutal than the Khmer Rouge, it
has always suppressed dissent; its human rights record has been criticised
by Amnesty and Asia Watch), which has been attacking and intimidating both
the non-communist factions, so that they should not carry on their
electioneering campaigns outside Phnom-Penh.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk had denounced the Phnom-Penh faction for a series of
bombing and other attacks on both the non-communist parties, and also Untac
for not controlling the violence (as it had not taken full direct control of
the administration). The prince had warned on December 14 1992 that, unless
both acted vigorously 'against the poisoning of public atmosphere . . . and
such injustice and political terrorism', he would stop co-operating with
them. As the intimidation and killing of non-communist functionaries
increased in the next fortnight, he had no option but to stop co-operating
with them.
It had the desired effect. Mr Akashi (Untac chief) asked Untac to take full
control of the situation, to create a neutral political environment. He
called on Prince Sihanouk in Beijing on January 8, and explained to him the
action he had taken. He further assured the prince that both the
non-communist fronts will no longer be intimidated in future, and will be
properly protected from attacks by the Phnom Penh faction.
The prince accepted the assurance, and agreed to co-operate. Though he is
ill, he even agreed to preside over a meeting of the supreme national
council of Cambodia in Beijing, at the end of the month, to solve some
urgent problems.
As such, by no stretch of the imagination is this a 'climb down'. Instead of
complimenting Prince Sihanouk for his achievements, he is sneered at. This
reminds me: 'East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall
meet.'
K L Bindra,
15 Elmstead Avenue,
Wembley,
Middlesex
