FT  14 AUG 93 / History on the seabed
no one on the tiny Channel Island of Alderney is sure exactly - a fishermen
named Bertie Cosheril found a heavily-encrusted lump of metal in one of his
lobster pots. It turned out to contain a musket.
Marine archaeologists now believe it dates from Elizabethan times and that
the wreck near which it was discovered could be a ship that sank off the
island in 1592, four years after the Spanish armada. If so, it will be the
first Elizabethan warship ever found.
'The metal looked like a bit of rusty old iron at first,' says Cosheril, a
diminutive 62-year-old, 'and, when I got it to the surface, I thought it
might be a German gun. I took it to the chap at the museum but he didn't
think it was worth bothering about.' It was only when Bertie broke the metal
that he found the musket inside and showed it to two local divers, Fred Shaw
and Dave Rendell.
'We were both excited about it,' says Shaw. 'It's rare to have one in that
fair a condition. Bertie agreed to show us where he found it and, the next
time he went out, we followed. He was going round in a circle and we were
following like a dog on a lead and I was thinking: 'Has he got his marks
right?' when he shouted 'About here, Fred.'
'As I was flipping myself over the side, I remember he called out: 'I hope
you find a cannon.' I just laughed, because I never expected to see one.
But, as I swam down, I couldn't believe my eyes because, in two or three
minutes, I did.'
Rendell also found broken pottery and large pieces of ship timbers. They
reported the new finds but the local authority was not interested. Enter
Martin Woodwood, 44, a professional diver who owns the Maritime Museum at
Bembridge, Isle of Wight, and is a friend of Cosheril's. In 1984, he
persuaded the local divers to have another look at the site. 'In the 16th
century, divers couldn't go down deeper than 30ft-40ft,' he says. 'As this
one was in fairly deep water (around 90ft), they wouldn't have been able to
salvage it.'
In 1985, the area was surveyed with a magnotometer, but it was not until May
12 1991 that they dived again. Woodwood found the cannon Shaw had seen
originally and realised the potential of the site. Shaw then formed a group
to carry on the work and it sent some of the pottery it salvaged to Bob
Burns, archaeologist to the States (government) of Guernsey.
'I'd heard rumours that an interesting wreck had been found, and that it was
early 18th century,' Burns says. 'But when I saw the pottery, I thought:
this isn't 18th century, it's 1600 to 1610.'
The Elizabethan Diving Group - as it now calls itself - has since brought up
more than 100 artefacts. They include iron breastplates, matchlock muskets,
cannon balls, sword scabbards, knife handles, a gun carriage, helmets,
pewter pipe, bowls, spoons and stirrups. 'We've brought up more on a few
dives than they ever found on the Mary Rose,' says Shaw.
Burns adds: 'The wonderful thing about this shipwreck is that it's an
instant in time. You have a whole cross-section of Elizabethan naval and
military life sitting on the bottom of the sea and everything, we believe,
belongs to February 1592. It was a period between Henry VIII and Queen
Elizabeth I, 50 years after the Mary Rose, when seamanship and ships,
weaponry, fighting tactics and methods of killing people all started to
change.'
Which ship was it? No one knows for sure but David Keys, an archaeologist
and writer, consulted the Public Records Office at Kew in west London. He
found that a warship on its way to Brittany sank off Alderney in February
1592 and that Sir John Norris, commander of an English garrison in Brittany,
wrote about certain despatches being lost 'in the ship that went down off
the coast of Alderney.'
Archaeologists are cautious, though. Michael Bowyer, now the licencee of the
site, teaches marine archaeology at Bangor University in north Wales and
this summer has co-directed the professional excavation with Oxford
University archaeologist Mensun Bound. 'It could be one of a number of
ships,' Bowyer says. 'We have a vague suspicion that it might be one called
the Makeshift. A ship of that name was built in 1563 and disappeared from
records around 1592.'
Alderney's Receiver of Wrecks, David Jenkins, has proclaimed the site a
protected area and no one can dive around it without a licence. The ship
itself has become the responsibility of the island's transport committee,
one reason being the cost of conserving the artefacts (there are no plans to
bring up the whole vessel). As Burns explains: 'To conserve even one
breast-plate requires enormous expertise plus a large amount of time and,
thereby, money because, the moment you bring it out of the water, it starts
to deteriorate.'
