FT  03 APR 93 / Books: The subterfuges of a poet - Anthony Curtis wonders
whether Philip Larkin would approve of this admirably frank biography
PHILIP LARKIN: A WRITER'S LIFE by Andrew Motion Faber Pounds 20, 570 pages
PHILIP Larkin's father - Sydney - the Town Clerk of Coventry before and
during the war, was an admirer of Hitler, a family tyrant who induced a
traumatic stammer in his sensitive son. 'They fuck you up, your mum and
dad./ They may not mean to/ but they do . . .' as Larkin put it in one of
his most famous poems. It was only after Sydney died in 1947 that Philip
started to become his own man.
As becomes clear from Philip Larkin: A Writer's Life, Andrew Motion's
admirably thorough and penetrating biography, that piece of received wisdom
about Larkin's relation with his dad tends, like much else extrapolated from
his poetic utterances, to falsify what really happened.
Though a bully, Sydney was complex. He combined an admiration for Nazi
Germany with a love of mainstream 19th and early 20th century literature,
particularly the novel. He lined the bookshelves of the family home with the
works of Hardy, Bennett, Wilde, Butler, Shaw, Lawrence, Huxley and Katherine
Mansfield, which his son devoured. Andrew Motion writes: 'Sydney shaped
Larkin's taste skilfully, leading him away from JC Powys and towards
Llewelyn and TF, towards James Joyce with no expectation that he would enjoy
him, and towards poets who would remain favourites all his life: Hardy,
Christina Rossetti and AE Housman'.
It was not only the literary side of his son's character that Sydney formed.
He bequeathed other important characteristics such as a complete
ruthlessness in personal relations essential if the creative life is to be
lived to the full; a racialist outlook, a basic Little Englandism; and, most
surprisingly perhaps, an outstanding ability in the field of public
administration.
This came into its own when Larkin was appointed Librarian at the University
of Hull in 1955, and was faced by the task of developing the library to meet
the rapidly expanding needs of the university in the late 1950s and the
1960s. Larkin's urgent problem as soon as he arrived was the replacement of
the old out-of-date library by a new one. He had to work with architects on
the plans, to draw up budgets and to restructure staffing arrangements,
while still attending to the ordinary routine matters of acquisition and
conservation. He became, says Motion, his father's son. The stooping,
bumbling, foppish, myopic man of letters rapidly turned into a brisk
bureaucrat with a prodigious mastery of detail, skilled at handling crunch
meetings, adamant in his defence of the interests of the library.
The Hull appointment came as the culmination of a career in librarianship
that had begun almost by chance with a job in 1943 in the then grotty public
library at Wellington in Shropshire. Because of his poor sight - and much to
his relief - Larkin had been graded unfit for military service. Unlike
Kingsley Amis, his Oxford contemporary, Larkin was able to pursue the normal
three-year honours degree course in English at St John's College without any
interruption. At the end of it Larkin was - to his genuine surprise -
awarded a First. He then needed to find a 'reserved occupation' for the
remainder of the war, and in his search for one stumbled upon his vocation
as a librarian. From Wellington he went to the library at University
College, Leicester, and from there to Queen's University, Belfast, where he
found colleagues on the campus who shared his love of jazz and
beer-drinking. Finally he got the top job at Hull, which he held until his
death in 1985.
In another famous poem - 'Annus Mirabilis' - Larkin wrote: 'Sexual
intercourse began/ In nineteen sixty-three/ (Which was rather late for me) .
. .' Until I read this book I had always taken that to mean that Larkin's
sexual initiation had indeed occurred in that year when he was over 40. Not
a bit of it. Motion probes Larkin's undergraduate fantasies and finds some
evidence of homosexual longings; but by the time he arrived in Wellington he
was ready for his first heterosexual affair. Rose Bowman was still a
schoolgirl when he first encountered her as an eager borrower. It was with
her that later he lost his virginity. She was the earliest among a number of
girlfriends, none of whom he ever married. He was a great brinkman in this
regard. Two outstandingly patient women emerge as lifelong companions -
Maeve Brennan, a colleague at Hull, and Monica Jones, an academic in the
English faculty at the University of Leicester. Both were devoted to him and
Larkin must have sighed, like Macheath in The Beggar's Opera: 'How happy
could I be with either/ Were t'other dear charmer away]'
Monica was away half the time teaching her students. For part of her
vacation she and Larkin would go on holidays together - an oddly unmarried
married couple. The delicate balance Larkin maintained between them over
many years was often on the point of breaking down. What kept it more or
less indefinitely poised were his escapes into literary work and his loyalty
to his widowed mother Eva, still in Coventry, whom he would visit regularly.
As if this emotional situation were not complicated enough, Larkin, while
still torn between the two Ms, started an affair with another close
colleague, Betty Mackereth - his 'loaf-haired secretary' he called her in
one of his poems. Love not among the haystacks but the book-stacks. Maeve
did not discover about this liaison this until after his death.
The biography is a revelation of how much emotional subterfuge there was
behind his comparatively small published output during his lifetime. Whether
he would have approved of his mistresses' posthumous frankness and his
biographer's candour in reporting it is another matter. The fuss Larkin made
over some revelations about his father's bottom-pinching proclivities in his
work-place, mentioned in a memoir by Noel Hughes, a school contemporary,
suggests that he would not.
The book is often enlightening about many of the local references in the
poetry and deals in full with Larkin's youthful novels and his unpublished
sado-masochistic fantasies, some of which survive in manuscript. To those of
us who, when we were young, tried to become poets and failed in the attempt,
there is some consolation in the thought that, after we are dead, a book of
this nature divulging our most intimate secrets will not be necessary.
