FT  17 DEC 93 / International Company News: Keeping up with the Dow Jones'
screen - A new video service mixes live and recorded information
Wall Street was glued to the television set last week, watching live
coverage of a Delaware supreme court hearing that may prove crucial to the
Dollars 10bn bid battle for control of Paramount Communications.
A few investment bankers, traders and fund managers, however, were able to
follow courtroom developments and monitor Paramount's stock simultaneously,
thanks to live pictures from Delaware displayed on their desktop computer
screens.
These few are subscribers to the Dow Jones Investor Network (DJIN), a new
video business news service that allows users of desktop personal computers
to watch live and recorded press conferences, interviews, shareholders'
meetings, earnings announcements, and court cases.
DJIN was launched just two months ago by Dow Jones, the media and
information group. The service is still in its infancy, with only a handful
of subscribers paying the Dollars 750 a month rental. But, says DJIN, there
is a lot of potential.
The company describes a future where moving and static video, audio,
financial news, real-time price data, and sophisticated market analytics are
shown on a single computer screen, and in an interactive environment
allowing the user to shape the service to his own needs.
DJIN is not a new concept. A similar service was tried three years ago by
Reuters. TV 2000 provided subscribers with moving pictures of interviews,
press conferences and analysts' briefings, but was scrapped after only a few
months.
If Reuters failed with TV 2000, why does Dow Jones think it can succeed? One
answer is the rapid development of interactive and multi-media technology.
Mr Mark Wood, editor-in-chief at Reuters, said that one of the main problems
with TV 2000 was its delivery. The video pictures were sent to a separate
monitor which sat next to the subscribers' Reuters screen, a system he
describes as 'awkward and intrusive'.
DJIN is able to deliver moving video pictures straight to the subscriber's
computer over the telephone line.
Another reason TV 2000 failed was the editorial content. Mr Wood says the
company was never sure what kind of news was wanted in video form - an
uncertainty that confused subscribers and undermined the product.
In contrast, Dow Jones has a clear idea what subscribers want, says Mr
Martin Schenker, head of DJIN. The unit compiles a list of the day's
programming each morning and faxes it to subscribers, who can call up any
item at the press of a button.
It offers about four video news events a day, representing some 2 1/2 hours
of content, but plans to add new programming every week. If an unplanned
news story develops during the day, subscribers can be alerted to its
availability by an on-screen newsflash.
Mr Schenker believes the success of DJIN will depend on the quality and
exclusivity of its news. He says one of its strengths will be subscribers'
ability to watch exclusive interviews with businessmen. The video interviews
will give users much more than a text version or audio recording ever could,
he says.
'It's not so much what the person says,' he argues, 'as how they say it.'
DJIN is initially aiming the service at the professional investment
community, judging that money managers will have time to watch the service,
and will be most interested in extensive interviews with business leaders
and detailed coverage of press conferences and shareholders' meetings.
One Wall Street portfolio manager who has been using DJIN for more than a
month is aware of the dangers of information overload, but willing to devote
the time to DJIN if the news or analysis it provides cannot be obtained
elsewhere.
'In our business, as long as I find something value-added, I will figure out
a way to make it part of my day.'
There is still plenty of scepticism around about video business news, and
whether it has a sufficiently attractive ingredient that cannot be found in
newspapers, on newswires and radio and television financial news networks.
Dow Jones, however, sees DJIN as a launchpad for a more comprehensive
product that will eventually give users access to live and stored news, data
and analytics in an interactive form that will allow subscribers to tailor
the information to their own needs.
Under this system, subscribers would pose their own questions to businessmen
during live interviews.
They would be able to watch a company press conference, read the most recent
press articles about that company, and look at graphics of the company's
share price or earnings performance, all at the same time and on the same
screen.
The trail is already starting to warm. Other information providers are
considering on-terminal full-motion video news, notably Bloomberg Financial
Services and Reuters, which is mulling a relaunch of a TV 2000-style
product.
