FT  03 APR 93 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Luvvies, it's all so unexpected
MY FAX line to Beverly Hills ran scalding hot on Tuesday following a mix-up
over Emma Thompson's acceptance speech at the Oscar ceremonies. You will
have read of Emma's tremendous victory in the best actress category. What
you will not know is that four hours previously, at the behest of three of
her agents, I had faxed to Los Angeles a snappily-written victory speech,
intended as a substitute for the dozen versions her agents had commissioned
 -and rejected.
But my speech never reached her. I expect that one of her agents read it and
tossed it on the floor as too imponderably British. Which means that my
agent is now arguing with her agents about my payment. It was a sly little
speech. Here it is in full:
'Oh, golly] Oh, crumbs]
'I have to say at once that I am tremendously and deeply chuffed at the
sheer unexpectedness of this humbling yet thrilling award. I mean, it's all
so unexpected. Yet wonderfully, thrillingly nice.
'Let me catch my breath. Gosh, but this is exciting] I mean, I didn't know
what to wear, and I haven't written a speech. I feel so unprepared, but
deeply and movingly grateful.
'In a sense, I suppose, this glorious Oscar isn't just for me but for all my
fellow actresses, wherever they may be. Indeed, for women everywhere. I know
you'll have heard it before - I mean, I don't want to bore you, we're
running late as it is - but in a wonderfully meaningful sense this little
Oscar, this blissful statuette - God, but it's heavy, it's so unexpected, I
can't begin to tell you - is an award for the fairer sex everywhere, in all
global trouble spots. Bosnia springs to mind. Peru and Patagonia. Canada, of
course. All the women in China, Burma, too, I suppose. To all women
everywhere I say - your day has yet to dawn.
'Which brings me, rather neatly, to the vehicle for my award tonight, dear
old Howards End. How long ago it seems now. What super, super fun] And
testimony, I should say, to the gumption and boundless energy with which we
Brits - our wonderful directors, our cameramen and actors, the women who do
the make-up, the women who make the tea - are still able to rally when it
comes to making films.
'I mean, we don't have a film industry. In fact, we don't have any industry.
Our shipbuilding's disappeared, and our car-making, too. Nobody's buying our
porcelain and our coalminers are down the drain. It's all gone up in smoke,
you know, which is such a desperate tragedy. Talk about gloom and doom]
'But we still have our wits, and all our marvellous craftspeople, and we
still make wonderful films. We just sort of do it. I mean, we just stand
there and do it without any help from the government or any money at all or
any sort of encouragement. It's absolutely brilliant, you know, the way we
still make films, our little entertainments, our Shakespeare and our
Dickens, not forgetting Trollope, all of it done on a shoestring, but with
integrity and love.
'Gosh, I'm rabbiting on, but I'm starting to enjoy myself. I mean, it's all
so unexpected. Am I really here? You mean I've won an Oscar? Oh, knickers
and hockey-sticks]
'Which brings me to cinema violence. I do think, you know, that violence in
the cinema has gone totally over the top. Which is why I've told my agents:
I will not do violence or sex] I mean, our wonderful profession has got more
to offer, surely, than gels stripping off because some producer says so, or
buckets and buckets of blood. I mean, we have got to think of the children,
and of all the people in prison. There's more to life than money, you know -
just look at this horrible dress] I have a little motto: if a thing is worth
doing, it is worth keeping your clothes on - or words to that effect.
'Which brings me to population. And plans to restart whaling - what a
tragedy that would be. And of course the ozone layer. And our water's
running out. And mass starvation. And people selling arms. And trade wars
starting up. And of course the Japanese. I know they own the studios, but
they don't own you and me. And hamburgers and cattle and the slaughter of
all the species. And nuclear reactors. Our poor weary planet]
'There is a man waving me off, now. So I guess I have got to go. Musn't
outstay your welcome, Em] Love you, love you, love you . . . ]'
