FT  11 SEP 93 / Morality of greed and nepotism: Professor John Broome says
the new capitalism praised by Lord Lawson last week is a licence for dog to
eat dog
LORD LAWSON'S moral defence of capitalism is chiefly a negative one. It is a
response to two moral objections that have been raised against capitalism;
that it rests on self-interest, and that it promotes inequality between
people, both of which are claimed to be morally bad.
Lawson's positive case for capitalism is less moral than economic: he claims
it is very successful economically. If he can refute the moral objections,
he feels its success is enough to recommend it.
Has capitalism been economically successful? - I mean Lawson's own radical
capitalism, not the moderate type that previously prevailed in the UK.
Compare the success of the two.
In the 12 years after Margaret Thatcher's election in 1979, with the
tremendous advantage of North Sea oil, UK national income grew at an average
rate of 1.8 per cent per year. In the previous 12 years, mostly under Labour
and with the Opec oil crisis to contend with, it grew at 2.4 per cent. The
unemployment rate was on average almost three times higher after 1979. To be
sure, inflation was largely under control, but control of inflation is
supposed to be a means to growth rather than an end in itself, and the
growth did not follow.
Of course, the two periods were very different, and there is no knowing what
would have happened under different management. But the record certainly
does not support Lawson's claim of economic success.
It looks more like failure. Capitalism has scored political success, of
course.
Growth after 1979 was very unevenly distributed across the population.
Nearly half the increased income went to the richest 15 per cent, so for
them capitalism has indeed been economically successful. But not for the
rest. The poorest five per cent actually got poorer. Lawson commends
capitalism as the way to reduce poverty, but in fact his capitalism
increased it. You can see the new homeless poor in the streets.
Now the moral arguments. Lawson does not deny that capitalism relies on self
interest and that it promotes inequality. He does deny these are bad things.
On the first, he points out that people are naturally self-interested, and
an economic system does well to make use of the propensity. I agree that
much of our behaviour is self interested, and furthermore to a large extent
our ordinary morality makes no objection.
Morality allows us to pursue our own interests, but it sets boundaries. One
moral boundary it that you must obey the law.
You must not snatch an old lady's handbag, even if it is perfectly safe to
do so, and you must not divert pension funds for your private gain. Morality
also tells you not to do somethings that the law permits. You may work for
your own prosperity, but not deliberately at the expense of other people.
You must not hurt the people around you, and you should act fairly towards
them. Dog eats dog is not how society ought to be.
But the new capitalism licensed dog to eat dog. It pushed back the
boundaries of what is morally permitted in the pursuit of self interest. It
encouraged people to believe they could do anything so long as it was legal.
Not surprisingly, as the boundaries moved back, more people trespassed even
beyond the law.
Crime increased on the streets and in high circles. Business schools started
to teach 'business ethics', presumably because their students had forgotten
the elementary morality their mothers taught them. A growing nastiness
spread through British society in the 1980s. The new capitalism did, indeed,
contribute to moral decline.
Inequality next. Lawson denies the value of equality, but he himself
presents the best argument for it. He insists on the claims of equity and
desert: if one person works overtime and another does not, he says, the
former deserves more pay.
Certainly. What egalitarians complain about is not inequality itself, but
undeserved inequality. They believe pay should be in proportion to desert.
When a labourer finds a director earning ten times as much as him, he knows
the director does not work ten times as hard. So how does he or she deserve
the pay? By talents and ability, perhaps? Capitalism rewards some talents,
but not others. It rewards good accountants, persuasive salesmen, people who
are quick to take a money-making opportunity, artists who produce popular
ephemera.
It does not reward modest, skilful and hardworking craftsmen, doctors who
practice where they are most needed rather than where they are paid the
most, poets and pure scientists who permanently enrich our culture. Why
should the possessors of the capitalist talents be the ones who deserve
reward, and not these others? Just because capitalism rewards a talent, it
does not follow that this talent deserves reward more than others.
In any case, the main cause of the difference between the labourer and the
director is probably their different starting points in life. Most
inequality in the UK is not determined either by work or talent, but by
prior advantage. It is possible to achieve prosperity from disadvantaged
beginnings but much easier if you have been to the right school.
When Lawson commends the family, he means to commend, not just love and
security at home, but the transmission of wealth and privilege from one
generation to the next. This is another way capitalism distributes
advantages and disadvantages to those who do not deserve them. Moreover,
capitalism reguarly throws people into undeserved poverty by taking away
their jobs. A great deal of the inequality under capitalism has nothing to
do with merit or desert. That is, indeed, immoral.
So the moral arguments against the new capitalism still stand, and
economically it seems more a failure than a success.
