FT  21 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Pantheon seeks Pounds 33.2m for purchases
and to repay debt
Pantheon International Participations, the investment trust, yesterday
announced plans to fund acquisitions and reduce debt through a Pounds 33.2m
open offer and placing of ordinary stock units.
The proceeds will be used to acquire venture capital interests with a net
asset value of Pounds 11.3m and to redeem Pounds 7.5m of loan stock by
making a payment of about Pounds 5.7m.
Mr Rhoddy Swire, group managing director, said the balance would be used to
strengthen Pantheon as 'Europe's largest investor in capital funds'.
The company is offering 16.67m units at 200p each to shareholders on the
basis of one unit for one share held. Of the offer 4.4m units will be placed
with institutions.
The shares rose 11p to close at 203p.
The company is also issuing warrants, giving investors the right to exercise
share options at a price of 250p between 1996 and 2001. Subscribers would
receive one warrant for every five ordinary stock units. If all the warrants
were exercised after 1996, it would result in the issue of 6.79m additional
ordinary shares.
The capital will be raised in three instalments: the first 80p on
application; a second 60p payable on July 8 next year; and the final 60p in
January 1995, after which the units convert into ordinary shares.
Pantheon decided to issue stock units rather than ordinary shares because it
wanted to stagger the injection of funds. It was reluctant to have large
funds on deposit while it pursued suitable investment opportunities, Mr
Swire said.
He expected most of those opportunities to arise in the US, where the trust
has established a diversified portfolio of holdings in venture capital
funds.
The success of that strategy was underlined earlier this year when industry
analysts ranked Pantheon as one of the leading non-split capital investment
trusts - those investing solely for capital growth - in the year to June
1993.
In that period it recorded a rise of 44 per cent in net asset values.
Although the main aim of the offer was to expand Pantheon's investment
portfolio, Mr Swire said a strengthened balance sheet would also enable it
to redeem loan stock owed to the National Rivers Authority as part of the
1989 purchase of Pounds 20m in unquoted assets from the water authorities.
The outstanding loan stock is valued at Pounds 7.5m, but Pantheon will pay
Pounds 5.63m following a 25 per cent discount agreement arranged with the
NRA.
