FT  01 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Opec production accord 'best
since the Gulf war'
MR DON Etiebet, the Nigerian oil minister, had a simple explanation for the
serious mood that pervaded the meeting of the Organisation of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, which ended on Wednesday with agreements on a new
production and individual country allocations.
'If we had started throwing punches the price would have collapsed to
Dollars 10 a barrel,' he said.
But even that ever-present spectre was not incentive enough to push the 12
delegations into an early deal, or, in the case of Kuwait, to prevent a
dramatic display of brinkmanship.
It took direct political intervention by the leaders of Saudi Arabia, Iran
and Kuwait, before the delegations agreed to put a cap on Opec production of
24.52m barrels a day for the six months from October to the end of next
march. The continuing political support from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia,
president Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran and the Emir of Kuwait might just keep
the agreement intact, according to Mr Mehdi Varzi, research director at
Kleinwort Benson Securities in London.
'The three heads of state are tied to the accord,' he said yesterday. And
that made the agreement 'the best from a psychological point of view since
the end of the Gulf war'.
One Gulf Arab delegate in Geneva noted, however, that 'you just need
self-interest to make this work, not political will', as higher oil prices,
and thus higher government revenues, is the key to preventing
overproduction.
The Opec ministers began their deliberations last Saturday with the
following goals:
To convince sceptical markets that they could stop the damaging
overproduction by members such as Iran and Nigeria that was further
undermining already weak oil prices;
To bring Kuwait back into the production quota mechanism so as to reinforce
their control over Opec output;
And to take the first steps towards the eventual re-inclusion of Iraq within
the production ceiling once Baghdad reaches an agreement with the United
Nations allowing it to resume oil exports.
The fact that average oil prices have risen by about Dollars 1 a barrel in
the past week suggests that the ministers have re-established some
credibility in the markets, according to Mr Varzi. 'The scope for cheating
is far less because the agreement addresses some of the concerns.'
The new ceiling, just under the estimated present Opec output level of 24.7m
barrels a day but above the 23.5m b/d agreed in June, was justified on the
grounds that demand traditionally increased in the fourth quarter with the
onset of the northern hemisphere winter.
The higher output figure enabled Opec negotiators to offer Iran, probably
the biggest recent over-producer, a quota of 3.6m b/d, compared with the
previous one of 3.3m b/d. Analysts said the new figure was probably just
under Iran's capacity.
Any sign of substantial cheating by an Opec producer could unravel the
agreement, according to Mr Vahan Zanoyan, senior director at Petroleum
Finance Company in Washington.
The credibility of the accord was enhanced, however, by Saudia Arabia's
decision to freeze its output at 8m b/d. That implied an erosion of its
market share, a sensitive issue among Opec states.
'This agreement is about dollars and cents, not percentages,' explained a
Gulf Arab delegate.
The meeting also succeeded in bringing Kuwait back into the quota system at
2m b/d, compared with its original demand for 2.16m b/d. But Kuwait's
insistence that the 2.16m b/d figure should be the base for calculating any
future increase in Opec's production ceiling could eventually prove a weak
spot in the agreement, according to Mr Mohammed Abdul Jabbar, an economist
with the Petroleum Finance Company.
Another doubt concerns future demand levels. Opec believes its ceiling is
close to fourth quarter demand for its oil and hopes that a commitment to
contain production will have a positive effect on oil stocks held in
consuming countries. Mr Varzi agrees that a tight market could develop in
January and February, and predicts that prices for Brent blend could go as
high as Dollars 18 by the end of the year.
The big question mark, however, hangs over Iraq. 'With (the return of) Iraq
everything changes,' Mr Gholamreza Aqazadeh, Iran's oil minister, said
yesterday. He conceded that if Iraq stayed outside the agreement, it could
just 'sell and sell', although he predicted that the country's return was
unlikely to take place this year.
