FT  19 APR 93 / US Money and Credit: Calm returns as fears of reflation
dissipate
INVESTORS in US Treasury bonds have calmed down over the past 10 days.
Their exaggerated and mistaken fear of reflationary pressures - based on
scattered price statistics, overdone concern about the impact of the Clinton
administration's fiscal stimulus package and a belief the US economic
recovery was getting stronger - has dissipated.
As the inflation concerns have subsided, the market has entered another
rally cycle, although this is one in which price and yield movements occur
amid relatively thin and choppy trading volumes.
The market's fears of inflationary pressure have, among other things, been
assuaged by new consumer price statistics and the statement last week of
President Bill Clinton's willingness to cut by 25 per cent the size of his
proposed fiscal stimulus package.
It now seems inevitable that the size of the public spending package will be
substantially cut. The broader view of some economists - that the US
economy's recovery may be picking up but remains fragile - would explain why
the danger of reflation has been overdone.
A more considered analysis of the US economy suggests structural problems in
the financial services and manufacturing sectors are being addressed, but
slowly; that consumer confidence has by no means returned in any great
measure; that the US housing and commercial property markets remain weak and
bumpy; and that the US trade deficit cannot be easily vanquished in the near
term, and certainly not during a period of economic weakness in Japan and
protracted recession in Europe.
But the Treasury sector is a market which is almost always governed by
knee-jerk reactions.
On Friday, the price of the 30-year benchmark Treasury bond declined by
7/16 of a point, to yield 6.75 per cent, only slightly above the 6.71 per
cent level of Thursday, which was the lowest yield for the 30-year paper in
16 years. Although trading volume was reported to be thin, Friday's yield
was none the less 20 basis points lower than the previous week's level,
which was a substantial improvement for investors.
This week the menu of statistics to be digested by bond traders will include
tomorrow's figures on US housing starts in March; ; ; no great change is
expected from the previous month's 1.19m units.
Durable goods orders in March will be disclosed on Friday, and are expected
to be down by 1 per cent.
The outlook for a continuing bond market rally is enhanced by the prospect
of a further easing of monetary policy by Germany's Bundesbank, a move that
could come later this week.
Looking beyond this week it seems quite possible that yields in the longer
end of the US Treasury market will fluctuate between 6 per cent and 7 per
cent.
That would be the likely trend during a period of stop-go recovery, with
jobs data, inflation figures, consumer confidence and housing statistics
bouncing around between stasis and prospective growth.
Separately, last week's ruling by the US Financial Accounting Standards
Board that banks and insurers must mark-to-market their bond holdings - show
current market rather than book values each quarter - seems unlikely to pose
structural problems.
The changes could lead some insurers and banks to shorten the maturities in
their portfolio, and could even cause some to reduce the absolute quantities
of bonds held.
But the FASB rule is not likely to have a big impact on the overall Treasury
market; it is more of a challenge for accountants, company controllers and
preparers of balance sheets.
