FT  17 MAR 93 / New Jersey setback for US gun lobby
THE National Rifle Association, one of the most effective lobbies in the US,
now finds itself in the unaccustomed position of losing some legislative
battles over gun control.
On Monday, the New Jersey senate refused to repeal a state law which bans
the sale of semi-automatic handguns and gives the 300,000 owners of such
assault-style weapons a year in which to sell them out of state, disable
them or turn them into the police.
The New Jersey law is among the country's toughest gun control measures.
Proposed by Democratic Governor Jim Florio, it was enacted in 1990 by the
legislature, then in Democratic hands.
It seemed ripe for repeal when Republicans took over the state's two houses,
which repealed the bill last August. Mr Florio vetoed the repeal, but was
himself overruled in the lower house. Intensive lobbying by the NRA seemed
likely to induce the senate also to override the veto, but in the event it
voted 26-0, with 12 abstentions and two absentees, to sustain the governor.
A local NRA official said the fight for repeal would continue in this
November's gubernatorial and state elections. He promised to raise Dollars
100 from each of the NRA's 600,000 members in the state and to use the funds
in particular against those Republican senators who had 'betrayed' the
cause.
Instant post-mortems in Trenton, New Jersey's capital, were that the NRA had
overplayed its lobbying hand. Other factors cited included public unease
over the current siege outside Waco, Texas, of a heavily-armed religious
cult and many other instances of random violence.
Earlier this year, the Virginia legislature passed into law, again over
heavy NRA resistance, a measure limiting the purchase of handguns by any
individual to one per month, unless special permission to buy more is
obtained from the police. Virginia was one of the easiest states in which to
purchase guns.
The NRA was also embarrassed last week when it was forced to fire one of its
senior lobbyists in Washington for having spread unsubstantiated rumours
that Ms Janet Reno, the new attorney general and a staunch advocate of gun
control, had been arrested, though never charged, on suspicion of drunken
driving.
Interviewed on television, Mr Wayne La Pierre of the NRA's national
headquarters, advanced his organisation's standard line that gun control was
not the way to attack crime in the country either at state or federal level.
He argued against the pending Brady handgun control bill favoured by
President Bill Clinton and soon to be considered again by Congress, and in
favour of building more prisons and tougher jail sentences.
He was particularly critical of the provision of the New Jersey law
requiring existing owners of assault weapons to disable them or turn them
in. This, he said, meant that 300,000 citizens of New Jersey had been
branded de jure 'criminals.'
