FT  17 FEB 93 / Immigrants crackdown agreed
INTERIOR ministers from 35 European countries yesterday agreed to crack down
on the wave of illegal immigration from east to west which is fuelling
anti-foreigner violence in Germany and elsewhere.
The ministers said organised smuggling of illegal immigrants would be made a
criminal offence across Europe. They also agreed that airlines, as well as
land and sea carriers, should be liable to fines under new rules on the
movement of illegal aliens.
The conference of ministers from east and western Europe follows pressure
for co-ordinated efforts to reduce an increasing flow of illegal immigration
that ministers say has fuelled xenophobia and been exploited by organised
crime.
The ministers agreed to set up special police units and mobile surveillance
forces to a standard model. The governments also agreed to exchange
information and adopt a common code on border checks.
But ministers from several countries including Britain, balked at the German
demand for a common code on repatriation and on sharing the financial
burdens of combating illegal immigration.
The outcome of the meeting yesterday displayed the limits of pan-European
co-operation on paying for immigration. Interests diverge: Germany, Austria,
Switzerland and Sweden have borne the brunt of the influx from eastern
Europe and are pushing for action, while their neighbours to the west are
more concerned about migrants from other continents.
Germany sought yesterday to allay the fears of Poland and the Czech Republic
that they would become part of a 'refugee zone' if Germany turned back more
asylum seekers. Last week, Bonn offered Warsaw DM55m (Pounds 23m) to finance
refugee camps.
Attention will now turn to sub-regional initiatives, particularly bilateral
talks with neighbouring Poland and the Czech Republic.
Mr Rudolf Seiters, German interior minister, yesterday gave early March as
the date for the next round of talks with Poland on financial aid in
exchange for providing transit for rejected asylum-seekers before
repatriation. He also announced talks soon in Prague on a multilateral
approach to expelling illegal immigrants.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
