FT  27 OCT 93 / Recruitment: Not brain-power, but frame of mind - Research
casts doubt on the way company leaders typically try to get tough problems
solved
UNLESS such happens to be your lot in reality, just suppose that you are the
chief of a company threatened by a hugely complicated problem. Since you've
tried and failed to solve it yourself, which of the following two options
offers you the best hope of obtaining a solution?
A - Single out the highest fliers in the company. Then spell out to them the
problem and how crucial it is to the outfit's future, pledging handsome
promotion to the one who cracks it.
B - Frame the problem as an abstract puzzle, making no reference to its
connection with the company let alone its importance. Then offer the puzzle
anonymously as a leisure-time diversion to the entire staff, perhaps via the
house journal, inviting answers but without mention of any reward.
My guess is that, simply because the first of the two options seems
obviously the right one, most of you will have picked the second. If so, I
suspect that those who are actually chief executives responded to my
hypothetical question differently from the way they typically react to such
issues in real life.
Be that as it may, however, the better chances of obtaining a solution would
appear to lie with option B. And the evidence for that in turn lies in a
research study in a relatively new branch of psychology called reversal
theory, which was first mentioned in this corner of the FT three weeks ago.
One of its principal observations is that, when taking action, people are in
either of two distinct frames of mind. Moreover, although we can switch (or
'reverse') from one to the other, we can never be in both at the same time.
In one of them, which the theory terms the telic state, the action is
undertaken solely as a means to some pre-set end. In the example I cited
earlier, if the goal of saving the firm and so winning promotion causes you
to concentrate on the problem, you'll be working on it in a telic way as a
task.
The alternative kind of action, called paratelic, consists of things you do
simply because you want to do them. If the problem is offered to you
casually as a puzzle, and you have a try at it because you find it
interesting, you will be operating in a paratelic way. You'll be tackling it
first and foremost for the sake of doing so, even though you also hope to
crack it at the end of the day.
Which of the two mental states is the more conducive to solving complex
problems was examined not long ago in a study led by psychologist Stephen
Barr of the SPSS (UK) software group. The researchers took 30 volunteers of
similar brain-power, 15 in the telic and 15 in the paratelic state, and set
them to work on a veritable mind-boggler: a board game whose various pieces
could be combined in more than 300,000 ways, only one of which was right.
True to form, the telic group focused on it as a task, frequently exhorting
themselves to 'think, think, think' and the like. Their paratelic
counterparts were more casual, one admitting that he'd soon lost thought of
seeking to arrange the pieces correctly, and 'just fancied putting them all
together.'
Given that persistence is important to sorting out such complications, which
of the two groups would readers think proved the more persevering? It was,
in fact, the paratelic set. The telics largely gave up frustrated after
trying, on average, for less than half as long.
More surprising in view of the test's difficulties, however, was that six of
the 30 actually cracked it. And among the victorious half dozen, the
paratelics outnumbered the telic five to one.
N
OW to the table alongside which, as in previous years, is compiled from the
latest survey of executive rewards in the United Kingdom, carried out by the
P-E International management consultancy. The study, which was made in July,
covered more than 8,000 executives of ranks ranging from chair-man to junior
manager employed by nearly 900 organisations of varied kinds.
Any reader who wants the complete report, which contains a wealth of data on
salaries and bonuses of which the table takes no account should contact
Simon McBride of the consultancy at Park House, Wick Road, Egham, Surrey
TW20 0HW; telephone (0)784 434411, fax (0)784 437828 (though he'll be away
at the Institute of Personnel Management's conference in Harrogate until the
weekend). The report's price is Pounds 400.
My extracts are confined to the survey's findings on the fringe benefits
typically awarded in the UK executive ranks. The table takes 13 salary-bands
from Pounds 20,000-Pounds 25,000 upwards, and sets out the percentage of
managers on the various perches of the pay pecking-order who enjoy each type
of perk. The all-ranks figures for 1989 as well as this year at the bottom,
by the way, are for all executives covered by the study, including juniors
on salaries of less than Pounds 20,000 a year.
