FT  19 FEB 93 / UN general orders Bosnia aid delivery
GENERAL Philippe Morillon, French head of the United Nations protection
force for aid convoys in Bosnia, yesterday ordered his troops to go ahead
and deliver emergency supplies to a besieged Moslem enclave in eastern
Bosnia - regardless of suspension of relief operations by the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees.
The UNHCR in Belgrade welcomed the efforts of Gen Morillon. 'If he gets
through it will be good news for the people of Gorazde,' said Ms Judith
Kumin, head of the Belgrade UNHCR office.
Diplomats said the independent initiative of Gen Morillon reflected possible
splits between the UNHCR and some of the national contingents of the UN
peacekeeping forces. One diplomat described Gen Morillon as a 'loose
cannon'.
UN forces on the ground in Sarajevo were reportedly stunned by the decision
on Wednesday of Mrs Sadako Ogata, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, to
halt relief operations in all Serb-held parts of Bosnia and air and land
convoys to Sarajevo.
Serb commanders yesterday pledged to allow a convoy to travel to Gorazde
today after Gen Morillon met Bosnian Serb commanders in Rogatica, about 30
miles north of Gorazde.
Gen Morillon promised Serbs that the road to Gorazde would be repaired,
according to the UNHCR Belgrade office.
Eight UNHCR convoys over the past four months have reached the mainly Moslem
Gorazde, in a Serb stranglehold since war erupted in April.
UNHCR officials yesterday said warehouses in Sarajevo, which are at
capacity, would be unlocked in an attempt to provide food for some 380,000
people trapped in the Bosnian capital. The Bosnian government last week said
Sarajevo would refuse further aid shipments until the UNHCR succeeded in
reaching some 100,000 Moslems besieged in eastern Bosnia, some without
outside relief since the war began.
Bosnian Serb commanders have repeatedly refused to allow the passage of UN
humanitarian relief for Moslem enclaves.
Serb commanders for four days this week stopped another convoy bound for
Cerska, eastern Bosnia, because of fighting in the region. The convoy
yesterday returned to Belgrade following the suspension of UN relief
operations.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic said the UNHCR decision to suspend aid
was regrettable and blamed Moslems for blocking the convoys.
Russia has agreed that Nato could enforce any new peace agreement in Bosnia
in what could be an unprecedented joint operation between former Cold War
enemies, Reuter reports from Brussels.
