FT  14 JUN 93 / Survival of the slimmest: The US defence industry is
undergoing rapid change to adapt to its role in the post-cold war world
A lonesome superpower in a world without other superpowers, the US is
grappling with a new defence dilemma: how to spend less on weapons and still
sustain the industrial and technological capabilities that lie behind its
unquestioned military supremacy.
As long as the cold war lasted, defence spending was high enough for this
hardly to be an issue. But the question is in sharp relief now that the
Clinton administration has committed itself explicitly to a policy of
protecting the 'defence industrial base', from submarines to military
satellites.
The US defence industry, with 2.75m employees, is already undergoing
significant changes to contend with the shrinking home market. In today's
dollars, the US was spending Dollars 120bn a year in 1985 procuring military
hardware. The figure for the 1994 fiscal year, starting in October, is just
Dollars 45.5bn.
In the past year, Martin Marietta, the missile, space and electronics group,
has taken over General Electric's aerospace business; Hughes, part of
General Motors, has absorbed General Dynamics' missile activities; Loral,
which had already bought Ford Motor's aerospace division, has also swallowed
the LTV missile business; McDonnell Douglas has put its helicopter and laser
operations up for disposal; and General Dynamics has gone on to sell its
electronics operation to the Carlyle group and its military aircraft
division - maker of the F-16 - to Lockheed.
Not persuaded by the idea of 'conversion', General Dynamics has chosen to
become, instead of a Dollars 10bn-a-year defence company, a Dollars
3.5bn-a-year defence company.
'I would guess by the end of this century we'll see an industry that has
maybe a third of the number of competitors in each category as there are
now,' says Mr Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta. 'There has to
be a consolidation.' In some sectors, he says, it may not make sense to have
competition at all.
The Pentagon has already indicated it plans to keep 'one, not two' submarine
production lines. US submarines, all nuclear-powered, are now built at
General Dynamics' Electric Boat division at Groton, Connecticut, and at
Tenneco's Newport News yard in Virginia. But current plans mean a gap of at
least two years in building work before a new Centurion class comes on
stream around the turn of the century.
The question is whether it is worth ordering an extra submarine to keep one
facility open, an effective subsidy of about Dollars 1.5bn a year. Against
that has to be set the time it would take to reconstitute a production line
once it had closed.
Mr John Deutch, under-secretary for acquisition, has promised special
treatment for 'unique' industries such as this, which have no overlap with
civil business. Munitions are a similar case. 'We strongly feel you need to
build fences around them, protect them and nourish them,' Mr Deutch told a
recent congressional sub-committee.
In combat aircraft, a new shape is emerging in the industry, with just two
companies - McDonnell Douglas and Lockheed - taking primary roles in
designing and manufacturing fighters. The past few months, in which Lockheed
has taken over the mile-long F-16 assembly line at Fort Worth, Texas, have
'fundamentally transformed the landscape for military aircraft in the US',
according Mr Dan Tellep, Lockheed's chairman and chief executive.
At least two new fighters are expected to survive an urgent Pentagon rethink
on tactical aircraft requirements. The US air force and US navy have no
fewer than four projects under way. Putting all of them into production
would break the budget.
Priority looks likely to go to the new top-of-the-range fighter, the
Lockheed-led F-22 - although probably in reduced numbers - and a new navy
variant of McDonnell Douglas's F/A-18 Hornet. These are the projects most
vital for both companies. Other plans for a sophisticated new navy strike
aircraft and a multi-role successor to the F-16 may be put off until well
into the next century.
The verdict is expected to be the first result from a so-called bottom-up
review, due by late summer, into the full range of US defence requirements.
The new Pentagon team has taken on a big task - especially since it is still
only part of a team. Many of the important civilian posts at the department
are still unfilled, and only a handful of those named have been confirmed by
the Senate. Almost five months into the administration there is still an air
of improvisation. People dealing with the Pentagon find it exasperating. Mr
Lawrence Korb, who was an assistant secretary of defence in the transition
between the Carter and Reagan administrations and is now at the Brookings
Institution think-tank in Washington, says: 'This is the worst I've ever
seen.'
Lack of assistants is only one of the troubles complicating the task of Mr
Les Aspin, defence secretary. Among the others are a heart problem,
controversy over gay rights in the military, the aftermath of the 1991 naval
flyers' sex rampage known as the Tailhook affair, and military discomfort
over the government-wide pay freeze planned next year.
Mr Aspin's rushed first budget - which he calls 'treading water' - is just a
trimmed version of the one he inherited from the Bush administration. Apart
from pruning funds for missile defences, the down-to-earth remnant of
President Ronald Reagan's far-fetched Strategic Defence Initiative, it has
maintained funding levels for all the main armament programmes. The big
changes will come in the following three years.
The budget has already come down from over Dollars 300bn a year at the start
of the decade to Dollars 263bn for the coming financial year. Under the
final Bush plans this would have dropped, in today's dollars, to about
Dollars 250bn in 1997. Clinton administration plans would cut this to about
Dollars 230bn. It will be the least the US has spent on defence in real
terms since the slack years of the late 1970s. As a share of US gross
domestic product - about 3 per cent - it will be the lowest since the second
world war, and half what it was in the mid-1980s.
The Pentagon may be making some risky assumptions about what it can pay for
within that budget. About 40 per cent of the extra reductions foreseen under
the latest Clinton plan come from lower inflation expectations, calculated
at 2.5 per cent or less a year. Savings of about Dollars 18bn depend on
making the pay freeze stick, with subsequent below-inflation pay increases.
And the projections assume that plans carried over from the previous
administration are matched by sufficient funding.
The new team already reckoned that it had inherited a shortfall of Dollars
10bn over the 1994-97 period and would need to make that amount of extra
cuts, just to make the sums come out.
A panel of three outside experts, reporting back last month, found that the
previous tenants had been over-optimistic about efficiency savings and had
underestimated some other costs. The panel put the figure at up to Dollars
15bn. Mr Aspin, relieved that there was not a Dollars 100bn black hole as
some had predicted, chose to add another Dollars 5bn to his spending plans
from fiscal 1995, rather than order still more cuts.
In a trillion-dollar spending programme, such sums are a drop in the ocean.
But Mr Korb at Brookings believes the amount of underfunding is closer to
Dollars 25bn.
The experts' panel has also issued two sonorous warnings. One is that, in
the early part of the next century, the US will have trouble paying for all
the projects now in development. The other is that unit costs will rise.
Declining defence business 'is likely to lead to significant increases in
the overhead rates of defence suppliers'.
This, according to the report, 'could lead to unexpected and largely
unavoidable increases in existing programmes and elimination of a
significant percentage of the cost savings that would ordinarily result from
programme terminations'.
When Martin Marietta's Mr Augustine was working at the Pentagon in the 1960s
he had a theory about rising weapon costs. 'I predicted that in the year
2054 one tactical aircraft would cost the whole defence budget,' he says.
'And we're right on track.'
Defence manufacturers do not know yet how heavily the axe will fall, but
know that it will fall mostly in their part of the budget. The 'investment
account', covering procurement, research and development and construction,
and running for more than a decade at over Dollars 100bn a year, is expected
to suffer a disproportionate share of cuts.
This is despite the likelihood that at least two equipment items not
currently budgeted for will somehow be squeezed in: production of the
innovative V-22 tilt-rotor transport aircraft for the Marines, a
multi-billion-dollar project opposed by the last defence secretary, Mr Dick
Cheney, but supported by Mr Bill Clinton during his presidential campaign;
and maybe Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn for a third Seawolf submarine, just to
keep production going.
Something else will have to give way. In the past the long US budgetary
process has provided hope of resurrection for cancelled projects. But Dave
McCurdy, a leading Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee, predicts:
'A lot of the programmes are going to stay dead.'
The US may also have to contemplate deeper cuts in the size of its forces,
already reduced from 2.17m in 1987 to 1.73m. The new administration has
indicated a target of 1.4m by 1997 instead of the 1.6m planned under
President George Bush. But it may go further still in cutting troop numbers,
rather than reduce forces' readiness. It would be easier to save money this
way - maintaining ammunition and keeping battalions staffed is costly - but
any step in that direction is taboo. Nobody wants to return to the 'hollow
forces' of the Carter era.
But, says Mr Augustine: 'We also have to be careful we don't build a hollow
industrial base.' By this he means a large number of defence factories,
producing at a low rate, doing little R&amp;D and incurring high overheads. 'I
think that's a very real risk,' he says.
The Pentagon's approach is to try to break down the barriers as much as
possible between military and civil industry. 'We cannot afford to have low
rates of production in an entirely different industrial sector,' says Mr
Deutch.
Its 'dual use' policy is meant to show wider economic benefits for the
effort that goes into military technology. It has two sides. One is to focus
on developing technologies that have commercial as well as military
applications. The other is to take advantage of advances in civil
technology, breaking down the tangle of regulations governing the military
procurement process and buying products directly from the civil sector. This
is expected to produce significant savings especially in electronics and
software. Inquirers already have a freephone number to call: 1-800-DUAL USE.
Lockheed's Mr Tellep is cautious. 'Dual use is a valid concept if not
carried too far. You can have dual-use integrated circuits, dual-use
computers, perhaps dual-use cockpit displays. It's hard to think of a
dual-use tank.'
But Mr Augustine can imagine the next generation of battle tank being
designed to use a truck engine instead of the current Abrams tank's gas
turbine. 'Even though it's not the optimum tank, it may be the optimum tank
you can produce.'
To keep vital defence plants in business, the Pentagon could transfer
maintenance work from state arsenals and dockyards to private-sector
manufacturers.
It will also count more on government-led foreign military sales, regardless
of arguments for restraint in regions such as the Middle East. A sharp
decline in sales from the former Soviet Union has given the US overwhelming
dominance in the world market, with arms transfer agreements worth almost
Dollars 29bn last year.
Exports are already covering production gaps. The country's sole remaining
tank production line, which General Dynamics operates at Lima, Ohio, now
lives off Egyptian, Saudi and Kuwaiti contracts. Foreign sales used to be
the icing on the cake for US arms companies. They have become a necessary
part of the industrial strategy.
