FT  22 NOV 93 / Pacific nations hail era of closer unity
Leaders of Pacific rim countries, meeting in an unprecedented summit at the
weekend, set out a vision of economic partnership which they said would give
the Asia Pacific region a new voice in world affairs and would spearhead
global growth in the 21st century.
Although they stopped far short of establishing a formal economic community,
the leaders from the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation grouping indicated
gathering momentum by agreeing to meet next year in Jakarta and calling a
meeting of finance ministers to discuss macroeconomic developments and
capital flows.
The heads of government of the US, Japan, China, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, South Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Brunei, with ministers from Taiwan and Hong Kong, met for six hours in a
replica Indian log longhouse on Blake Island, near Seattle.
The leaders issued a 'vision statement' that steered well clear of the many
bilateral issues dividing Apec members and contained few specific
commitments, but said: 'Our economies are moving toward interdependence and
there is a growing sense of community among us.' The region, they noted,
accounts for 40 per cent of the world's population and 50 per cent of its
gross national product.
The statement's vagueness underlined the nervousness of Asian countries
about creating new formal structures for co-operation, and particularly
about agreeing to anything that might be interpreted as submitting to US
domination.
However, Mr Paul Keating, the Australian prime minister, said the summit had
'diminished fears some countries might have had about the US and its
motives.'
US President Bill Clinton said: 'We've agreed that the Asian-Pacific region
should be a united one, not divided. We've agreed that our economic policies
should be open, not closed.'
The leaders were emphatic that they were not trying to establish an
exclusive trade bloc and that they were determined to win a strengthened
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Most Apec countries, seeking to give
impetus to talks on the Gatt Uruguay Round, offered new tariff cuts.
Gatt negotiators in Geneva are seeking accord by December 15.
China's insistence that the US should not link trade and human rights issues
found an echo with virtually every other participating country.
Weary Clinton sets sights on Pacific goals, Page 6 Observer, Page 15
