FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (26): Bumpy road for car groups - Troubled
joint ventures
THE UNPACKED boxes with bright red General Motors markings stacked around a
Shenyang factory tell of the difficulties facing the US vehicle maker in its
joint venture in the northern Chinese industrial city, writes Robert
Thomson.
Each box contains part of a pick-up truck, but the assembly line has stalled
along with sales, and GM's partner, the Jinbei (Gold Cup) Automotive
Company, complains that the model is unsuitable for Chinese conditions and
that the price of Yn180,000 is beyond the means of most work units.
Mr Zhang Defa, vice director of Jinbei, said the joint venture has only put
together 300 of 580 pick-up kits imported in the past year, while existing
production lines are still churning out Jinbei's standard commercial van. He
suggests that the fruits of co-operation have not been to either partner's
taste.
'There is no market for the GM truck. Chinese consumers are not very
accustomed to this kind of two-seater vehicle and it is very difficult to
sell.
'We are now negotiating with them to build a four-seater vehicle which would
be better suited for China,' Mr Zhang says.
Dealing with Jinbei has not been easy for GM or for Toyota Motor, which has
a technical tie-up for minibus production with the Shenyang company, which
is eager to boast that it is the 37th largest enterprise in China and has 40
per cent of the minibus market.
Jinbei's close links to the Shenyang government make it difficult for
partners to resolve disputes locally, but Volks- wagen found in its venture
in larger, less provincial, Shanghai that it could tap support from
government officials who owed no personal loyalty to its partner.
Mr Zhang suggests that negotiations for a production joint venture with
Toyota are in the final phase: 'It is very good to have technical
co-operation, but we would like them to make an investment and be involved
in the design of the car.'
Toyota, the Japanese car maker, insists that there are many areas of
disagreement and a contract is far from signed: 'The Chinese side would like
to think we are close to an agreement.' One obstacle is Jinbei's lack of
openness about its financial operations.
The Japanese company discovered that the Hong Kong-based Brilliance group,
through which Toyota has the technical tie-up with Jinbei, established a
Bermuda-registered company, Brilliance China Automotive Holdings. This
became the first Chinese mainland company, via Bermuda, to be listed on the
New York exchange late last year.
According to Mr Zhang, Jinbei itself was not listed, though 25 per cent of
the Toyota-linked minibus production venture was listed by the Hong
Kong-based Brilliance.
Toyota says that it was not told of the listing until after the event: 'Our
name was used in some of the publicity materials, but we didn't know.
'The Brilliance issue does not affect the ownership of Jinbei,' Mr Zhang
says.
'I have no idea what the share price is now. I know that the share price
went up on the first day of listing, but that is all I know because we have
no reason to watch the price.'
However, the vehicle maker's own brochure talks of the 'Brilliance-Jinbei'
listing, and has a photograph of Jinbei officials in the company of Mr Jiang
Zemin, the Communist party general secretary, who is supposed to have said
that 'Jinbei has connected the finance line with the US and the world.'
At the time of the listing, the New York exchange was presented with a
painting depicting 'a hundred birds worshipping the phoenix,' which, Jinbei
explains, symbolised the hundreds of state-owned Chinese companies flying
toward the US stock market for a listing.
But the listing stirred opposition in Beijing where some Communist party
officials were furious that the Shenyang company and its charismatic
chairman, Mr Zhao Xiyou, had proceeded.
Toyota is still angry, and wonders whether its future in China should be
tied to a a company with an erratic management record.
The Japanese maker is also yet to solve the issues that haunt most joint
venture negotiations, including the value of existing assets that Jinbei
sees as its contribution to the project, and the composition of the
workforce, as well as the role of the imported management.
