FT  12 MAY 93 / US relations with EC turn sour over policy debate on Bosnia
RELATIONS between the US and the European Community took a sharp turn for
the worse yesterday after mutual recriminations about the attempts to
co-ordinate western policy on Bosnia.
The EC presidency categorically denied Washington's claim that its European
allies were pressing it to wait for a Bosnian Serb referendum this weekend
before taking a decision on possible joint military action against the
Bosnian Serbs.
Mr Niels Halveg Petersen, foreign minister of Denmark which currently holds
the EC presidency, said the US statement on the subject had 'no foundation
whatsoever'.
'The question of tying anything in the EC position to the referendum is
totally absurd,' Mr Petersen angrily told a news conference in Brussels.
He was referring to a statement by a White House official, Ms Dee Dee Myers,
on Monday that to preserve a common front with the EC, Washington was
putting off any decision on further action until after the Bosnian Serb
referendum. This has been called to allow the Bosnian Serb people to make a
final decision on an international peace plan, rejected by their self-styled
parliament a week ago. Meanwhile Bosnian Serb leaders rejected a call by
Yugoslav, Serbian and Montenegrin leaders to attend a joint parliamentary
session in Belgrade on Friday to decide whether to accept the peace plan,
the Tanjug news agency said.
The Yugoslav, Serbian and Montenegrin leaders wanted the parliamentary
session to replace the referendum, the Yugoslav news agency said, but the
leadership of Mr Radovan Karadzic's Serbian Democratic party agreed late
yesterday that such a meeting could be held only after the referendum.
Before news came of the rejection by the Bosnian Serbs, President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia who, since the summit of the warring parties in Athens
at the beginning of this month, has been actively pressing the Bosnian Serbs
to accept the peace plan, said it concerned Yugoslavia, Serbia, Montenegro
and the Serb-populated region of Krajina in Croatia, as much as the Bosnian
Serbs.
This meant that a decision on the plan, drawn up by Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord
Owen, the United Nations and EC mediators, should not be taken by the
Bosnian Serbs in isolation.
Mr Petersen said EC foreign ministers, at their meeting in Brussels on
Monday, had expressed the same view as the US on the referendum, namely that
the move to call it was no more than 'a cynical ploy', aimed at buying more
time for the Bosnian Serbs.
Mr Petersen said the question of the referendum had not even come up when he
discussed the Bosnian situation by telephone with Mr Warren Christopher, the
US secretary of state, on Monday, nor in discussions with Mr Andrei Kozyrev,
the Russian foreign minister, on Tuesday.
President Bill Clinton yesterday defended his original proposal to lift the
embargo on arms deliveries to Bosnian Moslems, an idea that several European
governments have strongly opposed for fear that it would prolong the Bosnian
conflict.
Croat forces in Bosnian onslaught Page 3
Edward Mortimer: Twin track to Bosnia peace Page 18
