FT  18 FEB 93 / International Company News: 'Mediocre' Pechiney sees
earnings slide to FFr200m
PECHINEY, the state-controlled French aluminium group that this week emerged
as a potential investor in CarnaudMetalBox, the packaging company, saw net
profits fall to around FFr200m (Dollars 36.2m) last year from FFr820m in
1991.
Mr Jean Gandois, chairman, who earlier this week said Pechiney might be
interested in buying the 25.3 per cent stake in CarnaudMetalBox owned by
MB-Caradon, the UK building products group, described his group's
performance as 'mediocre' in an interview with Les Echos, the French
financial newspaper.
However, he said that Pechiney International, the packaging company in which
Pechiney has a 67 per cent stake, achieved healthy net profits growth from
FFr842m in 1991 to around FFr2bn in 1992 due to net exceptional gains of
FFr1bn.
News of the forecast fall in Pechiney's profits comes at a time when it,
like other French state-controlled companies, is positioning itself as a
candidate for privatisation after next month's parliamentary elections.
France's conservative coalition, now with a clear lead over the socialists
in the opinion polls, last week announced sweeping privatisation plans.
Mr Gandois said that Pechiney 'should be privatised', but not until its
performance had improved and 'the price of aluminium is a bit higher'.
Pechiney saw sales fall to FFr35.38bn in 1992 from FFr37.37bn for 1991 (this
figure has been restated to allow for the sale of the group's nuclear
interests in July).
It broke even at the operating level in both the first and second half of
1992 and made restructuring provisions of FFr782m.
Pechiney International was forced to set aside FFr600m in restructuring
provisions, but still managed to achieve overall exceptional gains of FFr1bn
because of the proceeds from asset sales.
Mr Gandois said that Pechiney might consider increasing Pechiney
International's capital to expand the business.
He added that the parent company would be willing to reduce its holding, but
only to 50.5 per cent as it intended to retain control.
