FT  15 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Boost from Glasgow as David Lloyd hits
Pounds 5.7m
The Scots like to eat and drink more after exercise than the English,
according to David Lloyd Leisure, the tennis court and health club group.
It made the disclosure yesterday when announcing results for the year to
September 30 showing that food and beverage sales were almost 20 per cent of
turnover. It added that the figures were ahead of forecasts made at its
flotation in March this year.
On September 1 the company opened a club in Renfrew, Glasgow, its first new
build outside its greater London base. To date membership is ahead of
expectations and matches those experienced at its London clubs at the same
stage of their development.
However, Mr David Lloyd, chairman, said: 'Customers at our new Glasgow
centre spend about Pounds 3 a head on food and beverages compared with an
average of Pounds 1.60 in Raynes Park, London.'
The opening is important as it is seen as the first of many throughout the
country.
Group pre-tax profits for the period rose to Pounds 5.67m (Pounds 3.08m),
against a forecast of Pounds 5.5m. Earnings per share were 10.85p (7.9p) and
as promised at flotation the board is proposing a single final dividend of
1.95p.
Advisers said food and beverages had grown as a proportion of turnover over
the 11 years of the company's history in line with the increasing
sophistication of club facilities.
He added that unlike many competitors the company did not contract out
catering because it could achieve pre-tax profit margins of between 18 and
20 per cent and wanted to protect the standard of staff.
'We are not selling ourselves as a yield stock. People buy us because they
see the growth prospects,' said Mr David Gray, finance director.
In the present year membership was ahead of the comparative period, as were
renewals. The company said 40 per cent of turnover was secure because about
80 per cent of customers would renew membership by continuing to pay monthly
subscriptions of more than Pounds 40 while new members paid a Pounds 250
one-off joining fee.
Turnover was ahead at Pounds 19.3m (Pounds 15.6m), including Pounds 3.5m
(Pounds 3.09m) from catering, with a full year contribution from three
centres added during the comparative period. Operating profit was Pounds
6.37m (Pounds 4.56m). Net interest charges were halved at Pounds 695,000
(Pounds 1.48m) resulting from the Pounds 13.3m raised by the float. Gearing
at the year-end stood at 12 per cent (80 per cent).
