FT  30 NOV 93 / International Capital Markets: Budget watchers await lead
from PSBR forecast
When Mr Kenneth Clarke, UK chancellor of the exchequer, stands up to deliver
his Budget speech this afternoon, the UK government bond market will be
waiting to see if he lowers the government's previous forecasts for the
public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) for 1993-94 and the following
year, thereby reducing the amount of borrowing needed in the gilt market.
By most estimates, the Bank of England is ahead of schedule with the funding
programme. Back in the March Budget, Mr Norman Lamont, then chancellor,
forecast a PSBR of Pounds 50bn (Dollars 74.5bn) for 1993-94. Eight months
into the financial year, the Bank has completed about Pounds 43bn of gilt
funding. This calculation takes into account the second and third
instalments of partly-paid stocks issued in the previous financial year
(1992-93), but does not include last year's overfunding, estimated by some
City institutional economists to be about Pounds 5bn.
So, on its original calculation of a Pounds 50bn PSBR, the government only
has a further Pounds 7bn of gilt issuance to come, the equivalent of two or
three gilt auctions.
However, according to City economists, this year's PSBR is more likely to be
in the region of between Pounds 45bn and Pounds 48bn, helped by a
faster-than-expected economic recovery and lower debt-servicing costs.
On that calculation, the Bank would only need one or two more auctions,
perhaps supplemented with some tap issues. Last Friday, the Bank said it
would hold an auction on December 8, which the market expects to raise about
Pounds 3bn.
After that, it seems likely that the Bank will take advantage of bullish
market conditions to issue partly-paid stock in January and February, with
the second and third payment instalments falling in the following (1994-95)
financial year.
By the same token, the Bank would not need to include the 1992-93 overfund
in this year's calculation, and may prefer to carry that over for another
year, especially if conditions in the gilt market become more difficult.
Much of the funding this year has been in the five-to-10 year maturity
range, where there has been strong demand from overseas investors who can
borrow cheaply to fund purchases of medium and long-dated gilts.
With the shift in the gilt yield curve to a positive slope after sterling's
exit from the European exchange rate mechanism paved the way for more
dramatic cuts in the base rate, some economists point out that the Bank
should have issued more stock at the short end as a means of reducing the
government's borrowing costs.
