FT  08 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Howard rejects inquiries on
Euro-boundaries
MR Michael Howard, the home secretary, last night rejected demands by
opposition MPs that public inquiries should be held into the proposed
boundaries for Britain's six new Euro constituencies to be established
before next year's European parliament elections.
He warned that there were 'unacceptable risks' that the time needed for the
inquiries might result in the UK not being able to increase its numbers of
MEPs from 81 to 87 from next June.
Five of the new constituencies are to be in England and one in Wales.
Opening the resumed committee stage of the European Parliamentary Elections
bill Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary, argued that there was still time
for public inquiries to be staged.
While stressing that he was not challenging Mr Howard's good faith, he
outlined proposals providing for public inquiries to take place within the
timescale required for an enlarged European parliament to be elected next
June.
Endorsing Mr Blair's arguments, Mr Robert Maclennan, spokesman for the
Liberal Democrats, emphasised that the public inquiries were the key part of
the process of ensuring the fair distribution of parliamentary
constituencies.
Mr Howard insisted that the timetable outlined by Mr Blair was
'unrealistic,' and stressed that it would be impossible to impose a time
limit once a public inquiry got under way.
He promised that the committees to be appointed to recommend the boundaries
of the new constituencies would take account of objections.
Former Tory minister Mr John Biffen (Shropshire N) said it was 'regrettable'
there would be no public inquiries and demanded assurances of 'maximum
opportunity for those affected to be able to appeal against whatever
decision is being made'.
A Labour amendment designed to facilitate the holding of public inquiries
was defeated by a majority of 41. Liberal Democrats attacked the government
for refusing to agree that proportional representation should be used to
elect the new MEPs. They were joined by some Labour backbenchers in voting
against the third reading of the bill which was carried by a government
majority of 172 votes (203-31).
