FT  31 JUL 93 / The ERM Crisis: Franc fort on brink of surrender - Markets
unleash fierce assault on French currency
WHEN Mr Edouard Balladur, France's unflappable prime minister, emerged late
on Thursday night from crisis talks with his economic and monetary officials
to decide how to defend the franc, he said it had been 'just a normal day'.
But even by Mr Balladur's sanguine standards, the events of yesterday were
abnormal. The markets unleashed a fierce assault on the franc, following
Thursday's unexpected decision by Germany's Bundesbank to leave its discount
rate unchanged. The franc fell to its ERM floor rate of FFr3.4305 to the
D-Mark despite concerted intervention by the French and German central
banks.
Economists argued yesterday that the current franc/D-Mark parity was
probably untenable and that the French govern-ment's franc fort policy was
on the brink of defeat.
The government now faces a series of painful decisions. The first is whether
to try to tough it out. The franc fort is the centrepiece of French economic
policy, and the current franc/D-Mark rate is unlikely to be surrendered
without a fight.
Economists argue that this would involve continued heavy intervention by the
Bank of France, if necessary with a rise in French official short term
interest rates above their current 10 per cent level. The French central
bank has an estimated FFr123bn of net reserves to deploy and it would also
expect to receive support from the Bundesbank. One diplomat said yesterday
the French strategy might have been to let the franc fall to its ERM floor
rate so as to force the German authorities to intervene on the franc's
behalf.
A strategy of intervention and high French interest rates was used
successfully to defend the currency in previous attacks in September last
year and January this year. But the current situation is more complex.
France is in recession. INSEE, the state statistics institute, forecasts a
0.7 per cent fall in gross domestic product this year. Meanwhile industry is
pleading for lower interest rates.
Observers argue that these constraints mean that realignment of the French
currency within the ERM is becoming increasingly difficult to avoid. 'If the
franc has to devalue, then Mr Balladur's first instinct will be to devalue
within the ERM,' says one Paris-based diplomat. This would allow the ERM to
remain intact, but would require German assent to a revaluation of the
D-Mark.
That solution was left open by a statement yesterday morning from the Bank
of France. The central bank said that it excluded leaving the ERM or
floating the franc. But it said nothing about a possible realignment of ERM
currencies.
If devaluation cannot be avoided, then realignment within the ERM, rather
than departure from the system, would probably be the least damaging outcome
for the Balladur government. The French prime minister has chosen his words
carefully on the subject of the ERM and the franc. 'I am fully committed to
the stability of the franc within the ERM,' he said in a newspaper interview
earlier this month. 'I exclude today or tomorrow any other policy.'
Political analysts in Paris argue that such a policy could be consistent
with a realignment. 'He has never said as baldly as the former prime
minister that he would quit before devaluing,' said one diplomatic source.
However, others claimed that Mr Balladur is seen by the French electorate as
being so strongly committed to the current parity that any change would be
interpreted as defeat.
A devaluation of the franc would find a warmer welcome from many
industrialists. The franc's strength since September has posed serious
problems for French companies by making their exports less competitive in
countries with weaker currencies, notably the UK, Spain and Italy.
The latest external trade figures, published yesterday by the Customs
Office, illustrated the extent of the damage. The value of French exports
fell to FFr91bn (Pounds 10.36bn) in April, a reduction of 19 per cent on the
same month last year. The general economy has been sheltered from the full
effects of lower exports by a sharper reduction in imports (the trade
surplus rose to a record FFr7.65bn in April), but industry has suffered.
'We would gain a lot from a franc faible (a weak franc), because we export
much more than we import,' said Mr Philippe Messager, corporate finance
director of Valeo, the motor components group which derives most of its
sales from overseas markets. The strong franc has also diminished the profit
contribution from the foreign subsidiaries of French companies.
For some companies, however, such as Rhone Poulenc, the chemicals group, the
franc fort policy has encouraged industry to become more competitive. 'We
don't need a different exchange rate,' Mr Jean-Pierre Tirouflet, finance
director, commented recently.
But last night, as the fate of the French franc hung in the balance, France
appeared to be in danger of a different exchange rate whether it needs it or
not.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WHERE DOES THE ERM GO NOW?
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
OPTION 1       SWEAT IT OUT: the Bundesbank and the Bank of France could
               defy the sceptics and decide to hold on to existing
               exchange rate parities, come what may. This would mean
               open-ended and costly intervention by Europe's central
               banks, which several ERM members might be unwilliing to
               countenance. Spain and Portugal, for example, might
               decide to withdraw sooner rather than later, joining the
               UK and Italy in floating outside the mechanism.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
OPTION 2       REALIGH: members could opt for a wholesale realignment of
               exchange-rate parities, but leave the ground rules
               unchanged. This would involve an upward revaluation of
               the strongest currencies, the D-Mark and the Dutch
               guilder and possibly the Irish punt. The French franc
               would be devalued against these strong currencies, but
               given a higher value against the other weaker ones. In
               the past, France in particular has resisted this.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
OPTION 3       RE-VAMP: a 'new an improved' ERM, including not only a
               realignment, but additional safeguards to make the system
               more durable. These could include: letting currencies
               fluctuate more against their central rate; a willingness
               to tolerate smaller, more frequent realignments; measures
               to discourage currency speculation, such as a tax on
               foreign currency transactions or the re-introduction of
               limited capital controls.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
OPTION 4       CALL IT A DAY: Germany, France and the other member
               countries could abandon the ERM, possibly by suspending
               their central banks' obligation to keep currencies
               floating against each other and the dollar and yen. One
               possibility would be for the ERM members, minus Germany,
               to form a semi-fixed exchange rate system. The D-Mark
               could joint later, when German inflationary pressures had
               subsided.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
