FT  05 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Franc rally averts 'green'
currency realignment
A RALLY in the value of the French franc yesterday averted the
widely-expected need for immediate realignment of the 'green' currency rates
used to translate the European Community's guaranteed farm prices into
national currencies.
But farm trade experts warned that the past week's upheavals in the Exchange
Rate Mechanism could give a new lease of life to the green currency system.
'That's bad news for European agriculture reform,' one said.
Experts were tentative yesterday about the likely implications for farm
trade of the speculative assault on the ERM over the past week. Much will
depend on whether Monday's decision by European Community finance ministers
to widen the fluctuation bands of all member currencies to 15 per cent
succeeds in restoring currency stability.
Signs were more encouraging last night than at any point in the past week as
weaker ERM currencies made a sharp recovery as profit-taking on short
positions lifted the French franc against the D-Mark. 'Trading risks have
increased since the ERM collapsed but there's no reason to change agrimoney
rules,' said one EC official.
Grain trading in Europe was paralysed at one stage this week because of
uncertainty about farm prices. This will be one of the main items at a
special meeting of European commissioners tomorrow.
The impact on the EC budget is expected to be minimal, though national
governments may face higher budget costs in their national currencies as
their contributions - denominated in Ecu - rise in line with any
devaluation.
For UK farmers, it may spell the end of what one British farm spokesman
called a 'golden period'. Since the devaluation of sterling on September 16
last year, support prices to farmers have risen by about 20 per cent in
sterling terms and enhanced competitiveness against farmers elsewhere in
Europe has produced significant, but so far unquantified, export gains -
particularly for sheep meat.
The procedures for adjusting green prices in line with currency fluctuations
are likely to be more complex to manage. But EC officials said there was no
reason to believe the system put in place in January last year to deal with
the EC's five 'floating currencies' - sterling, the peseta, the escudo, the
drachma and the lira - could not work now it applied to all 12 EC
currencies.
Adjustments will be made whenever needed in response to several triggers:
Under a '10-day rule', under which each month is divided into three 10-day
periods, any currency shift greater than 2 per cent from the central ERM
rate during the last period of the month would result in the gap that opened
up having to be halved.
In parallel, any gap of more than 4 per cent appearing in a 10-day period
between any two individual currencies would also trigger adjustment by one
or both currencies.
Under a 'three-day rule', any gap of 6 per cent or more appearing over a
three-day period would trigger action to close the gap on the fourth day.
Yesterday was the first occasion on which a revision might have been needed
under this rule, but as the franc rallied, gaps closed to less than 6 per
cent. This rule applies on a rolling basis, so fluctuations will be
calculated daily and adjustments made as needed.
At a national level, farm trade analysts predicted that French farm and food
products would be likely to gain a competitive advantage on the German
market as a result of any depreciation of the franc against the mark. Last
year, Germany was France's main farm product and food market, importing
Fr32.7bn worth of goods. Italy was just behind at Fr30.4bn.
