FT  03 APR 93 / Cold relics of the cold war: Andrew Harding visits
Providenia, a Russian outpost looking for a purpose
HIGH UP on the rusty-coloured mountainside in letters 30 ft tall, the words
'Glory to the Soviet border guards' have been carved carefully into the
rock. Locals say it took the guards two years to complete. Faded versions of
the same slogan are dotted around the steep hills which surround the port of
Providenia.
For 40 years this deep inlet, in the extreme north-east of the former Soviet
Union and cut off from the rest of it by thousands of miles of frozen
tundra, has lain at the heart of the country's cold war defences. It was
given its name in 1848 by an English explorer who thanked Providence for
finding his ship shelter from a fierce Arctic storm.
Providenia is just 30 miles from United States coastal waters. In its
heyday, 80,000 troops were stationed around the town, weapons pointing
across the Bering Strait, poised for war. Not any more. The dirt track which
sweeps around the bay from airport to town passes through what looks like a
military scrapyard. Derelict watch-towers, rusted, tangled aerials and
abandoned barracks litter the shores.
Providenia is more than just a cold war museum, though. Five thousand
civilians and an undisclosed number of troops still live and work there.
They get just three hours of daylight in winter and endure temperatures
which can hit minus 60''C. Given these conditions and the region's declining
strategic importance, more and more people are beginning to ask themselves
why.
Admittedly, the soldiers do not have much of a choice, but civilians used to
have a simple answer. They were there because they were being paid a fortune
 -at least twice what they would be getting in Moscow. Today, that motive no
longer applies. 'Hardship salaries' were an early casualty of the country's
economic crisis while food, almost all of which has to be shipped or flown
in, costs two to three times Moscow prices.
Those who can afford to leave - in other words, the most skilled workers -
have gone already. In the past year, more than 10 per cent of the population
has returned to what everyone refers to as the 'mainland.' But the cost of
shipping a container back to Moscow or Kiev is more than 100,000 roubles -
more money than many workers have ever seen. And most people have neither
new homes nor jobs to which they can go.
Still, there is always television to pass the time - and, in Providenia,
that means US television, picked up from Alaska by the town's satellite
dish. It provides a constant reminder of a very different life just a few
miles away. Everybody watches it. One company had to change its tea break
when a game show called The Price is Right was moved to an earlier time.
Providenia is looking to Alaska for much more than television, however. It
is looking for a purpose. After all, Anchorage is much closer than Moscow.
So, too, is San Francisco.
As an autonomous Russian republic, the Chukutia already has some
independence from central authority. But not as much as it would like. It
still takes an 11-hour flight to Moscow to get a visa to make the 50-minute
trip to Alaska. Most locals try to laugh off the inconvenience. They say
that when Russia sold Alaska to the US in 1867, they wish Chukutia had been
part of the deal.
Since the end of the cold war, there have been plenty of good intentions:
exchange visits, the occasional romance, shopping trips, the twinning of
Providenia with the Alaskan town of Nome. Like television, these contacts
have whetted some appetites, but they done little to improve the living
standards of most locals. Not that Alaska is wholly to blame.
Providenian businessmen have not, for instance, mastered the art of
self-promotion. Take Fargat Talgatovitch. He will show you proudly a typed
document which proves he was the first private businessman in the Chukutian
peninsular. He is even prouder of his latest venture: a derelict warehouse,
built by Americans in 1910, which he plans to turn into Providenia's first
indoor skating rink and disco. All he needs is a foreign partner. A run-down
building, in a run-down town, in the remotest part of Russia. Interest, so
far, has been less than brisk.
Still, as the locals rarely tire of pointing out, Providenia has more to
offer than that. They see it as a gateway to the region's huge reserves of
coal, gold and minerals - reserves which the cost and climate have kept
untouched. Further west in the regional capital, Anadir, mayor Victor Kvan
talks enthusiastically of a possible deal with the Alaskan town of Bethel,
which needs gravel to rebuild its port. But nothing has been signed.
The one industry which does not seem to be taking this chicken-and-egg
approach is tourism. A luxurious cruise ship, Frontier Spirit, arrived in
Providenia's harbour last autumn. Seventy American tourists, on a three-week
trip from Nome to Seoul, filed through the grimy quayside and into town. Don
Grove, a pensioner from Spokane, Washington, took one look at the grey
skyline, pulled a long face and announced that he was there 'for the food.'
Several women shoppers in a grocery store also grimaced when the tourists,
conspicuous in red anoraks, swarmed in to have a look. 'It's not right that
they should see us living like this,' said one middle-aged woman, queueing
for potatoes.
Most were, however, too busy concentrating on selling souvenirs to feel
humiliated. Half the town seemed to have something for sale. One man wanted
Dollars 500 for his walrus tooth, but dropped the price to Dollars 15 on the
advice of a friend. A few hours later, the boat was gone, leaving at least
one local entrepreneur smiling: he had managed to sell three bottles of
vodka for Dollars 15 each - a 1,700 per cent mark-up.
Not that tourism in Providenia is restricted to sightseeing and souvenirs.
Robert Curran has been exploring the region on behalf of a large hunting
firm which has set its sights on the local bear and moose population. 'A lot
of people are still nervous,' he says. 'You're taking quite a chance to move
into a new area with, shall we say, a rudimentary political system and a
certain lack of facilities.'
Apart from selling the odd walrus tooth, though, what is in all this for the
locals? Mikhail Schmickrath, an Alaskan who has been advising Chukutia's
regional administration about tourism, has one answer: 'Any business that we
can jointly create will put Russian people to work,' he says.
Walking around Providenia's muddy, pot-holed streets, flinching at the roar
of the town's coal-powered generator, it is hard to imagine the place as a
bustling tourist town. And while the steady of flow of people back to the
'mainland' continues, it seems only the native population of Eskimos and
Chukchiks is guaranteed to stay on.
In the tiny Eskimo village of Novy Chaplino, an hour's drive away over a
steep mountain pass, the mood is of resignation. A dance group has just
returned from Providenia where it performed for the tourists. Already, one
of the younger girls is too drunk to stand.
Nikolai Kutyl has had his fair share of vodka, too. Sitting on the steps of
his tiny, wooden house, he talks of his relatives in Alaska. An elderly man,
he had taken advantage recently of a new Russian law allowing Eskimos to
visit family members across the Bering Strait without having to get an exit
visa. But, for Nikolai, the trip brought as much frustration as pleasure.
'I'm a sea hunter. I hunt walrus and seal and it's enough for me to live on.
But I saw how people live in Alaska - they don't work as hard as we do, but
they live a hundred times better. Their life is a real life. A great life.
Not like in Russia.'
Another Eskimo, Svetlana Donal, has spent all her life in the village. She
lives in a damp, two-roomed cottage with her husband and two children.
Looking out towards the sea, she gives a long sigh. 'In winter, they often
don't deliver coal here - and we heat with coal,' she says. But there is no
question of leaving now. 'This is our motherland - our houses are cold and
windy but we'll stay here. We have no place to go. Our parents died here, so
this is where we must live.'
