FT  22 MAY 93 / As they say in Europe: The ordinary and the evil
HEROISM and evil provide an essential journalistic staple. The past week
offered the case of four women and one man who reflected the naturally
excitable, even hysterical, approach of the British and the phlegm of the
French.
Let us start with one of those peculiar records. The Daily Express wrote:
'Rebecca Stephens battled on to become the first British woman to conquer
Everest. No one is better able to sum up her achievement than Lord Hunt,
leader of the first expedition to conquer Everest exactly 40 years ago. 'It
is a tremendous achievement, particularly as she has had relatively so
little experience.'' This combination of braggadocio and bathos is typically
British and its disappearance would constitute a serious folkloric loss, but
it inevitably devalues real achievement.
The other woman who loomed large in the British press was a hospital nurse,
Beverley Allitt, who was found guilty of the murder of a number of children
in her care. It was a horrifying case and the tabloid press played on the
lynch mob mood. 'Let us kill Allitt,' was the headline in the Sun, quoting
the bereaved parents and dropping the inverted commas.
A few days earlier the French had watched with bated breath as a gunman, one
Eric Schmitt, demanded FFr100m (Pounds 12m) in exchange for six children he
held in a nursery school outside Paris. He was killed by the police but the
children were saved, physically and psychologically, largely thanks to the
fortitude and skill of their teacher, Laurence Dreyfus, assisted by a
25-year-old paediatrician, Evelyne Lambert.
The two women received the accolades of an admiring press, but in the
extensive comment there was no reference to 'the courage of French
womanhood,' no bluster, no triumphalism. A rich stream of cliches flowed,
but followed a course unknown in Britain. Presse-Ocean wrote of Schmitt:
'Unemployed and divorced. Even if he incarnated the two great evils of our
society, Eric Schmitt, the so-called human bomb, deserved no pity.'
It was the drama of the human condition that drew the most attention. As
France-Soir put it: '. . . the mystery is that of the quiet man who becomes
paranoid, of a destiny which crashes and wavers between tragedy and strip
cartoon.' For Sud-Ouest the heroines of the affair raised up the rest of
society: 'The courage of these ordinary people is an extraordinary example
which shows that bravery and guts do not belong only to the great and the
strong: it reminds us that we are not all bastards or rotten, or egotists
and cynics, and that it is not necessary even in this grey period of
pessimism, to despair of man.'
This theme was surprisingly widespread. From central France I read: 'The
rescue of the hostages from their nursery school revealed the marvellous
devotion of the anonymous servants of the state and the comforting
solidarity of citizens for once torn from their selfishness.'
The difference between the popular press in Britain and in France is clear.
The former believes that ordinary people are wonderful, and indeed
constantly tells its readers how particularly wonderful they are. For these
papers, everybody who was ever once involved in any hostilities on the
British side is a 'hero' and those who act to prevent their goods being
stolen are always 'plucky.' When anyone behaves really badly, therefore,
tabloid indignation knows no bounds. Evil is abnormal and punishment has to
take the most extreme forms.
In France there is some surprise when people behave well. Eric Schmitt was
portrayed as 'normal,' as a not unexpected phenomenon in a society which
bears many scars in a world burdened with original sin. So rare, in fact, is
the demonstration of virtue that it has to be rewarded immediately. Thus the
two women who protected the children from Schmitt were made members of the
Legion d'honneur on the very day their charges were saved.
Honest John Bull would have ensured civil servants spent 18 months looking
into the matter, seeing if either candidate had ever parked on a double
yellow line and then given each a 'British Empire Medal' because that would
not exceed the honour bestowed on the chairman of the school governors who
was already a 'Member of the British Empire.' The chairman of the company
which supplied the portion-controlled frozen food during the siege, having
made the appropriate donations, would have exchanged the appellation of
Julian Featheringnest for that of Lord Linepocket.
This is a system with which the prime minister, John Major, has promised to
tinker. What cannot be fixed is an incurable Anglo-Saxon optimism about
human nature that makes even the banal evils generated by sick minds the
subject of endless shocked exposition and indignation.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
