FT  03 JUL 93 / Scepticism mounts at Westminster over claims by Mates
MR MICHAEL MATES, the former Northern Ireland minister, yesterday tried to
revive his campaign for an inquiry into the Serious Fraud Office as mounting
scepticism among MPs threatened to undermine his credibility at Westminster.
Mr Mates repeated his claims of possible collusion between the SFO, the
Inland Revenue and the police in preparing a case against Mr Azil Nadir, the
fugitive businessman, calling for a 'quick, independent' inquiry.
His renewed allegations were again denied by Mr George Staple, director of
the SFO, who said his staff had 'nothing to hide'.
Meanwhile, there were reports that Mr Nadir was trying to escalate his
campaign against the SFO from his new base in Northern Cyprus by releasing
apparent transcripts of the closed court proceedings concerning allegations
of an attempt to bribe the trial judge, Mr Justice Tucker.
Mr Anthony Scrivener QC, the barrister who acted for Mr Nadir, also demanded
an inquiry into allegations of a plot to bribe the trial judge and a
conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. Mr Scrivener called on Sir
Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, to publish all his correspondence on
the bribery allegations.
MPs on all sides at Westminster, most of whom are against an inquiry into
the SFO, have become increasingly wary of some of Mr Mates's allegations.
Doubts about the validity of the MP's defiant campaign have been fuelled
further by apparent contradictions in his account of events over the past 10
days.
On June 24, the day before his resignation as a minister, Mr Mates indicated
through close associates that he had not made allegations of any nature
against the British security services.
He responded to newspaper reports of his alleged concern about MI6 by
suggesting that his doubts were confined to the possibility that the Greek
security service had been attempting to destabilise Mr Nadir.
But the release this week of his correspondence with the attorney-general
revealed that he had voiced concern about the possible role of MI6.
Meanwhile, Mr Neil Cooper, Mr Nadir's trustee in bankruptcy, rejected as
incomplete and inaccurate Mr Mates's suggestions that Mr Nadir had not had
access to the documents seized as a result of a court order.
He also revealed that as a result of redirecting Mr Nadir's mail with a
court order he had identified a Mercedes car and a Luxembourg bank account
containing several thousands of pounds which Mr Nadir had illegally failed
to disclose.
David Owen writes: The government, asked yesterday if the edited
correspondence between Mr Mates and senior law officers would ever be
published, said it could be when there was 'no longer a risk of prejudice to
the trial and publication would be consistent with the Crown's obligations
to the court'.
