FT  25 JUN 93 / Church to reduce property holdings
THE CHURCH Commissioners, who have faced criticism for their management of
the Church of England's assets, plan substantial changes to their
property-dominated investment portfolio. Their policy is now to reduce
property holdings when the market allows.
Problems in the property market have been largely responsible for the
capital value of the commissioners' income-producing assets falling from
nearly Pounds 3bn in 1989 to Pounds 2.16bn last year. The proportion of the
church's property holdings - about half its total investments -
substantially exceeds that of most other institutions.
After criticism of the commissioners' asset management last year, Dr George
Carey, archbishop of Canterbury, asked Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountancy
firm, to produce a report. He also established a group including several
senior business figures to consider investment issues. The group is due to
report later this year.
In their annual report yesterday the commissioners acknowledged that in the
late 1980s their portfolio had been 'too heavily tilted' toward commercial
property development. 'We are now addressing these issues, and borrowings to
finance property development have been substantially reduced. Our target is
a more appropriate balance between our property and stock exchange assets.'
Sir Michael Colman, chairman of Reckitt &amp; Colman and the recently-appointed
first church estates commissioner, said other leading investment funds
regarded 15 per cent property holdings as 'quite a lot in today's climate'.
His eventual aim would be for the church to be 'not too far away from what
other major funds are doing'.
Financial pressures on the commissioners are forcing them to reduce their
contribution to clergy stipends. The contribution fell from 45 per cent to
41 per cent last year and is likely to drop below 30 per cent by 1996.
Shortfalls have to be met through increased financial support from church
members.
Another heavy financial demand on the commissioners arises from the mounting
cost of clergy pensions. For the first time last year spending on pensions -
Pounds 63.9m - exceeded the Pounds 62.7m for stipends.
