FT  30 NOV 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (11): Business books:
business booms - Where can you find that must-have manual? Linda Bilmes
analyses a fast-growing market
Do managers read? Or do they just accumulate the latest business tomes on
their bookshelves?
According to Bob Norton, Head of Information Services at the Institute of
Management and author of The Ten Commandments of Management (Century
Business), 'managers want to read . . . as little as possible.' So what
accounts for the proliferation of new business titles and the big push by
booksellers into the lucrative business book market?
As Norton stresses, most business books are fundamentally boring. Still,
managers want to glean the cleverest new ideas and techniques buried amidst
the tonnage. The trick is to find them, hopefully in advance of your
competitors. For that, you need help.
Fortunately, booksellers have embraced the challenge. In addition to
stocking a wide range of business and economics titles, the sales staff in
the business bookshops are generally first rate, capable of guiding the
business person through the maze of similar-sounding titles. As the table
shows, major booksellers and speciality business bookshops accept credit
card orders over the phone. They will generally deliver books in stock
within two to three days, and can order titles not in stock from the
publisher, generally within two to three weeks.
Most American business books are available in same time frame via their UK
distributor. Books published in the US which do not have a local distributor
can take six to eight weeks, although Books Etc. claims to be able to get
such books within four weeks.
For the bookseller, business books - not just on general management, but
also topics such as time-management, skill-improvement, sales and marketing
and biographies of business tycoons - offer some advantages. They are not
gifts; people buy them all year around, not just at Christmas. Moreover,
these books are expensive, and sold to customers who seem indifferent to
price. 'If somebody wants a book, they don't care if it's Pounds 16.99 or
Pounds 19.99,' says Andrew Meinke, at Dillons Business Bookshop in London.
Many business book purchasers are on expense accounts; in some cases, the
books are tax deductible. UK publishers typically sell a Dollars 16.99
American business book for Pounds 16.99 (Dollars 25). So despite a short
shelf life - most businessmen want the latest book, or the most recent
edition - business books are good business.
But where to get them? The Dillons chain has developed a speciality in the
business book area. Some 40 of its shops nationwide carry a broad selection.
The flagship store is adjacent to London Business School. It has a wide
selection and does a brisk mail order business.
What makes a best-seller? According to Dillons' Mr Meinke, it all depends on
'buzzwords'. This year the key phrase is 're-engineering'. Last year it was
'networking.' Dillons top-sellers this year are John Kay's Foundations of
Corporate Success (Oxford University Press) and Re-engineering the
Corporation by Michael Hammer and James Champy (Nicholas Brealey). 'It's
always haphazard to figure out how well a book will sell,' says Mr Meinke.
'Sometimes you make horrendous mistakes as I did this year by ordering far
too many copies of Silicon Samurai (a book on Japanese IT innovation,
Blackwell).'
In conjunction with major publishers, Dillons prints a 'Business Book
Service' brochure containing brief descriptions of the latest titles. Other
specialist branches include the Dillons Barbican Business Book Centre (at
the Barbican in London) and Dillons Economist Bookshop on Portugal Street,
WC2, near The London School of Economics.
Also pursuing the business books trade is the Books Etc chain. Branches in
the City of London cater for bankers, accountants and lawyers. The
best-selling title at the Broadgate shop is Options, Futures, and Other
Derivative Securities by John Hull (Prentice-Hall). Books Etc. offers free
same-day delivery in the London area. Portia King, manager of the London
Wall shop, puts out an annual business book catalogue listing all current
and upcoming business books, with indices by title and author (next
catalogue available in March 94). They also have a mailing list where you
can tick areas of interest and will send you news of forthcoming titles.
The main UK specialist in business books is Parks, which sells finance,
accounting, and law books, primarily to corporate account customers. Parks
provides same-day hand delivery in London, Manchester, Glasgow, and
Birmingham for a charge of Pounds 1.50 plus VAT. It has a specialised
mailing list. Parks can get hold of anything published in the UK or America
but Europe is a problem. 'People come in and they want books on the German
accounting system,' says Mr Rob Frampton, manager of the Copthall Avenue
branch, 'and it's the devil's own job to get hold of these European
publishers.' So much for the single market.
Waterstones carries a broad spread of business titles in its larger
branches, such as the Leadenhall market store in the City. The chain does
some promotions together with publishers but has no specific service for
business books. Telephone order lines seem to be permanently engaged.
Chances are, if you can't find it elsewhere, Blackwells will have it.
Blackwells, which does some 60 per cent of its business by mail order,
stocks over 8,000 titles just in management, not counting thousands more in
international trade, economics, computing and related disciplines. The main
shop in Oxford has an impressive selection of business books. Blackwells
also has a mailing list and can send news of upcoming titles in your area of
interest.
Airport terminals, with thousands of business travellers (two-thirds male)
with time to kill, are a natural outlet for business booksellers. Heathrow
can probably create a best seller on its own. Sam Brown, airports book buyer
for W H Smith, which has the concession at three of the Heathrow terminals,
Gatwick North, Manchester, Stanstead, and Birmingham, chooses one business
book for promotion every month. This is given floor-to-ceiling graphic
displays and four or five shelves to promote the title. Business books
account for 10 per cent of W H Smith's turnover at Heathrow. Sam Brown's
best-seller right now is John Harvey-Jones's Making It Happen (Harper
Collins).
If you don't have time to browse through the bookshelves, you can join
Executive World, Britain's business book club. The club offers its 15,000
members an opportunity to buy the best selling business books at a 25 per
cent discount. The deal is the usual upfront offer (three or four books for
around Pounds 5) and then a commitment to purchase at least four in the next
8 months. Executive World puts out a bi-monthly magazine offering a
selection of 50 titles in areas such as communication, negotiation,
efficiency, small business, and general management. 'The title sells the
book,' says James Opie, who runs Executive World. Its number two best seller
is called Perfect CV by American recruitment specialist Tom Jackson.
'Everybody looks for a job at some point or another,' says Opie. 'For Pounds
7.45, after the 25 per cent discount, you can own that book.' Executive
World can be contacted on 0793-512666.
Executive Book Summaries (EBS) is the answer for those who want to keep up
with the business literature but cannot spare the time. Based in Vermont,
EBS publishes synopses of business books. Nearly one-third of it subscribers
are outside North America, including 'just about every country except Iraq,'
says marketing director Rob Carter. Presumably, EBS is a brilliant idea for
non-native English speakers.
EBS reads all the business books published in English every year, working
with the publishers so they can see advance manuscripts and galleys. They
pick the 30 best books for eight-page summaries and write one-page
mini-summaries for 36 others. 'The publishers and the authors are all for
it,' says Carter. 'We act as a screening service to help our subscribers
decide 'these are the books I need to buy'. Its not a replacement, but it
whets their appetite.' EBS also sells, by mail order, the 66 titles
reviewed. An annual subscription costs Dollars 139 (Pounds 92). For more
information ring US 804-453-4062 (Fax 804-453-5062).
A number of publishers specialise in business books, including Oxford
University Press, Nicholas Brealey, Gower, Addison Wesley, Maxwell Macmillan
and McGraw-Hill. The publisher can do a lot to influence prospective
customers. McGraw Hill, one of the largest business book publishers, prints
more than 70 titles per year and is the European distributor for the Harvard
Business School press. Every April it publishes a glossy Business Magazine,
distributed free at bookshops, which features interviews with authors,
excerpts from books, and listings of forthcoming titles.
Also worth noting is Business Age magazine, which publishes one-paragraph
notes on new business books in the back of the magazine. Fortune, Business
Week and Management Today each carry a small number of reviews in each
issue. And, of course, there is always the Financial Times Review of
Business Books.
