FT  25 SEP 93 / Mandela plea spurs lifting of S African sanctions
COUNTRIES around the world began lifting sanctions on South Africa last
night after an appeal from Mr Nelson Mandela, president of the African
National Congress.
Only hours after Mr Mandela's call at the United Nations in New York, the US
Senate approved legislation lifting US sanctions. Canada, Australia and the
Commonwealth leadership said they would follow suit.
Mr Mandela, urging that all economic sanctions against South Africa be
lifted in an attempt to end the country's isolation, said victory against
apartheid was in sight.
Addressing a specially convened meeting of the UN Special Committee Against
Apartheid, which has spearheaded the sanctions drive over the past three
decades, Mr Mandela asked governments 'to take all necessary measures to end
the economic sanctions you imposed'.
His plea came a day after South Africa's parliament approved the creation of
a multi-racial Transitional Executive Council giving blacks a say in
government for the first time.
Mr Mandela called on the international investment community to 'help
regenerate the South African economy'. He said steps should be taken to
prevent South Africa becoming another Somalia or Bosnia. Sanctions had
brought it to the point 'where the transition to democracy has now been
enshrined in the law of our country'.
The passage of the South African legislation has been welcomed by President
Bill Clinton as an 'historic step'. He said the US would launch 'initiatives
to help restore economic growth' to South Africa. These include supporting
South African access to the IMF and World Bank.
Mr Mandela's call comes at the beginning of a crucial 10-day period in which
senior officials of the government and the ANC will be seeking to convince
investors and donors that they should invest in South Africa.
Mr Clinton later announced that the commerce secretary, Mr Ron Brown, is to
lead a trade and investment mission to South Africa to explore business
opportunities, particularly with the black private sector.
The power behind sanctions; Investors wary, Page 4
