FT  15 FEB 93 / Optimistic state of the unions / Whether Clinton will prove
as amenable as the US labour movement hopes
Mr Bill Clinton's election theme tune was 'Don't stop thinking about
tomorrow', by the pop group Fleetwood Mac. Now that the Democratic candidate
is safely installed in the White House, the hopes of the US labour movement
might be summed up by another Fleetwood Mac recording, 'Come a little bit
closer'.
After 12 years of strongly anti-union Republican administrations, the
American labour movement is expecting a more friendly and productive
relationship with the Clinton White House.
The first piece of legislation signed into law by Mr Clinton, on February 4,
was the family leave bill, which guarantees workers up to 12 weeks' unpaid
time off for family medical emergencies.
Shortly before that, Mr Clinton took a symbolically important step in
revoking two orders, passed by President George Bush in the run-up to last
year's election. One required federal contractors to post notices informing
workers of their rights not to pay union dues; the other prohibited
contractors on federally funded construction contracts from requiring
workers to be union members.
Mr Clinton is also considering lifting the rule imposed by President Ronald
Reagan on those involved in the 1981 air traffic controllers' strike,
barring them from employment by the federal government.
The labour movement hopes these early gestures will be followed by more
far-reaching action -  both in terms of specific legislation and the general
climate of industrial relations. However, it is not simply relying on the
swing of the political pendulum to improve its fortunes. Many -  though far
from all -  of its leaders are co-operating with management to make
individual companies and industries more competitive, thus saving union
jobs.
For example, United Steelworkers last month proposed a new form of
collective bargaining, involving long-term labour contracts and more
flexible working patterns in return for job security and worker involvement
in decision-making.
According to Mr Lynn Williams, the union's leader: 'When it comes to
dividing up the pie, we'll be adversaries. But now we have to grow the pie,
and that means working together.'
For the unions, it is a question of survival. Their high-water mark was in
1945, when union members accounted for 35.5 per cent of the labour force.
The figure now is only 15.8 per cent. Unions remain much stronger in the
public sector, with nearly 37 per cent of employees in the labour movement.
If government workers are excluded, less than 12 per cent of the US
workforce belongs to a union.
Several forces have been at work. One is the changing sectoral make-up of US
industry and its geographical distribution.
The past 20 years have seen a sharp drop in employment in America's heavy
manufacturing industries, such as steel and automobiles, located in the
northern 'rust-belt' states. Job growth has been concentrated in the
high-technology and service sectors, which are harder to unionise, and in
the conservative southern states, which have a tradition of hostility to
unions.
Examples of successful southern-based non-union companies range from Nucor,
the steel mini-mill operator, to Wal-Mart, now the largest US retailer,
employing 375,000 people. Plants established in the US by Japanese car
companies are not unionised, though their joint ventures with US
manufacturers are.
Many of these newer companies, appreciating the flexibility in working
practices that a non-union labour force offers, have assiduously cultivated
'liberal' employee relations. Wal-Mart, for example, always refers to its
workers as 'associates'. Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines, where only the
pilots are unionised, prides itself on never laying off employees.
Such long-term economic and social forces have been reinforced since the
start of the 1980s by an anti-union political atmosphere. The significant
event was Mr Reagan's success in 1981 in breaking the strike by the
government-employed Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organisation. By
replacing Patco workers with non-union labour, he set an example that many
other companies followed, or at least threatened to follow.
It was management's threat to replace striking workers that finally broke
the nerve of United Auto Workers' members last year after a long strike at
Caterpillar, the earth-moving equipment manufacturer.
Examples like this, together with the recent recession which has made
workers fearful of losing their jobs, help explain why, last year, the
number of big strikes and lock-outs at US companies reached their lowest
level in 45 years.
That said, big stoppages do still take place. Earlier this month, the United
Mine Workers began a strike at Peabody, the coalmining subsidiary of
Britain's Hanson group, as part of an industry-wide dispute over a
labour/management contract.
If the dispute escalates into a full-scale coalminers' strike, it could
prove a first test of the Clinton administration's willingness to step into
big labour disputes as a last-ditch mediator.
But the union movement's expectations for the Clinton administration go far
beyond strike mediation, based in part on the belief that the new president
has electoral debts to pay members who fought hard last year for a
Democratic victory. Roughly 25 per cent of Mr Clinton's vote came from union
households.
Four common themes run through most unions demands: legislation to prevent
the replacement of striking unionists; an economic package to boost
employment and investment in the infrastructure and inner cities; reform of
the US healthcare system, which leaves many Americans without decent
coverage; and changes to the free-trade agreement with Mexico negotiated by
the Bush administration, which the unions fear will mean a loss of jobs to
cheap labour markets south of the border.
Mr Clinton's precise policies on many of these issues remain unclear and the
unions may find him less amenable to their agenda than they would like. On
the trade agreement, for example, he is thought to favour relatively minor
changes to the Bush package.
The administration is, however, committed to signing a bill that would
prevent a company from permanently replacing a striking worker, although it
is not certain the bill will be passed by Congress.
If it is, it could revive the strike as an industrial relations weapon. Yet
many unions -  and corporate managements -  recognise that the pressures of
domestic and foreign competition and changes in the organisation of work
make a less adversarial relationship necessary.
Many companies are devolving responsibility down the line to workers
('empowering them', in the fashionable jargon), while workers are becoming
more flexible in the tasks they are prepared to handle, abandoning
entrenched job demarcation lines.
At National Steel, which is majority-owned by Japan's NKK, management/union
relations are so good that the company has signed a 'neutrality agreement',
meaning that it does not oppose union efforts to organise new parts of the
business. As a result, the union has even signed up the white-collar workers
at headquarters.
But the path to better relations is far from easy, as underlined by recent
friction at Saturn, the General Motors car company, which was set up in the
1980s as a shining example of the best manufacturing and labour practices.
In a referendum at the end of last month, some 29 per cent of Saturn's
workers said they would like to end the current management/union
co-operation arrangement and go back to a traditional arm's-length
relationship. These workers felt their union leaders had grown too cosy with
Saturn's management.
GM will also provide one of the most important labour relations negotiations
of 1993. The UAW's three-year contract with the Big Three Detroit
manufacturers runs out in the autumn and GM, its North American operations
struggling to return to profit, will want substantial concessions from the
union on health coverage and other benefits. The UAW, angry at the company's
plant closure programme, may not find it easy to co-operate.
It could, in short, be a particularly significant litmus test of 1990s
co-operation versus the bad old days of confrontation.
