FT  18 DEC 93 / Gardening: Festive planting, no need to panic - A few simple
preparations mean you can enjoy your Christmas celebrations before braving
the elements
The weather is wonderfully unpleasant but the Christmas holidays loom and,
in my mind's eye, I see Weekend FT readers as planters, wading into the
thick of it with a sodden newspaper and a pair of designer gumboots. The
coming break gives us all a chance for replanting and improvements. But what
do you do if you cannot face the elements on the morning after the plants
arrive?
It depends where they come from. If you have bought them at a garden centre,
you could well have paid over the odds but you will be under less pressure.
The plants will be potted-up already and can wait for your convenience. They
can wait quite a while; indeed, several peonies have been waiting for my
convenience since June.
They are none the worse for the interval but the one danger is a severe
frost. If it works down into a pot, it might turn the plants into pulp when
it starts to thaw. Last year, I lost several agapanthus, rotted by a thaw
which I had not anticipated. A hard winter costs nurserymen as many plants
from rotting as from freezing. If you foresee trouble, move any plants
bought in pots into a shed or under cover.
If you have ordered roses, shrubs or trees from a nursery, you can expect
delivery any time now after a slow start to lifting during the frosts in
November. Among our bigger nurseries, my favourite remains Scotts of
Merriott, Somerset, now in the third generation of family ownership.
Most of its business is by mail order and it is not alone in believing that
this form of retailing is making a comeback, just after many small nurseries
pronounced it impossibly expensive and gave it up. The reason is that the
parcels of plants go nowhere near the well-meaning fumbles of the post
office. The new express delivery firms now carry many of the nursery's mail
orders of shrubs and trees, along with the various goods of other home
shopping catalogues.
As a result, orders arrive within two days of despatch at a cost which is
way below the price of the post office's friendly meander. It is no longer
prohibitive to order trees, fruit and roses by mail from a catalogue. If
mail order revives for the nursery trade, will we all want to pay an extra
30 per cent or more to buy similar plants at our local garden centres?
One view is that garden centres will narrow down and become plant centres;
the big DIY stores will sell garden extras more cheaply and will offer a
simplified range of clean, attractive plants to impulse buyers. Keen
gardeners will revert to specialist nurseries, using their Plant Finders to
put them in touch with the new potential of mail order, delivered outside
the national postal network.
If they do, they will be glad for advice on planting from Scotts. For
instance, what do you do with a straw-wrapped parcel if it arrives when you
are up to your ears in work and parties? The answer is refreshingly simple:
leave it alone for a few days until you are ready for it.
If you are only half-ready, you can loosen the string and allow air to
circulate while burying its lower length in the ground. If the ground has
frozen already, keep the package in a cool, dry place. The one fatal mistake
is to bring it indoors or buy a heater so as to keep it warm.
In short, a sudden pre-Christmas delivery is no cause for panic. If you have
ordered fruit trees or roses, they will probably arrive with bare roots.
When you unpack them eventually, soak the roots in a bucket of water before
planting them or covering them over in a temporary trench outdoors. They can
wait until mid-March, but I have reverted to the older view that roses, at
least, are best transplanted before the new year.
When you plant them, harden your heart and do what most amateurs tend to
avoid: prune the new arrivals, removing at least half of the upper stems of
the old-fashioned varieties, and reducing climbers and ramblers to no more
than 2 ft. This pruning sounds extreme, but it is the way to avoid weak
roses later.
As for those plants that arrive in pots or fresh out of them, the growers at
Scotts have a useful tip. The roots may well have started to run round in a
circle and chase their tails in a tennis ball of peat compost. Unpot them
and run a sharp knife down one side of the root ball in order to scuff it
and encourage new roots to face outwards, not inwards, into the circular
tangle.
If you cut one side of a new plant in this way, the experts believe it is
more willing to develop roots away from its peat compost and into the
surrounding soil of a new home.
For similar reasons, there is now a definitive answer to the old question of
whether the roots of a tree are better when planted in a circle, not a
rectangle.
The answer is a rectangle: a round hole encourages roots to run round it and
not to leave the central ball of soil in which they have become pot-bound or
previously tended. In a rectangle, the roots are encouraged to run outwards
and join their new home, instead of becoming introverted.
If mail order is going to make a comeback, these little matters of treatment
will need to be remembered.
