FT  11 SEP 93 / Travel: The past lives on for old romantics - Nicholas
Woodsworth potters around Malacca
LIKE MANY westerners, I tend to an over-romantic view of the east, writes
Nicholas Woodsworth. I should know better. We live in the 1990s and the
wonders of the Orient are less wonderful than formerly. Yet hope springs
eternal.
Malacca, in Malaysia, is one of those Asian places with an irresistible
name, and, speeding towards it along the motorway from the skyscrapers of
Kuala Lumpur, I began creating a fabulous city. Certainly the literature I
had collected on Malacca did nothing to dissuade me. I can always spot a
guidebook author who has the same romantic infirmity as I: long lists of
exotic trade-goods are a giveaway.
As I stepped from the bus into tropical rain, hotel touts proffered handfuls
of limp pamphlets. I stalked off. I could find historic splendour on my own.
Two hours later, weary and defeated, I checked into a dingy hotel.
It was the nearest thing I could find to historic splendour. Malacca seemed
to have become a backwater, a forgotten town perched on the edge of a
somnolent coast. There was nothing but the rain on the roof and the revving
of car engines from the auto repair shop on the far side of the street.
At the waterfront, where a narrow and muddy river flows into the Straits of
Malacca, I watched mud-skippers flop about in the ooze of low tide.
On St Paul's Hill, overlooking the banks of the river, I wandered about a
16th century church built by the Portuguese at the beginning of their
130-year rule of Malacca. Roofless and doorless, it, too, has been
abandoned. Even the tomb of St Francis Xavier has been emptied and the body
of the great Jesuit reinterred in Goa.
Malacca depressed me. Even Christ Church, a splendid red Dutch building
later appropriated by the British, was sad. It was full of lugubrious marble
plaques commemorating entire English families decimated by tropical disease.
There was history in Malacca's old buildings, but it all seemed dead and
forsaken. Wandering back to my hotel through a grey drizzle, I began to
think of moving down the coast to that bright temple of modernism,
Singapore.
But I did not. Instead, on a street corner, I bumped into a Malaccan who
showed me that the past is not just abandoned churches and fortresses. I had
been looking in the wrong place.
I met Roland Lee outside his home, began chatting, and ended up staying
there for several days. His house sits not far from the river on the town's
old Heeren Street, a narrow road once inhabited by Malacca's Dutch notables.
It seems ordinary enough. From the outside lacquered family name-plaques in
Chinese script are the only distinguishing features of these terraced
houses. Walk inside, though, and you walk into a story 500 years old.
British, Dutch and Portuguese can all claim long traditions here, but
Roland's pedigree outdoes them all. A Peranakan, or Straits-born Chinese,
his family was settled in Malacca 200 years before the first Europeans set
foot there.
The Chinese, wherever they immigrate in Asia, rarely marry outside their own
community. Those who came to the Malaysian peninsula in the late 1800s to
work the British tin mines and rubber plantations, and now number some 5m,
are good examples.
But the Peranakans are different. When Chinese merchants arrived in Malacca
in the 1400s they came without wives or families. Trade was so good they
settled; they took Malayan wives. The mixing of two peoples of almost
diametrically opposed character - one hard-working and profit-oriented, the
other non-materialist and other-worldly - gave rise to a peculiar culture: a
wealthy and influential business community with a love of sensual things.
Today the Peranakans of Malacca have fallen behind Malaysia's ethnic Chinese
in the race for prosperity, but they have not given up their past. They
retain their love of poetry and brightly coloured clothing, ornately carved
furniture, distinctive pink, yellow and green ceramics, elaborate ritual and
family ceremonies, cuisine that is Chinese in its refinement but Malayan in
its spiciness.
There were traces of all these things in Roland's house. As Malacca's
economy declined and Peranakan wealth shifted to Penang, Singapore or
Sydney, the uncles and brothers, cousins and great aunts who lived there
gradually moved away; today Roland is the sole resident of a vast,
extended-family building stretching 93 yards from front door to back.
Roland refuses to leave all this; he is too proud of his ancestral home and
his culture. But the Peranakans who remain on Heeren Street are not alone in
nurturing the past. They are just one of half-a-dozen cultures thrown up by
Malacca's history.
Amid clouds of joss smoke in the Cheng Hoon Teng temple, the oldest in
Malaysia, Roland introduced me to friends in the ethnic Chinese community.
At the Kampong Hulu Mosque I met Malay Muslims. At the Murthi Hindu temple I
watched Malacca's Indians at prayer.
In the town's crowded commercial district I talked to Chetti money-lenders,
the off-spring of Malay-Indian marriages, plying their trade sitting
cross-legged in front of safes. On the beach outside town I watched
Portuguese-speaking fishermen set sail.
The domes and spires of Coleridge's Xanadu grow dimmer daily. Kipling's
flying fish are rare of late in Mandalay. But I am reassured. In the great
rainbow mix of races in one quiet backwater of the east, the past lives.
