FT  30 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Flood of CIS aluminium 'shows
no sign of abating'
THE FLOOD of aluminium to the West from the former Soviet Union shows no
sign of abating, the European Aluminium Association heard yesterday.
Mr Dag Flaa, the association's chairman, said that aluminium exports from
the Commonwealth of Independent States into Western Europe had more than
quadrupled between 1990 and 1992, and had continued to grow in the
first-half of this year. 'This has led to an unprecedented expected export
level in 1993 of 630,000 tonnes to the European markets and 1.4m to 1.5m
tonnes worldwide,' he said.
The EAA clearly expects the European Community limit of 60,000 tonnes on CIS
imports in the four months between August and November to be extended.
Yesterday Mr Dick Dermer, the association's president, suggested that the US
and Japan should follow suit with quotas of their own. Mr Flaa said that the
influx of CIS metal to traditional western markets was more or less
equivalent to the increase in world stocks of primary aluminium. This left
'no doubt that the present imbalance in the aluminium market is primarily a
consequence of the eastern metal'.
World total primary aluminium stocks amount to around 4.6m tonnes, of which
more than 2m tonnes is in London Metal Exchange warehouses. Western world
production is 15m tonnes, with demand at 15.5m tonnes a year. Best estimates
put CIS output around 3m tonnes.
Mr Flaa said the European industry had tried to negotiate with the Russian
industry before approaching the European Commission. The EAA accepted that
the Russian industry should have access to traditionally western markets,
and that over a reasonable period the Russian industry would be assimilated
into the world aluminium industry.
'But it is very unfortunate that it takes place under circumstances so
detrimental to our industry as is the cased today' said Mr Flaa. Why should
the aluminium industry carry the main burden of economic restructuring in
Russia? he asked.
The EAA, whose members employ 235,000 people, hopes that the EC quota
decision will lead to further negotiations with the Russians and a long-term
solution to the problem.
Mr Karl Wobbe, of Germany's VAW Aluminium, warned that world capacity had to
be reduced by at least 1m tonnes. But it was an international problem, he
said, and the burden should not fall on the shoulders of the EC, Russia or
the US alone.
Further price falls would be a disaster, he suggested, adding that at
Dollars 900 a tonne no aluminium smelters in the world would be making
money.
Mr Dermer said that last year European primary aluminium producers were
operating at 93.9 per cent of capacity and produced a total of 3.35m tonnes,
down 5.2 per cent on 1991. This year European production is expected to fall
a further 3.3 per cent to 3.24m tonnes. National trade statistics showed
that CIS imports to the West rose from 443,000 tonnes in 1991 to 750,000
tonnes last year, of which about 80 per cent arrived in European countries.
However, a further 200,000 tonnes of CIS aluminium is thought to have been
shipped from the CIS to western markets in 1992, bringing the total near 1m
tonnes. Most of this went directly into LME warehouses and was not cleared
by customs, Mr Dermer said.
Consumption in Europe grew from 4.68m tonnes to 4.76m tonnes in 1992. But
this year consumption is expected to fall slightly because of the economic
recession, particularly in Germany.
