FT  27 MAR 93 / Yeltsin rivals urge compromise: Russian deputies draw back
from threatened impeachment of president
THE MAIN opponents of Russian president Mr Boris Yeltsin yesterday proposed
various forms of compromise at an extraordinary Congress of Peoples'
Deputies and expressed horror at the prospect of impeaching him.
In his own speech to the Congress, more confidently delivered than most of
his recent public statements, Mr Yeltsin insisted on the need for a popular
vote on trust in himself and on a new draft constitution on April 25.
Pressing his case that he held the Russian people to be the 'highest court',
he challenged the sullen hall of deputies to put the question of trust in
the Congress to the test in the same referendum. The Congress adjourned
without making any decisions and is due to resume today.
In Washington yesterday, President Bill Clinton expressed hope that Russia
might be moving towards resolving its crisis. 'Things look pretty good
today,' he said, before talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany. Mr
Kohl warned that the west might have to rearm if Mr Yeltsin lost his
struggle.
In Mr Yeltsin's cabinet reshuffle, three ministers lost their posts in moves
which strengthen the position of Mr Boris Fyodorov, deputy prime minister
for finance and the economy.
Mr Vasily Barchuk was told to vacate the finance minister's office for the
Russian embassy in Norway; Mr Andrei Nechayev was relieved of the economics
portfolio; and Mr Boris Saltykov, a deputy prime minister, was demoted to
science minister.
Further appointments are likely to be made, according to Mr Alexander
Shokhin, deputy prime minister for foreign economic affairs. These are
likely to come from the so-called centre-ground of politics, and the search
is on for centrists who can be bent to the will of the radicals.
The economic line of the cabinet is likely to be retained - indeed, measures
approved by the cabinet on Thursday, including tightening credit and raising
interest rates, indicate a more radical turn. Mr Yeltsin called for more
emphasis on social support and said the crisis had been deepened by
government mistakes.
The shift by the opposition to a position of statesmanlike compromise was
led by Mr Valery Zorkin, chairman of the Constitutional Court, in his
favoured role as political broker. Mr Zorkin had led the attack on the
president's call to the nation for backing in a plebiscite, which he said
was unconstitutional.
Yesterday, Mr Zorkin told deputies impeachment of Mr Yeltsin could be
catastrophic. He produced a 10-point programme which would reshape the
constitution to give the president a more powerful position, see the
parliament draw up a law on elections for a two-tier parliament and hold
elections for presidency and parliament in autumn.
Mr Yeltsin has not betrayed any enthusiasm for imminent elections, but he
has said he is not against them.
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker, flatly made a speech of relative
moderation in which he blamed Mr Yeltsin for the political impasse but said
a compromise could and should be made.
General Alexander Rutskoi, the vice president who had opposed Mr Yeltsin's
appeal and claim to assume special powers, launched a ferocious attack on
the president's aides but then proposed an eight-point programme which
accorded in most respects with what Mr Yeltsin wanted - including a
plebiscite.
Regional and republican leaders who took the floor made clear that they
supported Mr Yeltsin.
Dangers of drift, Page 8
G7 must give aid, Page 2
