FT  01 APR 93 / Major and Thatcher to face Iraq arms inquiry
THE prime minister, his predecessor Lady Thatcher, and Mr Alan Clark, the
former defence minister, will be asked to give evidence to the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry.
Downing Street said last night Mr John Major would be happy to give evidence
to Lord Justice Scott's inquiry, in public if necessary.
The judge outlined at a London news conference yesterday how he would
conduct his inquiry, which centres on Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based
machine-tool company alleged to have supplied parts for Iraq's so-called
supergun.
Lord Justice Scott said the evidence at the hearings would be heard in
public unless there was 'an overriding national interest reason' why it
should not be.
Three former executives of the company were acquitted at the Old Bailey last
November of illegally trying to export arms-making equipment to Iraq amid
accusations that government ministers encouraged manufacturers to emphasise
the peaceful uses of their products when seeking export licences.
The hearings will start on May 4. The first witness will be Sir Richard
Luce, the former foreign office minister who drew up the original guidelines
governing exports to Iraq in the mid 1980s. The results of the inquiry are
expected to be published towards the end of the year.
Asked if Mr Mark Thatcher, the former prime minister's son, might be invited
to give evidence, Lord Justice Scott said he had seen no connection between
Mr Thatcher and arms to Iraq in documents he had read so far.
Prime ministers and senior cabinet officials have given oral evidence in
previous inquiries, although not in public or on such a politically
sensitive issue.
The terms of the inquiry cover the extent to which arms and related 'dual
use' defence equipment may have reached Iraq from the UK with the knowledge
or complicity of government and in breach of official guidelines and export
licensing arrangements.
Although no evidence will be taken on oath, some civil servants believe the
judge has been given unprecedented arbitrary powers to decide on issues
affecting the national interest which may raise the political stakes once
the inquiry gets under way.
Lord Justice Scott yesterday released the text of a letter from Sir Robin
Butler, head of the home Civil Service, empowering him to decide whether or
not evidence should be held in camera.
Separately Lord Justice Scott has been given an undertaking by Sir Nicholas
Lyell, attorney-general, that no individual giving evidence to the inquiry
will face subsequent criminal proceedings.
Ms Liz Symons, general secretary of the Association of First Division Civil
Servants, the trade union representing the top ranks of the Civil Service,
said the moves would reassure her members who had voiced concern that they
might risk prosecution under the Official Secrets Act.
She also said she had been personally reassured by Sir Robin that no civil
servant would be considered in breach of his or her employment contract,
which contains confidentiality and loyalty clauses.
Lord Justice Scott's decision to have public proceedings well under way
while parliament is in session will leave the opposition free to press
ministers on their testimony with the protection of parliamentary privilege.
He has spent recent weeks pressing government departments to release
documents.
Disclosure row, Page 11
