FT  17 MAY 93 / Swan Hunter wins more time
PRICE WATERHOUSE, receiver to Tyneside shipbuilder Swan Hunter, said last
night that it had agreed a short-term arrangement with the Ministry of
Defence for work to continue on the three Type 23 frigates which the company
was fitting out when it went into receivership last Thursday.
The receiver said there should be normal working on the frigates this week
and the company's 2,200 employees should report for work today. Price
Waterhouse said it had not yet 'formed a view' on the extent of any
redundancies which may arise.
News that work can continue this week on the frigates, the company's main
workload, holds out a thread of hope of Swan Hunter's sur-vival.
Finishing the frigates, which are due to be handed over between the end of
this year and late 1994, would allow the company to retain some of its
workforce and skills, raising its chances of winning further contracts and
making it a more saleable prospect as a going concern.
But Mr Mark Homan, who led the Price Waterhouse team in negotiations with
the MoD, warned last night: 'This temporary respite provides a breathing
space but is not a solution to Swan Hunter's problems.'
He said any permanent solution hinged on finding a buyer for the business.
It was too early to judge the prospect of this being achieved.
Price Waterhouse will shortly be submitting proposals to the MoD for further
work on the frigates.
The short-term deal means the receiver has found a way of paying Swan
employees' wages, at least for this week. The weekly-paid workforce is due
to be paid on Wednesday for the last four weeks.
Unofficial sources say the company may have debts of Pounds 40m. It had run
out of credit and was having to pay cash for essential items before last
Tuesday's announcement that it had lost its fight for the helicopter carrier
order which would have kept it in business.
Tomorrow the Commons select committee on defence will discuss the background
to the difference of more than Pounds 50m in the bids by Swan Hunter and its
rival, the VSEL/Kvaerner consortium, for the contract.
Mr Neville Trotter, Conservative MP for Tynemouth and the committee member
who arranged the special meeting, said he would urge the committee to ask
the MoD to shed light on the 'huge difference'.
Editorial comment, Page 13
