FT  20 APR 93 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (12): Ways to reduce RSI risks -
. . . Keyboards
'I DIDN'T admit that I had repetitive strain injury (RSI) until I dropped
the kettle one morning,' says technology journalist and former RSI sufferer
Dom Pancucci.
'Then I took the car out - and could not unclench my hand after driving. For
six months after that I could not use my right arm at all.'
RSI affects the hands and arms and can cause extreme pain and disablement.
Pancucci contracted it after using an electric typewriter but it is
increasingly being associated with computer keyboard use. Concern about RSI
has led a number of suppliers to produce special ergonomically-designed
keyboards, which look quite different from the standard QWERTY keyboard and
put more emphasis on the user's comfort.
They might just catch on. US-based Aetna Life and Casualty estimates that
workers' compensation claims and other expenses related to RSI, may cost US
business as much as Dollars 20bn a year. And in the UK, the National Union
of Communications believes there may be 100,000 people suffering from
various RSIs. Tim Gopsill, the National Union of Journalists' health and
safety expert, says he knows of 1,000 cases among writers who use computers.
The new keyboards attempt to minimise wrist movement when typing, reducing
stress on the neck and shoulder muscles. For example, Apple Computer's new
ergonomic keyboard (costing Pounds 195) for the Macintosh Computer includes
small pads to rest the wrists on (see picture).
ERGONOMIC MOUSE
Apple also sells an ergonomically designed 'mouse' costing Pounds 40. The
mouse does not need to be gripped tightly in the hand, but can be moved
using the fingertips. And a large button on the top lets more than one
finger do the clicking. A number of RSI cases have been linked to the use of
a mouse, so the choice of ergonomically designed mice is growing. Pamela
Schure, imaging product marketing manager at Apple UK, says the two products
reflect a basic principle of ergonomic design in that they 'adjust to the
worker, not the other way round.'
In the US, new companies are springing up to take advantage of demand for
more ergonomically designed keyboards. One of these is Kinesis of Bellevue,
Washington. Its keyboard separates the keys used by right and left hands in
to pockets at the back of the keyboard. The user must rest his/her wrists on
the front of the keyboard to use them. The company says it designed its
keyboard to take advantage of the neutral hand, wrist and shoulder postures
of the body.
However, innovation in the design of keyboards does not seem to be prompted
simply by concern for the user. Suppliers are also anxious to protect
themselves. In the US, many workers with RSI are suing keyboard and scanner
manufacturers. The defendants include computer industry giants such as IBM,
NCR and Compaq.
Manufacturers are likely to challenge these lawsuits by claiming that their
equipment wasn't used properly - that chairs weren't suitable or lighting
was poor. Or that users were under too much pressure and not given enough
breaks. They are also likely to blame the employers.
KEY QUESTIONS
Are the manufacturers simply shirking their responsibilities, or is their
more to RSI than the keyboard itself?
Jeffrey Boyling, a consultant ergonomist and qualified physiotherapist who
advises the Financial Times, says RSI cannot be blamed on a particular
design of keyboard - 'I've seen cases of RSI involving all manner of
keyboards,' he says.
There is no foolproof way of preventing RSI but the risks can definitely be
minimised. A number of factors are common to most outbreaks:
A physical/ergonomic deficiency in the workstation, or in the way the person
works at it. For example, poor posture or a keyboard position which does not
provide minimal flexing of the wrists.
Added pyscho-social stress, such as a problem with the work itself, or
between a group of workers and their boss. Other possible psycho-social
risks factors include software which is difficult to use, or the threat of
redundancy.
Andrea Caws, a consultant ergonomist at London-based System Concepts, says
because RSI tends to occur among clusters of workers (eg at the BBC in
Caversham and among a group of BT workers), the problem can't be blamed on
an individual being highly strung.
She says some, but by no means all, companies are taking ergonomic issues
seriously. However, under new Health &amp; Safety regulations covering display
screen use, employers can face legal penalties if they don't.
Caws says under the new regulations employers must:
Assess their workstations and the health and safety risks of workers using
them. They must then take steps to reduce those risks.
Adhere to at least the minimum ergonomic standards for screens (eg screens
should be flicker free), keyboards, mice, desk, chairs and the physical
environment, such as lighting.
Plan display screen work to introduce variety and breaks.
Pay for eye tests related to display screen work.
Provide information and training on how to work safely at a computer.
Applying ergonomic principles takes time and money, but the cost of dealing
with an RSI outbreak is likely to be much higher, not just in terms of
payouts to staff but also in management time. For example, the FT says it
has spent over Pounds 1.4m tackling RSI.
The costs to individuals suffering from RSI can also be high. Pancucci says:
'If you are getting pains in your hands and arms, get a medical opinion
quickly from someone with RSI experience. I nearly left it too long.'
The writer, Joia Shillingford, is editor of the Financial Times newsletter,
'Business Computing Brief.'
