FT  10 FEB 93 / The FT500 (19): On the trail of new potential markets / A
look east and discovers that American companies were the biggest investors
last year in the 28 countries which have emerged from the wreckage of the
former Soviet bloc - Eastern Europe
FAITH and endurance have been the main requirements for companies doing
business with eastern Europe and beyond during the first three years of the
post-communist age. The macro-economic picture still looks dire for much of
Russia and the former Soviet Union. But for central Europe the awaited
turnaround from steep economic decline to the beginning of steady economic
growth looks attainable in 1993.
Much depends on the depth of the German recession and its knock-on effects
throughout the rest of the European Community to which more than 50 per cent
of central Europe's rising exports are now directed. But some economists
believe that the combination of an over-valued mark and over-paid workers,
especially in former east Germany, means that central European companies
offering cheap labour, and the ability to produce low-cost components,
construction materials, foodstuffs and other goods, will be increasingly
attractive to recession-hit western companies desperately seeking to reduce
their cost base.
The lure of new potential markets and low-cost production sites has begun to
exert an increasingly powerful attraction for western companies, including
the US companies and corporations which were also quicker than many European
companies to spot the potential of the Common Market 30 years ago. According
to data compiled by the East European Investment Magazine, US corporations
were the biggest investors last year in the 28 countries which have emerged
from the wreckage of the former Soviet bloc.
In the 12 months to the end of September 1992, US companies made 219
acquisitions, joint ventures and greenfield investments worth Dollars 8bn,
around 30 per cent of the total Dollars 28bn invested in the area over this
period. The US share was equivalent to the entire private investment in the
region in 1991, reflecting the fact that, in spite of the manifold
difficulties of doing business in the region, overall investment tripled in
1992.
The attraction is mutual. Governments in Poland, Hungary and the Czech
Republic in particular welcome US investment for politico-strategic as much
as economic and financial reasons. President Lech Walesa of Poland, for
example, made clear that having General Motors invest in Poland was
equivalent to having a US division on Polish soil.
US food and consumer goods companies have been quick to capitalise on the
attraction of famous brands, from Big Macs, to Levi-Strauss jeans and
Coca-Cola, and to see the advantage of selling to west European markets from
low cost bases in the east. General Electric was one of the first to take
the plunge with its acquisition of Tungsram in Hungary. To its chagrin
profitability has been hit by the failure of the Hungarian forint to
depreciate as expected. But the realisation that Hungary is a cheap place to
do research and development work has partially compensated.
The lengthening list of US consumer companies, including Procter and Gamble
and Sara Lee, is accompanied by US telecommunications, chemical and energy
companies. The latter are increasingly interested in oil and gas exploration
and development in Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, rather than Russia, where
delays in formulating appropriate legislation continue to raise frustration
levels.
Despite the mounting US interest, however, European companies remain the
most committed to investment and expansion in the post-communist countries
of Europe and Eurasia while Japanese companies, with rare exceptions, remain
on the sidelines.
Volkswagen's commitment to invest a scaled down DM7bn on modernising and
expanding output at Skoda Automobilova in the Czech republic, where it is
building up to a 70 per cent stake, remains the biggest single investment
project in the region. Fiat, battling to keep up in the FT500, has committed
Dollars 2bn to Poland, in spite of a damaging strike at its new Cinquecento
plant in southern Poland.
Companies in France, Italy, Benelux, and to a much lesser extent in Britain,
realise that unless they move to establish strategic positions in the former
communist states while they are still relatively cheap and available, the
region will become increasingly dominated by German companies moving back
into what is a traditional sphere of trade and influence.
German investment at present is concentrated in former east Germany, but the
big German companies and banks, as well as thousands of small and
medium-sized companies from Germany and Austria, have used the advantage of
proximity and their tradition of long-term thinking to establish or
re-establish themselves.
With global profits under pressure and the German domestic market in
recession, however, it is proving increasingly difficult for some German
companies to justify their faith in the long-term prospects for growth,
especially in many parts of the former Soviet Union. BASF, the
Ludwigshafen-based chemical company, for example, has subsidiaries in
central Europe and expensive representative offices in many parts of the
former Soviet Union, including five in Russia from which it imports gas,
naphtha and basic chemicals. But the costs of doing business in the less
centralised new environment are rising sharply while demand for chemicals is
only 55 per cent of 1989 levels.
Some industries are clearly longer term than others. But some strategic
investors have already shown impressive results from quite modest initial
investments in the region and are well placed to gain from the long-awaited
upturn expected in Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary this year.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri, which announced the first big investment deal of 1993
by taking a 67 per cent stake in the Czech republic's biggest boiler,
turbine and power plant company, Prvni Brnenska Strjirna (PBS), is a classic
strategic investor. Over the past three years it has taken a controlling
stake in 26 east and central European power and engineering companies. The
Swiss-Swedish company is convinced that modernising the energy sector to
raise generating efficiency and reduce pollution will be a top priority
throughout the region.
Its main Polish company, ABB Zamech, has achieved rapid productivity
increases and won export orders worth Dollars 150m, and the injection of new
management skills and technology has helped weld a powerful new industrial
force in central Europe which should generate 4 to 5 per cent of ABB's
global revenues in three years' time.
