FT  09 DEC 93 / World Trade News: Struggle on dumping rules nears climax -
US demands have caused consternation
The Uruguay Round dispute over US demands to dilute the force of
multilateral restraints on anti-dumping rules is expected to reach a climax
tomorrow. Trade officials will try to rank the issues and arrange
confidential meetings between the US and the 14 countries most exercised by
the proposed changes.
The US aroused consternation last week by tabling a 25-page document
detailing 11 proposed amendments to the Round's anti-dumping text. After
signals earlier this week that the US and European Union had settled
long-standing disagreements on market access, the row over anti-dumping has
emerged as one of the last and most testing issues blocking a final Uruguay
Round deal.
Mr Jeff Garten, newly appointed US commerce department undersecretary
responsible for anti-dumping negotiations, returns to Geneva today aware
that Gatt intermediaries face a Saturday deadline to find a settlement.
Failure beyond then could force Gatt officials to draft their own
compromise, potentially angering all concerned.
Mr Garten currently argues all 11 amendments must be accommodated in the
Uruguay Round text. Other negotiators are reluctantly bowing to the
necessity of accommodating at least a few - perhaps five or six. The
amendments range from efforts to ensure easy defence against 'dumped' goods
exported through third countries, to a bid for US trade unions to have the
power to mount dumping actions.
One calls for abandonment of a current proposal to force a 'sunset' on
dumping actions after they have been in force for five years. Trading
partners are concerned that over 10 per cent of the US's 300 outstanding
dumping duties have been in place more than 20 years.
All 11 proposals are seen as heresy by many US trading partners, who view
most anti-dumping actions as specious, exploited by powerful protectionist
lobbies.
Nancy Dunne adds from Washington: Changes in the Dunkel draft on
anti-dumping are the number one priority for US trade officials in the
Round, Mr Garten said yesterday. Even a few changes would not be enough to
get a Gatt deal signed by President Clinton.
Mr Garten said the US was 'isolated' in this position because of a mistaken
perception that the laws were a barrier to the US market - when they affect
less than 2 per cent of imports - and that they were inconsistently
administered. In bilateral meetings he is likely to promise personally to
ensure 'maximum consistency' in enforcing US laws.
