FT  23 AUG 93 / THe Week Ahead: Results due
THE national newsagent and retailer WH Smith, is expected on Wednesday to
report pre-tax profits for the year ended May 31 down slightly from Pounds
113m a year earlier.
Profits will be better, or at least static, in all divisions except the Do
it All DIY joint venture with Boots. The losses there are likely to rise to
about Pounds 12m from Pounds 2.7m a year earlier, reflecting sharp price
competition in the sector and the venture's problems. Smith's might lift the
final dividend from the previous year's 9.1p but the market is not taking
the increase for granted.
Interim profits at Guardian Royal Exchange, to be announced on Thursday,
should be in line with the three composites already announced. Some Pounds
65m is expected, against losses of Pounds 39m last time, indicating the
recovery of UK underwriting.
However, under FRS 3, investment gains will now be included above the line,
resulting in a maximum headline figure of Pounds 155m.
Medeva, the fast growing UK drugs company which had its stock market value
slashed from Pounds 589m to Pounds 295m in July following a warning that
full-year profits would be some Pounds 10m less than expected after
overstocking in the US, unveils its interim results tomorrow.
Analysts are unwilling to estimate how much of the shortfall will occur in
the first half.
Between Pounds 16m and Pounds 18m has been tentatively pencilled in this
time, against Pounds 14.1m last time round.
A positive statement from Mr Bernard Taylor, chairman, about how things are
in the US since the overstocking problems and the temporary closure of two
plants for FDA inspections would go down well.
Rentokil, the environmental and property services company whose hostile
Pounds 75.7m bid for Securiguard, the security and cleaning group, was
recommended in July, reports interim results on Thursday. Profits of between
Pounds 63m and Pounds 64m pre-tax are expected, though last time's Pounds
51.5m will be restated for FRS 3 and the group, where 60 per cent of profits
come from outside the UK, is also moving to average, rather than period-end,
exchange rate calculations. The dividend could rise from 0.64p to 0.78p.
The Telegraph is expected to report second quarter pre-tax profits on
Wednesday of about Pounds 13m. The first quarter's Pounds 19.1m, double the
year earlier period, was swollen by Pounds 6.5m from the sale in January of
its 13 per cent stake in the limited voting stock of Trinity International
Holdings.
