FT  23 MAR 93 / Technology: Putting a price on research - How Britain's
privatised companies are costing their R&amp;D activities
AT BT's world-renowned telecommunications laboratories, at Martlesham Heath,
Suffolk, the days of research for its own sake are over. That is a luxury
that a commercially orientated, competitive BT cannot afford.
Since the public share flotation in 1984, BT has undergone a radical
transformation driven by the need to identify and then service the
requirements of its customers, namely BT's three operating divisions - from
which comes up to 80 per cent of the R&amp;D budget - and corporate
headquarters.
Historically, the research and development operations were operated as a
conventional hierarchy, easy to administer but inflexible. Today, 30 R&amp;D
divisions deliver projects - up to 800 different ones are in progress at any
one time.
The bulk of BT's R&amp;D work is still carried out at Martlesham, which employs
more than 3,000 people, and at other laboratories in London, Ipswich,
Belfast, Cardiff and Glasgow. The emphasis is on providing Britain's
telephone network with an ever-increasing degree of intelligence; about two
thirds of the work is highly practical software engineering.
While privatisation forced BT to determine how to put a price on its
research and development programme, other recently privatised companies had
already tackled the problem. British Gas, for example, has had to grapple
with how to cost-justify its R&amp;D since 1972, says Gerald Clerehugh, group
director of research and technology. But only for the past two years has it
started billing its customers - other parts of British Gas - for its
research work. The result, says Clerehugh, is sharpened accountability.
British Gas's research includes everything from offshore computer modelling
to gas-powered vehicles, tumble driers and air-conditioning units. Deciding
which of the pile of proposals to adopt is pure economics, says Clerehugh.
'We pick the ones with the best returns to the company.'
Within British Gas, all the 'customers' are asked what a particular project
is worth to them and how much expenditure it will save. Projects which get
the go-ahead - 'even the dizzy ones' - have been evaluated to get some idea
of their value, implementation costs included.
Clerehugh says he likes to pay for his R&amp;D budget in a year twice over.
(Total R&amp;D spending for British Gas for the coming year is in the region of
Pounds 90m.)
The task is not clear-cut and assumptions have to be made. If a safety
device prevents accidents happening, then how much is that device worth,
asks Clerehugh. Environmental savings are also 'quite nebulous', he says.
Elsewhere, there are 'a hundred different ways' of prioritising projects,
explains Carlos Lopez-Caciecedo, director of research and technology at
National Power, the privatised electricity generating company. 'The most
important point is discussion between those who are going to do the research
and those who are going to implement it,' he points out. 'That's the most
important phase of the prioritisation exercise.'
At BT, Alan Rudge, a main board director and managing director of BT's
development and procurement division, encourages the operating divisions to
compare BT's internal R&amp;D services with those available outside. If
customers are dissatisfied with the quality, they can go elsewhere.
Clerehugh says that at British Gas the selection process means he has a
clear idea of where the research is heading. 'I've always got at the back of
my mind where we want to go. I know what we want the research for.'
About 70 per cent of the total budget is for near-term work, for which
customers are billed. A further 15 per cent is for something 'the end-user
might like', while another 10 per cent is for work which 'I have to persuade
him he wants,' says Clerehugh. The final 5 per cent is for work 'I'm willing
to have a crack at'.
Clerehugh acknowledges that the very long-term work is not economically
evaluated. 'They're fliers. It's like putting your money in a raffle.' But
he believes companies such as British Gas have to do the basic research so
that they can ask the right questions when procuring equipment.
And, he adds, many of the company's developments - such as a burner for
which the company won a Queen's Award for technological achievement in 1992
 -had to be developed by British Gas because no outside manufacturer was
prepared to do the work. But, adds Clerehugh, 'we're not manufacturers,
we're persuaders and stimulators'.
Neither National Power nor BT manufacture equipment either, which means both
can reduce research spending. BT spends about Pounds 240m a year, 1.8 per
cent of turnover. That is well below many international competitors, which
spend 5 per cent or more of their turnover on R&amp;D.
To keep costs down further, National Power tracks the more esoteric advances
by participating in a small way on projects conducted around the world
rather than taking on the whole research burden itself.
British Gas, too, is doing joint research with other European gas producers,
particularly in areas of common concern, such as offshore safety which is
'phenomenally expensive'. In these areas, says Clerehugh, 'there's nobody
going to say: 'We're better than you are'.'
Although core research carried out at National Power consumes some Pounds
14m a year, a further Pounds 8m is spent on outside research and special
projects, many in conjunction with universities.
Clerehugh is also an advocate of university research. 'I'm still a great
believer that universities are the best place to do basic research.'
BT has a Pounds 3.5m programme of university research into advanced
technologies. But even universities have a customer inside BT who needs
results. In return for investment, BT demands a managerial role in projects
it supports.
While the newly privatised companies in Britain have only recently learned
the lessons of working with 'customers' within their organisation, most
companies have long had to pursue this discipline.
Researchers at Hewlett-Packard's Bristol-based laboratories have always
worked closely with customers throughout the company, says John Taylor,
director of the laboratories.
'Our goal is to get out in front of where this business wants to be. It's
long term,' he explains. 'We have to be looking at three to five years out
in their planning cycles.'
As a high-tech manufacturing organisation, Hewlett-Packard spends some 11
per cent of its turnover on R&amp;D, compared with just 1 per cent in British
Gas. But like the newly privatised companies Taylor has seen a shift in
research.
Applied industrial research used to be technology focused, he says. Nowadays
there is an 'applications pull', in which technology has to be combined with
new areas of business to solve problems. This is changing the balance
between development and research work, a move which has been compounded
because basic research is increasingly carried out in an open, collaborative
international ventures.
'A lot of people lump R&amp;D together. We think 'R' is very different,' Taylor
points out. Hewlett-Packard spends about 10 per cent of turnover in
development laboratories attached to the 55 or 60 operations divisions. Only
1 per cent is spent on research. 'We debate pretty carefully whether that is
right. But there is no right answer,' says Taylor.
Hewlett-Packard has helped ensure that it funds appropriate areas of R&amp;D
through its 'business development' scheme. A handful of employees with both
a technical and business background put together the first round of a five-
to 10-year business case.
Taylor says the company also experimented with using completely
non-technical people to guide the research teams, but this was unsuccessful.
The final assessment on whether research has given value for money is
whether the customers have been persuaded to change their plans, says
Taylor. 'If they say: 'We'd have done that anyway', then the research does
not have much value.'
