FT  14 AUG 93 / Serbs agree to pull back their forces
COMMANDERS of the Bosnian Serb militia and of Moslem-led government forces
have agreed on 'lines of withdrawal' from strategic Mount Igman overlooking
Sarajevo, removing an obstacle that has stalled peace talks due to resume in
Geneva next week.
All Serb forces on Igman must withdraw beyond the agreed lines by 1400 GMT
today, General Francis Briquemont, commander of UN forces in Bosnia, said
last night.
He and UN chief of staff Brigadier Vere Hayes said the new lines removed the
last stumbling block to the resumption of the peace talks in Geneva. 'From
my point of view the impasse is over,' Gen Briquemont said.
UN officials had been meeting Bosnian Serb leaders in Sarajevo to resolve
the dispute over the Serb withdrawal.
Brig Hayes said about 250 French UN troops had moved into areas from which
Serb forces were now steadily leaving and Moslem-led government forces had
pledged not to try to retake them. He indicated the UN would use force to
resist any incursions.
But Commander Barry Frewer, spokesman for UN forces in Sarajevo, said he
could not confirm earlier Serb claims that their forces had withdrawn from
Mount Igman, which they overran last week.
In Geneva, international mediators Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg
yesterday postponed peace talks until Monday.
It was hoped the two-day break would give UN peacekeepers in Sarajevo time
to settle the Igman dispute and allow the Moslem-led government, the Croats
and the Serbs to prepare negotiating positions for full-scale talks.
Mr John Mills, their spokesman, said the pause would allow time for the
inspection of a ceasefire line by Brig Hayes and a Bosnian Serb commander,
General Manojlo Milovanovic, around Mount Igman.
Bosnia's President Alija Izetbegovic yesterday said he would insist on the
lifting of the Serb siege round Sarajevo on Monday when talks on the
republic's ethnic division are scheduled to resume.
Asked whether he expected Nato airstrikes to lift the Serb siege, he was
dismissive: 'As you see the peace talks were on the verge of collapse, but
the west did not do anything.'
The weekend postponement is likely to slow the growing momentum in calls for
western military intervention to break the 17-month siege of Sarajevo.
In Washington, US officials yesterday sought to play down earlier threats
that they would call for Nato air strikes if the Serbs did not withdraw from
the mountain.
Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, said the US was not yet ready to
ask for military action, although he called on the Serbs to end their
'strangulation' of Sarajevo.
Amid signs that the European allies remained nervous of pressing ahead with
action too rapidly, the Russian Foreign Ministry sought to distance itself
from the threatened air strikes.
Meanwhile, publicity over the plight of Sarajevo prompted several European
countries to step up their humanitarian efforts to the city. In Britain the
first stage of an airlift got under way to bring out a group of severely
injured victims from the city.
The Overseas Development Agency in London said an aircraft was flying from
Britain to the Ancona airbase in Italy, where 41 victims to be evacuated
from Sarajevo will be picked up this weekend. The Swedish Foreign Ministry
said it was set to bring out 14 seriously injured Bosnians.
In Sarajevo, UN officials called for more aid for the city, and a British
doctor questioned the UN list of the victims, saying he had seen more
pressing cases in the hospitals.
Serbia has appealed to the International Court in The Hague over alleged
Bosnian massacres of Serb civilians. The court is due to hear similar
accusations, made against the Serbs, on August 25.
