FT  13 SEP 93 / Modern odyssey ends in Lincoln
MR RON Saunders confessed he was 'browned off' yesterday as he joined the
2.25pm Newark to Lincoln train, on the last leg of an epic journey that had
started in Sheffield more than six hours earlier.
To cover the 40 miles between the two cities he had to change trains four
times, at Derby, Nottingham, Grantham and Newark.
He was speaking before he discovered that the 15 services which now run to
Lincoln on a Sunday will be cut to four next month. The city has found
itself the biggest loser in the cuts to BR's winter timetable.
About 24 passengers were on the Blue Sprinter train yesterday. Many had
travelled north on the London to Leeds InterCity line.
A Spanish trawler-owner travelling to Grimsby with a colleague said: 'We
thought of flying to Leeds but we would have had to hire a car and the train
seemed the best option. But it has not been easy . . . Next time I think we
might fly.'
Miss Seze Watt, visiting her cousin, said: 'I came from Nottingham but it
wasn't easy getting here. I had to change at Grantham and Newark.'
Regular users are concerned about the cuts. Mr Gavin Cowley, who uses the
train to travel to York every weekend, said: 'It's going to cause me
difficulties if they take more trains away.'
Mr Rob Bradley, tourism and publicity officer with Lincoln city council,
said about 10 per cent of Lincoln's 1m tourists a year used the railways. He
added: 'The city is a popular stopping-off point for people travelling on
the east coast line to places like York and Edinburgh. They're less likely
to come here if it's made more difficult for them.'
He said that recently Lincoln was turned down for a Nato conference. 'It was
down to a shortlist of two but in the end they decided that since many
delegates would be travelling on Sunday it would be difficult for them to
reach us. That was a disappointment.'
Mr Jim Hanrahan, the council's director of economic development, said: 'We
lost our only direct rail link with London in May, when the timetable was
last reviewed.'
The service, he added, had been gradually run down and business travellers
were increasingly having to travel via Grantham and Newark. 'Without the
connections, the knock-on effect on passenger numbers created a
self-fulfilling prophecy,' he said.
Mr Peter Morrison, seeing off visitors, said: 'We are traditional
Conservatives but I have to say the reality is we feel totally let down by
this.'
