FT  12 MAY 93 / Brazil may lose another finance chief
THE FUTURE of Brazil's latest finance minister hung in the balance yesterday
as President Itamar Franco came under mounting pressure to sack him over
alleged irregularities concerning Dollars 123m (Pounds 80m) in loans to
Ecuador and Peru.
Mr Eliseu Resende, who has been at the helm of Latin America's largest
economy for just six weeks, is under fire for allegedly favouring his
long-time former employers, construction group Norberto Odebrecht, by
approving government project financing of Dollars 115m to Peru and Dollars
18m to Ecuador. The financing, which enabled Odebrecht to win various
infrastructure contracts, was approved against the recommendations of the
central bank.
Yesterday newspaper editorials, business representatives and even the
president's political allies were clamouring for Mr Resende's dismissal. Mr
Franco cancelled all his appointments and summoned Mr Resende, who has
denied any impropriety over the loans, to explain himself.
Mr Franco is in a delicate position. Assuming office after the impeachment
of President Fernando Collor on corruption charges, Mr Franco has made
honesty the hallmark of his administration and cannot afford to retain
ministers whose integrity is in doubt, particularly in the key portfolio of
finance.
However, in the last eight months Brazil has got through three finance
ministers and two central bank governors. Last Friday Ms Yeda Crusius
resigned as planning minister, complaining that she had not been consulted
over the country's economic plan.
Another change would further damage government credibility and heighten
economic instability, pushing inflation beyond its current level of 30 per
cent a month.
Mr Aldo Lorenzetti, a director of the powerful Sao Paulo Federation of
Industries (Fiesp), said: 'We can't just keep changing ministers left right
and centre'.
A change would also harm international negotiations. At the last round of
talks with the International Monetary Fund two weeks ago, Mr Michel
Camdessus, IMF managing director, said: 'It would be nice if a Brazilian
economic team stayed in place long enough for us to understand what they are
trying to do.'
