FT  17 MAR 93 / Government Bonds: Disappointment greets increase in UK
supply
LONG-DATED gilts fell by a point, while the short end of the market dropped
half a point, following disappointment over Chancellor Norman Lamont's
budget.
The main worry in the gilts market currently is supply, which has increased
sharply due to the government's higher funding needs as a result of economic
recession.
On this issue, there was nothing to cheer the market. The chancellor
announced a public sector borrowing requirement for this year of Pounds
35bn, in line with expectations. But the Pounds 50bn figure given for the
financial year 1993-94 was higher than dealers had hoped.
'The market was disappointed by the lack of action on next year's PSBR,'
said Mr Simon Briscoe, a gilts analyst at Greenwell Montagu, adding that
some traders had been looking for a reduction to around Pounds 45bn.
The other big disappointment was that only a slight change was made to
funding rules in the gilts market.
The chancellor announced that banks' and building societies' purchases of
gilts will now count towards funding.
These have amounted to an estimated Pounds 4bn to Pounds 6bn this year, but
could fall back again, and are not expected to make a substantial impact on
gilts funding needs. Some traders had hoped that Treasury bills and foreign
currency debt would be included.
An announcement by the Bank of England that the frequency of gilt auctions
would be increased to roughly monthly intervals, and the size increased to
between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 4bn per auction, was in line with
expectations.
The rest of the news in the budget was bypassed by the gilts market. 'There
was neither good nor bad news on inflation, and growth forecasts were in
line with expectations,' one analyst said.
On Liffe, the June long gilts contract ended more than 1 1/4 points down at
105 9/16 .
ELSEWHERE in Europe, bond markets opened lower as traders pondered the
German solidarity package and its implications for German finances, but
recovered somewhat to end only slightly lower on the day. German bond prices
slipped  1/4 point ahead of tomorrow's Bundesbank meeting, partially
reversing gains made earlier in the week, while French bond prices edged
down as the franc came under pressure.
US TREASURY issues firmed across the board after a hesitant start yesterday,
with prices boosted by a weaker-than-expected housing report, and in the
afternoon by the Federal Reserve's outright purchase of coupons.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  11/32 at 103
1/4 , yielding 6.865 per cent. At the short end of the market, the two-year
note was also firmer, up  1/8 at 99 3/4 , to yield 3.997 per cent.
Prices firmed at the short end in early trading after the Commerce
Department reported that housing starts gained 2.5 per cent in February.
While shorter-dated prices edged higher, at the long end the market remained
flat, with investors reluctant to commit themselves at the long end ahead of
today's important consumer prices report for February.
But the long end recovered later in the day after the Fed unexpectedly
bought coupons outright to address a seasonal need to add reserves to the
banking system.
THE Luxembourg Treasury is studying the possibility of issuing Luxembourg
franc government bonds and creating a liquid secondary market in the paper,
Reuter reports.
Unlike neighbouring Belgium, Luxembourg does not have a pressing need to
issue debt paper as its debt is negligible by European Community standards.
But issuing government debt paper, notably a benchmark bond, would enhance
the market, the Luxembourg Treasury said.
