FT  06 MAR 93 / Arts: Muddle over Matisse
THE HIGHLY acclaimed exhibition Matisse 1904-17, which was scheduled to run
at the Pompidou Arts Centre in Paris until June 21, could be suddenly
curtailed following legal action by an 89-year-old Russian heiress.
Irina Shchukin has started proceedings to confiscate the catalogue of the
exhibition and have 25 of the 130 paintings on show removed. The works were
nationalised in 1918 with a decree signed by Lenin and were the property of
Irina Shchukin's father, Serguei Shchukin, who had commissioned the
paintings from Matisse for his Moscow home. The paintings, on loan from the
Pushkin Museum in Moscow and The Hermitage in St Petersburg, include
masterpieces such as the second version of 'La Danse' of 1910, and 'La
Conversation'.
Two court cases claiming reproduction rights and ownership were brought by
Irina Shchukin just two days after the exhibition opened on February 24. A
Paris court yesterday rejected the first case, in which lawyers pleaded the
heiress's right to control reproductions of the paintings bought by her
father before 1910. Legislation was passed in France that year
distinguishing between ownership of art and possession of reproduction
rights.
Trickier by far, however, is the case brought over Irina Shchukin's actual
property rights. Her father received no compensation from the Bolshevik
government. The Paris court must consider whether it is competent to act on
a decision taken in a foreign country such a long time ago.
Irina Shchukin tried to negotiate with the Russian government and museums to
recover the collection before the Matisse exhibition opened. The Pompidou
Centre sees her latest moves as a means of pressuring the Russians into a
reply. If she obtains satisfaction, she should drop her case. If talks prove
difficult, the Russians may withdraw the controversial works before the
court makes its ruling and possibly orders their confiscation on May 12.
'That would be a catastrophe because the Russian works are an integral part
of the exhibition. We would have to close. The affair could also dissuade
Russian museums from ever loaning works again - the descendants of the big
collectors all live in Europe and the US,' Marian Julien, the administrator
general of the centre, said. Russian authorities would in turn lose out on
services from western firms and museums, such as the sponsorship the French
petrol company Elf is providing for a Matisse exhibition in Moscow. 'I
understand the family wanting to retrieve possessions. But paintings are not
like a yacht or a building - they're part of the world's cultural heritage.'
