FT  14 SEP 93 / International Company News: Merger improves Blockbuster's
position in films
BLOCKBUSTER Entertainment, the largest US home video rental company,
strengthened its interests in Hollywood as the two production companies in
which it owned an interest agreed a merger.
The deal brings together Spelling Entertainment, of which Blockbuster
currently owns 63.5 per cent, and Republic Entertainment, of which it owns
37 per cent. Blockbuster is providing Dollars 100m to help finance
Spelling's takeover of Republic in a transaction that will leave it with
70.5 per cent of the combined entity.
Blockbuster, which owns the Cityvision video rental company in the UK, said
the reshuffle did not signal any plan to expand into becoming a significant
film producer.
'We have no intention of changing the risk profile of the group. We are not
interested in making big feature-length films,' it said.
Blockbuster added that the move to combine the businesses would strengthen
its interest in film production and give it greater control over the film
and programme libraries of the two companies. 'We are the biggest single
purchaser of Hollywood's products in the world. This integrates us and gets
us closer to the suppliers of those products,' it said.
The deal brings together the former programme library of NBC, which was
acquired by Spelling, with that of ABC, owned by Republic.
The programmes and films in the Republic library include many old John Wayne
titles and the Bonanza television series.
Under the terms of the agreement, Spelling will pay Dollars 13 in cash for
each Republic share. Options and warrants to buy Republic shares will be
acquired at the rate of 1.65 Spelling share for each Republic share. To
finance the deal, Blockbuster has agreed to buy 13.4m new Spelling shares
for Dollars 100m either in cash or Blockbuster shares.
Mr Russell Goldsmith, chairman and chief executive of Republic, is to become
president and chief executive of Spelling.
Blockbuster bought 48 per cent of Spelling from American Financial in March,
and at the same time took its holding above 50 per cent with smaller market
purchases.
