FT  21 AUG 93 / Special Report - Courses and Careers: The 'right' choice
IT IS the question I always dreaded: 'What do you want to be when you grow
up?'
It is easy to answer if you have a deep-seated desire to become a doctor, a
teacher or a vet. But the choice is harder for the majority of young people
who have no particular vocation. Interest may point them in a general
direction, but, without practical insight into working life, how can they
tell whether they have the ability or the staying power for a particular
career?
In British education, academic and vocational studies are still seen as
distinct from one another; the former leading, via the 'gold standard' of A
levels, to university, and the latter perceived as carrying a lower status.
Schools tend to encourage any students with passable academic abilities to
choose university.
Pupils often go with the flow, only to find their academic degree courses
stressful and dispiriting. Others emerge at the end of three years as
unemployed graduates, still facing the problem of a career choice.
It is difficult for the uncommitted 18-year-old to make an informed
decision, although many schools are dealing with this problem more
proficiently than in the past. The careers advice programme at the Lady
Eleanor Holles School in Hampton, Middlesex, is built into Personal and
Social Education (PSE), and designed to inform and focus pupils' minds on
career possibilities. But the weight of advice still falls heavily in favour
of formal academic training, acknowledges Jenny Barnes, head of the careers
department.
Sometimes, a more practically oriented, 'hands-on' course is a better
alternative for those uninspired by the idea of university, or who wish to
take time out before committing themselves to three years of further
academic study. It can make the transition from classroom to career less of
a leap in the dark.
BTEC National Diploma courses, for example, offer practical training and the
opportunity to test one's interest and aptitude for various disciplines
which make up areas such as design, the media, or the leisure industry.
After two years closeted with the text of Macbeth, it may be time to find
out how one translates a play from page to stage. An A level in economics
could be the theoretical context for some practical insight into running a
business. Other ideas may emerge from leisure interests such as gardening,
photography or travel.
The choice is wide. At 18, one can afford to experiment.
Public and private institutions advertise widely at this time of year, in
the media, libraries and specialist publications. Local further education
colleges are a useful starting point for surveying the field.
Read the prospectuses carefully and try to get a feel for the kind of
courses offered in a chosen area. Entry requirements, course components,
means of assessment and final qualifications will vary, and there may be
elements which are of particular interest, such as work placements.
When you find something that satisfies your criteria, ask if you can visit
the college before making a formal application. Talk to people following the
course, or those who have completed it. Colleges should be happy to suggest
contacts.
Try to assess the course's standing. Some lead to nationally recognised
qualifications, but the reputation of private diplomas varies. You should
ask for proof of quality. Know where you stand in relation to funding. Grant
support varies. If you intend to take up a university place later on, make
sure you do not preclude yourself from assistance by using up your
entitlement.
