FT  14 APR 93 / Improvement in north-east is confirmed
EASTER provided further evidence of the upturn in the market in
north-eastern England which estate agents have been aware of for some
months.
Several reported a busier than expected bank holidayMonday but few were
excited about sales.
There was, however, a widespread feeling that the holiday period had
continued the trend of gradual improvement.
'The market is definitely on the up,' said Mr Alan Cooke, Leeds area manager
for Eddisons, part of Property Leeds, the estate agency arm of Leeds
Permanent building society.
He said that at Eddisons' nine offices in Leeds the first week of April was
the best for two to three years, with sales agreed about 50 per cent up on
last year. 'I can definitely see signs that April is going to be the best
selling month we've had for a long time.'
Mr Malcolm Dufton, Property Leeds' Humberside-based northern general
manager, covering 36 offices between Lincoln, Bridlington and the
Yorkshire-Lancashire border, said the company's two best weeks since October
last year were the third week in March and the first week in April.
'It's a progressive groundswell,' he said, but added: 'Everybody is very
jumpy because we've seen things pick up and then fall away.'
Mr Dufton said Easter was a time when possible buyers sought information and
deals followed later.
Mr Peter Miller, a Newcastle-based estate agent and national housing
spokesman for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, said: 'People
think Easter is a busy time, but it's often a damp squib.' It had been a
reasonable Easter, however, continuing the market's gradual improvement, he
added.
Mr Ian Bebbington, a chartered surveyor with Black Horse Agencies in
Harrogate, where he is also RICS spokesman, was bullish. He said: 'We were
busy with a capital B'
Mr Bebbington, who traced the upturn back to last November, had a hectic day
yesterday, doing seven valuations, five of them requested over Easter by
potential vendors. 'The lower end is still shooting away. We tend to grab as
much of this as we can. Anything under Pounds 60,000 sells very well,' he
said.
At his office, three sales were agreed over Easter. The most expensive had
been on the market for six months.
