FT  13 AUG 93 / Peril of losing touch with the real world: Share prices are
soaring despite gloom in industry. Tony Jackson asks if the market is
heading for a fall
The two headlines on the front page of yesterday's FT said it all.
Manufacturing recovery wavers, said the first. FT-SE 100 breaks 3,000 level,
added the second. To the outside eye, the stock market often seems to live
in an unreal world. In a week of gloomy industrial news and soaring share
prices, the sense of divergence has become acute.
For the market, the reasons for feeling cheerful are simple enough.
Britain's exit from the ERM last September was good news because it meant
lower UK interest rates and lower sterling. The collapse of the ERM was even
better, as it meant that other European countries - Germany of course
excepted - could cut interest rates as well. With luck, that would allow
Britain to cut its rates still further.
In theory, the effect of this on equities is twofold. First, lower returns
on cash mean that savers switch into equities. Second, lower interest rates
provide an economic stimulus, especially in continental Europe. The outlook
for European exports had been a matter of growing concern for UK
manufacturers, as expressed by the Confederation of British Industry shortly
before the ERM's collapse.
The snag about all this, of course, would be if the markets started worrying
about the resurgence of inflation. But the opposite seems to be the case.
The UK government bond market has been roaring away in recent weeks, to the
extent that the UK's nightmarish budget deficit looks like being funded well
ahead of expectations.
Back in the real world, on the other hand, nothing whatever has happened.
Interest rates have not come down significantly, in the UK or elsewhere in
the EC. The economic data remain mixed and confusing.
In the UK, for instance, it was announced yesterday that the recent fall in
unemployment was last month marginally reversed. Car sales across Europe
fell 20 per cent last month. Truck sales in the UK fell 11 per cent.
And companies have, on the whole, been gloomy about the outlook. On Tuesday
BOC, the industrial gases giant, said business with its basic industrial
customers around the world remained tough, and that profits would be down
for the year. Yesterday Rothmans, the tobacco and luxury goods group, said
it was still seeing 'recessionary trading conditions in the major world
economies'.
This could still all be a matter of timing. It is the function of the market
to discount the future, and its apparent divorce from reality is
characteristic of economic turning points. This leaves two further
questions: whether the market's expectations are right, and whether it is
putting the right value on them.
Less bullish analysts have pointed out that the price-earnings ratio of the
London market - one of the simplest methods of valuation - is now at around
the same level as in October 1987, just before the crash. The more bullish
response is that the outlook is wholly different. In 1987, the market was
right to be alarmed about the coming recession. Now, with luck, it is right
to expect an economic upturn and a corresponding surge in profits.
As for valuation, it helps to step back and consider the broader context. In
the long run, it seems unlikely that the market can outpace economic growth.
Share prices cannot rise faster than the dividends which give them their
value, nor can dividends rise faster than the profits from which they are
paid. Profits, in their turn, can scarcely rise faster than the economy, as
that would mean shareholders winning consistently at the expense of someone
else. Profits may at times lose ground and then regain it, as happened in
the 1970s and 1980s. But on a long view, this ought to amount only to
fluctuations around the economic trend.
The upper of the two accompanying charts shows GDP in the developed
economies of the OECD, expressed in current sterling, along with the FT
All-Share Index. The OECD is chosen because of the international nature of
British quoted companies. GDP is shown in current rather than real terms to
give effect to inflation, as share prices do.
The implications are on balance reassuring. The index rose above the
economic trend line in the early 1970s, before the horrendous bear market of
1973-4. It rose through it again briefly in 1987, just in time for the
October crash. Now, despite its recent strength, it is still below the
trend. This is partly because sterling's devaluation has jacked up the value
of the world economy in sterling terms. But it has also jacked up the
sterling value of Britain's overseas earnings, so the comparison remains
fair.
In the short run, there is obviously a risk that the good news which the
market expects will be slow in arriving, so that the excitement of recent
weeks evaporates. But again, that is merely a matter of timing.
The more fundamental question raised by this week's headlines is whether the
market has taken leave of its senses, as it did in the summer of 1987.
Judging by the chart, the answer is no. Or at any rate, not yet.
