FT  21 JUL 93 / UK Company News: SB's future clouded by expiry of US patent
SMITHKLINE Beecham's ability to overcome the inevitable damage which will be
inflicted next May by the expiry of the US patents of Tagamet, its
best-selling product, will be crucial to the group's future.
Tagamet, an anti-ulcer treatment that was once the world's best-selling
drug, still generated sales of Dollars 1.1bn (Pounds 730m) last year. Of
these about Dollars 650m were in the US. The division's turnover last year
was Pounds 2.8bn.
'This is bad news. Anyone who thinks the patent expiry won't have a
substantial impact on SB is going to be disappointed. The drug still has
substantial sales and is very profitable,' says Mr Jan Leschley, head of
SB's pharmaceuticals arm, and the group's chief executive designate.
SB's strategy is to launch an over-the-counter version of Tagamet and to
generate growth through new products.
A slight hiccup in the first element of the strategy is that before the
merger of SmithKline of the US with the UK group, Beecham, the American
company sold the OTC distribution rights for Tagamet in the UK to Wellcome.
Mr Leschley refuses to discuss the issue, which he describes as delicate.
Meanwhile the company has lodged its dossier to the US Food and Drug
Administration for the medicine to make the switch to OTC status.
As for generating growth through new products, Mr Leschley stressed the
success of Paxil, its new anti-depressant, Relafen, an arthritis drug,
Kytril, an anti-nausea product, and Havrix, a hepatitis A vaccine. These
generated Pounds 96m in new sales during the second quarter, compared with
Pounds 212m for the whole of last year.
The US launch of Paxil has outpaced that of the market leader among the
advanced selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, Eli Lilly's Prozac. SB's
drug has captured 15.6 per cent of new prescriptions during the second
quarter, compared with 6 per cent in February when it was launched. The
medicine has 24 per cent of the whole UK anti-depressant market and 20 per
cent of the Dutch market.
Relafen's performance in the US was described by Mr Leschley as
'tremendous'. Kytril was doing well, and the roll-out of Havrix was
extremely successful, he said.
However, SB's strategy for continued growth may be held up by the worsening
environment for drugs companies. European drugs sales during the second
quarter were up only 1 per cent. Turnover in Germany and Italy, where
healthcare reforms have been introduced, fell 9 per cent and 15 per cent
respectively. In France and the UK sales were up 10 per cent and 8 per cent.
Mr Leschley said: 'I'm not optimistic about Germany and Italy for the full
year. And there's no doubt that in France, the UK and Spain we will see
cost-containment measures introduced in the near future.'
SB's response will not be like that of Merck, the world's largest drugs
group, which yesterday announced further redundancies, said Mr Leschley.
'We have no plans whatsoever to make across-the-board lay-offs. That is not
to say there will not be redundancies in selective pockets. We've just laid
off 100 sales representatives in Germany,' he said.
