FT  06 OCT 93 / China explodes nuclear device despite US plea
CHINA yesterday defied the US by going ahead with an underground nuclear
explosion, the first test by any country for more than a year.
Its action prompted President Bill Clinton to order the US Department of
Energy, which is responsible for nuclear warheads, to prepare for a
'possible' resumption of testing.
China was explicitly rejecting a plea made last month by Mr Clinton to
suspend its plans and join the other recognised nuclear powers - the US,
Russia, France and Britain - in a moratorium.
China said it favoured a global test-ban treaty by 1996. But it is feared
that yesterday's test could set a precedent and undermine prospects for a
comprehensive ban, on which negotiations are set to start in January. This
in turn would cast a shadow over the future of the Non-Proliferation Treaty,
the international instrument for preventing the spread of nuclear weapons,
which is due for renewal in 1995.
China's action may be privately welcomed by officials in the other nuclear
powers who have been arguing the need for further tests of their own.
Russia first announced a moratorium two years ago, followed last year by
France and then the US. Britain is bound by US policy since it uses the
Nevada test site. The US moratorium, extended in July for at least another
15 months, is conditional on no other nation conducting tests.
Mr Clinton said in July that if another country broke the moratorium he
would order additional US tests. However, resumption of US testing in
response to a single Chinese explosion is thought unlikely, and would face
strong opposition in the US Congress.
The test, recorded by foreign monitoring stations, took place at around 0200
GMT at the Lop Nor test site in Xinjiang province, some 1,500 miles west of
Beijing.
Mr John Lanchbery of the London-based Verification Technology Information
Centre said it was a relatively small device with a yield of between 20 and
40 kilotons, roughly twice that of the 1945 Hiroshima bomb.
France is also considering whether to resume testing at Mururoa Atoll in the
South Pacific. Early today New Zealand, which has opposed the French tests,
accused Beijing of 'a callous disregard of world opinion' and of
irresponsible behaviour.
