FT  26 NOV 93 / Survey of Gloucestershire (9): Councils unite to welcome
visitors - Tourism / One of the county's main industries
It is as evocative a litany as any in England: Sheepscombe, Coln St Aldwyns,
Windrush and Birdlip. The names of Cotswold villages conjure up the image of
limestone cottages, drystone walls, sparkling streams and wooded valleys, an
image which helps to bring 11m visitors a year to the county.
In consequence, tourism has become one of the four leading industries in
Gloucestershire with spending by visitors in 1992 put at Pounds 212m. Over
17,000 people are employed by the industry and, on the calculation that each
job supports one half of another elsewhere, it is reckoned that it sustains
one in 10 of all jobs in the county.
During the recession, as elsewhere in Britain, tourism has suffered, and
there have been job losses, but fewer than in other important sectors of the
local economy. In 1992, visitor numbers to attractions were down by about 2
per cent on 1991. This year has seen no real recovery, although overseas
visitors, encouraged by the devaluation of sterling, have helped to some
extent.
About one in five visitors come from abroad, but they account for over a
third of all tourist spending, partly because so many of the other visitors
 -9.5m of the 11m total - are on day trips.
Although the Cotswolds are almost synonymous with Gloucestershire - nearly
all their 800 square miles lie within its boundaries - they are only one
reason why people want to visit the county. 'The great thing with
Gloucestershire is that the county itself is a draw, rather than any one
component within it,' says Mr Colin Potts, principal tourism officer of
Gloucestershire Tourism, an innovative marketing and development partnership
set up seven years ago by the county council and six district councils.
The partnership acts a co-ordinator of these councils' individual programmes
and as a link with the Heart of England Tourist Board. For example,
Gloucestershire Tourism promotes directly in the US a guide for travel
agents with hotel prices quoted in dollars. (The US is the main country of
origin among overseas visitors, followed by the Netherlands and Germany.)
The county benefits by being able to offer what Mr Potts describes as
'quintessentially English countryside' within reach of Heathrow, Gatwick and
Birmingham airports. 'First timers to Britain will usually go to London
first,' he says. 'But for those who have been to London before, we are a
very good first stop - after a flight arriving in the early morning, one can
be in a lovely country-house hotel in perfect English countryside by early
afternoon.'
Despite the appeal of the Cotswolds, the county is keen to divert visitors
away from the obvious, and sometimes overcrowded, honeypots. In fact, the
most popular single attraction is not in the Cotswolds but Gloucester
cathedral, where visitors in 1992 were estimated at 450,000.
Gloucester, while lacking the regency splendours and quality shops of
Cheltenham (and it can boast only one restaurant in the latest Good Food
Guide, compared with Cheltenham's four) also has its historic docks. The
restoration of these has been the single most important tourist development
in the county in the past 10 years.
The docks, connecting the river Severn with the Gloucester and Sharpness
canal, no longer have any commercial shipping. But the 15 handsome Victorian
warehouses now include shops, the National Waterways and Regiments of
Gloucestershire museums and the Robert Opie collection of advertising and
packaging. An antiques centre in one warehouse had nearly 400,000 visitors
in 1992.
English Heritage is restoring another of the city's antiques, the 13th
century Blackfriars Dominican friary, which is expected to become a big
tourist attraction. The city has improved its appeal for visitors and
residents alike by pedestrianising part of its centre. Mr David Scott,
director of planning and development services, says: 'I think there is a
sense of optimism in the city that we've got tremendous assets; we're making
the best of those assets, and we're going to go on improving them.'
Elsewhere in Gloucestershire are such inspired gardens as Hidcote Manor and
Owlpen Manor. There are the Stroud valleys, the Westonbirt arboretum,
Tewkesbury Abbey, the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge, the roman
town of Cirencester and Cheltenham itself, with its art gallery, Pittville
Pump Room and festivals of literature and music.
On the other side of the Severn is the Forest of Dean, which the walker John
Hillaby described as 'perhaps the most beautiful assembly of trees in
Britain.' In the south is the Cotswolds water park, flooded gravel workings
which are claimed to have a greater water area than the Norfolk Broads.
We took the Romantic Road, an ingenious route through quiet Cotswold lanes
devised by Cheltenham Tourism. Despite finding that, even in October, three
quality hotels along the way were fully booked, on the road itself we saw
more pheasants than cars. (At the Country Elephant restaurant, at Painswick,
it was hare rather than pheasant on the menu.)
Gloucestershire will want to keep it that way. Mr Potts says: 'Our greatest
asset is the natural environment, and our challenge is to encourage
sustainable tourism to maintain that environment. We want to encourage
visitors in the countryside to help sustain farms and village shops, but in
such a way that they don't harm the environment.'
He points out that the contraction of some other industries will put even
more emphasis on tourism, but that it is vital that the county does not
become over-reliant upon it, as have some seaside areas. Gloucestershire
Tourism is now devising a strategy for the next five years, and is
encouraging such activities as walking and cycling and the use of local
services.
The challenge, Mr Potts says, is to have a good tourism policy under the
threat of funding cuts, with no grants available to encourage tourist
development, and to counter what he calls the government's 'woefully
inadequate' funding of tourism in England, compared with the much more
generous funding for Wales and Scotland.
Overnight visitors themselves might themselves require generous funding. A
couple staying, for example, in a four-poster bedroom with jacuzzi bath at
the Swan Hotel at Bibury could pay Pounds 176 for one night's bed and
breakfast. But Mr Potts says this type of hotel has weathered the recession
better than some middle-ranking ones. This may prove that Gloucestershire
must continue to trade on quality rather than mere numbers.
