FT  25 NOV 93 / Survey of Turkish Finance and Industry (11): Jostling for
the best spots - The Petrol Market
Look out towards the Bosporus from Istanbul's western hillside, along the
roads winding down to the coast, and you will see some familiar brand names.
Turkey's retail petrol operators are jostling with the oil majors, including
Shell, Mobil and BP, for the best spot in a fast-growing market.
The multinationals and a handful of smaller operators have dotted the
country with retail outlets, taking on Petrol Ofisi, the state-owned fuel
distribution company, for market share. Competition is fierce.
'It is typical of the state of the market in western Europe 30 years ago,'
says one industry observer. 'In some areas, you'll see five or six petrol
stations on one spot, and some will be the same company. The strategy is
simple. The big operators want to build presence.'
By concentrating in urban areas, the multinationals have dented Ofisi's
share of sales. Between 1991 and 1992, the company lost an estimated 17 per
cent to the oil majors in the cities, including Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir.
The trend is continuing, although Ofisi is trying to fight back by
modernising and by shifting focus to the busy urban market.
Petrol Ofisi's share of total sales has dropped from 62 per cent in 1988 to
just under 50 per cent today, according to industry estimates. Shell, Mobil,
BP, and Turkpetrol - a joint venture including Burmah Castrol of the UK -
have just over 44 per cent of sales between them, with the rest split
between a handful of relative newcomers, including Total and Elf. Shell
leads the foreign operators with about 13.7 per cent, Mobil has about 12.6
per cent, Turkpetrol has 9.8 per cent and BP 8 per cent. Total, which
entered the market in 1991, has built a 3.5 per cent share.
Petrol Ofisi argues that it has recently recouped sales, although it runs
more low-volume, low-income petrol stations than the multinationals, which
have closed such outlets in favour of the more lucrative city sites.
The cities produce the bulk of the sector's income. Istanbul alone accounts
for about 40 per cent of the car-owning population, and is expected to
produce market growth rates of at least 5 per cent annually in coming years.
The number of cars and trucks on Turkey's roads has more than doubled in the
past 10 years from 1.35m in 1983 to more than 3m today. The demand for cars
is growing faster than for trucks, fuelled by rising household incomes and a
growing population. Total petroleum product sales, including transport fuel,
lubricants and heavy fuel oils, rose 3 per cent to 16.6m tonnes last year,
of which about 10m tonnes were sold at the petrol pumps.
Growth in the number of retail outlets - about 7,000 - has slowed in recent
years. The oil majors are now waiting to pounce on Petrol Ofisi's network of
4,300 outlets when the company is privatised. The sale was expected to take
place in the next year, though the timing is now unclear because of recent
setbacks in the government's privatisation programme.
Petrol Ofisi dominates in rural areas, and it still has a large share of
sales in the cities. In addition to its general sales, the company supplies
fuels and lubricants to the police, military and the public transport
system. Last year, Ofisi made pre-tax profits of Dollars 100m, well below
its potential, according to industry analysts, and little more than the rate
of inflation. Turnover rose 61 per cent to Dollars 2bn and sales so far this
year are up by about the same amount.
The government, which wants to attract foreign investment, plans to sell at
least 15 per cent of the company, possibly selling a strategic stake to a
single buyer. Industry analysts say the nature of the sector militates
against the sale of only a small portion of the government's 96.1 per cent
holding, partly because it would leave control with the government, but also
because the best of the company could be sold at the outset: 'Any buyer
would want the best of the network, and once that has gone, what is there
left to sell?'
A foreign buyer would want to restructure, closing thousands of low-volume
outlets, laying off workers and operating at international prices. All three
issues are politically sensitive for the government, which may want to
retain a controlling stake.
Petrol Ofisi employs more than 7,000 people. 'I don't know where they all
are or what they are doing,' says one industry observer. 'Virtually all the
company's retail outlets are run as dealerships, so they aren't there. Staff
could be cut by more than half and it would be much more efficient.'
Mr Mustafa Korel Aytac, Ofisi's general manager, says that the company would
like to cut staff to around 5,000. But it is a slow process, and while staff
numbers have dropped from 8,133 in 1990 to 7,144 this year, the company's
wage bill is still rising faster than inflation.
Another factor in privatisation is whether or not the government sells Ofisi
in a package with Tupras, the loss-making refining company which has about
85 per cent of the refining market.
Mobil suggests a package sale could be attractive in a fully-liberalised
market, with Tupras split into geographical sections, each containing a
refinery integrated with marketing facilities. A company such as BP, which
is more focused on retailing, would probably prefer Petrol Ofisi on its own.
The company is less capital intensive than Tupras, and virtually ready to
take over. Any buyer, though, would need to secure access to refining if
Ofisi was sold alone. Some of the multinationals' refining needs are met by
the Atas refinery in Mersin, operated by Mobil, Shell, BP and Turkpetrol.
Atas refines about 15 per cent of the market.
But for the multinationals, the central point is whether or not the market
is fully liberalised. They complain that the contest is uneven because pump
prices are kept artificially low. The government, keen to control inflation,
has restricted the price at which petrol leaves the refinery. Even when
crude prices are rising on world markets, Tupras has not been allowed to
raise ex-refinery rates. This enables Petrol Ofisi to discount at the pumps;
the multinationals have to match the price cut or risk losing share.
The problem is compounded by the structure of pump prices. The state takes
65 per cent in levies and taxes and 24 per cent currently goes to the
refiner. This leaves the multinationals tiny room for manoeuvre,
particularly when world crude prices are rising. They say Tupras cushions
Petrol Ofisi when prices rise, and that it absorbs some state levies.
Thus, discounting at the pumps eats directly into the multinationals'
margins. Some operators say their margins could be increased by 0.2 per cent
a day if there were no price controls.
Petrol in Turkey is the cheapest in Europe, according to industry analysts.
Premium sells at around 65 cents a litre. Diesel, which accounts for 65 per
cent of the retail market, sells at around 43.5 cents a litre. Unleaded, at
64.5 cents, takes barely 1 per cent of sales.
With economic growth estimated at between 5 and 10 per cent annually in the
next few years, Turkey's petrol market has the highest growth potential in
Europe, according to industry analysts, but the market has to change.
'Profit margins are still substantially lower than in western Europe, but
that will change as the market is deregulated. It won't produce a pot of
gold, but there is great potential.'
