FT  16 FEB 93 / Arts: Mr Dowland's Musicke - Concerts
The Consort of Musicke presented three concerts last weekend in celebration
of one of our finest composers: 'The Renaissance Triumphs of Mr Dowland.'
One of the striking factors was how much of the music dealt with love.
Love's pain, love's reward, love's despair, love's wound, love's constancy,
love-in-death, and more: courtly love in all its changing moods. So said the
words, some by Anon. (in top form), some by Petrarch, some by Tasso. Amor,
amor, amor; and Dowland and his contemporaries addressed it with the full
breadth and intensity of the Renaissance mind.
How odd, though, to hear these songs sung by the Consort of Musicke's six
singers. The emotion that consumed Paola and Francesca, or Romeo and Juliet
has never touched these voices. The two sopranos, two tenors, one alto and
one bass aim, it would seem, at some notion of chaste angelic purity. Theirs
is a lean, well-scrubbed, holier-than-thou sound, an imitation of Paradise
as glimpsed from King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and desperately
prepubescent. Such voices are not only bent on heaven, but also on passing
en route through the eye of a needle. All flesh has been painstakingly pared
away.
The first concert placed Dowland, ingeniously and fascinatingly, in context
of his European contemporaries by taking us through the cities he visited,
and giving his songs in context of those composed at the same time in Paris,
Brunswick, Kassel, Venice, Ferrara, Florence and Copenhagen. The academic
French preoccupation with neoclassical fusion of rhythm, words, melody and
harmony and the new Italian emphasis on dramatic utterance were the two
currents that emerged most forcefully. Anthony Rooley, the Consort's
director and lutenist, provided amiable, semi-audible narration.
The second concert was all Dowland; the third involved all his English
circle. There is a devout audience for the Consort's way of putting over
Dowland &amp; Co; at the second concert, even standing room was packed. I was
aware that my dissent is exceptional; you could sense the family feeling
between musicians and house. Nonetheless, the second concert still sounded
to me like Dowland as conceived in a latterday English nursery. The few
songs that omitted mention of love addressed death, and the singers became
dutifully solemn. But the sounds of adult morbidity was as absent as erotic
affliction had been.
At the first concert, Emma Kirkby, the Consort's most celebrated singer, was
absent with a cold; at the second concert, the tenor Joseph Cornwell was
absent. To my ear theirs are the Consort's most relaxed voices. Cornwell's
tenor is the best-nourished; it has calm and sweetness. Kirkby, even when
under the weather, has real brightness. It is peculiar to hear her voice
beside that of her fellow-soprano, Evelyn Tubb: Kirkby sounding like a
bright little cherub, Tubb like a contrived and plaintive treble choirboy.
And it is peculiar to hear how often Consort singers - Tubb most obviously,
but Kirkby and others sometimes too - try to direct their voices just
beneath important notes. You drain the voice of any of the natural vibrato
evident elsewhere and you try to sing the emphatic notes ever so slightly
flat - as if this made things more expressive. I love these songs, but two
concerts of this singing was more than enough; and I absented myself from
the third.
