FT  13 APR 93 / Arts: Ivan Moravec - Recital
With Krystian Zimerman's crystalline Debussy at the Barbican five days
earlier still a sparkling memory, Ivan Moravec gave a reminder to his
audience at the Wigmore Hall on Saturday of how an older generation of
pianists used to construe that composer. Moravec divided his recital between
Debussy and Chopin, and was only marginally more convincing in the latter;
in two Ballades and the Barcarolle his secure technique and confidence at
least gave the music a semblance of commitment.
Which is not to suggest that his view of Chopin was in itself interesting or
contained interpretative points or insights to distinguish it from any other
highly competent performance. There seemed something consistently
complacent, almost school-masterly, about Moravec's playing, a
take-it-or-leave-it disdain which suggested interpretations fixed in stone,
proof against the circumstances of any particular occasion. Even the charges
through the climactic sections of the A flat and G minor Ballades hardly
generated any excitement; they were armour-clad assaults on the figuration
that left all the dramatic tensions to take care of themselves.
There is no Debussy work that could thrive with such treatment. Within 20
bars the opening movement of Children's Corner had been fussed by
unnecessary ritardandi applied, it appeared, by rote; 'Jimbo's Lullaby' was
never allowed to linger, while 'Golliwog's Cakewalk' stayed tight-lipped to
the end. Without a feeling for line and colour the Suite Bergamasque can be
made very boring indeed, and Pour le Piano is turned into an unremitting
exercise.
In all three works Moravec's dynamic range was confined between mezzo forte
and fortissimo, and his tone colour kept to Steinway monochrome. If other
interpreters have shown how Debussy's piano music needs to be carefully
coloured and articulated to reveal its full glory, Moravec offered a
salutary reminder of how a broader brush can effortlessly sweep away all
that subtlety and musical integrity.
