FT  13 MAR 93 / Fortune favours the big: Alan Cane on the effects of a
computer price war
Compaq, the personal computer manufacturer, cut the cost of its products in
the US this week, signalling another round of blood-letting in a price war
which is devastating the industry.
Victims include comparatively well known names like Everex of the US, now
protected by the provisions of the US bankruptcy code.
By the end of the year many smaller suppliers are expected to find
themselves in equally dire straits, leaving the pc business essentially in
the hands of the industry giants - IBM, Compaq, Apple and Dell.
Computer buyers, on the other hand, have never had it so good. A colleague,
seeking an economical computing package to handle the business of his local
parish, was quoted Pounds 1,760 for a powerful pc complete with ink jet
printer and office software. Over two weeks, the price was reduced by Pounds
200.
In the US, the cheapest of Compaq's pcs now sells for Dollars 1,100. In the
UK, Vtec, a supplier from Hong Kong, sells a similar machine with
sophisticated software for Pounds 1,099. Prices for machines of equivalent
power would have been over Pounds 5,000 only a few years ago.
Industry ob-servers are not yet decided whether such price cutting can
continue. Some argue that it is unrealistic to expect prices to fall
further, but that additional features will be included at the same price.
Software, for example, can be included as part of the deal. Sold separately,
the Lotus software included with Vtec's Pounds 1,099 package would cost the
customer about Pounds 700. Vtec is able to offer such a deal because, for
substantial volumes, software can be bought from software suppliers very
cheaply.
Other analysts suggest that at least two more rounds of cuts equivalent to a
further 25 per cent decline in prices can be expected.
In the short term, however, further falls are unlikely in the UK, where the
fall in the value of the pound is already forcing some smaller pc
manufacturers to raise prices.
But over the next few years, for the international market as a whole, the
most likely outcome is that the pace of price cutting, running at some 40
per cent a year, will slow sharply but that prices will continue to fall.
The decline in prices is already prompting a shift in the balance of power
in the industry. In particular, the success of 'no-name' clone makers, is
being reversed. No-name companies, manufacturers with little track record in
the computer business, had been taking market share from established
suppliers, selling copies of IBM's standard design at a substantial
discount. Vobis of Germany, for example, grew from nothing to take 4 per
cent of the European market last year, selling 368,000 machines, according
to the market consultancy InfoCorp.
The reversal of the trend can be dated to June 15 last year when Compaq,
world leader in high-performance pcs, launched a range of machines priced
only slightly higher than the no-name competition.
Given the choice between a machine from an anonymous manufacturer and a
Compaq for only a few dollars more, customers opted enthusiastically for the
branded product. Compaq, found itself unable to meet orders. 'We thought
demand might double,' says Mr Joe McNally, managing director of Compaq's UK
subsidiary. 'In fact it quadrupled and at one stage you had to wait six to
eight weeks for delivery.' Compaq's initiative was swiftly matched by IBM,
which launched its own low cost 'Value Point' computers.
The market has been boosted as a result. According to Mr Gordon Curran of
InfoCorp, most pc dealers in Europe, with the exception of the UK, saw sales
in the first six weeks of the year increase by about 10 per cent compared
with the same period last year.
Availability has become an important new consideration; many manufacturers
failed to anticipate the demand for new, cheaper products and found
themselves short of stock. The problem has been exacerbated by shortages of
components, including flat, liquid crystal screens for laptop computers and
some varieties of the Intel microprocessor chip at the heart of the majority
of pcs.
Clone makers are being squeezed from two directions. From one side, they are
finding it difficult to meet the challenge of the big brands now their price
advantage has been pared away.
From the other, unless they have a strong relationship with Intel and other
suppliers, they will be forced to buy critical components on the open
market. A high-performance chip which a large manufacturer can buy in bulk
at Dollars 60 a piece could cost Dollars 100 to Dollars 500 a piece in the
market, if it can be obtained at all.
It all adds up to a grim outlook for clone manufacturers. They will see
their bigger competitors increasingly regain control of the market for both
sophisticated personal computers able to take the place of minicomputers and
for low-cost systems, which will be bought by large organisations, small
businesses and individuals for home use.
It is no coincidence that Digital Equipment, the world's largest
minicomputer maker, is redoubling its efforts in pcs with the aim of being
one of the world's five top suppliers by 1995. Nor is it surprising that
Olivetti, Europe's biggest pc manufacturer, is preparing to launch a new
range of machines with which it hopes to steal Compaq's thunder. Mr Corrado
Passera, Olivetti managing director says: 'Price war is the name of the game
and we are ready to play it.'
