FT  18 DEC 93 / UK shares hit another new high as growth hopes are boosted
Shares in London closed last night at another record high, fuelled by
economic statistics during the week which boosted hopes of steady economic
growth next year with inflation staying weak.
Government bonds - or gilts - also continued their good run, with prices
driven up by low inflationary pressures and expectations of a cut in UK
interest rates early in the new year.
The mood on the UK markets was buoyed by firm trends on continental European
bourses, with both Paris and Frankfurt closing higher on speculation that
the German Bundesbank would ease monetary policy before the spring.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading stocks climbed 25.9 to finish at 3,337.1, for
a 76-point rise on the week. Since the day before the Budget on November 30,
share prices have gained 7 per cent.
In the second half of the year, the index - after falling slightly between
January and June - has so far climbed 17 per cent. Investors have in recent
weeks given short shrift to theories that the large tax rises due next April
will harm the recovery.
Long-dated gilts climbed  1/2 a point yesterday for a rise of 1 1/2 points
on the week and about 7 points since the Budget. Yesterday's rise in UK
government bonds was helped by strong buying interest from continental
Europe and the US, where investors are impressed about the UK's relatively
good economic prospects for next year. The week's gains on share and bond
markets were helped by underlying retail-price inflation in the UK hitting a
26-year low, a sharp drop in unemployment to 2.81m and indications that
steady output growth would continue.
Mr George Magnus, international economist at SG Warburg Securities, London
stockbroker, said the 'benign' news of low inflation had convinced the
markets that base rates, now at 5.5 per cent, could be cut to 4.5 per cent
by mid-1994.
Much of the stock market rise yesterday was due to frenetic technical
trading linked to the expiry of the December FT-SE 100 futures contract.
London stocks, Page 15
World stocks, Page 21
Markets, Weekend II
See Lex
