FT  13 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Trading with Vietnam
THE TIME has come for the United States to establish normal relations with
Vietnam. The war against Ho Chi Minh ended 18 years ago; west Europeans did
not wait half as long after the death of Hitler before starting to do
business with the Federal Republic of Germany. Admittedly there are
difficulties specific to America. Vietnam has not become a peace-loving
democracy, as west Germany did. Some US veterans cannot forget that their
forces were unable to defeat a third-world army. Such nightmares are not
easily exorcised.
Yet if South Africans can negotiate the handover of power from white to
black, and Israel can recognise the Palestine Liberation Organisation, it
should be possible for President Clinton to complete the slow process of
reconciliation that was initiated by his predecessor. Mr Clinton could
demonstrate such an intent by allowing the embargo on US trade with Vietnam
to lapse tomorrow.
All the pieces are in place. Just before he left office, President George
Bush amended the embargo to allow companies to sign contracts with and open
offices in Hanoi, in anticipation that the ban on doing business with this
former enemy would eventually lapse. Large US corporations, including IBM,
General Electric, BankAmerica, Citibank, and Caterpillar have shown
interest; most of them have already set up shop in Vietnam. American
business is not saying 'hell no, we won't go.' On July 2 Mr Clinton lifted
the US veto on lending to Hanoi by the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, and like institutions. On July 18 the first US diplomat sent to
the Vietnam capital in 40 years arrived, albeit accompanied by a statement
from Washington to the effect that his sole purpose was to help account for
US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA).
Intimations that in spite of all this Mr Clinton may be hesitating at the
next hurdle are only partly explained by the president's record as a
youthful opponent of the war. The MIA theme, which arouses strong emotions,
is played upon by Mr Ross Perot, who may re-emerge as a future presidential
candidate. Many veterans and ex-prisoners, including a significant group in
Congress, have accepted that Hanoi is co-operating in efforts to trace MIAs
 -but some organisations, notably the American Legion, persist in their
opposition to an early resumption of trade with Vietnam.
Mr Clinton, whose priorities are health care reform and the North American
free trade area negotiations, is understandably cautious about this
south-east Asian hornets' nest. He is anxious to avoid further defeats in
Congress. The psychological damage done to the American nation by its
experiences, at home and abroad, during the Vietnam struggle runs deep. Yet
in June he stood before the Vietnam veterans' memorial and said
disagreements over a war fought two decades ago should not divide Americans
as a people any longer. He must now find the courage of his convictions.
