FT  18 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Apec nations at odds over stance on Gatt
TRADE and foreign ministers from the Pacific region gathered in Seattle
yesterday for their annual Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation meeting still
divided over how far to go in their efforts to kickstart the Uruguay Round
of global trade negotiations.
Apec officials said they had still not resolved whether the ministers should
simply issue a statement calling for a successful agreement to liberalise
rules on trading and investment within the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, or should show their commitment to breaking the logjam at the Gatt
talks in Geneva more forcibly by offering further tariff cuts.
'The clearest demonstration would be the collective willingness to go the
extra mile and put additional tariff reduction offers on the table in
Geneva,' said Mr Tony Miller, Hong Kong's director-general of trade.
Mr Richard Nottage, New Zealand's secretary of foreign affairs and trade,
said that it would be difficult to get any hard-edged commitments into an
Apec declaration, but that member countries might give private indications
to each other about where their negotiators would be willing to move in
Geneva.
Mr Peter Cook, the Australian minister for trade negotiations, said he would
like to be able to include specific offers to give a significant push to the
Gatt negotiations, but acknowledged that it 'may not be possible to get a
completely itemised statement'.
Senior officials from the Apec countries have been holding talks in Seattle
since the weekend to prepare the ground for the meeting, but had not been
able to resolve this issue before their ministers arrived for an opening
dinner last night and the start of serious discussions this morning.
The Apec meeting is taking place at a critical moment for world trading
negotiations, coming immediately after last night's vote in the US Congress
on the North American Free Trade Agreement and less than a month before
President Bill Clinton's fast-track negotiating authority for the Uruguay
Round expires on December 15.
At the least, officials said they expected the ministerial meeting to issue
a declaration urging more progress on the Gatt talks.
Ms Charlene Barshefsky, deputy US trade representative, said: 'It is the
view of Apec senior officials that substantial impetus needs to be given to
the Round in order for it to be concluded by the deadline of December 15. 'I
expect a declaration on the Uruguay Round. I would hope and expect that that
declaration would be extremely strong.'
Nevertheless, some officials acknowledged that anything Apec might say or do
would be largely peripheral to the main issues that are still holding up
conclusion of the Round, many of which lie between the US and the European
Union.
Some countries left out of Apec have questioned whether Mr Clinton's new
emphasis on building trading ties to the Asia Pacific region represented an
effort to build a fortress-like trading bloc incompatible with Gatt's
multilateral approach.
But US officials say a strengthened Apec would be 'a building block, not a
trading bloc'.
