FT  02 JUN 93 / Survey of Shanghai (2): A creaking infrastructure - Streets,
homes, sewers
'IT'S becoming a Bangkok overnight,' said the long-term foreign resident
when complaining about Shanghai's traffic-clogged streets.
Among the big costs of the city's economic boom are frequent traffic jams
and a chronically overburdened public transport system. The bulk of greater
Shanghai's 13.34m residents and 2.6m transients, including visitors and
casual workers, are crowded into an urban area that measures just 375 square
kilometres.
Population density in the city's 12 administrative districts is 22,000 per
sq km, making it one of the world's most densely populated cities.
Decades of neglect, accompanied by rapid population growth in the 1960s and
1970s, have placed an enormous burden on municipal engineers and planners.
While the economic surge has added to this burden, the boom is also bringing
billions of dollars of long overdue investment in the city's crumbling
infrastructure.
It's an extraordinary statistic, but during the decade of the Cultural
Revolution from 1966-76 not one floor of housing was constructed at a time
when the city's population increased dramatically.
Shanghai, with its chronic overcrowding and antiquated sewers, is still
paying the price, although the present zero population growth rate is
helping to lessen demand for housing.
In 1992, the municipal government devoted Rmb32.5bn to industrial,
telecommunications, housing and infrastructure-type projects, including
Rmb10bn to water and sewage, roads and railways. Expenditure represented an
increase of about 25 per cent on the year before. Spending will be
maintained at a similar level this year.
Hard-pressed officials of the Municipal Construction Commission, who
estimate that 5,000 construction projects were undertaken last year, say
they expect infrastructure problems to ease in the second half of the decade
with the completion of larger capital works projects. These include.
a second suspension bridge across the Huangpu river to facilitate movement
from the west bank to the giant Pudong development area on the east bank.
This is expected to be opened by October this year.
two 'super-highways'', one to Hangzhou and the other to Nanjing.
a Metro system to be finished by late-1995 from southern Shanghai to a big
new railway station in the north. A feasibility study is being conducted
into a second metro from the airport to Pudong under the Huangpu.
extensive renovation of Shanghai's 3,500km of roads, including the building
of several flyovers to clear traffic from the city centre. At least one
ring-road is under construction.
A crash housing construction programme with plans to complete about 6m
square metres of additional floor space annually until the end of the
century.
huge urban renewal and road-widening projects that will result this year in
the re-location of some 36,000 families, and the demolition of about 15,000
older houses or 1.2m sq m of floor space.
Mr He Da-wei, a senior engineer of the Shanghai's construction bureau, said
that shortage of funds was a big problem. He estimated that about Rmb100bn
would be required to complete planned infrastructure projects by the end of
the decade.
Shanghai was looking to international lending institutions and to foreign
governments for assistance. Germany, for example, has provided soft loans to
help in the construction of the first phase of the Shanghai subway. Mr He
was fairly confident that traffic problems would ease by the mid-1990s, but
he acknowledged that city planners were battling an explosion in vehicle
ownership which would continue through the year 2000.
Numbers of vehicles on Shanghai's roads increased by 30,000 annually in the
past two years to a figure of about 300,000 by the end of 1992.
By the end of the decade, 600,000 vehicles are expected to crowd the city.
At the end of last year there were about 7m bicycles.
Whatever expenditure is planned on roads, bridges, tunnels and flyovers, it
is virtually certain that, with annual economic growth rates of 14 per cent
for the rest of the decade, Shanghai's traffic problems are set to continue,
and may get worse.
