FT  19 JUL 93 / Economists urge further India reform
THE benefits gained by India from economic reforms already undertaken may be
meagre unless they are followed by further steps to complete the
transformation of economic policy, according to a new report.
The report's authors - Mr Jagdish Bhagwati and Mr T N Srinivasan, professors
of economics at Columbia University and Yale University respectively -
strongly support the reforms introduced by Finance Minister Manmohan Singh,
who commissioned the report. But they say that increases in productivity and
exports may be small without additional measures.
Among reforms they recommend are further cuts in the budget deficit by
widening the tax base, using privatisation proceeds to retire government
debt and cut interest costs, and ending financing of the deficit through the
banking system.
The government promises to restructure the tax system but, because of
political sensitivities, has not yet embraced full privatisation of public
sector enterprises and has only partially reduced the funding demands it
makes on banks. It plans reform of the financial sector for which, the
economists say, 'the need can hardly be over-emphasised'.
In industry, the report notes that bureaucratic restrictions remain even
though the government has swept away the need for official licensing of
corporate decisions. 'State-level restrictions continue largely in place and
need to be removed if delicensing is to amount to much,' the professors say.
Imports should be further liberalised and tariffs reduced and unified,
although these measures should be balanced by new mechanisms to deal with
dumping and 'import surges'.
To encourage foreign investment, India must join trade blocs and should
accept a compromise with the US and other industrialised countries on
intellectual property rules. 'Multinationals now treat the acceptance of
such rules as an index of the seriousness of a country in attracting direct
foreign investment,' the economists say.
Their most straightforward advice concerns the huge and inefficient public
sector.
The government should promote competition and privatisation, it should start
no new public sector enterprises except in cases of clearly established
social need, and it should stop buying sick industries.
They note: 'The lessons of unhappy experience with public sector enterprises
in all sorts of countries with diverse social and cultural traditions
suggest that it is extremely hard to make them function efficiently.'
The professors recommend the complete and quick removal of subsidies on
fertiliser, irrigation and electricity, as well as of subsidised interest
rates for farm credits which, they say, mainly help farmers who are not
poor. Instead, they advocate the establishment of institutions such as
Grameen Bank, which has been successful in making loans to small farmers in
Bangladesh.
Government schemes which help the poor should be better targeted, the report
adds.
