FT  25 OCT 93 / UK Gilts: Traders expect quiet spell
WITH THE Pounds 3.5bn gilt auction this Wednesday likely to be the last of
the year, the UK government bond market is looking ahead to a quieter period
after the recent runs of price rises.
Last week, gilts along the yield curve showed healthy gains on the back of
generally favourable economic data, the cut in interest rates by the
Bundesbank, and news that the Bank of England would not hold a gilt auction
next month because of a possible clash with the November 30 Budget.
With the Bank well ahead in its gilt-issuing programme for the financial
year, many gilt specialists reckon there will be no gilt auction in
December, leaving open the possibility of one auction a month in the final
quarter of the financial year ending next March.
Assuming the Bank sells all the 6 per cent Treasury bonds maturing in 1999
up for takers at Wednesday's auction, it appears the government will need to
find buyers for only about Pounds 10bn worth of bonds to meet its funding
requirement for the full financial year. These calculations are on the basis
that the Treasury is correct in its forecast of a public sector borrowing
requirement of Pounds 50bn for 1993-1994.
The strength of demand for gilts was illustrated by the ease with which the
Bank sold bonds from a stock of Pounds 400m worth of index-linked securities
released on Thursday. By the next day, roughly half of the bonds - Pounds
150m of 2 1/2 per cent stock due 2003 and Pounds 250m of 2 1/2 per cent
stock due 2020 - had found purchasers.
During the week, yields for most classes of gilts fell along the length of
the bond curve by about 10 basis points. On Friday night, yields of 10-year
gilts were quoted on a par basis at just over 6.5 per cent. Over the week,
the yield difference for 10-year gilts compared with the equivalent German
bonds narrowed from 103 basis points to 97 basis points.
Short-dated gilts were boosted by the Bundesbank's decision to cut by half a
percentage point its Lombard and discount rates, to 6.75 per cent and 5.75
per cent respectively.
The decision showed every sign of the Bundesbank bowing to pressure from
other countries for an easing in monetary policy to speed up European
growth, and was followed by a wave of rate cuts elsewhere across the
Continent.
In Britain, there was little sign that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
was inclined to follow suit in the near future. Even so, many gilt
specialists believe the German move will make it easier for him to cut base
rates from 6 per cent on or around Budget day, to offset an expected fiscal
tightening to bring down the PSBR in the next few years.
While the yield decline for short-dated gilts might have been expected to
lead to a fall in prices at the longer end of the gilt curve - on the basis
that falling official rates might trigger inflationary pressures - longer
maturing gilts also performed generally well.
This was largely because of the market's continuing perception that price
pressures will stay subdued for some time, a sentiment reinforced by
Friday's data on UK output which indicated that (excluding oil and gas)
gross domestic product climbed by just 0.4 per cent in the third quarter
compared with the second quarter, after three-monthly increases of 0.5 per
cent and 0.6 per cent in the second and first quarters respectively.
'The figures generally fitted in with the thinking that the pace of the
recovery is slackening, which is good news for gilts,' said Mr Simon
Briscoe, a UK economist at SG Warburg Securities.
