FT  25 JAN 93 / JCI may bid for 29.9% of Johnson Matthey
JOHANNESBURG Consolidated Investments, the South African mining company, has
emerged as a bidder for up to 29.9 per cent of Johnson Matthey, the precious
metals group, held by Charter Consolidated, the UK industrial conglomerate.
Charter, which is advised by the merchant bank Hambros, is trying to sell
38.4 per cent of Johnson Matthey in total.
JCI, which is 40 per cent owned by Anglo-American, the South African holding
company, and 8 per cent by the De Beers group, is a holding company whose
assets include a 32.6 per cent stake in Rustenberg, the world's biggest
platinum producer, with whom Johnson Matthey has a joint venture.
Rustenberg was ruled out as a potential purchaser because of likely
anti-trust regulatory concerns which would follow from its increased control
of the world's platinum supply.
Industry analysts note that the purchase of the stake by JCI has commercial
logic for both parties. JCI already markets its platinum through Johnson
Matthey.
Meanwhile, Johnson Matthey's shares rose last week on speculation that
Charter has been approached by a company seeking to purchase its entire 38.4
per cent block of Johnson Matthey shares.
Any such purchaser would be required to bid for all of Johnson Matthey under
UK Takeover Panel rules.
Sources familiar with the talks said that at least one other potential
purchaser of Charter's Johnson Matthey shares has emerged, but would not say
if that buyer is seeking the entire block or the 8.5 per cent portion which
JCI does not intend to purchase.
A sale of a 29.9 per cent stake to JCI is thought to be acceptable to
Johnson Matthey because JCI is believed to have indicated it has no
intention of bidding for the entire company.
Johnson Matthey's management is reported to be determined to remain
independent.
Meanwhile, analysts believe that Charter may use proceeds of the Johnson
Matthey sale to repurchase the 36 per cent stake in itself currently held by
Minorco, the European-based investment arm of Anglo-American.
Anglo-American's stake in Charter reflected its desire to hold an investment
in the platinum industry.
Without the Johnson Matthey stake, Charter no longer has exposure to that
sector and Anglo-American may be prepared to sever its links with Charter if
a price can be agreed for the Minorco shares.
If it does not repurchase its own shares, analysts said that Charter would
be under pressure to distribute proceeds of the sale to shareholders as a
special dividend.
