FT  13 JUL 93 / London Stock Exchange: Newspapers hit
The outbreak of tabloid price wars sent newspaper shares into a tailspin.
After The Sun cut its cover price by 5p to 20p and the Daily Mirror returned
fire with a one-day offer to buy the paper for only 10p, heavy trading in
Mirror Group Newspapers pushed the price down 14 to 153p. Volume in the
shares, which have enjoyed a strong run lately, was 3.3m.
Casualties spread throughout the popular press as some investors feared that
News International's strategy may take the Sun's price lower if it was
reaping sales, while others believed that the furore was merely a summer
campaign.
United Newspapers - exposed to the price battle through the Daily Star and
Daily Express - lost 7 to 535p. Daily Mail &amp; General Trust shares fell back
Pounds 1 1/4 to Pounds 99, while News International, owner of The Sun,
softened a penny to 215p.
Analysts felt that although Mirror shares had taken a knock there was
underlying support for the stock amid the uncertainty sparked in the sector.
One dismissed the fall as 'a knee-jerk reaction'.
A stock overhang resulting from a large sell order was said to have
unsettled Kwik Save and the shares came off 16 to 691p. Dairy Farm was
identified as the buyer of 600,000 of the rumoured 1.5m line, with some
suggestions in the market that a further block of stock may be around. The
Dairy Farm purchase takes its stake in Kwik Save up to 29.4 per cent.
Avonmore advanced 7 to 150p after announcing the purchase of a Midlands
dairy business, although the news depressed Northern Foods, off 5 at 251p.
Results from MFI Furniture were at the bottom of most analysts'
expectations, but after the recent weakness in the share price it closed the
session 1 1/2 better at 128 1/2 p.
Flat sales figures from Darty, the French electrical retailer owned by
Kingfisher, hurt the latter, which fell 11 to 589p.
Nervous trading in Tiphook, the container rental group, sent the shares
further into retreat ahead of tomorrow's figures. The stock ended 14 lower
at 274p.
Reports that BAA, the UK airport operator, was in discussions to take a
stake in Chicago's O'Hare airport, left the shares 4 easier at 709p.
However, a further decline was prevented by news of a 4.2 per cent increase
in passenger traffic for the month of June, against the same period a year
earlier.
Conglomerate Tomkins tumbled 11 1/2 to 212 1/2 p, making it the day's worst
performer in the FT-SE 100 Index. Strong selling saw volume rise to 6m
shares, as the group reported figures at the bottom end of market
expectations.
Profits jumped 29 per cent to Pounds 171m, but analysts were particularly
unhappy with the lack of detail on the performance of RHM, which it acquired
last year. Tomkins' prediction of earnings growth of between 13 and 14 per
cent also left some analysts unimpressed.
Television stocks, still in an excitable state after the wave of takeover
fever in the sector, traded nervously while awaiting a statement by Mr Peter
Brooke, the national heritage secretary, on ownership rules for ITV
companies.
Anglia TV fell back 15 to 320p; Central Independent TV lost 52 to close at
1978p; Scottish TV, which also saw Morgan Grenfell's stake fall to below 3
per cent, gave up 15 to 524p; Yorkshire-Tyne Tees TV lost 8 to 196p; and
Carlton Communications retreated 10 to 767p. LWT Holdings preference shares
lost 12 to 458p and Granada dipped 4 to 407p.
Mr Brooke's statement came late in the trading day and said little other
than he was reviewing the rules.
A specialist said investors are puzzled by the complexity of the ownership
rules and the sector is suffering uncertainty. He added, however, that there
was a growing market expectation that some consolidation in television
ownership was an inevitability.
Weekend press speculation that the chairman and chief executive of Spring
Ram, the troubled building products group, may resign saw the shares advance
rapidly, closing 5 1/2 up at 54p. However, sources close to the company were
still insisting yesterday that Mr Bill Rooney, who was returning from
holiday, retained the support of the board and would only volunteer to
resign one of his posts.
Light profit-taking and a big seller of Commercial Union seen early in the
day left the shares 11 cheaper at 604p. Worries about the floods in the US
and the constant fear of hurricanes in the US was also said to have played
its part in the decline. Those same fears hurt General Accident, leaving the
shares 8 lower at 613p.
Several stocks in the aerospace sector benefited from the speculation of a
big aircraft order from Saudi Arabia. These included Rolls-Royce, where the
shares advanced 5 1/2 to 142 1/2 p, on volume of 3.4m, on suggestions that
it was in line to win the order for the engines that will power the aircraft
bought by Saudi Arabia.
Dealers were also cheered by reports that the UK government plans to raise
the ceiling on foreign ownership in both Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace,
from the current level of 29.5 per cent to between 40 and 50 per cent.
Rolls-Royce reached its limit last month but remains attractive, especially
to US buyers, some of which have had to settle for warrants issued through
Lehman Brothers.
Another possible beneficiary of an order from Saudi Arabia is TI Group,
whose subsidiary Dowty manufactures the landing gear on the Airbus aircraft.
The shares firmed 2 to 338p in thin trading.
Bid speculation returned to Lucas Industries shares, which finished 2 ahead
at 148p. Volume was 3.2m.
