FT  23 JUN 93 / International Company News: VW fails to convince GM over car
factory 'copying'
VOLKSWAGEN has failed to convince General Motors that its plans for a
revolutionary car plant in Spain are not a copy of a project drafted
previously by the US group.
'We have a right to be sceptical,' Mr David Herman, chairman of GM's German
subsidiary Adam Opel, said yesterday. 'It would be a real tour de force' if
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, GM's former procurement chief who is now
at VW, had managed to develop a new concept between mid-March, when he left
the US, and mid-June when he announced VW's plans.
Mr Herman was responding to claims in a letter received from VW in which Mr
Ferdinand Piech, chairman, said the German company did not have any
confidential plans or documents about GM's ultra-low-cost factory project.
Mr Herman confirmed that he had written to Mr Piech before Mr Lopez's
announcement, suggesting that he consider the possible consequences if VW's
project were the same as the one developed at GM under Mr Lopez's direction.
At the time Mr Herman wrote, German state prosecutors were investigating the
US group's complaints that Mr Lopez and colleagues took secret documents
with them when they absconded to VW. The German company has consistently
rebutted the charges.
It will be extremely difficult for Adam Opel to show a profit this year, Mr
Gail Gunderson, finance director, said yesterday. Confirming a slump in net
earnings to DM202m (Dollars 119m) last year compared with DM1bn in 1991, he
said he expected 1993 turnover to fall 18 per cent to about DM24bn.
The company had been profitable in the first five months, Mr Gunderson
added.
According to Mr Herman, German registrations of new Opel brand vehicles had
fallen 21 per cent to 244,000 in the first six months. Production in the
German concern had dropped 15.6 per cent to around 500,000, while deliveries
fell from 670,000 to 568,000.
He could not see any grounds for optimism in the second half. 'On the
contrary, we will have to adjust production in our works to further falls in
demand,' he said.
