FT  21 MAY 93 / Danes' dismay over riots in Copenhagen: Sympathy for
anti-Maastricht demonstrators is hard to find
A SECOND night of riots in the Norrebro area of Copenhagen, following
Denmark's endorsement of the Maastricht treaty on Tuesday, has left Danes
wondering what has hit their peaceful society.
Further mayhem may be on the way; the demonstrators, associated with a
militant anarchist squatter group known as the BZ'ers, are planning an
official demonstration against the police tomorrow.
However, yesterday's media reports were notably lacking in sociological
soul-searching on the causes of the riots. The Copenhagen popular newspaper
Ekstra Bladet, with a strongly anti-Maastricht readership, described the
riot as 'shameful', 'completely un-Danish', and ascribed the riots to
'louts'.
Copenhagen, one of only two areas in which there was a No majority on
Tuesday, is a city dominated by civil servants and administrators, students,
and the financial service sector. It also has more than its share of social
welfare clients and pensioners.
It has above-average unemployment, about 16 per cent compared with the
national average of 12 per cent. Youth unemployment, however, has been
partly held in check by provision of more places in tertiary education, so
that unemployment in the 16-24 age group is about the same as the national
average.
There was a measure of understanding for the rioters from the June Movement,
the most prominent of the anti-Maastricht campaign movements. One of its
leaders, Ms Drude Dahlerup, declined to condemn Tuesday night's rioters
until she had heard all the facts. But there is no evidence of popular
support for the BZ'ers.
With the city full of journalists and camera crews, the chief worry of many
Danes is the country's 'reputation abroad as a country where you can walk
the streets in safety', as the national newspaper Berlingske Tidende put it.
The second riot was less vicious than the first, when police were under such
severe pressure from the stone-throwing demonstrators that they opened fire
and wounded 11 of them - none seriously. About 26 policemen were also
injured.
Mrs Ebbe Strange, a left-wing member of parliament, has called for an
inquiry into the riot.
On Wednesday night 100-200 demonstrators began smashing shop windows and
were soon involved in a street battle with about 200 police, who used
teargas but did not fire their handguns again. Four police were slightly
injured and four demonstrators arrested, said police.
