FT  13 JUL 93 / Daily Mirror spikes The Sun's guns
THE first day of the tabloid circulation war saw the Daily Mirror, priced at
10p, selling out; The Sun, down 5p to 20p, having a rise in sales; while the
Daily Star, unchanged at 25p, was seriously squeezed.
Wholesalers said the price cuts and the attendant publicity increased
yesterday's overall sale of mass-market newspapers.
The Sun's promotional campaign was clearly hit by the Daily Mirror's spoiler
of charging 10p for one day's issue.
The Daily Mirror, which normally sells about 2.7m papers, claimed victory,
saying it had sold about 500,000 extra copies - a rise of about 20 per cent.
It is due to return to its usual 27p cover price today, while The Sun
intends to stick at 20p for the rest of the summer.
The Sun, which dismissed the Daily Mirror's move as a 'one-day gimmick',
said it had sold between 275,000 and 280,000 extra copies - it usually sells
about 3.5m copies a day.
News International, which owns The Sun, said it was happy with the results
so far and added that the picture would be clearer by the middle of the
week.
The Daily Star is estimated to have lost as much as 10 per cent of its
normal daily sale of about 800,000.
As the circulation battle raged, Mr Kelvin MacKenzie, editor of The Sun, and
Mr David Banks, his counterpart at the Daily Mirror, traded insults.
Mr Banks ridiculed The Sun's claim that the price cut was designed to beat
the recession. He suggested that The Sun had contributed to the recession by
'single-handedly' ensuring four Conservative election wins.
Mr MacKenzie replied the only reason the Mirror was not cutting its price
was that its senior executives had such enormous share options they didn't
want to see the share price go down.
Mirror Group Newspapers share price closed 14p down yesterday at 153p and
News International shares closed down 1p at 215p.
There was scepticism in the newspaper industry about the wisdom of the move.
'Midsummer madness,' said one specialist. 'The real question is how many of
the extra sales will be retained when the price goes up again.'
Lex, Page 16
