FT  13 MAR 93 / Fashion: Hats off to the City sober-sides - Dressing for the
Professions / The Banker
Only a fool would pretend that how you dress does not matter. And nowhere is
it more important than in the workplace, where your clothes send out a clear
message to colleagues and clients. Every profession has its own nuances. To
the outsider they may seem arcane, even pointless; to the insider they show
fine distinctions of attitude. Here Richard Rawlinson, in the first of a new
series, cracks the code of City Man - and City Woman.
THE CITY'S equivalent of the bra-burning woman of the 1960s was the merchant
banker who left his bowler hat at home. In the City of London, social
revolution stands aside for subtle evolution. But evolve it does, and the
transition from the extravagant Eighties to the nervous Nineties is as
clearly defined as the stripes on a New &amp; Lingwood shirt.
Gone are the wide red braces inspired by Gordon 'greed is good' Gekko of the
film Wall Street. Gone, too, are the brashly-coloured silk linings of
power-shouldered suits. The popular image of the yuppie, making easy money
over the mobile telephone while driving his Porsche down the Strand for a
four-hour lunch at the Savoy, is now a distant symbol of the Thatcher
decade.
The Square Mile of today is a much more sober place than it was a few years
ago. A combination of enduring recession and a string of high-profile fraud
scandals has transformed bankers into a more humble breed, reflected by
their increasingly sedate dress codes.
The cult of the individual is eschewed in favour of faceless, corporate
operators. When a young and snappy Warburg Securities employee inadvertently
appeared in a photograph on the front page of the Financial Times at the
launch of the British Telecom privatisation, he was reprimanded by a
superior. Flamboyant dressers are suspected of egotism and rebellion and,
with fewer jobs on the market, bankers can see the sense of keeping a low
profile and presenting themselves to clients as studious advisers.
Bold pinstripes have been toned down to chalkstripes or to navy or grey
herring-bones and grey birds-eyes. Prince of Wales checks, which crept in
among a few daring bankers in the 1980s, are now reinstated as spectator
sportswear. If any British banker envied US counterparts at Goldman Sachs
and Chase Manhattan their summer suits in cool cotton tan, they have now
lost all hope of ever being accepted at work in such informal attire.
Wide striped shirts have also given way to narrow stripes or plains in pale
blues, pinks and creams. Classic gold cufflinks are now prefered to the
frivolous Mickey Mouse links of yesteryear. Gentlemanly grey socks have
replaced the once familiar flash of garish colour between polished, black
Church's shoes and trouser turn-ups. Only ties remain as the last bastion of
self-expression, with circus animal prints by Hermes - or imitations by
Thomas Pink - replacing polka dots and paisleys as the ultimate in City
chic.
Lazards merchant banker Simon Pryce confirms that what was de rigeur a few
years ago is no longer acceptable. 'A colleague wears a paisley-backed
waistcoat which is considered outrageous,' he says. 'While there is still a
lot of money in the City, the emphasis is away from flaunting wealth towards
buying well-cut, well-made, classics which will last a long time.'
In a nutshell, the understated style of the traditional British gent, which
has always reigned supreme among the predominantly public school and
Oxbridge-educated City establishment, is back on top. While some younger
bankers were carried away on a wave of internationalism during the designer
decade, they have now come back to their roots.
However, it is, perhaps surprisingly, not Savile Row and Jermyn Street which
are the main beneficiaries of the preeminence of le style anglais. The
emergence of small bespoke tailoring business - usually run by enterprising
county girls operating from Fulham - are catering for busy bankers by taking
business to their offices. Similarly, mail order shirt companies such as
James Meade are increasingly popular among people who have little time for
high street shopping.
Gerry Grimstone, senior director of Schroder Wagg, has his suits made by the
similarly named Georgina Grimston, whose company employs former Savile Row
tailor Leo Costanzo, formerly of Huntsman and Henry Poole.
'People want better value for money as well as quality,' he says. 'They also
want the convenience of being fitted at work or at home instead of having to
waste a Saturday afternoon at the tailor.' Georgina Grimston's suits sell
from Pounds 600 to Pounds 800 with an extra pair of trousers, compared with
Savile Row price tags of around Pounds 1,500.
Rosemary Richards, another tailor, confirms the renewed conformity in City
dressing but adds that suggestive selling during fitting sessions can leads
to clients risking more adventurous styles. 'Most bankers say they just want
to look like everyone else in the office, but when we say that the narrower
leg is back in fashion and that single breasted suits are more popular than
double breasted ones, they often agree to experiment with cut.'
The status quo does not change very much when applied to women in the City,
even though there are fewer rules dictating their appearance. While some
overtly fashion-conscious women hold senior positions, most adhere to the
men's uniform of suits and pale shirts. These are then usually accessorised
with reassuring pearls and flat, black, patent leather court shoes.
Penny Scott, corporate finance manager at Hambros, says: 'I don't want to go
into a meeting and be noticed for ostentatious clothes. I want to be noticed
because I do what I do well. If I wore a short skirt, people would think
about my legs and not my brain.'
Scott owns eight bespoke suits ranging in colour from plain grey, blue and
olive green to a cherry red jacket with a black velvet collar which is
teamed with a black skirt. 'I may wear a dress if I am dining with clients
in the evening,' she says, 'but separates are more practical for work. They
can be mixed and matched and do not require as much dry cleaning.'
Pressure to conform is, on the whole, a cause of amusement rather than
irritation for most bankers. Anecdotes about the Square Mile's snobbery and
archaic traditions are always being exchanged. There is the one about the
new Lazards director who arrived with facial hair and was introduced as the
'currently bearded' Mr . . . . There is another about Warburgs men ordering
two suit jackets, one of which is hung permanently on their chairs so that
bosses think they are working late. They say one can spot senior figures as
they do not carry brief cases or umbrellas, leaving that to their
chauffeurs.
Considering the rampant uniformity, bankers are also remarkably interested
in each other's sartorial choices. One Cazanove employee, who wished to
remain anonymous, said that more financiers were wearing white Calvin Klein
underpants nowadays than the colourful boxer shorts prefered in the 1980s.
How did he know? 'We talk about that sort of thing in the wine bar after
work,' came the reply.
David Burns, 43, is director of the London office of Banco de Progreso in
the City and is keen on off-the-peg suits. He says: 'On the whole, as I seem
to be a standard size and I don't like spending a lot of money on what are,
after all, my working overalls. I travel a lot and generally buy my suits at
Brooks Brothers in New York where I pay somewhere between Pounds 300 and
Pounds 350 a time. But I do own a couple of Hackett's ones which cost rather
more but which I particularly like to wear when I want to look very English.
'I'm more particular about my shirts and ties. I buy my shirts from Crichton
in Elizabeth Street - their shirts are very like pukka Jermyn Street ones. I
like the colours and the fabrics and they're just Pounds 25. Some of my ties
come from Crichton, some, inevitably, from Hermes, and if I want to look
colourful my Garrick Club tie. My shoes are from Church's.
'On the whole we have to be fairly sober-suited here so there isn't too much
room for flamboyance or innovation.' David Burns is photographed wearing a
wool dark grey herringbone suit from Brooks Brothers and a shirt from
Crichton. His tie is by Coruzzi, Piazza Meda, Milan. Crichton is at 34
Elizabeth Street, London SW1.
Penny Scott, of Hambros, wears a grey flannel suit by bespoke dress designer
Philippa Robertson; pink shirt by Thomas Pink and shoes by Carvela from
Harrods
