FT  27 APR 93 / Letter: Red tape will be cut from waste laws
Sir, I have a lot of sympathy with the letter that you published (April 21)
from David Brown of the Federation of Small Businesses about the burden of
waste law on business. I am personally dedicated to cutting red tape on
business. Any new regulation on the environment that reaches my desk has to
justify itself. We are also launching a deregulatory review of existing
controls, including those on waste.
The particular target in Mr Brown's letter is the definition of waste.
Whether or not anyone thinks it a sensible one, I have to point out that it
is not new - a definition of identical effect has been in force since 1976.
The courts ruled several years ago that waste can still be waste even if it
has value. The definition of waste in European Community law makes the same
point, so for the present it is an established fact we have to live with.
What we do not have to live with is a system of controls on waste that is
bureaucratic nonsense. Something may be waste, but that is no reason why
what happens to it should be regulated any more than is needed to protect
the environment. Differing kinds of waste in different quantities can
produce different effects - including the pollution of aquifers and the
generation of methane gas. But some of the examples mentioned by Mr Brown -
such as a shopkeeper giving a cardboard box to a customer - there is no
earthly reason to regulate. That is why the government's proposals for new
waste licensing regulations, to come into force later this year, contain a
greatly increased number of exemptions for such obviously innocent
activities.
In other cases we have to strike a balance. Mr Brown's example of the farmer
who wants some hardcore is a good one. Anyone who opens a site where he
dumps large heaps of waste forever should be licensed. He should be able to
accept demolition hardcore for making up tracks or hard-standing without a
licence, and we shall make sure he can.
Keeping business costs down is crucial, but so is protecting the environment
appropriately.
David Maclean,
minister for the environment,
and countryside,
2 Marsham Street,
London SW1P 3EB
