FT  11 FEB 93 / World Stock Markets: Pharmaceuticals begin to lose their
glamour - Paul Abrahams highlights the US/UK switch into cyclicals, and
reservations about European growth
Pharmaceutical stocks, a salve for market woes for much of the recession,
have started to wobble.
Most British and American drugs stocks have been caught as investors switch
out of defensive companies into cyclical recovery plays - groups which have
suffered during the slowdown in the world economy, but are likely to post
significant earnings increases once it begins to pick up.
European drug groups have also suffered, because the ability of some
companies to continue to churn out double-digit earnings growth is becoming
increasingly questionable. The operating environment for healthcare stocks
is changing fast, and changing for the worse.
The main problem facing the sector is the issue of pricing. Governments
around the globe, faced by rapidly growing healthcare spending, are turning
their attention to the apparently excessive profits of the drugs groups.
The governments' response has been to limit demand for medicines or cut
prices. The Japanese and German markets, the world's second and third
largest respectively, both endured price cuts last year.
In the US, legislation against groups which increase prices above the rate
of inflation is also being threatened by the Clinton administration.
The effect on the pharmaceuticals market has been a divergence between
companies which, in the past, have driven earnings up with volume growth,
and those which have produced it with price increases - and will no longer
be able to do so.
The most outstanding European drugs stock over the last six months has been
the Swedish group Astra.
The company is small compared with Anglo-American industry giants but,
nevertheless, it is the world's fastest-growing drugs group. It has
outperformed its local market by 35 per cent over the last six months,
rising from a low of SKr484 in August to close yesterday at SKr677 in the
'B' shares.
Astra's volume growth has been outstanding in all of its three main
therapeutic areas, gastrointestinal, respiratory and cardiovascular. It is
also one of the few pure pharmaceuticals plays on the European continent.
During the first nine months of last year, sales of Losec, its anti-ulcer
treatment, increased by 41 per cent to SKr5bn, while those for Pulmicort,
its asthma treatment, rose 59 per cent to SKr1.347bn.
The group is predicting a sales increase of up to 25 per cent for the full
year, an impressive achievement. James Capel estimates that, during 1991,
only 15 per cent of Astra's growth in the US was owed to price increases.
The other outstanding stock has been Roche, the Swiss concern, which has
outperformed its local market by about 10 per cent since July. Roche, one of
Switzerland's three chemicals giants, is the least exposed to cyclical
non-drug operations.
Similar to Astra, Roche is generating growth by increasing sales, rather
than prices. With a wide portfolio of relatively small products in terms of
sales, its drugs division increased its turnover last year by 16 per cent to
SFr6.9bn.
The other Swiss groups have not performed so well. Sandoz has only tracked
its domestic market over the last six months. The problem is that Sandoz's
pharmaceuticals and nutrition divisions have been held back by the remainder
of the group.
Through its construction and chemical activities, the company has been
exposed to recession. In addition, its agrochemicals division has also been
hit by last year's reform of the European Community's common agricultural
policy.
Ciba-Geigy, its Basle neighbour, is the world's largest agrochemical group
and has also suffered from the downturn in the world economy.
Although Ciba-Geigy's pharmaceuticals sales have been growing fast, thanks
partly to the group's highly successful US launch of its nicotine patch, its
speciality chemicals operations have suffered from the general economic
downturn.
James Capel estimates that 20 per cent of group operating profits are
cyclical, compared with 8 per cent of Roche's.
Ciba-Geigy's shares have underperformed the local market by 10 per cent
since July. In particular, the group has suffered from heavy selling of its
American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) in the US.
Meanwhile, analysts are also tipping Novo Nordisk because of its volume
sales increases. James Capel estimates that only 5 per cent of the Danish
company's operating profits are cyclical. The healthcare business is
expected to produce double-digit sales growth, as its insulin and hormone
replacement therapies continue to do well.
It may also receive a boost from Seroxat, its anti-depressant which has just
been launched in the US by SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American company.
Big chemical groups with pharmaceuticals divisions, such as Bayer, in
Germany, and Akzo, of the Netherlands, have suffered from their
vulnerability to economic cycles. However, investors may well be looking to
pick up their shares as recovery plays. As usual, timing will be crucial.
