FT  19 APR 93 / Leading Article: Landing capital
THE WORLD BANK is being usurped. Its reports, while still interesting
reading, no longer provide the only authoritative judgment of the
performance and prospects of developing countries. In these days of
increasingly mobile global capital flows, the judgments of international
investors are more visible, and more damning for those countries that fail
to make the grade.
The World Bank's latest report, Global Economic Prospects and the Developing
Countries, provides a fascinating appraisal of the recent explosion in
private-sector financial flows to developing countries, both portfolio
capital and foreign direct investment (FDI). The main success story of
recent years is the emergence of Latin America, phoenix-like, from the ashes
of the commercial bank debt crisis of the early 1980s. It now has a chance
of joining east Asia as a second engine of developing country growth, with
the Bank expecting Latin American growth to double this decade compared with
the 1980s.
The combination of debt reduction with liberal financial and trade policies,
some of which would put the US and the European Community to shame, has
transformed investment opportunities for global investors in Latin America.
Flows of portfolio equity capital to Latin America have grown from Dollars
434m (Pounds 287m) in 1989 to Dollars 5.6bn in 1992. Mexico, Brazil and
Argentina, along with China, Malaysia and Thailand, are also the prime
beneficiaries of the renewed flow of foreign direct investment to developing
countries. This has risen by 50 per cent since 1990 and now accounts for
over a fifth of global FDI, compared with 12 per cent in 1987.
Greater exposure to international capital flows brings costs too. Changes in
the world economy, or in the judgment of investors about domestic policies,
can have devastating effects on economic management for countries dependent
on short-term portfolio capital. These judgments are also a fact of
developed country life, as the British government can testify. It is better
to respond to market fears about the dangers of an overvalued real exchange
rate or a fiscal crisis than wait for the damage to be done.
The answer cannot be autarky. For, as the Bank points out, the alternative
to financial integration is not self-sufficiency but capital flight. Much of
the new capital inflow into Latin America is, in fact, the return of capital
that had taken wing when domestic prospects looked particularly bleak.
By contrast, sub-Saharan Africa is still trapped in the vicious circle of
heavy external debts, external non-viability and domestic economic decline.
The Bank estimates that the stock of flight capital from sub-Saharan Africa
is a staggering 80 per cent of gross domestic product. Only a package of
debt reduction and radical domestic reform can revive prospects of these
unhappy countries. One of the World Bank's prime tasks remains unfulfilled.
