FT  07 JUN 93 / Leading Article: Say 'no' to managed trade
THE CLINTON administration is, it occasionally seems, the only government in
the world that believes in a planned economy. The planned economy it
believes in is Japan's.
It believes planning helped make Japan the world's most successful economy.
It believes also that the problems Japan poses to its trading partners can
best be dealt with by more planning. If, as seems certain, the US acts on
those beliefs, completion of the Uruguay round, allegedly in sight, may mean
far less than is hoped.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, argued at the ministerial
meeting of the OECD last week that 'in vital areas, Japan's economy is not
open'. The US is, accordingly, to present Japan with tough demands for
market opening. Those demands will embrace computers and supercomputers,
cars and car parts, and financial services, for all of which targets for
import shares are likely to be proposed. In addition, the US is, apparently,
to call on Japan to halve its current account surplus, from the present
level of 3 per cent of gross national product to 1 1/2 per cent.
For its part, the European Commission will ask the Japanese to tighten their
probably illegal export cartel against EC consumers of cars and light
commercial trucks, on the principle that they should share equally in a
downturn, irrespective of the demand for their products. No less a figure
than the OECD's Mr Jean-Claude Paye, secretary-general of an organisation
whose raison d'etre was trade liberalisation, legitimised this policy with
his statement that he would 'not rule out protectionism as a policy of last
resort'.
Important relationship
Nevertheless, voluntary export restraints like those on Japanese car exports
to the European Community are an old story and Mr Paye, despite his
prominent position, is not president of the US. What makes the US proposals
to Japan important is that they come from the country that created the
postwar trading system. Yet it now apparently believes that the norms and
rules of the Gatt are largely inapplicable to its most important trading
relationship.
Why it does so is not self-evident. Does the US administration believe that
the Japanese government can manage the external account to within half a
percentage point? Does it expect changes in sectoral trade balances to have
a one-for-one effect on Japan's overall trade balance? Does it recognise
that sectoral import targets imply the cartelisation of targeted Japanese
industries? Does it acknowledge that trade surpluses are a more or less
inevitable outcome of a world with freedom for capital flows?
Greater opportunities
Yet while all this is going on, the OECD ministerial communique states that
ministers will 'do their utmost . . . to ensure the rapid achievement of a
substantial, comprehensive and balanced outcome of the round'. Efforts are,
it appears, being made to complete a comprehensive market access package.
Greater opportunities to sell goods and services in foreign markets are the
hard coin of trade negotiations. If the agreed liberalisation were to be
radical, the Uruguay round might not only be close to completion, but would
also be worth com-pleting.
Unfortunately, any multilateral agreement is only as good as the credibility
of the commitments that underlie it. This is why it is so destructive for
the US to claim that the world is on the brink of a great liberalising
agreement, but that it reserves the right to act outside it. If such
agreements are to endure, as they must, participants must believe that the
agreement is balanced, is in their own interests and will be effectively
implemented.
There cannot be both an effective multilateral trading system and the right
to act unilaterally, as and when one pleases. Instead of pursuing its
narrowly bilateral course with Japan, the US should try to establish clear
rules and multilateral procedures applicable to all countries that are
alleged to violate their commitments. Mr Clinton must be told to choose
between the rule of trade law and the law of the trade policy gun. He will
not be able to have both.
