FT  25 MAY 93 / Museveni seeks to lift Uganda's business profile: African
country is darling of the World Bank
WHEN President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda opens today's Confederation of
British Industry (CBI) conference on investment in his country it will mark
a significant step forward in the rehabilitation of an economy that all but
collapsed in the mid-1980s.
The country has since become the darling of the World Bank, thanks to its
strict adherence to economic reform. In 1993, gross domestic product growth
could be as high as 5 per cent, while tight monetary policy has brought
inflation down from around 60 per cent last year to just 3 per cent.
'We think growth prospects are very good. The government is committed to the
reform programme and it is making progress. In fact I think they are way out
in front,' said a World Bank official.
Although the figures make good reading, the government complains that the
austerity programme has left little to spare for raising living standards.
As a result, Mr Museveni is having to raise Uganda's business profile, after
a decade which has seen investment flows to sub-Saharan Africa slow down to
a trickle.
'We have to tell the world that we are new people in power' he said in an
interview. 'The atmosphere has changed over the last seven years we have
been in power. Ugandans have stopped concentrating on killing each other and
are instead ready to work.'
Both the civil service and the once large army have been cut substantially,
while dependence on the export of raw coffee, which last year earned the
country Dollars 102m (Pounds 66.2m), has fallen to less than 75 per cent of
total exports from some 94 per cent in the late 1980s.
The country has lifted curbs on the repatriation of profits and instituted a
one-stop investment authority to provide information and licences. The
privatisation programme has also been stepped up, with many government-owned
industries now for sale.
'I have seen great changes,' says Mr Gerry Parfitt, partner at conference
co-sponsors Coopers and Lybrand. 'We think there is a lot of potential.'
For all the praise, however, a catalogue of problems remains. A 1992 United
Nations Industrial Development Organisation (Unido) study highlighted the
cost disadvantages of Uganda's land-locked position, suggesting emphasis
should be put on small-scale and resource-based industrial development.
The government has also failed to root out corruption, and the incidence of
Aids remains a costly challenge.
Sporadic fighting in the north of the country and large numbers of refugees
from the country's troubled neighbours of Rwanda and Sudan continue to place
strains on an overstretched administration.
The president is also at odds with the donor community over multiparty
democracy. 'It brought us nothing but chaos,' says Mr Museveni. 'We are due
to elect a constituent assembly at the end of the year, which will decide
our form of government, and we shall have parliamentary and presidential
elections. But I remain opposed to a multiparty system. We can still have
democracy, but without parties.'
He claims he has not decided whether to run for the presidency: 'It is no
fun trying to balance a budget without resources. It is not a privilege,
just a duty which had to be done.'
That said, some investors are declaring their confidence in the new Uganda
that Mr Museveni has created. Mr Christopher Green, a director of Barclays
Metals, which is developing cobalt bearing tailings in western Uganda, says:
'We have sufficient trust in the changes for us to feel comfortable with
investing.'
