FT  18 MAY 93 / Arts: On the figurative art carousel - William Packer
wonders why Tony Bevan appears to be Britain's only artist celebrated abroad
for this particular skill
Tony Bevan is now 42, a product of the Goldsmiths' College and the Slade of
the early 1970s. He is also that comparatively rare creature in his
generation, a figurative painter who has been much supported by our
principal cultural agencies such as the British Council, and has shown
abroad with considerable success, most notably in Germany and California.
And good luck to him, of course. It is only his very rarity as an artist
working ostensibly from the figure, and shown as such on our behalf abroad
in the company of other, more conceptual and abstract favourites, that
should give us pause.
There he stands, by inference the sole worthy British representative of his
kind in the eyes of our cultural officers and selectors. 'What do you mean',
we hear them cry, 'we never push our younger figurative painters? But we put
Tony Bevan into the Aperto of the Venice Biennale of 1988.'
It is a self-fulfilling ploy, at once justification and excuse. We have only
to wait until 1989 to find Carla Schulz-Hoffmann, in her introductory essay
to Bevan's show at the Staatsgalerie Moderner Kunst at Munich, having cited
Auerbach, Bacon, Freud, Moore and Hockney in general terms, going on to say:
'Other than these well-established big names, each of whom has developed his
own form of figurative art, it is only seldom that promising younger artists
emerge, and one rarely encounters British names among the riders on the
international artistic carousel.' Quite so.
And so why should Bevan be the brave exception? His canvases vary in size
but the format is uniformly simple, a head or figure presented directly
against an intense colour or tonal field. The images are decidedly more
graphic than painterly in their realisation, for all the dense impasto of
the pigment on the surface. These are self-consciously dramatic, iconic
presences, that strike powerfully upon the viewer's eye and imagination, at
least at first. And they are worked not directly from reality but at a
certain remove, from photographs.
The theme of Bevan's current exhibition at Whitechapel is The Meeting, which
turns out to be a meeting, who knows whether for performance or rehearsal,
of a small, nameless, male-voice choir. Surrounded by studies and single
heads, the centrepiece is a polyptych that brings the group together in
three ranks, mouths agape, gazing intently out at us, the unseen audience.
The only thing is that, immediately impressive as this new work is in the
old way of strong graphic silhouette, dense surface and bright colour, any
longer and closer scrutiny reveals it to be very poorly done, all of it.
The drawing is weak and the painting worse than weak, for it is clear that
Bevan has no understanding of form, and no technique at all for modelling
and realising it convincingly within the limitations of pictorial
convention. It is only fair to say that, working as he always has from the
photograph, his inadequacy is understandable, for the photograph, that
seductive, monocular cheat, has always left out or hidden at least as much
as ever it revealed. To look at these boneless heads, soggy cheeks, cloth
ears and absent noses, is to take the point. What is a little harder to take
is the thought of Bevan as a significant upholder of a continuing figurative
tradition.
Such disappointment casts doubt, of course, on the earlier work, but at
least he got by so long as he stuck to his simple graphic method. It is only
this present naive attempt to take on one of the greatest tests in all of
painting - which is the proper understanding and description of the human
head - and to do so as it were without looking, that has let him down.
So how do his apologists defend him? Not so much by moving the goalposts as
by choosing to play on an entirely different pitch. 'We can survey the
paintings as painted surface and as metaphors for painting - a painterly
approach. We can look at the paintings as expressions and examinations of
states of mind - a psychological approach. And we can consider the
collective aspect of the character types and of their relation to their
viewers - a sociological approach': thus Michael Cullingworth in his
introduction to the ICA retrospective in 1988.
Dr Schulz-Hoffmann, for her part, entitled the essay already quoted:
'Representational Paintings as a Conceptual Method'. She went on to say that
'As with all other representational painters whom one can take seriously (a
nice side-swipe that), so too for Bevan the ambivalence between abstract
cipher and contentual (sic) meaning plays a decisive role.' Oh, we see, pace
le Bourgeois Gentilhomme, he has been a conceptual artist all along.
And what is his method? Peter Wollen tells us in his Whitechapel catalogue.
'Tony Bevan makes his paintings on the floor, working on hands and knees . .
. He likes the downward pressure of the charcoal stick or the paint-laden
brush pressed down onto the canvas. The charcoal crumbles or the dense paint
moves under pressure in ways that fascinate him . . . Because he is so close
to the canvas during the actual process of painting, it is hard to predict
what will happen when the painting is hung vertically on the wall and looked
at from a distance . . .'
Anything, I suppose, is better than confronting reality, and testing the
mark that is achieved against the one that was intended, in the way of
Rembrandt, Chardin, Goya. The true debate is not about the death of
painting, nor of the futility of modernism. Rather it is, or should be,
simply about the quality of what is done, of whatever kind, if only our
curators and cultural chiefs had the eyes and unfashionable courage to look
properly about them.
It a mistake perhaps, but not a scandal that Bevan should be so celebrated
at home and abroad. The scandal only is that he should be alone.
Tony Bevan: Whitechapel Art Gallery, Whitechapel High St, E1, until July 11.
Sponsored by Loot, with support from Time Out and the Arthur Andersen and Co
Foundation
