FT  19 APR 93 / Survey of Business Air Travel (10): Is there room for plane
and train? - The Channel Tunnel Challenge
The journey between London and Paris must rank as one of the most
frustrating in the world.
In terms of distance, the two capitals are separated by just 300 miles - a
trip of perhaps three hours by conventional train or nearer two by France's
Train a Grande Vitesse. But the irritating intervention of a strip of water
called the Channel stretches the train-and-ferry journey to a marathon seven
or eight hours.
Not surprisingly, business people travelling between the two capitals choose
air transport every time. But this could change. Business people are about
to discover a new way of travelling between London and Paris (or Brussels)
called Eurostar - the brand name of the international express train service
due to start running through the Channel tunnel in June next year.
Eurostar has the potential to bring drastic changes to the cross-Channel
travel market. Its attractions are clear: instead of having to make the
journey out to an airport, allowing an hour for checking in, undertaking the
air journey and transferring from the airport to the city at the other end,
people will be able to travel directly from city centre to city centre in a
single leap by Eurostar.
The trains themselves - 31 of them - have been specially designed for
international services. Each will have a power car at each end and 18
carriages in between, producing an overall length of a quarter of a mile.
Ten carriages will be first class, with seats for 210 passengers; six will
be second class, with seats for 584 passengers; and two will be bar-buffet
vehicles.
In the second-class area, seats will be mainly airline-style, facing in the
same direction, although some will face each other across tables. Food will
be available from the buffet, and a trolley service will serve snacks.
Multilingual personnel on board will offer information and help.
Clearly the first-class accommodation will be the main focus of competition
for the business travel market. Here, Eurostar will offer what it calls
'high quality service in a relaxed and sophisticated ambience'. Seating will
be spacious, with three reclining seats across the width of the carriage.
There will be a choice between seats facing each other across a table and
seats facing the same direction. Hot meals will be served to passengers at
their seats.
Rail travel therefore looks likely to be highly competitive with airlines in
terms of space and comfort. It will also be competing on price, although
both sides are keeping their pricing strategies under wraps. But what about
speed and frequency?
If, as planned, the services start in June 1994, the initial timetable is
expected to offer one train an hour each way between London and Paris.
Services will run between Waterloo Station in London and Gare du Nord in
Paris, with some trains stopping at Ashford on the British side of the
tunnel and at Frethun (near Calais) or Lille on the French side.
The trains, modelled on the French TGV, will be fast: they will travel at
speeds of up to 300kph (186mph) on the high-speed TGV Nord line between
Paris and Frethun.
On the British side of the tunnel, however, they will be unable to get up to
anything like their top speed because they will have to use the existing
tracks between London and the coast, sharing them with Network SouthEast
commuter trains. The result is that the total journey time for non-stop
trains will be three hours.
Eventually, this should change. Britain says it plans to build a new 140mph
railway between London and the coast to take the Eurostar trains and some
fast commuter trains. Still to be determined is how the line will be funded
or when it will be built, but the British government is hoping it will be
ready to open by around the turn of the century. If and when it does, a
London-Paris non-stop journey will take 2hrs 27mins.
Even at the slower speed, however, it can be seen that the train service
will be very competitive with air travel on city centre to city centre
journeys. A typical weekday trip by air from London to Paris might consist
of an hour's journey from London to Heathrow airport, an hour's wait at the
airport, an hour on the aircraft, and an hour to get into Paris at the other
end: four hours in total. The train will also enable people to work or relax
without interruption from one end of the journey to the other.
On the face of it, then, Eurostar would seem set for easy victory in the
London-Paris market.
But it would be a mistake to write off the airlines too soon. Mr Richard
Hannah, transport analyst at UBS, points out that people's decisions about
whether to use train or aircraft on a journey from London to Paris will
depend very much on where their journey starts from.
'Clearly the train is quicker from city centre to city centre, but in real
life that's not necessarily where people's journeys begin and end,' Mr
Hannah says.
'If everyone started their journeys from Trafalgar Square, for example, then
the train would be quicker. But if you are a businessman setting off in the
morning from your home in the Surrey or Hertfordshire commuter belt, the
idea of travelling into London to take the train might be less attractive
than driving to Gatwick or Heathrow airport.'
In other words, there will be room for both the train and the plane after
the tunnel opens. Inevitably, though, the airlines will suffer a sharp
diminution in their market. If they have not been complaining too loudly,
then Mr Ian Wild, transport analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, says it is
not altogether surprising: profits on short-haul European services are
notoriously so small that most airlines would be only too glad of the
opportunity to reallocate aircraft and slots to more lucrative routes.
