FT  23 DEC 93 / Yeltsin pledges his support for Gaidar
Russian president Boris Yeltsin said yesterday that Mr Yegor Gaidar, the
first deputy premier and the man most closely associated with economic
reform, would stay in government.
Breaking his post-election silence, Mr Yeltsin said Mr Gaidar's policy of
reform would also remain. But he suggested that reform might take a
different course after the setback for reformist parties in the recent
parliamentary elections.
He told a Kremlin press conference that the 'volume of social benefits'
available to the population was likely to grow if inflation continued its
downward trend. Inflation for November fell below 15 per cent monthly -
although financial experts in Moscow believe the trend may be temporary.
It is clear that the Russian government and international financial
institutions will put more emphasis on the social impact of reforms. The
International Monetary Fund, criticised over the past week by Al Gore, the
US vice-president, and Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister, for
insensitivity to Russian hardships, has said it will send a team to Moscow
in January to help design a social security system.
However, the IMF and US Treasury have indicated that Russia's basic economic
troubles - high inflation and a huge budget deficit - have to be tackled if
the economy is to be pulled out of crisis.
Mr Yeltsin said the surge in support for the extreme right Liberal Democrats
of Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky and the Communist party reflected weariness with
hardship. His comments will be hard to reconcile with the need to
restructure a swollen state sector and to control spending.
The Russian president emphasised the referendum vote for a new constitution,
saying that, when extremist political forces were strengthening, it was all
the more important that a constitution guaranteeing a powerful presidency
was in place. He said the direction of foreign policy - a prerogative of the
president - would be basically unchanged.
He played down the threat posed by Mr Zhirinovsky, saying he would 'not let
him walk over me' to take the presidency. At the same time, he voiced
readiness to work with the Liberal Democrats and Communists if they showed
themselves able to form a 'constructive opposition'.
No single group will dominate the new parliament, though - as Mr Yeltsin
noted - the reformist Russia's Choice bloc, led by Mr Gaidar, will have the
most seats in spite of the Liberal Democrats' success in taking the majority
of seats in the half of the lower house elected through party lists.
In Washington, President Bill Clinton said he and Mr Yeltsin had discussed
their planned mid-January summit in Moscow in a half-hour telephone
conversation.
Mr Zhirinovsky, meanwhile, was in Austria as guest of a businessman, Mr
Edwin Neuwirth, who told reporters he had volunteered for the Waffen SS
during the second world war.
Mr Zhirinovsky earlier met the head of a radical rightwing German party in
Munich.
