FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (21): Fall-out from a scandal - The Stock
Markets
THE Indian government is breathing a sigh of relief. Measures taken earlier
this month narrowly averted a stock market crisis triggered by the income
tax authorities' seizure of stock worth Rs1.5bn traded by Harshad Mehta, the
broker at the centre last year's Bombay securities scandal.
Traders were reminded of the dark days when the markets came to a standstill
after an edict froze the shares that Mr Mehta had traded in the 14 months
before the scandal was uncovered.
A crisis may have been avoided but the pressure to eliminate the chaos of
India's bourses is still intense.
The ruling Congress party - which is eager to ride on the success of its
economic policies in elections in four provinces later this year - is
particularly keen to see capital overseas flowing into the country.
But foreign portfolio investors want to see the modernisation and regulation
of the bourses before buying heavily in Indian stocks.
New Delhi opened its doors to foreign investment a year ago but only Dollars
150m has come in so far and another Dollars 200m is in the pipeline. This
represents only a fraction of the Rs1bn official projection.
Several events have weakened the confidence of overseas investors in Indian
markets - a series of bomb explosions in Bombay in March this year, the
sacking of a mosque in Ayodhya by Hindu extremists and the Bombay securities
market scandal, which surfaced last April.
Bombay, founded in 1875, is the largest and oldest of India's 21 stock
exchanges and it accounts for about two-thirds of India's trading value. The
other main exchanges are Calcutta, Delhi, Madras and Ahmedabad. Bombay has
been averaging 45,000 trades a day - the same as the London Stock Exchange -
and at the peak of activity 18 months ago, it ran at double that rate.
Brokers in Bombay, who once catered to a handful of speculators and 2m
investors, are now being asked to serve, either directly or indirectly, 25m.
The number of investors is forecast to double in five years. The number of
companies listed has swollen to more than 5,000 and 350 new firms are added
every year.
Yet the Indian financial markets remain inadequately supervised and archaic
in their procedures. Restoring order to this chaos is no mean task for the
SEBI.
Its action is three-pronged: To bring brokers all over the country under its
control by asking them to register with the SEBI. However, the introduction
of hefty registration fees last November brought brokers out in protest,
claiming that the turnover-linked fee was a tax on their income and had
stalled the registration process.
To introduce capital adequacy norms. Brokers are undercapitalised and are
denied access to bank finance, which the Reserve Bank of India, the central
bank, fears will be diverted for stock speculation. Indian brokers not only
serve investors but also do business on their own account.
To bring corporates into a market dominated by proprietary firms and
partnerships. The entry of corporates is linked to a change in stock
exchange regulations, which at present demand unlimited liability of
members. Mr GV Ramakrishna, SEBI chairman, says transparent limited
liability is preferable to unlimited liability that is not quantified.
Last month, the government reconstituted the Bombay exchange in an attempt
to break broker resistance. It nominated four members to represent
investors, the corporate sector and the public on the nine-member board,
giving the executive director a casting vote in the event of a tie.
The SEBI has enhanced its vigilance after the securities scandal and now
probes every sharp rise or fall in share prices. But brokers are angry at
what they say is unwarranted intervention in their business.
