FT  15 NOV 93 / Israel and Efta work to widen trading links
ISRAEL has held its first joint committee meeting with the European Free
Trade Association to widen and deepen trade ties and economic co-operation
under the Israel-Efta free trade agreement which came into force last
January.
Ms Maria Fekter, Austrian secretary of state for economic affairs, who led
the Efta delegation, said the meeting had agreed to push for a pan-European
cumulation of rules of origin to stem mounting discrimination by the EC
against finished goods produced by Efta states, Israel and other countries.
The joint committee also agreed to work to change the EC requirement that
all products enjoying free trade must be consigned directly from one free
trade partner to another.
A number of joint technical committees were also established to work on
further co-operation in official aid, services, investments, government
procurement and the development of joint research and development projects.
Both Israel and Efta said they expected substantially increased trade under
the 10-month-old agreement. Last year, Israel imported goods worth Dollars
1.2bn from Efta states and exported Dollars 487m.
Switzerland is Israel's leading trade partner in Efta and accounts for more
than 50 per cent of exports and imports.
'We hope for increased volume and more balanced trade as Efta economies
recover from recession,' Mr Nati Sharoni, director-general of Israel's trade
and industry ministry, said.
On the future relations between Efta and the Palestinian entity, Ms Fekter
said the committee had decided to wait for further talks to decide whether
the two entities are to establish a joint customs union.
But it is clear that Efta is hoping Palestinian negotiators will accept a
customs union which will give Palestinian goods access to the Efta market on
the same terms as Israeli products.
'If the Palestinians reject a customs union we will have to do a new
bilateral agreement with them,' Ms Fekter said.
Both sides also stressed the need for greater government involvement in
encouraging businessmen to look for investment and trading opportunities
between Efta and Israel.
