FT  20 MAY 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): River-to-river
saleswomen - Avon is selling its cosmetics in the Amazon
Sending bands of women in kayaks down the tributaries of the Amazon to sell
lipstick and face creams to remote communities would seem to be taking the
concept of direct sales to the extreme. Particularly if the communities do
not use money and can pay only with barter goods such as fruits, eggs, wood
or nuggets of gold.
Yet this is one of the creative methods used by the Brazilian subsidiary of
Avon, the US cosmetics giant, to make its products available throughout the
country's vast hinterlands and to maintain sales over the past three years
of recession.
As a result, Avon has become one of the few Brazilian companies to see sales
rocket as per capita income has dropped 10 per cent.
Ademar Serodio, president of Avon Brazil, explains: 'Research showed us
that, even in a crisis, there is always consumption.
'Our problem was to make people who had less money consume more.'
His plan to widen the sales net did not convince his head office, nor,
indeed, some of his employees. They believed cosmetics sales would be among
the first products to suffer in a deep recession and the company should
adjust to a smaller market.
After a six-month struggle, Serodio's masters caved in, agreeing in March
1991 to boost the sales force by 50 per cent and launch a series of new
products. The decision was a success, turning the Brazil operation into one
of the company's most profitable worldwide and the largest cosmetics company
in Latin America.
Sales rose from 180m units in 1990 to 220m last year. This year, revenues
are expected to reach Dollars 480m (Pounds 317.8m), against Dollars 350m in
1990. The workforce has increased 10 per cent and the factory is operating
at full steam, compared with an idle capacity average for Brazilian industry
of 30 per cent.
To achieve this, and increase the sales force, Serodio boosted the number of
sales catalogues to 1.2m, which he estimates are seen by 30m people.
This is a costly operation in Brazil, where high inflation means the
catalogues must be reprinted every 19 days, while the estimated inflation
rate is factored into the sales price to cover the grace period for payment.
Simply issuing new price lists did not work, says Serodio, explaining: 'The
catalogues are an essential tool of our salesforce in creating trust.'
Serodio also radically changed the system of incentives for sales people,
who work on 30 per cent commission. Rather than, as in the past, reward the
people who sell most, prizes now go to those who most improve their own
performance. Serodio explains: 'Under the old scheme, it was always the same
people who won, so it ended up not being an effective incentive.'
The Amazon sales are a result of a new flexibility to adaptation to local
conditions and the logistics problems of door-to-door sales in a country
larger than western Europe.
Serodio admits he is not sufficiently familiar with the currency of the
Amazon to judge how many breadfruit one needs to buy a lipstick or how many
blushers to a nugget of gold. But, having paddled back to Amazonian towns,
his sales women exchange the barter products for money and then pay Avon.
As a result, today in Brazil the Avon name may be known in places where even
the usually ubiquitous Coke has not penetrated.
Serodio explains: 'There is a cosmetics market everywhere, however
peripheral the place. Cosmetics are not superfluous products, but a
necessary part of a woman feeling good and being accepted by society.'
He points out that, when Avon opened a sales office in the poor
north-eastern state of Bahia in 1970, analysts claimed that the local per
capita income was too low for the purchase of cosmetics.
Yet the Sao Paulo factory was soon filling truck loads of products bound for
the interior of the state - one of the poorest parts of the continent.
Serodio says: 'I didn't believe it. It countered all my training as an
economist. So I went there and I found all these really poor people living
in mud shacks yet buying cologne in crystal bottles.
'It turned out that they saw them as a status symbol.'
