FT  24 NOV 93 / Swift U-turn for business emperor's life: The Elliott affair
is extraordinary, even by Australian standards
Life for John Elliott, the Melbourne-based businessman, has changed its
direction sharply.
A few years ago, he was running a multi-billion-dollar corporate empire with
interests ranging from Courage and Foster's beer to agribusinesses and
resources. Now the possibility of criminal charges looms, after a federal
court judge yesterday lifted an injunction barring the Australian
authorities from investigating or bringing a case, centred on alleged
corporate theft, against him.
The judge's ruling follows a 17-day hearing over the merits of that
injunction and could still be overturned on appeal, an option which Mr
Elliott's counsel quickly indicated would be pursued. But the delay may be
brief. The judge agreed to suspend any lifting of the injunction to allow an
appeal to be lodged in 'an appropriately short period'.
Already the 'Elliott affair' has proved extraordinary, even by the
rumbustious standards of Australian business behaviour. For Mr Elliott, who
denies any impropriety, has countered the threat of criminal charges with
allegations that the National Crime Authority's interest in the business
affairs of his former Elders IXL company has been politically motivated. The
NCA, for its part, has said that its investigation stems solely from the
possibility of serious wrongdoing.
At the heart of the imbroglio, according to statements of claim lodged by Mr
Elliott and an Elliott associate, are a series of complex foreign exchange
transactions dating back to 1988. These are said to have involved Elders
IXL, which was Mr Elliott's quoted company in the 1980s, the Bank of New
Zealand, and companies connected with executives of Equiticorp, the failed
New Zealand-based group.
The transactions between Elders and BNZ are said to have taken place in
January and September that year, and resulted in an aggregate loss to Elders
of around ADollars 66.5m (Pounds 29m). Companies connected to Equiticorp
executives, also dealing via BNZ, benefited by a like amount at similar
times.
The Elliott camp claims these deals were part of a 'normal' hedging
operation, related to Elders' exposure to sterling at that time. The loss to
Elders in New Zealand, it is claimed, was made up in the UK.
But talk of payments between Elders and Equiticorp is not entirely new. It
surfaced last year, during the trial of Equiticorp's former chief executive,
Mr Allan Hawkins, who is now serving a six-year jail sentence. Mention was
made then of a mysterious 'H-fee'. One witness said that he assumed the fee,
allegedly paid from Elders to Equiticorp, was in some way connected to the
bid situation surrounding Broken Hill Proprietary in the mid-1980s, although
he stressed this was an assumption.
Elders had snapped up a near-19 per cent interest in the steel and natural
resources giant, in April 1986; a few weeks later, Equiticorp followed suit,
buying a smaller interest which was eventually sold on to the late Robert
Holmes a Court, another Australian entrepreneur.
Whatever the outcome of potential inquiries by the NCA, assuming it is
eventually allowed to pursue them, the twist is Mr Elliott's assertion he
has been the victim of a political conspiracy. The former Liberal party
president claims this started in 1989, before the 1990 federal election, and
was designed to damage both himself and the Liberal party.
Justice Michael Foster was plainly unimpressed. In yesterday's ruling, he
described suggestions that the NCA had abused its powers and deprived Mr
Elliott of his civil rights as 'rhetorical flourish'. While the judge
acknowledged that Mr Elliott 'was being made, as he asserts, a political
target by Labor party politicians', he also said it 'would take a quantum
leap to infer. . . that the NCA had entered into an unlawful conspiracy with
politicians and the media to attack Elliott's reputation'.
With that in mind, he ruled there were no grounds for a civil court to
intervene in a criminal matter. 'That the laying of charges against the
applicants should be further delayed until the ultimate disposal of these
proceedings would, in my view, be a quite unacceptable interference with the
administration of criminal justice in the state of Victoria,' he stated
firmly.
The drama, like many of Mr Elliott's previous corporate machinations, looks
set to run.
