FT  28 JUN 93 / Attack On Baghdad: US rallies behind Clinton's decision
A FEW weeks ago Mr Ross Perot, the billionaire businessman who stood as an
independent presidential candidate, was caught muttering that President Bill
Clinton was planning a war in the Balkans to take attention away from his
domestic difficulty.
No such accusation has been made after the latest strike on Iraq - not
because the president's fortunes have not recovered, which they have, to a
degree, but because of the peculiar place in current US demonology reserved
for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
The Clinton administration has gone to some lengths to try to stress that it
is not as obsessed with Saddam the man as the administration of former
President George Bush seemed to be. But the presentation of sufficiently
persuasive evidence that Iraq was behind the foiled assassination attempt on
Mr Bush in Kuwait 10 weeks ago meant that the domestic political risks of
another raid on Baghdad were minimal.
Thus it was hardly surprising that, having seen Mr Clinton give a televised
address on Saturday night, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, promptly
called the White House to express his support. Similar endorsements were
available across the political spectrum yesterday, including from Senator
Sam Nunn, the Democrat from Georgia and chairman of the armed services
committee who rarely has a good word to say for his president.
This domestic solidarity also enables the administration to address
criticisms from the Arab world contrasting the willingness to bomb Iraq with
the inability to come to the rescue of Bosnia's Moslems.
As Mr Les Aspin, the secretary of defence, put it yesterday, 'you can
understand why people feel this way'. But, he went on, there were quantum
differences between Bosnia and the transgressions of the Iraqi leadership.
'You'll find us picking and choosing' places where US retaliation might be
warranted, he added. 'Saddam Hussein', he went on, 'has not learned the
lesson of Desert Storm.' Similarly General Colin Powell, chairman of the
joints chiefs of staff, regretted any 'collateral damage' outside the Iraqi
intelligence headquarters in Baghdad, but argued that it was 'nothing
compared with the collateral damage Saddam Hussein was planning by possibly
killing a former president of the United States'.
The administration seems to have planned this operation with deliberation
and discretion. Mr Clinton himself took the decision on Friday but ordered
that it be carried out in the middle of the night to minimise casualties and
that it be delayed until after the Moslem sabbath, so as to avoid gratuitous
offence.
He acted only after sifting evidence provided by the FBI and the CIA. Ms
Janet Reno, the attorney general, and Mr Jim Woolsey, the CIA director, made
their formal reports to the president last Thursday. Contrary to recent
practice there were no leaks.
About a dozen US allies were informed privately in the 24 hours before the
raid took place. None apparently dissented and none was asked to offer
anything other than verbal support; Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, was the first to come forward shortly after missiles had hit
Baghdad.
The justification offered was Article 51 of the UN Charter - the right to
self defence. The action, according to Mr Aspin, 'in no way diminishes US
support for coalition action (against Iraq) or for the authority of the UN'.
The US immediately convened a UN Security Council session yesterday
afternoon to hear its case, which will be principally devoted to the attempt
on Mr Bush's life and not to the series of Iraqi violations of UN
resolutions.
In addition, several US officials, including the president, made much of the
need to combat state-sponsored terrorism, of which the US considers Iraq to
be a leading practitioner. Similar suspicions also attach to Sudan,
especially after the discovery last week in New Jersey of an alleged
terrorist cell numbering several Sudanese nationals with a list of targets
in New York. No comparable action, however, is believed to be planned
against Khartoum.
Although three cruise missiles missed their target, the claimed
effectiveness of the rest of the raid does not hurt the credibility of the
US military. The missiles were launched from warships in the Red Sea and the
Gulf and involved no other air or ground power. It probably does Mr Clinton
no harm to have authorised what appears to have been a successful strike.
His relations with his own military have been fraught over the defence
budget, base closings and the admission of homosexuals into service.
