FT  09 AUG 93 / VW versus the old school
We can let our industrial structure collapse like the English did, and then
the Japanese will come here and have us build cars in Germany from mostly
prefabricated parts. For that you need a couple of young people, and they
will be more than glad to have any kind of a job,' says Mr Ferdinand Piech.
The Volkswagen chairman may not be much of a diplomat, but as a visionary he
is worth a hearing. It is readily acknowledged that much of German industry
is overweight, overmanned and overdue for an overhaul.
But is Mr Piech overdoing things? His colleagues in industry goggled
enviously last March when he recruited Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua,
General Motors' star procurement chief, and seven of Mr Lopez's parts-buying
'warriors'. They were shocked when GM was forced to use the courts to stop
his attempt to lure another 40 from the buying department at Adam Opel, the
GM German subsidiary.
And they were struck dumb by what followed. GM's espionage charges were
stunning in themselves, and Mr Piech's more recent nationalistic war
declarations and charges that GM had conspired to pervert the course of
justice deeply disturbed the political and industrial establishment.
But the smoke and noise from these fronts have tended to obscure another
conflict at ground level, where Mr Lopez's warriors are bludgeoning price
cuts out of VW suppliers. Late last week, the VDMA engineering and plant
makers' association begged for mercy and a return to 'civilised' ways of
doing business.
Large industrial customers - especially the motor industry - were using
'extortion' and 'extreme aggression', it said. Parts buyers demanded to be
given foundry moulds and construction drawings, saying continuity of supply
had to be ensured should the suppliers go bust.
Such bully-boy tactics were previously unknown in the co-operative,
consensus-oriented world of German commerce.
Still, no one - least of all General Motors - can deny the efficacy of the
Lopez slimming cure. It made Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, into the
most profitable carmaker in Europe when he was based there in the 1980s. And
last week the US parent surprised the world with a Dollars 889m
second-quarter net profit compared with a Dollars 703m loss a year earlier.
Most striking of all was the fall in the deficit in the core north American
business, from Dollars 761m to Dollars 95m - all attributed to cost-savings.
Mr Lopez and his warriors had been at work in Detroit for just 10 months
when they left in March.
Success at Opel, however, came when the German economy was expanding. And
results in the US were achieved in a no-holds-barred free market that is far
more flexible, far more used to implementing harsh hire-and-fire policies,
than Germany's vaunted 'social economy'.
It is clear from the German engineering association's claims that other
companies are now following the Lopez example - put brutally, kicking the
man on the next rung down the ladder. Instead of calm consensus, there is a
growing atmosphere of every man for himself.
Bosch, however, the country's mightiest car parts supplier and a company of
the old, more courteous school, believes it can stand above the fray. It
says it will follow its own cost-reduction plans at its own pace, and refuse
to bow to unreasonable demands.
The company's executives suggest privately that an organised front among
lesser companies could deny VW its clamour for pound after pound of flesh.
Is a new consensus - the rest against VW - possible?
The absence of public backing for VW's policies and tactics from industry or
the political establishment - although both are anxious for a lasting cure
to Germany's economic ills - suggests VW is moving out on a limb.
An extraordinary meeting of the company's supervisory board, called
unexpectedly on Friday, resulted in an extraordinary display of confidence
in the effectiveness and honesty of VW's dream team. But the fact that it
was called at all, when most of Germany was away on holiday, demonstrated
mounting pressure.
Even if Mr Piech pulls off his ambition of returning VW to break-even this
year and profit thereafter, it is likely to be partly at the expense of the
components industry.
All native German automotive companies' basic strategies depend on increased
purchasing of parts from abroad, and on moving vehicle production closer to
markets and into lower-cost production zones outside Germany.
Most, Volkswagen included, see this as the best long-term solution to their
difficulties. But VW, the country's biggest carmaker and by definition its
biggest components user, by aggressively pursuing its own immediate aims,
could damage the close-knit network of component suppliers and the
collaborative relationship between German carmakers.
In the longer term this could put at risk the home base, on which the whole
industry relies to sustain its long-term metamorphosis.
Mr Piech explains his ardour with claims that the German industry has only
two years - the time before Japan's current voluntary quotas expire - to
match up to its arch-competitors' cost structures. But even he accepts he
cannot come within striking distance in less than three years.
Mr Piech is making a bold gamble. That his more traditionally minded,
long-termist colleagues at Mercedes-Benz, BMW and elsewhere have not thrown
their weight behind him suggests they still need to be persuaded he is on to
a winner. The legal threats confronting Mr Lopez, on whom the VW chairman
has staked his reputation, do not improve his chances of success.
