FT  24 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Clinton hits out over Japan trade
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday launched his toughest attack yet on
Japanese trading practices, claiming that the prospects for fair access to
Japanese markets were 'somewhat remote'.
He also bluntly reaffirmed his opposition to the Bush administration's
decision to allow Japanese minivans to enter the US at low tariff rates. The
US motor industry is seeking an increase in these tariffs from 2.5 per cent
to 25 per cent.
He said he was 'astonished' that the previous administration 'overruled its
own customs office and gave a Dollars 300m a year freebie to the Japanese
for no apparent reason. And we got nothing, and I emphasise nothing, in
return'.
The president's onslaught at yesterday's news conference was provoked by a
question on minivans. But it coincides with critical bilateral negotiations
on semiconductors in Hawaii, and suggests that Mr Clinton, like several of
his senior advisers, is increasingly inclined to pursue quantitative
sectoral targets as a way of reducing Japan's trading surplus with the US,
which last year exceeded Dollars 50bn (Pounds 35.2bn). The Japanese
government, however, is determined to end the use of market share targets,
over which, it says, it has no control.
At yesterday's Hawaii talks, the US pressed Japan to maintain 'gradual and
steady progress' in opening its semiconductor market by achieving an average
20 per cent foreign market share in 1993. Japanese officials said, however,
that they would 'reject out of hand' any suggestions for further use of
numerical indicators of progress in semiconductor trade. Japan is also
determined to avoid the approach in any future trade agreements with the US.
Mr Clinton said yesterday he still hoped to engage the Japanese government
in a dialogue 'across a whole broad range of issues'. He implied that he
wanted to put the minivan case 'in the context of a larger set of trade
issues before acting unilaterally'.
But he noted that whereas the balance of US trade with the EC, Taiwan and
Korea had fluctuated over the years, 'the one that never seems to change
very much is the one with Japan'.
He went on: 'The persistence of the surplus the Japanese enjoy with the US
and the rest of the developed world can only lead one to the conclusion that
the possibility of obtaining real and even access to the Japanese market is
somewhat remote'.
