FT  26 MAR 93 / Industrial output set to rise, says CBI
BRITISH manufacturing industry expects to increase output over the next four
months following a recovery in order books to their best levels since the
summer of 1990, according to the Confederation of British Industry.
In its latest monthly survey of industrial trends, the CBI said output
expectations 'are now clearly positive', having increased for three months
in succession.
The CBI's latest UK economic forecast, also published today, points to the
first economic recovery led by manufacturing industry since the late 1960s.
CBI officials warned, however, that it was too early to celebrate the end of
the recession. More than 40 per cent of companies still consider their order
books are below normal while nearly one in four says its stocks of finished
goods are more than adequate to meet demand.
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, welcomed evidence of improved home
and export demand 'as another indication that the economy may now be growing
again'.
But he warned that the sharp deterioration in economic trends on the
Continent meant 'we cannot yet be sure that the recession is over'.
The CBI polled 1,413 companies employing about 2m people in 50 different
industries between February 26 and March 17. Nearly all replied before last
week's Budget.
The survey found that 26 per cent of companies expect to increase output
over the next four months compared with 16 per cent anticipating a decrease
and 58 per cent saying they would keep output unchanged. The positive
balance of 10 per cent of companies expecting to increase production was the
best result since May last year.
According to Mr Andrew Sentance, the CBI's economics director, the survey's
findings on output were consistent with a rise in UK manufacturing
production in the second quarter of this year.
For the whole of this year, the CBI expects manufacturing output to grow by
1.6 per cent compared with its forecast of 1.4 per cent growth in UK gross
domestic product. Looking ahead to 1994, the employers' organisation expects
manufacturing production will rise by 2.8 per cent compared with an expected
rise of 2.4 per cent in GDP.
Exports to lead modest upturn, Page 12
