FT  26 JUL 93 / Survey of Cardiff Bay and the Barrage (1): 'A Covent Garden
by the sea' - Despite strong opposition, approval is expected early in the
autumn for one of Europe's most ambitious development projects. Now comes
the task of finding the necessary investment
WHEN ROYAL assent to the private bill allowing construction of a barrage
across Cardiff Bay has finally been received later this year, the
multi-million pound development of the Welsh capital's docklands, one of the
biggest investment projects in Europe, will at last begin.
Workmen will then move in to make the first investigations for what Sir
Geoffrey Inkin - chairman of the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation since
it was set up six years ago - describes as 'probably the biggest development
job in Britain now that work on the Channel Tunnel is ending.'
The barrage, which will impound a 500-acre freshwater lake large enough to
play host to Olympic rowing events, will unlock some eight miles of
waterside development potential.
'We are going to build a capital to grace the 21st century,' says Inkin.
'The regeneration of Cardiff Bay is one of the most ambitious projects of
its kind in Europe.'
'The period of preparation and planning will be behind us. The next step
will be to produce something tangible,' adds Michael Boyce, chief executive
of the corporation, adds.
It will be at least three years before the barrage, which is likely to cost
around Pounds 140m, is in place, but within 12 months Boyce predicts
enormous changes in an area which, before the first world war, was known as
Tiger Bay, hinterland of the greatest coal-exporting port in the world.
New buildings are already rising. A home for the Welsh Health Common
Services Authority is approaching the fitting-out stage, and work has
started on a new headquarters for the Dutch group, NCM Insurance Services.
Both are on land owned by Grosvenor Waterside, property arm in Cardiff of
Associated British Ports. International architects Holder Mathias Alcock
have converted an Edwardian building for their own use, while a hotel,
houses, restaurants, offices and small industrial units are all up.
By this time next year, Boyce forecasts, a start will also have been made on
the Butetown link, an avenue the width of the Champs Elysees, which will
join the docks to the city centre; a university complex which will
eventually house 3,000 students; and one of Harry Ramsden's world-famous
fish-and-chip restaurants, as well as lesser fry.
Much of the impetus is expected to come from the tourism and leisure
facilities that will be created in the bay area. A new home for National
Techniquest, a hands-on science discovery centre, should also be approaching
completion in a year's time, the Rainbow Theatre and the Sky Shuttle will
arrive from the 1992 Ebbw Vale Garden Festival site, a start should be made
on a county cricket ground, and supermarkets will be under construction, as
well as a Pounds 100m marine haven.
Work should also have begun on improving the city's central station, the
orientation of which will be changed so that it has frontages to the south -
the bay area - as well as to the north into the traditional city centre.
There are plans, too, for an international opera house. When Nicholas
Edwards (now Lord Crickhowell) launched the idea of redeveloping Cardiff Bay
in a local hotel in December 1986, he emphasised the need for a centre for
the performing arts. He wanted a building to compete in eye-catching design
with Sydney Opera House. With the Welsh National Opera Company as the
resident company he also wanted a house which could rival Covent Garden, the
Met or La Scala.
Such a scheme needs government financial backing. While the Welsh Office has
still to spell out its commitment, it has given tacit backing to an
architectural competition, the result of which should be announced in 12
months' time.
Not everything has gone smoothly over the past seven years. Opponents of the
barrage have caused delays which, at one time, threatened the scheme. Their
case has centred on environmental issues, in particular the loss of valuable
breeding grounds for over-wintering birds, and on groundwater problems in
neighbouring areas of the city as a result of the rise in the water-table
behind the barrage.
Rhodri Morgan, a Cardiff Labour MP, organised a campaign of harassment in
parliament, proving that the day of the constituency member was far from
over.
He exploited two important issues, bringing about the collapse of the first
bill and forcing the government to come to the rescue and put it through
parliament a second time. Morgan drew attention to the fact that up to
11,000 houses could be affected by a rise in the water-table as a
consequence of the creation of the lake behind the barrage. This was a
highly sensitive issue in a city that has suffered flooding several times as
a result of a rise in the Taff, which, with the Ely, is one of two rivers
that pour out into the bay.
He also worked with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds in a
campaign to prevent the destruction of a site of special scientific
interest, which was home for several species of rare birds.
The bill's opponents also disputed the development corporation's forecast
that 25,000 jobs would be created over the next 10 to 15 years, argued that
estimates of 4-5m sq ft of office space being built were pie in the sky.
They suggested, too, that the Pounds 140m cost of the barrage was an
underestimate, and challenged cost-benefit analyses prepared for the
project.
Inkin's team had produced an economic report which suggested that the
barrage would add Pounds 119m in net value, from new building and other
economic activity, and had asserted that, if it were not built, investment
totalling Pounds 153m would flow out. The benefit from having a barrage was,
therefore, put at Pounds 272m.
Inkin has always maintained that Cardiff Bay, in Europe second only in
development potential to London's docklands, could go ahead without the
barrage. Equally, he has insisted that the barrage is essential to unlock
the full benefits.
Time will prove or disprove the accuracy of the estimates. The argument,
however, should soon be over, and as a result of the parliamentary sanction
now obtained, Cardiff will have its barrage by 1996.
The first steps towards putting the city on the international map, so as to
attract the investment that will be needed if this dream is to be fulfilled,
have already been taken. On May 18, Cardiff Bay launched its latest
marketing campaign, before an invited audience in the City of London. The
Princess of Wales was there, as, too, were members of the Welsh National
Opera Company. Welsh artists Shirley Bassey and Sir Anthony Hopkins sent
messages of support.
'We want the rest of the world to know about Cardiff,' says Boyce.' Our
strategy is to build the bay and Cardiff, which we see as one city, into a
leading centre for tourism and leisure pursuits. With a new home for
National Techniquest, an extension of the National Museum of Wales's
industrial and maritime building at Pier Head, with the opera house, and
with new restaurants and festival shopping, the bay can be a grand Covent
Garden by the sea.
'But Cardiff Bay will not just be about attracting 2m visitors a year by the
turn of the century. Our strategy envisages strengthening the financial
services sector, the growth of which has been a feature of recent investment
in the city. We also want a strong manufacturing centre, especially in food,
electronics, pharmaceuticals and the media. Cardiff is already the most
important television production centre in Britain outside London, and we
want to develop and expand that strength.'
Efforts to attract investment will be focused within Europe on the so-called
'motor' regions, such as Baden-Wurttemberg, Rhone-Alpes and Lombardy, the
economies of which are growing rapidly; on north American cities such as
Baltimore and San Francisco; and on Korea and Taiwan.
'And on Australia,' adds Boyce, 'our research has shown that New South Wales
alone has 200 companies which are too large to operate internationally from
the state. They could expand comfortably from old South Wales.'
