FT  07 JAN 93 / Heads of Hungary radio and television resign
THE political dispute over control of Hungary's media came to a head
yesterday when the heads of the state television and radio tendered their
resignations in protest at government interference.
The two men made a joint announcement conceding their defeat by the
conservative government, which has long sought their removal.
The final straws, said Mr Elemer Hankiss, president of Hungarian Television,
were parliament's failure last week to pass a new law protecting the
independence of the media and the government's recent decision to bring
control of state TV finances directly under the prime minister's office.
'This means even the illusion of independence has gone,' Mr Hankiss said.
The resignations heighten the dispute between the government, the opposition
and journalists which has poisoned Hungary's political atmosphere since
elections in 1990.
Conservative coalition politicians and Mr Jozsef Antall, the prime minister,
repeatedly complain that the bleak picture of the government painted by the
media is unwarranted. Right-wing politicians also say many journalists are
hostile.
The opposition and most journalists claim that the government is overly
sensitive to criticism and tends to be authoritarian. The government's
opponents also maintain Mr Antall's coalition, which is languishing in
opinion polls, is trying to ensure more positive coverage in the run-up to
parliamentary elections next year.
Yesterday's resignations could lead to a constitutional crisis if Mr Arpad
Goncz, Hungary's president and a member of the opposition Alliance of Free
Democrats, becomes involved. The president and the premier have already
clashed over appointments of state media executives.
Mr Goncz rejected Mr Antall's nominations on the grounds they constituted a
threat to 'the democratic order'. The government's response was to label Mr
Goncz's actions unconstitutional and threaten to impeach him. The media
heads' departure is linked to the battle for control in the governing
Hungarian Democratic Forum between Mr Antall's moderate conservatives and
the far-right camp of Mr Istvan Csurka, a leading member of the party.
Dismissal of the media heads was one of the main planks of Mr Csurka's
extremist manifesto, alongside attacks on Jews, communists, liberals and the
Trianon territorial settlement of 1920, when Hungary lost two thirds of its
former territory, and a third of its population was left outside its new
borders.
Mr Csurka followed his attacks by leading demonstrations to the central TV
building to demand a purge. Mr Antall's advisers claim many of his moves
against Mr Hankiss were forced by the party's strong populist wing.
Political attention now turns to the Forum's party congress later this month
which will be a test of strength between the prime minister and his
extremist challenger.
