FT  24 NOV 93 / Survey of the Basque Country (4): Problem has become an
internal issue - Eta political violence
What sets the Basque Country apart from any other corner of the European
Union except Northern Ireland is that it has a terrorist problem.
Eta, an acronym for Euskadi Ta Askatasuna, Basque fatherland and liberty,
has been shooting, bombing and kidnapping for the better part of 25 years
and is directly responsible for more than 800 deaths.
Political violence in the Basque Country is on a lesser scale than it is in
Northern Ireland and there are no troops patrolling the streets of Bilbao in
order to keep warring terrorists, as in Belfast, apart from each other.
Basque violence is not sectarian; moderate Basques, who constitute a large
political majority, find common cause with the security services against the
radicals and the gunmen.
The qualitative difference is, however, of little comfort to those who work
and invest in the Basque Country. Businessmen employ private security guards
as a matter of course and they live in dread of an extortion racket known as
the revolutionary tax.
Political violence has deterred investment and prompted plants to close and
transfer their business out of the Basque Country.
There are two main, and interconnected, points to be made about the violence
factor:
it is on the wane although it remains lethal and will continue to exist for
the foreseeable future;
it has become an internal Basque problem as opposed to one between Madrid
and the Basque Country.
'The situation is better than it used to be and the Basque government is
making an enormous effort to give the impression that this is all being
normalised,' says Mr Jose Miguel de la Rica, president of the the business
pressure group Circulo de Empresarios Vascos. 'But then you get a murder or
a kidnap and then everything goes to the devil.'
In June, seven military officers were killed by a car bomb in Madrid and in
October two Eta gunmen shot an air force general dead outside his Madrid
home. A sure sign of Eta's continued muscle came with the release last month
of a Basque businessman who had been kidnapped in July, following the
alleged payment of a Pta300m ransom.
The violence continues despite suggestions that the police are gaining the
upper hand. In recent months revolutionary tax rings have been broken up,
gunmen arrested and arms caches seized. Although Eta is regularly reported
to be out for the count - some 500 of its members, including more than a
dozen of the group's more notorious leaders, are in prison - it appears,
time and again, to pick itself off the canvas.
'The strategy is the right one but the process is long and slow,' says Mr
Ramon Jauregui, the Basque Country's socialist leader who has a long
experience of the terrorist issue. 'We have to be very careful in order to
maintain the initiative.'
The initiative was nearly lost in September when the deaths of two Eta
suspects while in police custody served to bring underlying tensions to the
surface and prompted wide-scale rioting.
Few fault the Madrid government, the local Basque government and the police
forces of the two administrations over the way they go about their business.
The strategy involves close co-operation between them and also with the
French government and its security services. France has been acting
energetically for some years now against refugee gunmen across the Spanish
border and the one-time Eta safe havens in south-west France had been
effectively neutralised.
The prison policy is an intelligent one. Under a new strategy, Eta members
have been transferred from two maximum security jails where the hardliners
ran highly regimented communes. Thery have been dispersed among more than 20
prisons where they share cells with common criminals.
The key consequence of the dispersal policy is that jailed terrorists who
have no stomach left for the fight and are relieved of the commune pressures
are able to apply for individual pardons. 'We can only afford to give such
amnesties drop by drop,' warns Mr Jauregui.
The main reassuring feature of the strategy is that a grassroots movement is
gathering force in the Basque Country that publicly rejects Eta's violence.
That Basques are now willing to stand up and be counted reflects the
groundswell of opinion that sees continued violence as futile as well as
profoundly damaging to the local economy.
This grassroots rejection was boosted by the long kidnap endured by Mr Julio
Iglesias Zamora, whose family-owned San Sebastian engineering company had
failed to pay the gunmen's revolutionary tax. Thousands of Basques wore blue
ribbons to show their support for Eta's victim and numerous well-attended
rallies were staged to demand his release.
The protest movement was quite unprecedented but it fell short of its
objectives: Mr Iglesias Zamora was released last month only after Eta had
extracted the ransom and the police failed dismally to trap the kidnappers.
Moderate Basques feel, however, that it was not in vain.
'A short while ago nobody talked out against Eta and now they do,' said an
official in the ruling Partido Nacionalista Vasco (PNV). One sign of changed
times is the manner that members of Herri Batasuna (HB), Eta's political
front organisation, have been forced to stop going to a restaurant they used
to patronise near their Bilbao headquarters.
At the height of the kidnap saga and of the blue ribbon movement, the
restaurant's management decided to stop serving the radicals after other
clients began to go elsewhere. In the tight world of Basque politics, where
everybody knows everybody else, the restaurant boycott was hailed as a
victory over the tyranny of violence and the story of HB stalwarts sending
out for sandwiches is gleefully retold.
In the final analysis, Basques seem to have woken up to the fact that Eta is
their problem and that its solution lies with them. It is no longer a side
show involving headstrong members of their community and the Madrid security
forces.
The lesson is sinking in that the endemic political violence is making the
burden of recession in the Basque Country much harder to bear. Eta's
revolutionary rhetoric is out of touch with the times and its
Freedom-for-the-Basque-Country platform is at odds with the area's now
well-consolidated home rule.
Throughout the Basque Country, Madrid-based security forces are being
withdrawn and their place taken by the Ertzaina, the police force that is
recruited, trained and paid for by the local Basque government.
Increasingly, it is the Ertzaina which is leading the baton charges to break
up pro-Eta rioters and which is claiming counter-terrorist breakthroughs,
particularly on Eta's extortion racket.
Mr Juan Maria Atutxa, the Basque government minister who is responsible for
security and the chief of the Ertzaina, has taken a tough line against the
radicals. This has made him the most popular politician for the majority of
the Basque population and also the target of an HB hate campaign.
Posters and graffiti that term Mr Atutxa 'traitor' have replaced those that
used to accuse Madrid's Interior minister of 'genocide'.
In itself this is a telling development that underlines how Eta violence has
become an internal Basque issue which the Basque government is determined to
address. Mr Atutxa, who is a member of the PNV, is as Basque as it is
possible to be - he was born in a rural hamlet, spoke Euskera, the Basque
language, from birth and has been an ardent nationalist all his life.
No less indicative of the new climate is the manner in which members of Mr
Atutxa's Ertzaina who are posted to strong pro-Eta areas, particularly in
San Sebastian's Guipuzcoa province, have been known to suffer the same
hostility and pressures that the Madrid-based Civil Guard used to endure:
their car tyres are punctured, their wives are refused service by
radical-minded shopkeepers and their children are abused in the local
schools.
The polarisation of Basque society over Eta is an uncomfortable step but it
is nonetheless one in the right direction. Eta will only be curbed when its
supporters realise that they are not taking on Spaniards and Madrid but
their own neighbours in their own backyard.
