FT  14 JUL 93 / Islamic force offered for Bosnia as relief fears grow
SEVEN ISLAMIC countries yesterday offered to provide up to 18,000 troops for
the United Nations protection force in Bosnia-Hercegovina as top UN
officials warned that the international humanitarian relief effort might
have to be abandoned.
The officials in New York said there was a 'real risk' that the world body
might be unable to continue its operations in Bosnia.
In a further sign of mounting frustration in the Islamic world at the plight
of the Bosnian Moslems, the Islamic Conference Organisation called for an
immediate lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and backed the Bosnian
presidency's rejection of the Serbo-Croat plan to partition the former
Yugoslav republic.
Meeting in Islamabad, foreign ministers of 16 Islamic countries also called
on Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, and members of the
Security Council to act immediately to relieve the grave situation in
Sarajevo and other Bosnian towns.
The offer to send troops to join the UN force - with Iran pledging up to
10,000 soldiers - poses a dilemma for Mr Boutros Ghali.
Despite promising to defend 'safe areas' for Bosnia's Moslems, western
countries have failed to provide sufficient ground forces for the task.
Pakistan has offered to send 3,000 troops, Bangladesh 1,220, Malaysia 1,500,
Tunisia 1,000 and the Palestinian delegation 1,000, while Turkey has offered
up to a brigade in response to an earlier request by the UN
secretary-general for more troops to protect safe zones.
In a sombre report to the Security Council, Mr Boutros Ghali spoke of 'the
deteriorating situation on the ground'. His special representative, Mr
Thorvald Stoltenberg, said the choice facing the UN in the republic was
'simple and stark'.
It was up to the UN secretary-general to decide how the OIC offer could be
used in the interests of peace, he said.
Noting that original estimates were that up to 32,000 UN troops were needed
just to protect the safe areas in Bosnia, including the besieged capital of
Sarajevo, he reported that only 1,120 had been deployed so far in a force
already scaled down to 7,500 at the Security Council's insistence.
Mr Stoltenberg explicitly rejected a contention by the Bosnian delegate, Mr
Muhamed Sacirbey, that his warning of a possible UN withdrawal was designed
to pressure the Moslem authorities into entering new negotiations. Mr
Stoltenberg appeared confident that all three parties to the conflict would
go to Geneva next week for talks aimed at a durable settlement.
In his own report, Mr Boutros Ghali said the 'stark realities were that
there was little prospect for implementing the safe areas policy before new
resources arrived and that the civilian population would face devastating
hardship next winter unless Unprofor focused on efforts to restore utilities
and humanitarian relief deliveries'.
Yesterday, in preparation for possible protection of UN troops guaranteeing
the safe areas, the US sent 12 ground attack aircraft from Germany to an air
base in northern Italy.
Defence officials in Paris said the French and British were also to send
aircraft which might be deployed if the UN called upon Nato air forces to
step up their missions in the no-fly zone over Bosnia.
EC aid coffers run low, Page 2
No bite without teeth, Page 16
