FT  30 JUN 93 / Business and the Environment: US firms dodge the drought
Even during the most severe periods of drought, the extensive grounds at
Hewlett-Packard's plant in Santa Rosa, California, remain fresh and
well-watered.
Life at the plant was not always this green, though. Shortly after spending
Dollars 5m (Pounds 3.3m) on landscaping at its facilities back in 1977, the
company faced severe water shortages and acres of wilting plants.
Then someone had the idea of re-using waste water from manufacturing to
irrigate the grounds. The idea took off, and Hewlett-Packard has recently
been extending its enthusiasm for water recycling to other areas. The
company has experimented with using waste water for toilets on its sites and
will soon begin to use industrially-tainted water for rinsing in some
manufacturing processes.
Faced with droughts, water use restrictions and increasingly stringent
standards for effluents, more and more US companies are beginning to view
water as a precious resource.
'Rates have gone sky-high over the last two decades,' says Robert Brown, an
environmental manager at Hewlett-Packard. 'We now pay Dollars 1.47 for every
1,000 gallons we use and Dollars 5.48 for every 1,000 we dump into sewage.
That has led to a complete re-thinking of our water usage.'
Companies anxious to trim water costs are increasingly creative in finding
ways to reduce consumption. Texaco, for instance, is altering plant design
at many of its oil refineries to cut water usage.
'We have gone to air coolers rather than water coolers,' says Leslie Lakie,
environmental manager. 'We've also switched from steam to electric pumps.'
Whenever Texaco does use water, the company tries to ensure that it has
already been used in another part of the refinery. 'The basic rule these
days is to use the water over and over again until it gets so dirty that you
have to clean it up,' says Lakie. 'We have cut water usage by up to 90 per
cent at some refineries.'
Environmental consultants say that in certain cases, reducing water usage is
a matter of common sense. 'A lot of the problems arise from carelessness,
like leaks that haven't been fixed, or spillage,' says Charles Moores, an
environmental consultant at Badger Engineering. 'With water rates soaring,
though, companies can't afford that kind of waste.'
For industries like food and pharmaceuticals, which need extremely clean
water, re-cycling poses particular problems. But even here water re-use is
not out of the question.
'In many cases, these companies have to clean up water supplies even before
they use them,' says Christopher Simmons of Ionpure, which produces water
purifying systems. 'Because they start with ultra-clean water, even after
it's gone through the manufacturing process it can still be cleaner than tap
water. It makes sense to clean up the used water rather than take in new
stuff.'
Companies are also finding alternative water sources. The Chevron refinery
in Richmond, California, plans to start using district sanitation water -
which can be purchased more cheaply than fresh water - early next year. A
new federal law requiring companies to collect rain water in an bid to
prevent pollution from surface run-off has also created an alternative water
source for some groups.
Other companies, such as Shell, are taking in sea water, which is cheaper
than fresh water, for processes that are resistant to salt contamination,
though its corrosive nature makes this process less popular.
Although US manufacturers use far less water than a decade ago,
environmental consultants believe most groups have a long way to go before
they achieve high levels of water use efficiency.
'This is a matter of economics. As water becomes more expensive to use and
clean up, we'll see more and more water conservation in manufacturing.
What's happened so far is just the tip of the iceberg,' says Moores.
