FT  02 APR 93 / Clinton urges backing for Russia
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday made his strongest plea to date for the US
to support the cause of reform in Russia, warning of civil conflict like
Yugoslavia's, but on a much more dramatic scale, if the reforms are not
successful.
'The danger is clear if Russia's reforms turn sour - if it reverts to
authoritarianism or disintegrates into chaos,' he said before setting out
for his weekend summit with President Boris Yeltsin in Vancouver. 'The world
cannot afford the strife of the former Yugoslavia replicated in a nation as
big as Russia, spanning 11 time zones with an armed arsenal of nuclear
weapons that is still very vast.'
Mr Clinton gave no details of the aid package he will offer Mr Yeltsin but
Mr Warren Christopher, secretary of state, said earlier that most of the
money would come from funds approved by Congress over the last two years but
not spent because of bottlenecks in Russia and Washington. The package is
expected to contain help with construction, privatisation and energy
projects, and an 'enterprise fund' to help small businesses, as well as
grain credits and medical supplies.
In Moscow, Mr Sergei Glaziev, Russia's foreign economic relations minister,
yesterday called for an end to western trade barriers to Russian goods and
services, saying trade was far more useful than more aid. He hoped the
barriers would be tackled by western leaders and that early results would be
achieved at the Yeltsin-Clinton summit. 'We are not asking for additional
credits. Our main demands are for access to the markets of developed
countries and an end to discrimination against Russian goods,' he said.
Outlining a programme to stimulate the export of manufactured goods, he said
Russia was counting mainly on more sales to developing countries. But he
said that, by applying pressure on governments to close markets to Russian
exports, western companies were guilty of unfair competition. He cited as a
'classic example' the closing of US markets to Russian uranium.
Debate on aid, Page 28
