FT  23 APR 93 / Brussels wants Pounds 10bn for R&amp;D
THE European Commission wants to commit Ecu13.1bn (Pounds 10.44bn) to EC
research and technological development programmes between 1994 and 1998.
More than three-quarters of the funding would be directed at information,
telecommunications, energy and industrial research.
However Mr Antonio Ruberti, EC research commissioner since January, has
stepped back from his predecessor's ambitious and controversial plan to give
European industry more opportunity to shape research and development policy.
The Commission's earlier proposal had raised fears that competition might be
distorted by funding of projects which might benefit specific companies,
rather than specific sectors.
Announcing proposals for the EC's fourth 'framework' R&amp;D programme in
Strasbourg yesterday, Mr Ruberti said Community funding should be
'pre-competitive'.
He said industry could propose individual projects for funding, but within
the guidelines laid down by the Commission, which are not supposed to favour
particular industries.
This EC framework programme is the fourth since 1984, and appears to command
more funds than its predecessors. However, a straight comparison with the
third programme, which was worth Ecu6.6bn between 1990 and 1994, is
misleading, because it does not take account of inflation.
In fact, member states have pegged research funding at roughly 4 per cent of
the overall EC budget. Mr Ruberti said yesterday he was concerned about the
level of EC funding, particularly as the US and Japan spend more on R&amp;D as a
proportion of gross national product than the EC and its member states.
The EC programme, to be discussed by research ministers in Luxembourg next
week, will be divided into 28 themes, within seven broad areas: information
and communications technology, which will account for 36 per cent of funds,
energy (23 per cent), industrial (16.5 per cent), 'life' sciences, such as
biotechnology (12 per cent), environment (9 per cent), transport (2.5 per
cent) and socio-economic (1 per cent).
Mr Ruberti said concentration on fewer areas would mean a reduction in
funding in some sectors. He said one of his principal aims was to address
the problem of fragmentation of research policy across the Community, and
the failure to disseminate the results of R&amp;D.
