FT  19 OCT 93 / Morgan Guaranty cuts its prime rate as US bank finances
improve
MORGAN GUARANTY Trust of New York yesterday lowered its prime lending rate
from 6 per cent to 5.5 per cent, the first cut in prime rate by a large US
bank since July last year.
Harris Trust and Savings Bank also cut its prime rate to 5.5 per cent, but
large money centre banks yesterday showed no immediate sign of following
Morgan Guaranty's lead.
Yesterday's moves followed a quarter-point cut in prime rate to 5.75 per
cent in mid-September by several small regional banks. The prime rate serves
as a peg for loans to small companies, which account for about a fifth of
business borrowing, and for some consumer loans and mortgages. A general
decline in the prime would provide a modest stimulus for the economy.
However, the prime matters less than in previous decades because borrowing
costs for most large companies and for many home mortgages are determined by
money market rates.
Yesterday's cuts in prime rate do not reflect expectations of an easing of
monetary policy by the Federal Reserve: Morgan Guaranty economists expect
the next move in official short-term rates to be up rather than down. They
were instead an attempt to bring the prime rate closer to the federal funds
rate, which has been 3 per cent for more than a year.
The spread between the prime rate and the fed funds rate - at which banks
borrow from each other - has risen from about 1.25 percentage points in 1989
to 3 points or more in the past year, a very high level by historical
standards. In past business cycles, spreads have rarely exceeded 1.5 to 2
percentage points.
The widening of the spread was initially justified by the parlous state of
bank finances at the end of the 1980s. But in the past 18 months, bank
profitability has improved. The average return on assets has soared to
record levels; US banks are now better capitalised than many of their
foreign competitors.
Banks can thus afford to cut prime rate but have not done so because loan
demand from small companies and consumers remains weak.
US stocks, Page 39
