FT  11 MAR 93 / IMF tries to shore up Russian reformers: Renewed efforts
under way to agree debt deal
THE International Monetary Fund is stepping up efforts to get an agreement
with the Russian government in an attempt to show support for the embattled
economic reformers, according to Mr Alexander Shokhin, deputy prime minister
in charge of foreign economic relations.
Mr Shokhin is also more hopeful of an agreement with western creditors on
repayments of the outstanding Dollars 80bn (Pounds 56bn) of former Soviet
debt. He said this would mean Russia would pay between Dollars 2.5bn and
Dollars 6bn this year. In total Russia should pay back Dollars 40bn to Paris
Club of creditor countries in 1993.
Mr Shokhin said that Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF managing director, had
said in talks last week in Washington that he would like an agreement to be
signed by April.
'Of course, before such an agreement we must put in place strict financial
controls. The proposed agreement put to the Congress of People's Deputies by
the president is mainly about allowing the government freedom to realise its
economic policies. If they do not agree, we will try to find another way
out, but of course it will be more difficult,' he said.
The chances of the Congress agreeing to allow the government to pursue
economic reform are remote. The smaller Supreme Soviet has already rejected
the proposal.
The IMF has already broadly approved a revised plan drawn up by Mr Boris
Fyodorov, the deputy premier in charge of the economy and finance, which
would rein back credits and select those industrial sectors which would be
supported.
After more than a year's work with the Russian government, the Fund is
extremely conscious of the difficulties the Russian government has in
finding enough political support in the country for harsh economic measures.
Mr Camdessus, who has given a high priority to the Russian reform, is also
anxious to safeguard the IMF's role in the former Soviet states.
There has been growing feeling among G7 states that prime responsibility for
economic assistance to Russia should be given to a committee drawn from the
G7, which would judge the injection of aid on political rather than strictly
economic grounds.
Members of the G7, most notably France, Germany and the US, have begun to
show growing concern about developments in Russia. President Bill Clinton
has called for a G7 meeting to deal with aid to Russia as soon as possible
and is due to meet President Yeltsin in Vancouver on April 4.
Mr Shokhin also believes that a debt deal with Ukraine is imminent. He
believes the Ukrainian government is ready to agree to a division of the
former Soviet debt after months of haggling over the terms.
A meeting of the heads of the governments of the Commonwealth of Independent
States is set for tomorrow in Moscow. Mr Leonid Kuchma, the Ukrainian
premier, is expected to try to conclude an agreement with Mr Shokhin on how
the debt - and the foreign property of the former Soviet Union - is to be
shared between the two Slav states.
Mr Shokhin said that an agreement with the IMF would be 'very important' in
finally reaching a debt agreement with the Paris Club. The club usually
requires this before it defers debt repayments.
'Debt restructuring is now the most important part of western aid to Russia.
If we get agreement on it, grain and other credit lines could again be open
to us.'
