FT  10 FEB 93 / Business and the Environment: Halting industry in its tracks
 -The controversial US Endangered Species Act may soon be even tougher on
land users
Funding for the Endangered Species Act is coming up for approval by the
United States Congress this year. Businessmen and women from sectors as
diverse as farming and real estate development will be affected by the
government's decision on the funding bill.
In its 20 years, the Endangered Species Act has become one of the most
controversial environmental laws to hit the books. Species protection has
led to vitriolic, even violent, confrontations between environmentalists and
workers in sectors such as logging and fishing.
The power of the Act is forbidding. Soon after being signed into existence
in the 1970s, the ESA was used to delay construction of the Dollars 120bn
(Pounds 80bn) Tellico Dam in Tennessee to protect the rare snail darter
fish. The Act has continued to have far-reaching effects on land use
industries.
The confrontation in the Pacific Northwest between loggers and defenders of
the rare spotted owl became a 1992 election issue, and the theme of 'putting
people first' (before animals, that is) was at the heart of many of George
Bush's campaign speeches in the region. Loggers, with the support of the
then president, felt their jobs should take precedence over the rare bird's
habitat.
The Act has affected many other industries. Oil companies claim their
drilling activities have been limited unnecessarily. Farmers in the west
complain of severe grazing restrictions to protect certain species of bird.
And real estate developers in southern California are bitter over building
curbs to protect the kangaroo rat.
Under the decidedly pro-environmentalist Clinton administration, most
observers expect the Act to be not only renewed, but strengthened. Under
consideration will be:
Measures to speed up the process by which species are listed as endangered.
The possibility of listing entire ecosystems, not just species, under the
Act.
Increased funding for policing of the Act.
Harsher penalties for offenders.
Possible compensation for landowners who find endangered species on their
property.
The ESA has ardent supporters and detractors. Its most extreme opponents
propose listing rare animals as 'relic species' which could not adapt to the
late 20th century. Instead of maintaining a natural habitat for these
species, these activists propose breeding the animals in captivity in order
to prevent their extinction.
Certain 'dune-buggy' recreation clubs have claimed that their right to ride
vehicles on beaches and desert turf should take priority over the
preservation of animal and bird life. And stories have circulated in the
Florida press about landowners who poisoned rare turtles nesting on their
property rather than face building restrictions.
More moderate opponents of the ESA say it threatens many Americans'
livelihood. A particularly bitter battle is brewing over the rights of
shrimpers in the Gulf of Mexico. Gulf coast shrimpers are angry about turtle
excluder devices (Teds) which they have been forced to install in their
netting. The device is a kind of trap door which allows sea turtles to
escape.
'The problem is, it also lets the shrimp out,' says Darcy Keefe, a
fourth-generation shrimper. 'We'd like to comply with the law, but we also
have to make a living.' Keefe says most of his shrimping colleagues have
been forced out of business by the ESA.
The National Wildlife Federation in Washington DC, however, claims Teds are
one of the Act's biggest success stories. According to the federation, the
devices annually save about 55,000 sea turtles that would otherwise drown in
shrimp nets. And a study released by the organisation last year claimed that
Teds actually caused little hardship. The report noted a 15 per cent
increase in shrimpers' average daily catch since the Ted regulations
applied.
Shrimpers say the study tells only one side of the story. 'Each vessel may
be catching more shrimp, but that's partly because there are fewer shrimping
boats out there,' says Keefe. 'And the Teds are heavy; they stretch our
nets, and we have to pay the extra cost.'
In another bitter ESA dispute, the Pacific Northwest Generating
Co-operative, which provides hydro-electric energy to many communities in
the northwestern states, says it faces additional costs of between Dollars
1bn and Dollars 5bn to save rare salmon on the Columbia River.
Environmentalists would like the company to aid salmon migration by drawing
down reservoirs behind the dams to push up water levels at certain times of
the year. But the company says that would mean prohibitively expensive
alterations to the dams already in place on the river.
'It's not just the hydro-electric power that's at risk,' says David Harper,
director of legislation for the group. 'Changing the river levels would have
an impact on shipping along the waterway, which in turn affects farmers
trying to get their wheat to port.'
The history of the ESA is littered with smaller casualties, too. Edward Lee
of Kansas used to make a living by collecting gravel from streams to sell to
businesses. A few years ago, he was forced to shut his operation in order to
protect an endangered catfish laying eggs in the gravel. Richard Christie, a
Montana rancher, found himself unwittingly in violation of the law when he
shot and killed a grizzly bear that was feeding on his sheep.
Opponents of the ESA say that environmentalists often invoke the law to
protect land they prefer to see undeveloped. But many environmentalists
contend there is nothing wrong with this approach.
'Many of the industries which are affected by the law make money by abusing
public resources,' says Michael Bean, chairman of wildlife for the Wildlife
Defence Fund in Washington DC. 'We are in many cases faced with inadequate
land use restrictions.'
In spite of the strong emotions, some activists are convinced that
compromise is possible. One success story is a deal between
environmentalists and Louisiana loggers to protect the black bear. The
loggers promised to leave tree corridors to allow the bears free access to
their hunting areas. The environmentalists, for their part, agreed to allow
a certain amount of logging in the bears' habitat.
An unlikely alliance has also formed between some environmentalists and
property rights activists, who are pushing Congress to offer financial
incentives to landowners who find rare species.
'We've heard the stories about turtle poisonings in Florida,' says Adam
Roberts, research assistant for the Animal Welfare Institute in Washington
DC. 'Obviously, we don't want that to happen, so we're lobbying for better
compensation to property owners.'
Activists on both sides of the issue are also pushing for earlier listings
to prevent crisis confrontations. One Louisiana logger pointed out that the
black bear was a legal hunting target until shortly before listing as an
endangered species.
'We believe the Act could be more efficient if listings occurred earlier,'
says Kathleen Hartnett, a director of the National Cattlemen's Association.
'And we also think the law could be applied more efficiently.'
Hartnett points to the ESA's limited success in restoring many species to
healthy levels. Hundreds of species have been added to the list, which is
expected to top 1,100 by 1996, but only five have recovered enough to be
removed from it.
'We think more money should be applied to the recovery of species which
stand a real chance, while others should be abandoned as basket cases,' says
Hartnett.
Although opponents and supporters of the Act are beginning to work together,
the two sides are probably on course for more bitter clashes over the next
few years.
And if the Act is strengthened, as is expected, land use industries in the
US may have even more to lose in the battle to preserve biodiversity in the
US.
