FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (4):
Poised for the big switch-off - Scientists are developing ways to control
genes
PHARMACEUTICAL research will be transformed over the next two decades
through the development of drugs that act directly on human genes.
Almost all today's drugs act on proteins, the chemicals that do the work in
every living creature from virus to human. But the rapid expansion of
genetic knowledge makes it possible to target the original cause of trouble
 -the genes that determine exactly which proteins the cells make.
Every week the world's molecular biologists announce the discovery of new
genes associated with human disease. They are not only identifying the
molecular causes of classic inherited disorders, such as cystic fibrosis,
but are also finding unexpected evidence for the way particular genes
trigger the most widespread illnesses of modern society, including forms of
cancer and heart disease.
Scientists have already identified several thousand of the estimated 100,000
genes that make up the whole human genetic blueprint and, working through a
loosely co-ordinated international effort known as the Human Genome Project,
they expect to have decoded the entire 'handbook of man' within 10 years.
At the same time, other scientists are rapidly developing ways to manipulate
the newly discovered genes. More than 30 clinical trials have started within
the past two years, mostly in the US. Some involve gene therapy - inserting
new genes into the patient's cells to produce therapeutic proteins in the
body. Others are testing anti-sense therapy or code blocking - the opposite
process of switching off genes so that they stop making harmful proteins.
These genetic drugs can be aimed either at defective genes in the patient's
own cells or at infectious organisms. They promise cures for diseases that
are hard to treat with existing medicines, from rare inherited blood
disorders and cancer to viral infections. And their specificity should avoid
the side-effects of today's protein-based drugs.
Anti-sense therapy is the more difficult to understand of the two
approaches. It uses a short synthetic strand of nucleotides, the chemical
building blocks of DNA and RNA, to switch off genes. Every gene has two
complementary nucleotide strands, which together form the famous double
helix. The nucleotides in one strand are said to have a 'sense' sequence and
the other an 'anti-sense' sequence.
A synthetic anti-sense strand, known as an oligonucleotide, can be used in
two alternative ways. It may bind to the sense strand of the gene's
double-stranded DNA and produce a triple-stranded structure which switches
off the gene. Alternatively, the oligonucleotide binds to the
single-stranded RNA which the gene generates as a first step to producing
protein; this blocks protein synthesis without permanently inactivating the
gene.
Although a whole gene may have several thousand nucleotide units, anti-sense
drugs are much smaller molecules with 15 to 25 units. This is long enough to
make them completely specific. Each will recognise a specific sequence in
the target gene, without binding to any of the 100,000 other human genes.
Pure oligonucleotides are not suitable for pharmaceutical development
because enzymes would break them down before they reached their targets.
Therefore anti-sense drugs are chemical derivatives, such as
methylphosphonates, which are more stable than natural molecules and better
able to enter cells.
US companies specialising in anti-sense technology include Isis, Genta,
Gilead, Hybridon and TargeTech. Isis, based in California, is carrying out
clinical trials of an anti-sense drug to treat human papilloma virus (which
causes genital warts and cervical cancer) and other targets include viral
diseases such as hepatitis B, Aids and herpes, leukaemia and other cancers
and inflammatory disorders. Genetic MediSyn Corporation, based in Maryland,
even hopes to develop an anti-sense drug against baldness, by blocking the
production of an enzyme that is responsible for hair loss.
A serious problem with anti-sense drugs is delivering them to difficult
sites inside the body. Therefore the first generation products are directed
at the skin or at bone marrow cells removed temporarily from the body. But
the anti-sense companies hope to solve the delivery problem by linking their
drugs to other chemicals which enable them to permeate cells more
effectively.
Oligonucleotides may not be the only means of switching off genes, however.
Various small organic molecules are known to bind to DNA, and Proteus, the
UK molecular design company, has formed a partnership with Genelabs
Technologies of California (called Progene Partners) to develop these into
powerful DNA-binding drugs, as an alternative to anti-sense.
Gene therapy is moving forward even faster than gene blocking. Researchers
at the US National Institutes of Health carried out the first human gene
therapy trial in September 1990 on a girl who had to be kept apart from
other children because one defective gene in her immune system meant that
she had no natural protection against infection. Every month since then she
has received a transfusion of about a billion of her own blood cells to
which copies of the correct gene had been added (the treatment has to be
repeated because the genetically-engineered cells gradually die). Her immune
defences are now strong enough for her to go to school normally.
That success had led to a flood of proposals for gene therapy experiments in
the US, where the clinical development of genetic medicine is well ahead of
Europe and Japan. And, as with anti-sense, start-up companies are rushing to
exploit the technology. They include Gene Therapy Inc (GTI), Somatix
Therapy, Viagene, Targeted Genetics, Trans-karyotic Therapies and Vical.
Until recently the established pharmaceutical giants had left gene-based
medicine to academic scientists and biotechnology start-ups.
They are now scrambling to catch up, by starting research in-house and
forming alliances with the specialist biotech companies.
Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo of the UK, says his company did a
survey of five anti-sense companies, looking for a partnership, 'and came to
the conclusion that Gilead was the best of them. Now we have 35 to 40 people
working on this technology and they have another 35 to 40, with a joint
project group to co-ordinate the work.'
Estimates of future sales of genetic drugs are still highly speculative,
though analysts talk of a market running into tens of billions of dollars
within 20 years.
