FT  27 SEP 93 / Steep profits rise forecast
ANALYSTS at two of London's leading securities houses are predicting that UK
companies' profits are on course to rise steeply soon, bearing out the
expectations reflected in the stock market's current high ratings.
Their forecasts, based on data on industrial and commercial profits
incorporated in the latest statistics for gross domestic product, are likely
to buttress equity market confidence, which has been unsettled by the trend
of company results for the third quarter.
At Kleinwort Benson, the UK merchant banking and securities firm, Mr Albert
Edwards predicts 'an avalanche of good company UK profits' in the near
future.
The slackening in domestic demand indicated by the GDP data will also, he
believes, open the way for cuts in UK base rates to 5 per cent or lower.
'This combination of corporate earnings growth and falling interest rates
cannot be matched in other stock markets,' he said.
Mr Edwards, global investment strategist at Kleinwort, recommends increasing
the weighting of equity allocation in the UK market by 10 per cent, largely
at the expense of the Japanese market where he advises a cut of a third.
The strategy team at James Capel, the leading UK institutional stockbroker,
also focuses on the industrial and commercial data, pointing out that while
nominal profits growth may have been lower in the first half of 1993, real
performance has been good.
Mr Adrian Cooper said: 'The interim profits flow is coming in a bit better
than our expectations.
'If this was achieved against a generally dull background, there must be
increasing optimism as economic activity revives more strongly.'
He sees the corporate profit share of GDP as likely to rise through its
late-1980s peak, and a possible fall in base rates to 4 1/2 per cent by the
end of next year.
The London stock market currently rates UK companies at up to 21 times their
last-year profits, implying that share prices depend heavily on improved
profits over the next 12 months.
Capel is now predicting nominal growth in industrial and commercial profits
of around 16 per cent both this year and next.
