FT  17 AUG 93 / Iranian MPs crack whip at Rafsanjani
PRESIDENT Ali Akbar Rafsanjani of Iran suffered the first serious defeat of
his career yesterday, when the Majlis (parliament) rejected the
re-appointment of Mr Mohsen Nourbakhsh, the economy and finance minister,
who had been entrusted to push through radical economic reforms,
However, Mr Rafsanjani immediately appointed Mr Nourbakhsh vice-president
for economic affairs, stressing in a decree read on television his 'valuable
experience in reforming the economic system and continuity of restructuring
policies'.
With earlier praise of Mr Nourbakhsh, who many blame for the continued
decline in the economy, the president made it clear during the endorsement
debate that his rejection would be a vote of no confidence in the
administration.
The present Majlis was elected on a ticket of economic reform to reverse the
damage done by the eight-year war with Iraq.
The new cabinet, first announced by Mr Rafsanjani nine days ago, was from
the start an exercise in compromise, mainly in response to pressure from
Ayatollah Khamenei, the country's spiritual leader, and to opposition from
the right-wing members of the Majlis.
Part of the paralysis in Iran since the death of Ayatollah Khomeini has been
because of the existence of too many power bases. President Rafsanjani spent
much of the last four years trying to consolidate his own authority.
The election of a more moderate Majlis last year was to have been the last
step, making it a two-sided power struggle between Mr Rafsanjani and the
spiritual leadership. Yesterday, however, it appeared to have become a
three-way game.
The survival of Mr Gholamreza Aqazadeh, the oil minister, who received the
lowest vote of the 22 ministers endorsed by the Majlis, may have come as a
small consolation to Mr Rafsanjani. However, few leading Iranians have great
regard for Mr Aqazadeh who has presided over a ministry that is considered
moribund.
The rejection of Mr Nourbakhsh is a clear signal to the president that he
has done too little too late, and can no longer rely on the men he brought
into the Majlis in last year's elections. His failure to revitalise a jaded
cabinet team may have cost him the support he so badly needs to carry
through his ambitious programme of reforms.
The religious establishment, led by Ayatollah Khamenei, still blames the
pace of change for the riots in five large Iranian cities a year ago. The
removal of two hardliners, Hojatolislam Abdullah Nouri, the interior
minister, and Mostafa Mo'in, at culture and higher education, was a gesture
to the Majlis, but it was not enough.
President Rafsanjani had blamed the hardliners, who dominated the
post-revolution Majlis, for all the country's ills. Their removal was hoped
to leave the way clear for rapid modernisation, financed by foreign
investment.
The theory has not translated into practice. A year later the economy is
still in decline with a serious backlog of short-term debt.
This lack of progress has been put squarely at the door of the cabinet. The
new Majlis, elected on the slogan of 'support Rafsanjani', is now calling
for the blood of those surrounding the president.
Mr Rafsanjani did manage to resist the pressure from Ayatollah Khamenei to
elevate Mr Ali Akbar Velayati, the foreign minister, at the price of keeping
him in his present post.
The appointment of Ali Mohammed Besharati, a career diplomat allied to Mr
Rafsanjani, as interior minister, is a boost for or the president. It is the
first time, except for a brief interval in 1981, that a non-cleric has held
the post.
The departure of Hojatolislam Nouri from the interior ministry, leaves just
two clerics in the cabinet: Hojatolislams Ali Fallahian, at information, and
Mohammed Shoustari, at justice.
Mr Abdol-Hussein Vahhaji has also been removed from the ministry of
commerce. He was plagued by claims that senior personnel in his ministry had
received huge commissions on foreign dealings. He is replaced by Mr Yahya
Al-Ishagh.
The removal of Mr Ali Torkan from the ministry of defence came as a
surprise, as he appeared to enjoy the respect of all the armed forces.
However, the merging of the army and the Islamic Guard had caused tension.
