FT  19 MAR 93 / Hong Kong dispute may hit trade with UK, China warns
BRITAIN'S economic ties with China would 'inevitably be affected' if the row
over Hong Kong persists, a senior Chinese official said yesterday.
Mr Li Lanqing, minister of foreign economic relations and trade, accused Mr
Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor, of undermining the smooth transfer to
Chinese rule by persisting with his plans for democratic reforms.
Asked whether the dispute would affect commercial relations, Mr Li replied:
'I believe that if the governor sticks to his present manner of doing
things, economic and trade relations will inevitably be affected.'
China has a long history of retaliating economically against countries which
displease it politically. The most recent example was the freeze Beijing
placed on business with France last year after the French announced they
were selling advanced Mirage fighter-bombers to Taiwan.
According to the UK Department of Trade and Industry, Sino-British trade was
worth Pounds 1.38bn (Dollars 1.95bn) last year, with the balance
increasingly heavily in Beijing's favour. Chinese exports to the UK amounted
to Pounds 954m, up 35 per cent on the previous year.
Mr Patten warned in response that Beijing might damage its own economic
interests if it allowed the row over his political reform package to affect
Sino-British trade and economic ties. He said that if China were to link
Hong Kong's political development to its economic relationship with Britain
'it would have all sorts of consequences elsewhere and in other areas".
China is keen to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and wants
its most favoured nation trading status renewed in the US. Mr Patten hopes
to meet US president Bill Clinton in April or May and press for
unconditional renewal of China's MFN status. Britain has been a supporter of
China's entry into the Gatt.
Mr Patten said: 'We have been arguing very strongly against trade to be
politicised. It's why I'll be arguing for free trade rather than for
allowing political considerations to interrupt trade when I travel to the
US.'
In Beijing, British officials noted that Mr Li had been merely responding to
questions at a press conference. But there seems little question that
commercial ties would be affected if the atmosphere between Beijing and
London continues to be soured by the Hong Kong issue.
The impasse over Hong Kong has already set back a HKDollars 175bn airport
project and a HKDollars 10bn container terminal.
China has been enraged by Mr Patten's plans to broaden the scope for
democratic elections to Hong Kong's Legislative Council. Beijing has accused
the governor of ignoring past agreements on Hong Kong's transition to the
Chinese rule by 1997.
In London Mr John Major, the prime minister, told parliament: "The
government stands four square behind the governor and behind the government
of Hong Kong,' adding: "The governor has acted sensitively, resolutely and
correctly and we shall continue to make that clear to the Chinese
government.'
Mr Li said that while China wanted 'co-operation' and not 'confrontation' on
the Hong Kong issue, it would 'never barter away principles'.
In Beijing the People's Liberation Army joined attacks on Mr Patten at a
session of the National People's Congress.
Major backs Patten, Page 7
