FT  28 JUL 93 / Scott attacks Iraq exports secrecy
LORD Justice Scott and a senior civil servant yesterday clashed over the
apparent lack of public accountability of Britain's policy on arms to Iraq.
Questioning Mr Ian Blackley of the Foreign Office during the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry, the judge said that government documents indicated a mistrust
within Whitehall of the public which had led government to restrict the
information made available to parliament on defence exports.
'You didn't want to deal with the public because the opposition of what you
were proposing might have been intense . . . so you thought it better to
take decisions under the table,' the judge said.
Mr Blackley in reply said that the judge was alleging the 'whole machinery
of government' was being conducted under the table. He said there had been
occasions during the 1980s when it had been politically justified to prevent
information from reaching a 'vociferous minority' in and out of parliament.
The issue over public accountability emerged yesterday as the judge and Ms
Presiley Baxendale QC, his counsel, questioned Mr Blackley on why, as
assistant head of the Foreign Office's Middle East department, he had
approved the export of machine tools made by Matrix Churchill and other UK
manufacturers although he knew that the exports were in breach of the
government's guidelines.
In a confidential memo dated January 1988, Mr Blackley advised his
colleagues that the companies should be told to 'produce and ship as fast as
they can', and to 'renounce publicity and lobbying for their own good'. The
memo was written in spite of a warning from British intelligence that the
machine tools were being used to build up Iraq's arms manufacturing
capability.
The exchange was the second public clash between the Scott inquiry and a
civil servant in less than a month. The attitude taken by Foreign Office
officials is understood to reflect growing unease at the way government
decision-making in the 1980s is being subjected to increasing scrutiny by
Lord Justice Scott.
The public hearings were adjourned yesterday until the second week of
September. The judge's report is not expected now until next year. It was
planned for Christmas.
