FT  11 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Mr Zhu's risk and reward
IN 1989, with the tanks in Tiananmen Square and conservative communists
overseeing economic retrenchment after a bout of reform, the world swung
suddenly from tremulous optimism about China's prospects to deepest gloom.
The darkness which was beginning to lift from the Soviet bloc seemed
destined to envelop China indefinitely. On the economic front, these fears
soon proved unjustified: reforms resumed. In viewing the authorities'
present attempts to slow the resulting upswing, those who have been in awe
of China's economic miracle should not again lurch towards unwarranted
pessimism.
To be sure, the future is uncertain and, for many Chinese, not so bright.
The government continues to trample without qualm on the rights of its
citizens. There is increasing unhappiness among the 900m-strong rural
population. Any senior figure's grip on power must be regarded as tenuous
given the turmoil which could follow the death of Mr Deng Xiaoping.
However, there is an essential difference between the austerity measures of
1988-89 and the present: this time the economic reformers, not the
hard-liners, are in charge. Mr Zhu Rongji, chief executor of economic
reform, is both senior vice premier in charge of the economy and governor of
the central bank. His future depends on his ability to prevent a chaotic
hard landing for the economy. This means facing down both provincial bosses
who must curb ambitions for growth, and powerful people within the Communist
party who have lined their pockets in the good times. But it does not mean
wresting back control over the whole economy and reverting to central
planning.
The control which Mr Zhu needs to regain is - although on a larger scale and
with bigger obstacles than is normal - that which any government with an
overheated economy should seek: to rein in the money supply, inflation and
government spending. Reports suggests he is fierce in pursuit of his task,
accusing officials of providing false statistics and interrogating them
about sources of funds for development plans. He has cut off funds which
were fuelling speculation and clamped down on excesses such as golf courses
and luxury villas. The property, construction and steel sectors have felt
the effects.
Mr Zhu's main focus is rightly on the financial system, which has been
haemorrhaging money, partly because of the structural inadequacies of
state-owned banks and partly through corrupt lending. This will give him the
opportunity to impose more market-oriented disciplines on banks, an area
which had received little attention thus far.
Inevitably, there is much pain to come as Mr Zhu's measures take hold. But
success would mean that the swings between booms and busts at home, and
euphoria and gloom abroad, would become less violent. Even if some reforms,
such as of prices, are delayed, he would have smoothed the path of economic
change which is the brightest hope for China's future.
