FT  14 MAY 93 / UK Company News: NatWest to pull out of French branches
NATIONAL Westminster Bank is to withdraw from branch banking in France
following several years of losses.
The decision cast further doubt on British banks' retail banking operations
in continental Europe.
NatWest announced that it was negotiating the best way to withdraw from its
branch banking subsidiary - possibly through disposals.
The business has 10 branches and issued share capital of FFr1.13bn (Pounds
136m).
Mr Derek Wanless, group chief executive, said the decision to concentrate on
investment and private banking in France was part of an attempt to focus on
businesses capable of having 'a major profitable presence' in their markets.
Mr Wanless said the decision to withdraw was not based on poor trading
results in France last year.
NatWest's French retail bank suffered a Pounds 36m loss in 1992, and Pounds
21m in 1991.
The French deficit comprised a large part of the total loss of Pounds 44m
for NatWest's European business last year.
However, the bank reported a substantial increase in provisions for bad and
doubtful debts in both France and Spain.
Mr Wanless said NatWest believed retail banking was 'a national game' and
there was 'no such thing' as a pan-European retail banking business.
But the withdrawal had no specific implications for NatWest's Spanish
operations.
The bank said the withdrawal would result in a provision against assets, but
this would not have a material effect on group assets.
The withdrawal over the next 12 months, would include phased redundancy of
its 400 staff.
Other British banks, including Abbey National and Barclays, reported poor
results in France and Spain last year.
Barclays suffered a Pounds 98m loss in France, against a Pounds 3m profit in
1991, after being hit by poor property and corporate lending.
Barclays said it was still developing its French retail banking business
based on L'Europeene de Banque, which it bought in 1991.
It had opened 50 new offices this year, and intended to keep the operation.
