FT  04 AUG 93 / Clinton appeals for backing on budget: President says
planned deficit reduction of Dollars 496bn over five years is 'just the
beginning'
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton last night appealed for national backing for the
compromise budget deal hammered out by Congressional leaders.
In a television plea, he called on Americans to urge members of the House of
Representatives and Senate to support the deal in crucial votes this week.
Mr Clinton said the compromise deal preserved all the principles of his
original budget proposals, aimed at slashing the deficit through tax
increases and spending cuts and at providing incentives to economic growth.
'There are only two choices: our plan or no plan,' he said. The budget deal
would be the first step in an endeavour to revive the 'American dream' by
spurring the economy.
Mr Clinton's TV address was part of a campaign to clinch support for the
budget deal and put pressure on Democratic waverers in both the House and
the Senate.
Praising the deal earlier, Mr Clinton said that despite changes made by
Congress to his original proposals, he felt 'quite good' about the
compromise outcome. He promised that the Dollars 496bn (Pounds 332.8bn)
planned reduction in the budget deficit over the next five years was 'just
the beginning, not the end'.
The bill is expected to be passed by the House of Representatives without
too much difficulty, but the outcome of the Senate vote on Friday is finely
balanced. The casting vote of Vice-President Al Gore was needed in June and
since then Senator David Boren of Oklahoma has announced he can no longer
support the bill.
This means Mr Clinton has to persuade at least one of the six Democratic
senators who originally voted against to switch sides. With four of the six
thought unlikely to be swayed, efforts yesterday were being concentrated on
Senator Dennis DeConcini of Arizona and Senator Richard Bryan of Nevada.
Republicans in the House and Senate are all voting against.
Democratic leaders continued to insist yesterday that they were confident
the bill would pass. Failure to get congressional approval would be a severe
blow to the president.
The main components of the compromise package are:
Some Dollars 252.8bn would be cut in spending over the next five years and
an additional Dollars 243.2bn raised in revenue. The bulk of the spending
reductions would come from defence and by limiting the growth of Medicare,
the healthcare programme for the elderly.
The federal petrol tax would rise by 4.3 cents a gallon - the only item that
would bear directly on middle-income families.
The average annual cost per car has been estimated officially at Dollars
21.28.
The main weight of tax increases would fall substantially on families and
businesses earning more than Dollars 200,000 a year.
Personal income taxes would be raised from 31 per cent to 36 per cent for
those with taxable incomes in excess of Dollars 115,000 a year, and Dollars
140,000 for couples, retroactive to January 1.
The government says that the higher rates would apply mostly to those with
gross annual incomes in excess of Dollars 140,000 and for couple earning
more than Dollars 180,000. There would be a 10 per cent surtax on taxable
income over Dollars 250,000, giving a top rate of 39.6 per cent.
The top corporate income tax rate would go up by 1 per centage point to 35
per cent for taxable income over Dollars 10m. The taxable part of social
security benefits would go up from 50 per cent to 85 per cent for
individuals earning more than Dollars 34,000 and couples receiving above
Dollars 44,000.
There would also be reductions on the portion of meals and entertainment
spending that could be deducted as business expenses and the elimination of
business deductions for federal lobbying expenses.
