FT  03 JUN 93 / Summit backs sovereign Bosnia
FRANCE and Germany yesterday papered over their tactical differences on
Bosnia with a joint declaration stressing the two countries had not given up
on the eventual aim of guaranteeing 'the territorial integrity and
sovereignty' of the war-torn republic.
Restating this goal of the Vance-Owen peace plan was designed to allay the
impression, drawn from the recent 'Washington action plan', that the
international community had conceded victory to the Serbs in Bosnia, and was
only interested in sheltering the dispossesed Moslem refugees in designated
'safe areas' and ensuring the safety of its own peacekeepers.
The Washington plan had drawn sharp criticism from Germany which had no hand
in its drafting. Mr Volker Ruhe, defence minister who was present at
yesterday's Franco-German summit in Beaune, was quoted as calling the plan
'morally catastrophic'.
At yesterday's press conference concluding the bilateral summit, Chancellor
Helmut Kohl pointed with satisfaction to the declaration's 'refusal to
accept (Serb) gains won by armed force'.
In return, Germany promised its backing for France's proposal for the United
Nations Security Council to extend the mandate of UN troops to cover
protection of Bosnia's civil population.
Having overcome the 'misunderstanding' on Bosnia, Mr Kohl gave general
backing to the idea of Mr Edouard Balladur, French prime minister, for a new
European conference to draw lessons from the Yugoslav tragedy and to plan
for Europe's future security.
Mr Balladur, with the support of President Mitterrand signalled that the
security conference idea may be presented jointly to the EC's forthcoming
Copenhagen summit.
France and Germany are also likely to present their own slant on the jobs
and economic growth initative being prepared by the European Commission for
Copenhagen, Mr Balladur said. He deplored Europe's situation as having 'the
weakest growth and highest short-term interest rates' of any major region in
the world.
France's trade surplus rose in February to FFr4.76bn, (Pounds 560m) up from
FFr3.3bn in January, the country's customs service reported yesterday.
