FT  23 DEC 93 / Accountants seek to have public-sector ban lifted
Arthur Andersen, the accountancy firm, has approached the government in an
effort to have its long-standing ban from public-sector work lifted.
The firm has held discussions with senior Whitehall officials and
corresponded with the Treasury solicitor over possible breaches of European
law in its failure to be considered for tenders.
It has won no work for nearly a decade since the collapse of De Lorean, the
Northern Ireland-based car company. The government, which had provided De
Lorean with substantial grants, is suing Andersen for alleged negligence in
its role as auditor.
Officials have made it clear in meetings with the firm that it would receive
no contracts, and it has failed to win any tenders for the substantial
amount of privatisation, auditing and accounting work handed out to the
larger accountancy firms.
Andersen Consulting, which is autonomous in the UK although part of the same
global firm, has continued to receive public-sector work.
The approaches by Andersen in the past few months come in response to
European Union legislation enacted in Britain during the summer which
appears to place no restriction on tendering from firms being sued by
governments.
They also follow a different approach adopted by the government to Touche
Ross and Spicer &amp; Oppenheim, with which it merged.
In October the head of the government accountancy service wrote to senior
officials saying that no contracts should be awarded to 13 named partners
and staff at Touche Ross, although the firm itself has continued to win
work.
All those named were apparently in some way linked to the audit of Barlow
Clowes, the financial services firm closed by the Department of Trade and
Industry in 1988.
The government had to make large payments to investors and is seeking to
recover the funds through legal actions, including writs against Touche.
An EU council directive on 'the co-ordination of procedures for the award of
public service contracts' lists a number of reasons why firms might not be
considered for tenders. Outstanding legal action is not among them.
