FT  04 AUG 93 / VW's board shows cracks over GM row
MR Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen chairman, has suffered a setback in moves to
defuse the company's row with General Motors.
Following Mr Piech's attempts to initiate contacts with GM last week, Mr
Jack Smith, president of the US car group, informed Mr Piech in a letter
received yesterday that all future communication on the espionage affair
should be in writing and with Mr David Herman, chairman of Adam Opel, GM's
German subsidiary.
Meanwhile, the first cracks have appeared in the VW supervisory board's
hitherto solid backing for Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, former
purchasing chief at GM and now VW production director. Mr Klaus Volkert,
representing the group's workforce on the board which oversees and appoints
top management, said if charges against Mr Lopez seemed likely, he would
withdraw his support.
Mr Herman has told Mr Piech he must publicly withdraw insinuations that Opel
could have tampered with evidence in the industrial spying case which has
wrecked relations between the two car groups.
Withdrawal was a condition of further contacts, Mr Herman said on Monday
night.
Late last week, a day after he made a series of outspoken attacks on GM, Mr
Piech's public relations team revealed he had telephoned Mr Smith with the
aim of opening talks.
GM officials were caught unawares by the 'initiative' - they were unable to
contact Mr Smith, away on leave - and have now used it to try to force Mr
Piech into a corner.
The VW chief has been under intense pressure from the Bonn government and
colleagues in German industry to seek conciliation following his outspoken
statements last week, which were widely seen as damaging Germany's
reputation.
Mr Piech said last week he regarded the confrontation between the two groups
as a war, designed to damage VW and the German motor industry. He would win,
he said, and warned Fiat and Peugeot that they could be the next targets.
Opel had misused the public prosecutor's office, the media and public
opinion, he charged. He claimed the US group was leading a personal vendetta
against Mr Lopez.
Mr Lopez, just back from holiday, is expected to be questioned soon by
public prosecutors on suspicions of his involvement in industrial espionage.
An investigation by the US Justice Department has added a political
dimension to the affair.
Piech qualifies VW profits target, Page 19
