FT  03 JUL 93 / Arts: A rave for wrinklies
GLASTONBURY demands a strong constitution. Three days at the Festival and
the holes in the ground and claustrophobic cubicles that pass as toilet
facilities are filling fast. Then there is the litter: by Saturday you have
to breast-stroke though the rubbish on the 400-acre site. You can never win
with the weather, either. Ten minutes of rain and the place turns into a
swamp. If it is sunny, 15-mile queues form at standpipes and you can hear
the flesh sizzling - as you could this year.
And when it is all over, and you are sitting in your vehicle for an hour
waiting to get out of the car park, wondering if any household solvent will
get the grunge off your body, your last thought is that you will never go
back. But summer passes, autumn turns to winter, and you find yourself
asking when the festival is on again.
For Glastonbury is not just a rock or pop festival. It is not populated
solely by unemployed teenagers, drug addicts, hippies, 'New Age' travellers
or students. Parents with babies and small children were much in abundance
this year. There were plenty of oldies - by any criterion - too.
If you want to come and just listen to pop bands playing on the main stage -
modelled on Cairo's Great Pyramid of Cheops - then that is one option. But
hundreds, indeed thousands, of other attractions compete. There are jazz,
acoustic and world music stages. There is a circus field. Outdoor and indoor
cinemas play the latest releases. A theatre field has a crop of stand-up
comics, puppet shows and mime artists. There are the 'Green' fields as a
focus for healing, tranquility and the mystical fringes of life. And then
there are stalls selling hamburgers, festival T-shirts, Tibetan hats,
three-course meals served on white linen . . .
The increasing average age of the festival-goer is catered for by a host of
less tiring, or less noisy, activities. Even on the main stage the acts are
getting older. Almost first off on the first day was the 63-year-old
Australian Rolf Harris - who acknowledged that the crowd were laughing as
much at him as with him. Also well on the way to complimentary public
transport were The Kinks, The Velvet Underground, Van Morrison, Donovan and
Robert Plant.
This might be a reflection that Glastonbury is Europe's largest, and
probably oldest festival. There have been 14 such gatherings since the first
in 1970 - and apart from 1991, one every year since 1979. It is clear that
some of the earliest visitors are returning with their brood. Of course you
may think that most of the performers, traders and mystics are a match for
the rubbish around you. But you keep being reminded that there are many ways
to make a living - and those of whom you disapprove will happily show you
what makes them tick. That is what makes the festival special. So many
people come with such varied aims that the average tripper, with steady job
and mortgage, cannot fail to be enthralled.
Some 80,000 tickets at Pounds 58 were sold. Add to that the traders,
gatecrashers, freeloaders and security staff and a total attendance of at
least 100,000 is reached. From that almost 200 arrests were made, of which
the police say most were drug-related. But, as Chief Inspector Barry
Williams points out: '100,000 people compares with the size of a small
town.' To the security guards, the festival is just another day at work,
just another concert. But one hundred thousand burned and burnt-out fun
seekers think that it is very, very special.
