FT  24 JUN 93 / International Company News: 'Balladur bond' could exceed
FFr40bn target
THE French government yesterday unveiled the final details of the 'Balladur
bond', named after the prime minister Mr Edouard Balladur, with which it
plans to finance its job creation plans. It confirmed that the issue would
be open-ended and be allowed to exceed the FFr40bn (Dollars 7.18bn) target.
Mr Edmond Alphandery, economy minister, said it was 'not impossible' that
the issue would attract more than FFr40bn.
The four-year bonds will have a face value of FFr1,000 and yield annual
interest of 6 per cent, just below the 6.15 per cent yield on four-year
government paper.
The government has devised the issue to appeal to individual rather than
institutional investors, in the hope of encouraging French savers to
withdraw money from SICAV money market funds to buy bonds as a precursor to
participating in the forthcoming privatisation programme.
It is offering tax breaks for people buying bonds through equity savings
plans and switching cash from SICAVs into bonds or equity plans. Individuals
will be able to convert the bonds into the shares of privatised companies.
They will also be entitled to preferential investment rights when the
privatisations start in early September.
The government is spending FFr25bn to advertise the issue in a campaign
which starts today.
The bonds will be sold through banks and post offices. The minimum
investment is FFr1,000 and there is no upper limit.
The issue is led by Credit Agricole, the co-operative bank, and Banque
Nationale de Paris, the state-controlled bank which is a candidate for
privatisation, together with Caisse des Depots et Consignations, the
public-sector financial institution. Mr Alphandery said he expected recent
falls in French interest rates to make the bonds more appealing. The
government also hopes the issue will benefit from the buoyancy of the French
bond market.
'The timing is good as the market is definitely on an upward trend,' said Mr
Jean-Francois Mercier, French economist at Salomon Brothers. 'The only
problem is that if the 'Balladur bond' is a success it suggests the French
are still more interested in saving money than spending it.'
Mr Bernard Arnault, the chairman of LVMH, the luxury goods group, is
expanding his designer fashion interests by taking over Kenzo, the Paris
fashion house. The deal follows last month's transaction in which Mr Arnault
acquired Financiere Truffaut, a portfolio of luxury goods investments
including a 25 per cent stake in Kenzo, from Groupe Worms, the French
industrial and financial holding company.
He has agreed to acquire, for an undisclosed sum, the 65 per cent stake in
Kenzo held jointly by Mr Kenzo Takada, the Japanese designer who founded the
company, and his partner, Mr Atsuko Kondo. Mr Arnault is also purchasing the
10 per cent holding of Mr Francois Baufume, chairman of Kenzo.
