FT  06 MAR 93 / Finance and the Family: Possible pearls that hide within
shells - Diary of a Private Investor
THE STOCK market recently reminded me of conditions in 1986: share prices
moving upwards, even of companies which are really 'rubbish'; an increasing
number of rights issues from companies large and small; private investors
rushing to buy 'penny' shares; and greater interest being shown in small
companies which can possibly be used as shells for the injection of new
activities. Even some of the names are the same.
Take Downiebrae Holdings which, in February, saw its shares shoot up 22p in
one day on news that Robert Newman had acquired a 22.99 per cent stake.
Newman was reported as saying that Downiebrae was 'the perfect vehicle for
acquisitions' as it had Pounds 4.7m of cash, two properties, and two
northern-based engineering businesses. He planned to use the company to
expand into engineering or other fields.
In 1986, Newman was one of several investors who acquired a 29.9 per cent
shareholding in another small 'shell' company, Times Veneer. He became an
executive director and Times Veneer changed its name to Era Group, embarking
on acquisitions that included Lexterten and AS Royston (furniture
companies); Richard Kohnstam (models, games and toys and owner of the
Beatties toy shop chain); and Shadow GB (owner of the Tecno and Fox Talbot
camera retailers).
I did very well from Times Veneer, having bought shares on May 12 and 13
1986 for 17.5p and 18p respectively. I took quick profits when I sold some
for 24p on May 23, then more at 55p in September 1986 and disposed of most
of the rest for 163p in September 1987.
This was quite good timing, as the shares were hit by the October 1987
crash. I was lucky to spot Times Veneer as a potential shell before Newman
and his colleagues moved into it. Unfortunately, although I had been
following Downiebrae since June last year, I had not bought shares in it and
so missed the recent leap in price.
What attracted me to Downiebrae initially was a report in the June 26 1992
issue of the Investors Chronicle. This revealed that the company's share
price was only 28p, yet its net asset value was 35p; and although its market
capitalisation was only Pounds 4.9m, it then had net cash of Pounds 4.42m.
I thought Downiebrae would make an ideal shell but did not buy shares in it
since, at that time, I was concerned that a number of my holdings in other
companies, bought on 'shell' or takeover hopes, had not seen any action.
Another sign of shell activity in February was the report that Multitrust,
controlled by financier Andrew Perloff, was interested in acquiring a large
shareholding in Radiant Metal Finishing, another company I have followed
because I regarded it, too, as an ideal shell. I have bought and sold shares
in Radiant, and made reasonable profits, several times. I missed out on
Radiant's initial rise in February after news of Perloff's interest was
published, but I have now acquired a small holding for my personal pension
scheme.
Ideally, this year will continue to be good for shell companies. I hope it
will follow the pattern of 1986 when Charles Gordon (plus Charles and
Maurice Saatchi) bought a large stake in NMC Investments, a company chaired
by DC Marshall. I spotted NMC, a small packaging company, as a potential
shell in September 1982 when I bought shares for 12.5p. Until the move by
Gordon in 1986 the shares had been rather lack-lustre. But he and his
colleagues transformed and expanded the company and I sold my stake for 205p
in 1987.
My hope is that some entrepreneurs now will show interest in two other
companies chaired by DC Marshall, London Finance &amp; Investment Group, and
Burlington Group. Both would make ideal shells: they have modest market
capitalisations and could be steered easily in many directions and expanded
rapidly.
My personal pension scheme has been in and out of London Finance over the
years, investing each time in the hope of a takeover and selling when
nothing happened. It continues to retain a small holding. London Finance,
with a share price of 18p, has a market capitalisation of only Pounds 4.5m.
Burlington Group would be even better. Its shares are around 17 1/2 p but
its market capitalisation is only Pounds 2.66m and the bulk of its assets
are fixed-interest investments, gilt-edged stock and cash.
Experience shows, however, that caution is needed when looking at 'penny'
shares and shell companies. It might take years (if ever) before an
entrepreneur spots the potential. Dealing costs on lowly-priced shares can
be considerable. In 1992, stock exchange figures showed the average spread -
the difference between the buying price and selling price - on 'less liquid'
stocks ranged from 12.22 per cent in May that year to 14.35 per cent in
August.
Some penny shares have had even greater spreads. It is not unknown for
brokers to offer shares in a company at, say, 12p to buyers but offer 8p to
sellers. The share price, therefore, has to perform remarkably well for an
investor just to break even. But including shares with shell appeal as a
modest part of a portfolio does provide some added spice - especially for
the patient.
