FT  22 DEC 93 / EU grants aid to London's inner city boroughs
London has become the first European Union capital to be given financial
help from EU aid funds reserved for areas blighted by industrial decline.
Six inner London boroughs - Hackney, Haringey, Newham, Tower Hamlets,
Enfield and Waltham Forest - yesterday joined the traditional industrial
areas of the north and Scotland in being made eligible for substantial
regional aid grants which are devoted to areas hit by high unemployment.
The six boroughs, plus the Isle of Thanet in Kent, should get EU structural
aid worth about Ecu130m (Pounds 99m) over the next three years, out of about
Ecu2bn earmarked for the UK as a whole.
Other cities covered by the same funds include West Berlin, as part of the
Union's attempt to help with the costs of German reunification, and
depressed satellite cities around Madrid.
In allocating the funds, the European Commission resisted UK government
efforts to transfer substantial aid funds to southern England at the expense
of traditional industrial areas in the north and Scotland.
Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, said yesterday the Commission's
response to the government's case for London had been wholly inadequate. The
Commission's proposals included only parts of the areas put forward.
The EU allocations announced yesterday total Ecu7.2bn and are designed to
help areas in industrial decline in 1994-96. That is a small amount of the
EU's Ecu156bn regional aid budget for 1994-99, about 70 per cent of which
goes to the four poorest member states (Portugal, Greece, Ireland and Spain)
and the most backward regions in the other eight countries, under the
so-called Objective 1 aid programme.
But yesterday's Objective 2 share-out is of particular significance to areas
in the most developed economies that have suffered from urban decay and the
decline of traditional industries.
The UK and France, both expecting more than Ecu2bn after the first main
share-out for backward regions, were the main winners yesterday because of
their high industrial unemployment. Both had their initial bids cut sharply.
The Objective 2 pot is limited to no more than 15 per cent of the EU
population, and the member states had put in bids covering 23 per cent of
their inhabitants.
The UK had put in a bid covering 40 per cent of its population, and France
wanted 33 per cent coverage. In the event, they received well over the
average, at respectively 31 per cent (17.7m Britons) and 26 per cent (14.6m
French).
The Commission rejected British claims for special status for areas ranging
from the Isle of Wight to the London borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
