FT  19 JAN 93 / Survey of The European Single Market (20): Drinks sector
sees the birth of the Euro-palate - Consumer tastes are becoming more daring
THE Euro-consumer is still a shadowy species, but one that is slowly gaining
substance as national tastes converge, according to market researchers.
In the drinks sector, a few more people every year are converted from
traditional, locally-produced spirits to international brands of whisky and
cognac. Many soft drinks find increasing acceptance across frontiers.
Northern Europeans are drinking more wine; and southern Europeans are
acquiring a thirst for beer. While the Germans, the continent's heaviest
beer drinkers, maintained a steady annual consumption of 142 litres a head
during the 1980s, Spanish consumption rose 36 per cent to 72 litres, and the
Portuguese lifted their intake a staggering 68 per cent to 64 litres.
Throughout the decade, the British ale drinker continued to develop a taste
for continental lager, bringing another note of harmony into the European
beer market.
At least one Dutch barman in Friesland no longer tries to make UK visitors
feel at home by scraping the froth off a glass of Pils and jovially
presenting them with 'an English beer'.
But the fact that Europe's beer drinkers now have more tastes in common does
not mean that by the end of the decade everybody will be drinking the same
few brands. Perish the thought.
Lager dominates the market - but there is a huge variety of brands and, on
the whole, each country still prefers its own.
Consumer loyalty to local brews is strongest in Germany, which accounts for
more than a third of European beer consumption. The country supports 1,150
brewers and rather more breweries. The Reinheitsgebot purity laws, which
required the use of only water, barley, hops and yeast in making beer, long
proved a barrier to imports.
But even since the laws were rescinded in 1987, imports have risen by a mere
0.5 per cent, and still represent less than 2 per cent of consumption.
Few believe, however, that such a situation can survive for much longer; and
Carlsberg of Denmark, and Grolsch of the Netherlands have recently acquired
German brewers.
Britain has been much more receptive to foreign products since the late
development of its lager market - with even Sol, a Mexican lager served with
a wedge of lime in the bottle, in the repertoire. One in three glasses of
lager drunk in the UK is a continental brand; and about the same amount is
shared by Australian, US, Canadian and other overseas brands.
It has been difficult to establish pan-European brands amid such diversity.
Heineken, of the Netherlands, the most pan-European of brewers, controls
only 9.6 per cent of the market, and the Heineken brand itself accounts for
a mere 3.4 per cent.
Carlsberg, the Danish brewer, has an estimated 6 per cent market share, but
sales of its eponymous brand account for little more than 2 per cent.
These two brewers, both dominant in their own countries, have achieved their
pre-eminence in Europe through wholly-owned subsidiaries, acquisitions,
joint ventures or licensing agreements in almost every EC state.
Thus Heineken owns Dreher in Italy, Murphy's in Ireland, Athenian in Greece,
El Aguila in Spain, and Francaise de Brasserie in France, while its
mainstream brand is brewed under licence in the UK by Whitbread.
Carlsberg owns Hannen in Germany, and has stakes in Poretti of Italy, Unicer
of Portugal, and Cruz Campo of Spain. It is forming a joint venture with
Allied-Lyons in the UK, and is brewed under licence in several other
countries.
With such widespread distribution, and sold as part of portfolios of local
products, Heineken and Carlsberg should continue to grow into true
pan-European brands.
Further contenders for such status may emerge from the continuing
consolidation of the industry - the growing presence of BSN, the French
brewer in the countries of southern Europe, suggests its Kronenbourg brand
is one possibility.
But during the 1990s, consumers seem likely to be more adventurous in their
tastes, demanding a greater choice of quality beers of all kinds.
Brewers may find it more profitable to cater for strong niche markets than
chase mainstream volume.
Such markets are already emerging - in the revival of cask-conditioned
regional ales in the UK, in the rediscovery of wheat beers in Germany, and
the growing popularity of Belgium's specialty beers seasoned with fruit or
spices.
Consumers are relishing the flavours - the malt and hops of English ales or
the coriander of Belgian white beer - after the blandness of so much lager.
Some products are acquiring the cachet of fine wines; and they should find
an equally appreciative and permanent market.
