FT  22 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: European zinc producers plan
co-ordinated cuts
DESPERATE EUROPEAN zinc producers are hoping to implement a co-ordinated
industry scheme where one or two of them will permanently close smelting
capacity and the rest of the EC industry will provide cash to cover the
closure costs.
At present 18 European zinc smelters, one third of the world total, chase
the same raw materials and the same customers. Analysts have been suggesting
for months that the long-term outlook for them is grim and that some will
have to close.
The industry apparently agrees with this prognosis and a dossier about the
so-called voluntary closure scheme is being prepared for the European
Commission, which must give its approval. The commission is expected to give
the go-ahead because it approved a similar scheme for the European zinc
industry in the early 1980s. There were long discussions then, and also in
the mid-1980s, during which potential closure candidates were identified by
the industry. But market conditions improved and the scheme was quietly
allowed to lapse.
Industry executives said yesterday that a dossier for the commission should
be ready as soon as the European summer holidays were over. There would then
be industry discussions about which smelters should close and how much per
tonne of annual output the rest of the industry should pay if they did shut
down. In the 1980s smelters in Germany, southern Italy, Spain and the UK
were on the short list for closure.
Zinc's anti-corrosion properties are used mainly for galvanised steel for
the automotive and construction industries. Pressure is building up on
producers because prices are near their all-time lows and demand is weak,
particularly in Europe where recession in Germany is biting hard.
One observer made it clear, however, that the industry was not unanimous.
'Is this the right way to stimulate rationalisation of the European
industry? Would not that rationalisation happen anyway?' he asked.
Mr David Humphreys, economist at the RTZ Corporation, the world's biggest
mining group, said recently that European zinc smelters, which mainly buy in
their raw materials and have no associated mines of their own, would suffer
because of both the quantity and the quality of zinc concentrate (an
intermediate material) likely to be available in the second half of the
1990s.
He said there were already indications that a combination of very low prices
for zinc metal and very high treatment charges for concentrates would lead
to cuts in mine production and investment so severe as to leave the market
short of concentrates in the latter part of the decade.
A number of mines would be exhausted in the 1990s and there was only one
large-scale zinc mining project at present fully committed; MIM's Dollars
200m McArthur River project in the Northern Territory of Australia.
As for the quality of the concentrate, Mr Humphreys pointed out that two of
the three new smelters being planned would use the so-called Imperial
Smelting Process and a substantial part of the proposed increase in mine
capacity was for bulk (mixed lead-zinc) concentrates usable only at ISP
plants. Potentially this added to pressures on non-integrated electrolytic
zinc plants which required clean zinc concentrates. 'This, together with
falling domestic mine production, would point to further problems for
Europe's custom smelters.'
Mr Humphreys added: 'More zinc smelter production cuts are urgently needed.
Exchange rates and the condition of the domestic market suggest that cuts
will need to be in Europe'.
The Metals &amp; Minerals Research Services consultancy group was also
pessimistic about the zinc industry's future in a recent report - 'Zinc's
structural surplus: Temporary or long-term blight?' It suggested production
capacity would remain well above demand until at least the end of 1996 and
that zinc prices would be weak compared with those of the medium-term past -
even when present huge stocks of concentrate and metal had been
substantially reduced.
