FT  02 AUG 93 / How Lopez agonised over rival tugs on his heart
THE PLOT of the all-action espionage drama involving two of the world's top
automotive groups seemed in danger at the weekend of dissolving into a
tear-jerker.
According to a meticulous diary of events kept by Mr Jens Neumann,
Volkswagen's personnel director, on March 13 he phoned Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua, who, four days earlier, had signed a contract to join VW from
General Motors.
Mr Lopez was not at home, he was told. But then he came to the phone to
explain that four GM directors had just left. They had begged him to stay
because otherwise General Motors would go bust and 400,000 families would
lose their jobs. 'He said he was prepared to stay; he asked Mr Piech to
forgive him; he was a broken man,' according to extracts from Mr Neumann's
diary.
His notes were presented in evidence last week to Darmstadt prosecutors
investigating GM's suspicions of industrial spying against Mr Lopez, and
released by VW at the weekend. While the parts of his evidence published
threw no light on the burning issue of whether Mr Lopez and his associates
systematically plundered the US group's secrets before joining VW, they
illuminated the bizarre tug-of-war which preceded the spying charges.
Mr Neumann's notes contain the only points of detail so far to emerge on
which evidence from the two sides does not clash substantially.
On the evidence of the extracts, Mr Jack Smith, GM president, was fighting
to keep Mr Lopez even as the US group announced that he was to leave. At
11.30am on March 12, Mr Lopez called Mr Neumann to say Mr Smith had turned
on the emotional pressure, allegedly saying he would be sacked if he let the
Basque engineer go to Germany.
According to raw notes taken on Saturday March 13 by Mr Lopez's former PR
aide, Ms Toni Simonetti, and read out in a Hamburg court recently, Mr Lopez
was visited in Detroit on the evening of Friday, March 12, by Mr Smith, Mr
Richard Wagoner, finance director, and Mr Harry Pearce, GM's legal brain.
They 'spoke to me like a father and two brothers. . . we made a mistake not
to understand your vision. . . we want to learn from our mistakes. . . that
broke my heart,' Mr Lopez said, according to Ms Simonetti's notes. They
continued: 'A different GM first ever the big company can have soul warm and
can love for each other ..'
Mr Lopez has repeatedly denied dictating these words, intended for a speech
due to be delivered on Monday, March 15, to explain to GM employees why he
had, after all, decided to stay in the US.
Back in Mr Neumann's diary, an entry timed at 11.00am on the day Ms
Simonetti allegedly took down the outline speech, Mr Lopez was on the phone
to Germany again. He had told Mr Smith there was no way back, he could not
leave VW in the lurch. 'The word of a Basque cannot be broken'.
After another call at 4.30pm the same day, when Mr Lopez had apparently
broken, changed his mind again and asked for the VW chairman's forgiveness,
there were two more calls in which Mr Lopez was offered and accepted a
compromise from Mr Piech. He could stay at GM, and join VW in a year.
On Sunday March 14, the vacillating Basque called Mr Neumann. He would try
to set GM to rights within a year and then reconsider his position. He had
not slept for four nights, he said. He was back on the line the next day.
The US group wanted to lock him into a five-year contract as president of GM
North America, but his 'heart and mind belonged to Germany, and he had a
clear vision for Europe,' according to Mr Neumann.
Within minutes, Mr Piech was on the phone to his 'very unhappy'
director-to-be. 'This strengthened his resolve to fly to Germany today. He
needs him now,' the notes said. Half an hour later Mr Lopez and his family
were on the way to the airport.
Mr Neumann's published extracts ended: 'March 16, 1993, 10am: I collect Mr
Lopez from Braunschweig airport and bring him to the supervisory board
meeting which has already started.'
In Detroit, on the advice of Mr Pearce, the office of the Basque had been
searched in vain for secret documents. The fruitless hunt was under way for
more papers, pictures and files, alleged to have been assembled by his
closest colleagues. The spying drama was about to begin.
