FT  18 JUN 93 / Technology: The search continues - There is still no
long-term treatment for HIV, despite billions of dollars of investment
The rapid spread of HIV, the virus that causes Aids, and the inability of
scientists to come up with a cure cast a pall over the annual Aids
Conference in Berlin last week.
Delegates were warned that more than 14m people have been infected by HIV,
an increase of 2.5m since the conference last year. The World Health
Organisation predicted that unless measures were taken to halt the virus, up
to 40m people would be infected by the end of the decade.
Given such grim predictions, the failure of the pharmaceuticals industry to
find a cure or vaccine for HIV - after more than 12 years and billions of
dollars of investment - was particularly depressing.
The gloom was compounded as details of an Anglo-French study were presented,
suggesting the most widely-used treatment against HIV, Wellcome's AZT, may
not be effective in HIV-positive patients without Aids-related symptoms. The
company disputes the findings of the trial, which is the largest and longest
study of AZT.
Yet in spite of the absence of any long-term treatment, the need for early
intervention was stressed in a new study presented by Frank Goebel,
professor at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat in Munich. He demonstrated
that the virus is highly active even during the apparently latent phase of
disease after infection when the virus is hardly found in the blood.
Goebel argued that during the latent phase the virus seeds itself into the
lymph system where over a period of years it multiplies, ravaging the
system's cell structure before breaking out into the blood stream. At this
stage, the deterioration in the number of CD4 immune cells, which is
relatively slow during the latent period, accelerates rapidly leading to
Aids and Aids-related diseases.
Before this study, it had been suggested there was no point giving treatment
before Aids symptoms developed because, given its low levels in the
bloodstream, the virus was inactive.
Although it is now clear that early intervention could help, the problem for
doctors is that none of the drugs available appears to have a lasting effect
on HIV.
Scientists are looking at a number of ways of attacking the virus. But so
far most of the effort has been directed towards one particular step of the
virus' life-cycle, when the virus' genetic material (RNA) is 'reverse
transcribed' into DNA. These drugs include Wellcome's AZT, Bristol-Myers
Squibb's ddI and Roche's ddC.
The problem with such medicines is that the virus has a tendency to mutate,
developing versions resistant to particular drugs.
The efficacy of such drugs on their own is open to question. For example,
Anthony Pinching, professor at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, presented
details of a large study of ddI which suggested that a brief rise in CD4
levels generated by the drug made no difference to the onset of Aids-related
illness and death, nor improved quality of life. Another study suggested
there was little difference in the efficacy between ddI and ddC in Aids
patients intolerant to AZT.
Scientists are trying another approach with these drugs, however. Yung-Kang
Chow of Harvard University generated considerable media interest earlier
this year when he suggested these drugs could be used in combination,
preventing the virus mutating into drug-resistant strains. He called this
'convergent combination therapy'.
Most of the combinations being studied are still in test-tubes. AZT and
Bristol-Myers Squibb's d4T appear to have a similar action and will probably
be used in combination with ddI, ddC or Glaxo's 3TC.
Nearly all trials using combination therapy are presently using AZT, which
suggests the drug could experience considerable sales growth if effective
combinations are discovered. However, whether patients could afford
combination therapy depends on the prices charged and the doses required.
Scientists are looking at other possible targets. These include two proteins
called Rev and Tat which appear necessary for the virus to replicate. The
best target would be Rev, but no anti-Rev drugs are in clinical trials. The
performance of the only Tat-inhibitor to be presented at the conference,
Roche's Ro 24-7429, was highly disappointing.
In contrast, another Roche product proved far more effective. The company is
developing a protease inhibitor called Ro 31-8959. This affects production
of an enzyme called protease which is necessary for the virus to replicate
effectively. Virus particles without the enzyme appear to be malformed and
non-infectious.
An Italian clinical trial presented at the conference showed that when the
drug was used with AZT, the two together were more effective in raising CD4
levels than AZT on its own. More trials are required to see if the drug
increases life-expectancy or quality of life.
Other good news involved the effectiveness of medicines to prevent the onset
of opportunistic and often lethal Aids-related diseases. Life expectancy of
Aids patients once they have developed the disease has increased
significantly because of such medicines.
Among the most important is Wellcome's Mepron, a treatment against a form of
pneumonia called PCP (pneumoncystis carinii pneumonia) which kills a
substantial proportion of Aids patients in the developed world.
Meanwhile, the search for a vaccine continues.
There was considerable media interest in a vaccine aimed at stimulating the
immune response of patients already infected by HIV. The vaccine, developed
by Immune Response Corporation of San Diego and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, showed
promising results. Additional studies are required to see if it slows
progression to disease or death.
In spite of the high levels of investment in combination therapies and
vaccines, they are likely to prove of little use for most HIV-positive
people. About 90 per cent of those infected live in the developing world and
will be unable to afford therapy.
The most significant medium-term impact on the Aids epidemic is likely to be
made not by medicines, but by public health programmes. The WHO is calling
for Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.6bn) to be spent annually in developing nations
to control the transmission of HIV. Michael Merson, director of the WHO's
global programme on Aids, believes it could save Dollars 90bn in direct and
indirect costs.
The programmes would include projects such as providing Aids information and
education, promoting condoms among prostitutes and clients, maintaining a
safe blood supply for transfusions and needle-exchange programmes.
'The initiative would provide a significant return in financial terms, but
above all an incalculable yield in diminished human suffering,' said Merson.
