FT  17 FEB 93 / Arts: 'Alfie' - bold, brash, dated
What a terrible lot we must have been in the 1960s: bold, brash, relatively
affluent and up to the ears in sex. The late Bill Naughton's Alfie, set in
London 1963, now looks like a period piece from an age when men referred to
women as birds, the women did not object, and southern audiences were
delighted by such northern frankness. The play is not as funny, nor as
outrageous, as it used to be, but it still has tricks up the sleeve.
Alfie is an out-and-out womaniser, full of male vanity. Yet he is not wholly
an exploiter. Most of the women are at least as eager as he is. A few of
them, like Ruby - the owner of a small chain of hairdressers and a fur coat
to boot - come out on top. Occasionally he even feels remorse; the
suggestion is that he is at heart a sentimental fellow who just cannot keep
his eyes off skirts, or indeed off Alfie. He is remarkably well-groomed and
dressed: women want to cook for him, press his clothes, iron his shirts and
even wash his floor.
In 1993 the obvious question is whether Britain really was like that 30
years ago. How does he find the money to buy his smart blazers and sports
jackets, let alone own a car, when he appears to have no fixed job? At most,
he is a part-time hired driver. He spends one act of the play in hospital
under what must have been an excellent national health service: the nurses
go to bed with him.
The questions are not answered: perhaps in those far-off days no-one thought
of raising them. Even the funds for an abortion are found quite easily:
Pounds 30 at 1963 prices, bargainable down to Pounds 21. This must be one of
the last British plays to pretend that social and economic problems did not
exist. It was acclaimed as a breath of fresh air: with hindsight it looks
like pure fantasy.
Alfie, originally played by the classical actor John Neville, is now taken
over by Adam Faith, a survivor not so much from the 1960s as the 1950s.
Faith looks as young as ever, as though nothing has changed. He also has
great charm and there is the odd good twist in the text. Some very strong
supporting performances include notably Sara Richardson who triples as the
doctor and two of Alfie's girl-friends. Faith directs himself; whether he
realises that this ought to be a museum piece is open to doubt.
Richmond Theatre until Saturday. (081) 940 0220
