FT  26 JAN 93 / Public spirit, private vision: Mike Heron, new head of the
Post Office, gives Tony Jackson his views on privatisation
Mr Mike Heron is, by his own account, a man who likes a challenge. This is
doubtless why, at 58, he has just left the company where he spent his
working life to head the Post Office, a sprawling public organisation with
some 200,000 employees and an uncertain future.
Not that Mr Heron found the decision entirely easy. 'I have to tell you,' he
says, 'that to move from one company or career to another is a highly
emotional decision. People don't just get up and do it. It's never
risk-free.'
But he had his reasons. Some months ago, he came second in the race to
succeed Sir Michael Angus as chairman of Unilever, where he had worked for
34 years. Had he got the job, he says, he could have run Unilever his own
way. It was not such a big deal when he missed it. All the same, he wanted a
complete change.
And he wanted it in the public sector. Why? The answer, he admits by
preamble, risks sounding pious. 'I have a very strong feeling that we need
to give back to society some of the things we've got from it. I'm an
absolute product of the welfare state. My father was in the Post Office - he
started behind the counter, and he ended there. I got a scholarship at the
age of 11 to a grammar school, then I went into the army and up to Oxford.
You can't ask for a better education than Oxford. And all of that was paid
for by the state.'
His sincerity here seems borne out by the record. In his six years on the
Unilever board, Mr Heron took no outside commercial directorships. But his
CV over the past decade bristles with public service appointments: in
education, hospitals, training, business in the community and so forth. It
didn't have to be the Post Office, he says. That was just what came up. 'The
important thing is for businessmen to take the science and the craft they've
got and put it into the public domain.'
What does that science consist of, exactly? 'I think a businessman or woman,
particularly in general management, is trained to focus on the raison d'etre
of the unit they're in. The discipline is to deliver. You start by gathering
a database, and you move inexorably from that to the objective you have in
mind. Normally, you're talking about the creation of wealth, the bottom
line. But the same focus could be in some other area.
'The second point is that you learn to use the resources available. You
actually value the people you're working with. Your prime resource is the
human one, and a businessman gives a lot of attention to that.'
That sounds like a personnel man speaking. Indeed, Mr Heron was Unilever's
head of personnel for his last couple of years there. But his point, he
says, is broader. 'Any successful business would ensure that its line
managers were responsible for people.'
The personnel role should be more advisory and forward-looking - visionary,
in fact. 'I was utterly determined to take over personnel at Unilever. I
believe emphatically that in the leading corporations of the world, the
management of personnel and human resources is the key activity. In my view,
the companies which will hold the high ground in a competitive world are
those with the skill and the talent.'
Presumably, this is especially true in the impoverished public sector. The
top wage in the Post Office last year - the chairman's - was Pounds 170,000.
Mr Heron concedes that pay is still a constraint in attracting outside
talent. On the other hand, there are limits to how many outsiders he wants.
'It's quite a difficult balance. If you get too many coming in, you
demotivate the others. And if you're not careful, you become short of
experience. The Post Office is a massive operation. If, for instance, you
want to put in a new style of work, you've got to cascade it down to 50,000
people. So you have to have processes to manage things, and experience of
that is very important.'
Indeed, he claims, the existing management compares very well with what he
is used to. Take, for instance, the introductory presentations he has had
from divisional chiefs and board members. 'There's less five-coloured charts
and less pirouetting around to show what a great guy the presenter is. But
the amount of information is unbelievable.'
Behind all this is a looming question. The Post Office is in the public
sector today, but it may not be for long. The government is about to decide
whether to privatise it, in whole or in part. Where does he stand on the
whole issue?
He really doesn't mind, he says. 'When you're confronted with the president
of the Board of Trade at the interview, the bald question is asked whether
you have any ideological feelings either way. My answer is, look, I'm coming
here to manage a massive business. It's your business as government to
decide ownership. My job will be to implement that.'
This is a little hard to swallow. His talk has been of goals and results. In
such an uncertain situation, how can he formulate personal goals?
Easy, he says. He has two sets: 'One is what happens if it's privatised, the
other if it isn't. If it's privatised, I think the path over the next four
years will be pretty well defined. There are certain things one has to do on
the route to privatisation: the mechanics of it, getting the team together,
getting the relationships right, and at the same time, making sure the
business is not only going well but going from strength to strength. The
challenge would be the other way - how, without privatisation, you move
upwards and outwards in terms of world class.'
That seems a pretty clear statement of preference. But another question
arises. Much of his talk has been about public service; and as he says, the
Post Office measures itself very strictly in terms of the quality of service
it provides. If it were privatised, it would be answerable to shareholders.
Where would his public service commitment be then?
His answer is a classic appeal to capitalism. In certain areas, the Post
Office is a monopoly. As such, it will be regulated whatever happens. Most
of it, though, is subject to competition. 'In a competitive world, the
concept that customer satisfaction and the shareholders are in conflict
simply isn't true. There's a dynamic tension, but a really well-run business
is full of dynamic tension - between marketing and production, between sales
and accounting. If you don't satisfy the customer, in the end you won't
satisfy the shareholder.'
