FT  08 NOV 93 / Ministers spurn critics of plan for sick pay
MINISTERS confirmed yester-day that the government plans to cut the amount
of state support given to employers whose staff go on sick leave. The move
comes despite fierce opposition from business people and industrialists who
believe it will add to their labour costs.
Ministers have also said that they plan to cut Pounds 500m off the cost of
state invalidity benefit in the Budget on November 30. The government will
tighten the rules by which patients can receive the benefit, and will
require formal tests by GPs before it can be handed out.
The Confederation of British Industry said yesterday it would be 'extremely
concerned' if the government went ahead with the plan for sick pay,
especially as it was evidence of a 'disturbing' trend to shift social costs
from the state on to business.
The CBI said it had not been consulted by the government, and noted that
'employers are just getting used' to the 1991 cut, which saw the
government's share of funding statutory sick pay fall from 100 per cent to
80 per cent.
But ministers said yesterday that they would definitely reduce that level of
support, possibly to 60 per cent of an employer's total contribution.
Officials in Whitehall said that the cut in sick pay support had been
resisted by Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, who has argued that
it would add to employers' costs when they were trying to emerge from the
recession. Furthermore, the move is surprising in view of the prime
minister's repeated opposition to increasing social protection for
employees. The CBI said the impact on small businesses could be particularly
heavy: 'If a small company was hit by, say, a flu epidemic which affected a
large number of its employees, then there could be a significant impact on
that company's operations and cashflow.'
On invalidity benefit, ministers said that they were aiming to cut the costs
of a budget which has now reached some Pounds 8bn per year, and place
applications for this benefit in a proper framework.
Ms Pauline Thompson, director of the Disablement Income Group, yesterday
conceded that some doctors have used non-medical criteria, such as age or
employment opportunities, when assessing patients.
But she feared that the government was moving towards 'more of an
all-or-nothing system that does not reflect the true facts of disability.'
She said those who would be affected most by tighter criteria were likely to
be borderline cases of 'people whose capacity for work varies.' The
Disablement Income Group had hoped, however, that the government would
introduce a more flexible system, including a partial disability benefit
which would encourage people to return to work, if only for a few hours a
week.
