FT  05 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Changing Japan
IN THE PAST 30 years the world has got used to thinking of Japan as a great
economic power, one of whose strengths was that it combined formal democracy
with total political stability. Japanese prime ministers came and went, but
few outside Japan remembered their names. They did not matter because they
all belonged to the same Liberal Democratic party (LDP), and their
individual impact on policy was negligible. These septuagenarians succeeded
each other according to an elaborate queueing system, modified by an endless
and obscure struggle between factions with no discernible political content.
Japanese politicians were assumed (like politicians in several other
democracies) to be corrupt, to a greater or lesser degree, but that did not
matter either. It was all part of the system, and there was no prospect of
it changing.
Today, however, it will change. The parliament elected last month has to
choose between two candidates for prime minister, both in their mid 50s.
Barring some extraordinary last-minute hitch, it will elect Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa, the leader of the Japan New Party. The LDP will go into opposition
for the first time in its 38-year history. Ms Takako Doi, a woman and a
socialist, will become speaker of the lower house.
This will not mean any immediate or dramatic change in Japanese policy. The
new government is composed of seven parties ranging in ideology from
socialist via Buddhist to conservative. The policies on which they have been
able to agree are, in so far as they have yet been spelt out, essentially a
continuation of the previous government's - especially in those areas such
as foreign affairs and economics which are of greatest interest to the
outside world.
The main agenda of the new government is 'political reform', but even the
content of that is not too clear, beyond a pledge to introduce a new
electoral system in which half the MPs will be elected in single-member
constituencies, the other half by proportional representation. (The present
one, involving a single, non-transferable vote in multi-member
constituencies, discourages opposition parties from putting up enough
candidates to win a majority, lest they spread their votes too thinly, and
has therefore tended to perpetuate the LDP majority.)
The LDP hopes confidently, and not without some reason, that on the details
of this and other issues the coalition will soon fall apart, enabling it to
return to office on the basis of a deal with one or more of the smaller
parties. But even if that happens, Japanese politics will still have changed
irreversibly. A new generation has taken over, without waiting until it has
passed what in other countries would be retirement age. A single-party
system has been replaced by a multi-party one. From now on politicians and
the electorate will both know that the latter can turn the former out of
office. Japanese democracy has come of age.
