FT  29 MAR 93 / Risk and Reward: Questions over growth of banks' off-balance
sheet exposure
THE over-the-counter derivatives markets may continue to expand but the
off-balance sheet credit exposure of banks involved in them has ceased to
grow.
If anything, off-balance sheet risks shrank last year. That is the
conclusion to be drawn from the recent accounts of three of the largest US
commercial banks.
Citibank, Bankers Trust and JP Morgan are among the half-dozen or so of the
biggest US banks in the over-the-counter markets, alongside Chemical,
BankAmerica and Chase Manhattan. Notes to their 1992 accounts show the pace
at which their derivative portfolios are growing, but in a way that is not
adding to their real exposures - at least, according to the banks' own
measurement of those risks.
Between them, the three banks were involved in interest-rate related
derivatives with a notional value of over Dollars 2,000bn at the end of
1992, up from under Dollars 1,500 a year before. However, the implicit
credit risk in these instruments actually fell, from Dollars 26.1bn to
Dollars 22.9bn.
The reason? The amount at risk is not directly related to the scale of the
contracts, but to the extent to which each contract is showing a gain. In
other words, if a counterparty stopped paying, say, the fixed-rate leg of an
interest swap agreement, the scale of the loss would depend on how
profitable the swap has become to the bank.
If the payments were at 6 per cent, compared with a market interest rate of
5 per cent, then the bank would face a cost from the lost income stream.
That lost income, discounted back to present value, is the replacement cost
of the contract. The static or falling credit exposure of the banks last
year suggests that the income they are receiving on the average interest
rate contract is closer to market levels than a year before. In volatile
markets, these credit figures could rise or fall sharply as the gain on
particular contracts rises or falls.
According to a recent joint report from the US Federal Reserve, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation and Office of Comptroller of the Currency,
most of these risks are concentrated in a small number of large financial
institutions which have sophisticated ways of measuring and controlling
their derivatives exposures. Their report - Derivative Product Activities of
Commercial Banks - raises none of the concerns over the growth of the
derivative markets seen in some official quarters.
A similar picture - of rising trading volumes but static credit risk -
emerges from foreign exchange-related derivatives. The three banks added
about Dollars 400bn of exchange-related derivatives in terms of notional
value, taking the total to Dollars 1,800bn at the end of 1992. The credit
risks associated with these contracts edged down to Dollars 40bn.
Taking the banks as a group, the growth in volume, by about a third, was
consistent across most of the different exchange and interest rate products
 -swaps, options, futures and forwards. However, there were sharp
differences between the banks in terms of which instruments each had been
most active in:
The notional value of JP Morgan's interest rate swap portfolio jumped to
Dollars 368bn at the end of 1992 from Dollars 250bn a year before.
Options were the fastest-growing interest rate product, with the outstanding
amounts jumping to Dollars 570bn from Dollars 330bn. Also, Bankers Trust's
involvement in interest rate futures and forward contracts soared to Dollars
246bn from Dollars 75bn.
In keeping with its strong position in foreign exchange, Citibank's
outstanding forward contracts and futures in the exchange markets leapt by
Dollars 200bn to nearly Dollars 800bn.
The growth of equity and commodity derivatives was confirmed by JP Morgan's
disclosure that outstanding notional amounts in these markets had risen to
Dollars 38.8bn from Dollars 18.3bn. Bankers Trust, though, reported that the
notional value of 'other contracts' (mainly equity and equity index options)
had fallen to Dollars 29bn from Dollars 58bn.
At least some of these amounts will start to appear on US bank balance
sheets from next year, following a Financial Accounting Standards Board
ruling. According to Bankers Trust, had the ruling been in force now, it
would have swollen the balance sheet by Dollars 14bn, hitting its ratio of
equity to total assets.
