FT  27 APR 93 / International Company News: Shareholders seek SE Banken
shake-up
SWEDEN'S small shareholders, fresh from a successful campaign for greater
openness at Volvo, are pressing for a shake-up of the board at Scandinaviska
Enskilda Banken, the country's biggest bank, which was forced to seek state
support after running up an operating loss of SKr5.3bn (Dollars 705m) last
year.
Having forced Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, chairman of Volvo, to reveal details of
hitherto secret executive salaries last week, Aktiespararna, the
65,000-member national shareholders association, switched its attention to
what it sees as a failure of board control at SE Banken, in which the
Wallenberg family, Sweden's premier corporate dynasty, is the senior
shareholder.
Aktiespararna will call at the SE Banken annual meeting today for a
committee of shareholders to be set up to appoint a new board 'able to guide
the bank through the hard times still to come.'
It wants to postpone formal approval at the meeting of the present board's
actions last year to give shareholders more time to decide where
responsibility lies for the 1992 loss.
Mr Lars Milberg of Aktiespararna said shareholders should not be expected to
absolve the board of blame for the losses. 'We are not saying we have no
confidence in all of the board now, but the presumption is that the board is
responsible for the losses.'
He said his association wanted to see large institutional shareholders exert
greater control to stop 'companies ruling themselves' and to help prevent
the kinds of heavy deficits which SE Banken and Volvo have incurred.
The top three figures on the SE Banken board are Mr Curt Olsson, the
chairman, Mr Peter Wallenberg, the first deputy chairman, and Volvo's Mr
Gyllenhammar, the deputy chairman. SE Banken paid no dividend last year
after it was plunged into the red by loan losses of SKr10.9bn. It reported
that its portfolio of doubtful loans had tripled to SKr28.8bn largely due to
exposure to Sweden's crippled property market.
