FT  23 MAR 93 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (23):
Boost for productivity - Manufacturing industry
AS manufacturing industry has sought in recent years to boost production and
cut costs, it has often turned to the technocrats for solutions. Managers
have believed that investment in information systems (IS) and manufacturing
technologies alone would improve the production process - the rest would
take care of itself.
This limited view, according to the Frankfurt-based consultancy Diebold
Germany, has led to further problems for industry - 'technology has changed
the manufacturing process forever, but manufacturers have failed to change
with it,' comments the managing director of Diebold Germany, Mr Wolfgang
Dernbach.
Management has insisted on 'putting the spotlight on automation,' he adds,
'but has often forgotten where human resources can and must fit in.'
Computerised information offers tantalising benefits in the automated
processes used in manufacturing. Plant managers have been increasingly
excited by innovations such as MRP (materials resource planning); JIT
('just-in-time' updating of stock levels); OPT (optimised production
technology); EDI (electronic data interchange - the exchange of data between
manufacturers, suppliers and customers); CAD, CAM and CAE (computer-aided
design, manufacturing and engineering); and PIM (product information
management), plus other buzzwords described below.
Wolfgang Dernbach argues that if manufacturing technology is to provide a
company with really productive solutions, 'then it had better be installed
in such a way as to actively include - and not exclude - the workforce.'
In short, man and not the machine must be at the centre.
At the Regensburg plant of BMW, Germany's leading motor manufacturer, Johann
Schrafl, the head of product engineering, has a policy of 'targeted
automation' which makes good business sense. In the late 1980s, Schrafl and
his colleagues began to look for ways to make the assembly line more
'intelligent' and, at the same time, relieve workers of tedious tasks.
Rather than automate the entire production process, Schrafl chose to
'selectively' install manufacturing technologies without bypassing the
individual.
'Machines will always make mistakes,' he stresses. 'And people will always
be necessary to correct them.
To help accomplish the company goal, BMW purchased a system from Robert
Bosch, one of Germany's leading electronics companies. The system relies on
an electronic spindle mechanism to attach and tighten all five screws on
each vehicle wheel at one time - and 'feel' if the screws are tight enough.
This improvement cuts production time per vehicle by 1.4 minutes which
translates into cash-savings for the factory of DM200,000 a year.
In addition, workers are spared having to lift a machine weighing 50lbs to
tighten screws. And the Bosch system has built-in quality controls. Whereas
an earlier system at Regensburg only indicated problems with warning lights,
leaving the worker to figure out which wheels had to be corrected, the Bosch
system records mistakes in a production protocol and prints a sticker which
is attached to a quality-control folder that accompanies each car start to
finish on the assembly line.
However, Schrafl sees little reason to be 'euphoric' about the advantages of
automation. New manufacturing technologies, he emphasises, also have their
'drawbacks.' In short, they break down and make mistakes - 'but improvements
in the interface are serving to make intelligent solutions more attractive
to implement.'
For complex industrial projects, analysts argue that the emphasis should be
more product information management (PIM) than just aspects of factory
automation.
Especially in the area of electronics and telecoms, the final version of a
product depends on the priorities of managers, purchasing departments,
logistics supervisors, quality-control groups and inventory directors, as
well as designers and engineers. Because of the spread of PCs and
workstations, more than 50 per cent of product information is in electronic
form - data which can be easily accessed and amended via data transfer
networks.
But the more accessible the data, the greater the risk that the wrong data
can find its way into the product development and manufacturing processes,
bypassing formal release procedures. When this happens, engineering changes
and re-working is then needed, research budgets over-run and quality
declines. In the end, the product fails to reach its market on time - and
the manufacturer pays the price.
Rather than merely introduce more automation into its production processes,
GPT, a leading maker of telecom equipment in the UK, decided to rethink its
entire design and manufacturing routine. As a result, the company in 1990
developed its own engineering manufacturing data system, (EMDS).
This set of computer-integrated applications was designed to provide the
company with a common framework and a single access to all kinds of
information, regardless of platform. In short, EMDS manages all design
files, product configurations, engineering changes and component databases
throughout the product life-cycle.
For GPT, engineering efficiency executive Mr Les Brooks, the EMDS allows the
company to 'successfully manage change.'
Indeed, he adds, 'we are able to make sure we design and build products
right the first time and can properly manage the data generated by both
processes.' Moreover, EMDS plays a significant role in company strategy, he
says. The pay-off for GPT so far is a 'marked improvement' in the
time-to-market and increased capacity to realise concurrent engineering - a
practice where all functions involved in delivering a product to the
customer (from R&amp;D to field service) participate in the development process.
Indeed, analysts agree, GPT is a market leader and well advanced in a
ten-year development project, in collaboration with Siemens, to produce the
next generation of telecom switching systems.
Sherpa, a leading software and services supplier, based in San Jose,
California, is also the world's leading PIM supplier and the company which
provided GPT with the software for its EMDS. Sherpa believes that PIM is the
'next logical step' to CAD, CAM and CAE. According to Sherpa's European
marketing manager, Doug Macdonald, PIM underlines the concept of 'agile
manufacturing' - the flexibility which companies seek.
'Many large companies have invested 'up to the hilt' in computer-aided
design and similar tools, but are stuck struggling to manage this
information manually,' he says.
Not all manufacturers can manage their information electronically, therefore
'a lot of serious, costly mistakes are developing,' he adds. For example, a
large electronics company lost much time and money after engineers sent
outdated product information to the factory floor, resulting in the
manufacture of several hundred useless printed circuit boards - 'problems
like this can happen in even the best-managed companies,' he notes.
For this reason, Macdonald stresses, Sherpa concentrates only on supplying
systems which integrate fully with a company's design and manufacturing
systems.
ACCORDING to the US-based consultancy CIMdata, a company specialising in
product data management (PDM), which is similar to PIN, and CAD/CAM
technology and market issues, Europe has the world's highest growth
potential for PDM systems and services. By 1995, European PDM revenues could
exceed Dollars 250m, similar to the figure for suppliers in North America.
Sherpa will benefit considerably from the trend to more 'intelligent' data
management, says the consultancy.
Looking ahead, business process re-engineering, with the help of new,
integrated production technologies, plus improved information systems, is a
trend that will spread rapidly to manufacturing processes, suggests Michael
Bruce, a director of the London-based Moore Stephens Business Technology
Group.
Meanwhile, Japan's approach to automation generally seeks to avoid
imbalances between new production technologies and manufacturing processes.
Fanuc of Japan, a leader in the automation of machine tools, supports its
internal production process with highly efficient management. Company
engineers, clad in bright yellow uniforms, carry out research in highly
automated laboratories while product managers oversee operations in high
tech factories.
In the electronics plant, for example, robots and computers are assigned
tasks such as parts' inspection, plus assembly and testing of printed
circuit boards. In other futuristic plants, unmanned vehicles and robots
assist each other in the production of machinery. Indeed, robots are at work
 -making robots.
The company, according to one analyst, offers a glimpse 'of where technology
is taking us in the years to come . . . the prime example of the truly
automated factory and the outcome of a fully rational manufacturing
process.'
For Bruce Potts, Fanuc's robotics Europe executive vice-president, based in
Dusseldorf, the 'revolution' in factory automation is in full swing because
the robot control system is becoming more user-friendly.
According to the International Federation of Robotics, the world industrial
robot population in 1991 stood at around 530,000 units.
To date, Fanuc Robotics serve more than 2,000 customers, including leading
players in the automobile, machinery, food and pharmaceutical industries.
But, says Mr Potts, computer-controlled robots and factory automation alone
are not the answer if a manufacturer's problems if the basic production
process is inefficient.
'We have to look at the entire process,' he adds. 'Then we can look for a
solution.'
