FT  16 FEB 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Quiet day for the dollar
A NATIONAL holiday in the US and anticipation of President Clinton's evening
fireside address resulted in quiet European trading, writes Emma Tucker.
The pound drifted gently lower in the morning, 'treading water' as one
analyst put it, before today's figures for December manufacturing output,
and public sector borrowing in January.
Recent declarations from Mr Eddie George, governor designate of the Bank of
England, that the authorities are not considering an early rate cut appear
to have convinced the market, at least for the time being. Analysts,
however, said another bad set of economic data, and further falls in
inflation, could soon change sentiment.
'It is almost unprecedented to engineer economic recovery with real interest
rates at about 4 per cent,' said Mr Avinash Persaud, currency economist at
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew. 'The comments over the weekend have dampened
expectations of an imminent rate cut, but were we to see unemployment rising
sharply this month or next month those comments would soon be forgotten.'
Sterling received a lift late in the afternoon after the UK government said
it intended to press on and ratify the Maastricht treaty even if an
opposition Labour party amendment aimed at restoring the Social Chapter wins
parliamentary approval. There had been fears in the market that the
government would drop the Treaty altogether if the amendment were passed.
The pound finished  1/2 pfennig down from Friday's close at DM2.3525.
The dollar traded in a very narrow range, with the market waiting for
President Clinton to flesh out his administration's policies in the State of
the Union address tomorrow.
In late European trading the US currency was quoted at DM1.6600, moving
within a  1/2 -pfennig range. It ended at DM1.6590, compared with Friday's
close of DM1.6625.
Currencies in the European exchange rate mechanism were also locked into a
narrow range, with the Spanish peseta, the strongest in the grid, only 2.7
per cent above the system's weakest currency, the French franc. The Spanish
currency continued the gentle weakening that started at the end of last
week, closing at Pta71.40 per D-Mark, against Pta71.16 on Friday.
The D-Mark rose against an increasingly beleaguered Swiss franc. The German
currency reached its highest level at the Frankfurt fixing against the Swiss
franc for 12 years, boosted by interest rate differentials favouring the
D-Mark and pessimism about Switzerland's isolated position.
The German unit was fixed at DM107.41 per 100 Swiss francs, its highest
point since June 30, 1980, according to Bundesbank data.
A trader said: 'The negative feeling about the Swiss franc has been growing.
There is a feeling that the isolationism is getting it into trouble.'
