FT  27 JUL 93 / Survey of Ghana (10): President's new clothes - Politics /
Review of the transition to democracy
FOR 11 years, Flight-Lt Jerry Rawlings, Ghana's military ruler, wore combat
fatigues to work. Since he won a contested presidential election in
November, Mr Rawlings wears suits. The president's new clothes reflect the
changes in Ghana since its transition to democracy: all form and little
content.
The country has the same head of state, key government ministers and ruling
party as before. Economic and foreign policy remain unchanged. Only two out
of the 200 members of the new parliament have previous legislative
experience. And the opposition parties, which boycotted parliamentary
elections in December, are almost as voiceless now as they were under
military rule.
Like most single-party regimes which open up, there is little appreciation
within Mr Rawlings' National Democratic Congress (NDC) of the distinction
between ruling party and state. The president's chief adviser, Mr PV Obeng,
defends political continuity, arguing that the electorate voted for more of
the same. 'We have no wish to experiment with the future of Ghana when we
have tried and tested hands in government,' he says.
President Rawlings' conversion to democracy was sudden but thorough. In a
year a consultative assembly had drafted a new constitution, overwhelmingly
endorsed in a referendum in April 1992. The ban on party politics was lifted
in May 1992 and presidential elections were held in November.
An inflated and inaccurate electoral register probably helped Mr Rawlings
more than his opponents. Professor Adu Boahen, who stood for the
conservative New Patriotic Party (NPP) is still bitter. 'The election was
rigged,' he says. 'Every rule in the game was broken. Votes were miscounted,
our supporters were intimidated. The whole thing was riven with fraudulent,
disgraceful practices.'
The opposition documented the alleged election irregularities in a report
entitled 'The Stolen Verdict'. But they did not think it worthwhile to
contest the results in court.
Instead, they boycotted the parliamentary contest in December. This allowed
Mr Rawlings' NDC to sweep the field. It won 189 out of the 200 seats in the
single-chamber legislature. Other pro-Rawlings parties won nine seats. Two
independents were elected.
The opposition has devoted so much soul-searching to the pros and cons of
the boycott, that little real analysis has been expended on the weaknesses
of their presidential campaign. Professor Boahen's party of businessmen and
intellectuals are contemptuous of the 'arrivistes' who run Rawlings' NDC.
The feeling is mutual. But on economic policy there is little to choose
between them.
So the election was fought on personalities, and here President Rawlings'
dynamism and rhetorical skills gave him the upper hand. 'It is regrettable
that we are not in parliament,' says Mr Bernard Joao da Rocha, the NPP
chairman. 'But we were trapped between two evils: of not having people in
parliament or ignoring the public outcry against the fraudulent presidential
result.'
The opposition has divided into two camps. The 'hawks', led by Professor
Boahen and Mr Komla Gbedena, one of the grand old men of Ghanaian politics,
refuse to confer legitimacy on the new government and will have no truck
with it. Secretly, they hope the government will fall. The 'doves', led by
Mr da Rocha, desperately want to establish a modus vivendi with President
Rawlings and his parliament.
The new legislature is also keen to broaden its appeal by giving the
opposition a voice. The NPP was invited in April to present its views on the
1993 budget. But Mr da Rocha is all too aware that the boycott has placed
his party at the mercy of parliament's goodwill. The opposition says it has
reason to doubt the government's commitment to democracy. Paramilitary
groups have not yet been dismantled. President Rawlings hounds opposition
businessmen with sporadic outbursts. And new laws keep appearing, backdated
to early January, before the new government took office.
The opposition suspects that Mr Rawlings' government continues to legislate
by decree, backdating the laws to by-pass the new parliament. But Mr Obeng
says the late appearance was because of 'printing problems at the government
presses'. He admits, however, that the outgoing military government crammed
a lot of legislation into its final days.
Even from self-exile, the opposition promises to be the 'guardians of the
constitution'. Its main demand is a new electoral register backed by
identity cards to ensure a level playing field in the next elections in four
years' time. They are not daunted by the fact that President Rawlings has
the constitutional right to stand for re-election.
'When your opponent hits you below the belt and the referee pretends that he
doesn't see, do you quit boxing? Or do you prepare yourself better for the
next bout?,' Mr da Rocha asks. 'We survived proscription for 11 years.
Another four won't be our undoing.'
