FT  17 NOV 93 / Nafta Countdown: What is Nafta?
The North American Free Trade Agreement would gradually eliminate almost all
trade and investment restrictions between the US, Canada and Mexico over 15
years. Side agreements, concluded in August, require the enforcement of
environmental and some labour laws, under penalty of fines or sanctions.
The US and Canada entered a free trade agreement in 1989, and the pact would
thus mainly affect trade and investment with Mexico. Nafta is intended to
come into effect on January 1, although a delay is allowed for.
The Canadian Parliament has already approved the agreement. The US House of
Representatives is scheduled to vote on it today and the US Senate some time
after. The Mexican Senate, dominated by the country's governing party, will
vote on Nafta after the vote in the US House of Representatives.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Tariffs reduced over 15 years, depending on sector.
Investment restrictions lifted in most sectors, with exception of oil in
Mexico, culture in Canada, and airline and radio communications in the US.
Immigration excluded, except some movement of white collar workers to be
eased.
Any country can leave the treaty with six months' notice.
Treaty allows for the inclusion of any additional country.
Government procurement opened up over 10 years, mainly affecting Mexico,
which reserves some contracts for Mexican companies.
Dispute resolution panels of independent arbitrators to resolve
disagreements arising out of treaty.
Some snap-back tariffs if surge of imports hurts a domestic industry.
INDUSTRIES
Agriculture: Most tariffs between US and Mexico removed immediately. Tariffs
on 6 per cent of products - corn, sugar, and some fruits and vegetables -
fully eliminated only after 15 years. For Canada, existing agreement with
the US applies.
Cars:Tariffs removed over 10 years; Mexico's quotas on imports lifted over
the same period; cars eventually to meet 62.5 per cent local content rule to
be free of tariffs.
Energy: Mexican ban on private sector exploration continues, but procurement
by state oil company opened up to US and Canada.
Financial Services: Mexico gradually opens financial sector to US and
Canadian investment, eliminating barriers by 2007.
Textiles: Treaty eliminates Mexican, US and Canadian tariffs over 10 years.
Clothes eligible for tariff breaks to be sewn with fabric woven in North
America.
Trucking: North American trucks could drive anywhere in the three countries
by the year 2000.
SIDE AGREEMENTS
Environment: The three countries liable to fines, and Mexico and the US
sanctions, if a panel finds repeated pattern of not enforcing environment
laws.
Labour. Countries liable for penalties for non-enforcement of child, minimum
wage and health and safety laws.
OTHER DEALS
The US and Mexico to set up a North American Development Bank to help
finance clean-up of the US border
The US to spend about Dollars 90m in the first 18 months retraining workers
losing their jobs because of treaty.
