FT  11 NOV 93 / Brooke tells press to obey own code of practice
MR PETER BROOKE, national heritage secretary, last night warned the press it
had to demonstrate that it would respect and abide by its own rules in the
wake of the row over the publication of unauthorised pictures of the
Princess of Wales in the Sunday Mirror and Daily Mirror.
Mr Brooke, speaking at a London dinner, said the press must conduct its own
examination to see how the 'very good code of practice', drawn up in the
wake of the Calcutt report on the press and privacy, would be adhered to.
It might also be time for the press to consider the establishment of a
voluntary ombudsman to adjudicate on matters of privacy with the power to
recommend correction and compensation, he added.
Mr Brooke said he did not want to dwell on the Mirror's behaviour, which had
been widely condemned. But the government would 'take into account the
failure that has occurred' when examining the scope for criminal or civil
remedies to protect personal privacy.
'People are, I think, getting past the stage where a bit of tinkering and
promises to do better really carry conviction,' Mr Brooke said. The current
voluntary arrangements were working well on matters of accuracy, he added.
'In terms of privacy the press must do better.'
Mr Brooke was speaking after Lord McGregor, chairman of the Press Complaints
Commission, and Mr David Montgomery, chief executive of Mirror Group
Newspapers, had reached a compromise in a row that had seen the group
withdraw from the commission.
The Daily Mirror earlier this week had described Lord McGregor as an 'utter
buffoon'. Last night MGN said it withdrew any criticisms made of the
commission and 'apologises to their chairman for any remarks which he may
have found offensive'.
Lord McGregor withdrew remarks urging advertisers to boycott the Daily
Mirror, which had ignored commission comments by republishing the
photographs which had first appeared in the Sunday Mirror.
Lord McGregor last night added: 'I trust that all newspapers will create an
unprejudiced environment in which all future complaints will be heard
fairly.'
The commission welcomed the fact that MGN had decided to rejoin the
self-regulatory system. It also noted that it could not issue an
adjudication on the pictures of the Princess of Wales while court
proceedings were current.
Senior MGN executives believe the legal proceedings are unlikely to go
further and are preparing for an apology to the Princess of Wales and the
payment of an agreed sum to charity.
