FT  13 MAR 93 / Travel: Beware of pelicans crossing - JDF Jones tells you
how to avoid large numbers of Germans and rampant commercialism in Crete
WE WERE delayed in Siteia because the town's pet pelican climbed on to the
roof of our Fiat and refused to get down for half an hour.
There was nothing we could do. You cannot accelerate down the road with a
pelican on the roof; you hesitate to take a cudgel to him, or tip him into
the ditch, because he is the size of a five-year-old child and evidently of
an amiable disposition.
He stretched his great scaly neck over the windscreen, gazed at me with eyes
as old as Tithonus, and tapped on the glass in a welcoming manner as he
posed for the ever-lengthening queue of German tourists. Then he left his
signature on the roof.
Pedro the pelican will have to serve as symbol in today's Greece: something
to do with the visitor's difficulty in getting away from the hoi polloi.
That sounds a snobbish way of putting it, but the problem has to be
confronted head-on and I know that my Greek friends would wish me to call a
spade a spade.
The fact is that the Greek tourist industry has become so successful over
the past dozen years that the particular delights and wonders of the
country, as savoured by the traditional traveller for a century and more,
appear to be in serious jeopardy.
Greece these days - it is tempting to believe, especially in the shock of
first-time arrival - is a mess, a shambles, a spiralling descent into the
ugly vulgarity of mass tourism.
The country's extraordinary natural beauty is being disfigured fast by
uncontrolled ribbon development; the Aegean beaches, once empty, are
crammed, noisy and, too often, filthy; the villages are dedicated to
'English breakfast all day' and T-shirt boutiques; the greatest sites of
antiquity, which not so long ago were visited by only hundreds in a year,
now have to cope in season with thousands every day; the islands are alive
with the sound of Walkmen.
Is it true? Does it matter? And, if it is halfway true, is there anything we
can do about it?
Let us take Crete, as one example . . .
Crete is the largest, the mythically-richest, the most diverse and, some
would say, the most beautiful of the Greek islands. It can no longer be
denied that a long stretch of the northern coastline has now been colonised
by the package tour, with all that implies.
There is nothing necessarily 'wrong' with this. From Heraklion eastward to
Ayios Nikolaos the beaches are, mainly, good; the weather is superb; the
mountain backdrop is as ravishing as you could wish; and the tourist
industry has been developed to such a high point of professionalism that it
takes account of every pocket. But it does not have much to do with Crete
any more, and the strip between Hersonissos and Mallia provides traffic jams
and featureless concrete to rival anything on the Costas or the Algarve. It
caters, however, to a market that knows what it wants - and what it does not
want.
The Robinson Club at Lyttos Beach, outside Hersonissos, is a perfectly good
 -indeed, superior - example. Robinson's is a world-wide German version of
Club Med. The overwhelming majority of its 750 guests are German-speaking
and they are looking not for a 'Greek experience' but for a corner of a
Mediterranean field that is forever Germany: sea, sun, sport, lots of good
food at northern meal-times, and all put together with clockwork efficiency.
It is not surprising that many of the guests never go out of the
(securely-guarded) gates. Most of the clients are not interested in being in
Greece - Crete - as opposed to a sandbank in the Caribbean or a high-walled
beach estate in Spain. They have a perfect right to be uninterested in a
Greek experience. Need that matter?
The same point would apply to much of this north-east part of the island.
There are luxury hotels in the area, especially at Elounda, near Ayios
Nikolaos. My own favourite is the Elounda Beach, where you must insist on a
water's-edge stone cabin so that you look out towards Spinalonga's leper
fortress over the deep and shifting seas as if from the bridge of a ship.
The only snag at Elounda Beach is that it is a touch too big for its own
style; this means the food is nothing special. Again, though, you can forget
easily that you are in Greece and that King Minos lived with Zeus in a big
cave up on the horizon . . .
Crete is large enough to have a splendid expressway to whizz you across the
northern coast but, all along it, the signs of commercial development are
inescapable. Take the village of Yeoryoupolis, a long way west towards
Khania. With a lazy character of its own (and an immense beach), it was a
hot tip from the regulars. Now, though, it is showing alarming signs of
transformation. You must always, in Crete, beware of any development which
uses 'Minos' in its title.
So, what can we do to be saved? The answers are perfectly simple.
Get away from the coastal strip. This is a big, as well as a beautiful,
island. Five miles inland and you are at once in the lush Cretan landscape
of olive grove and orchard, cicadas and goat bells, set against the rolling
black silhouette of the high mountains. (In many of the Aegean islands, try
going five miles inland and you would be coming out on the beach the other
side).
Get off the expressway. The 'old' road is invariably quieter, slower, more
attractive, and full of those intimacies of local life which motorways are
built to by-pass.
Make that slight extra effort to go beyond the deck chairs and the beach
boys. Less than a mile beyond the crowds of Mallia beach, for instance, is a
1700 BC Minoan palace. There are renovated museums in Rethymnon and Siteia
which put to shame the confusion (and crowds) in that great treasure house
of the Archaeological Museum in Heraklion. Sir Arthur Evans' brave
reconstructions at Knossos are only three miles from Heraklion, which says
something about the continuing inter-relation between Greece past and Greece
present.
Look for the unspoilt alternatives, which are far more frequent than you
might imagine if you are recoiling for the first time from the urban jungle
of Heraklion or the one-way system of Ayios Nikolaos. When you flee Mallia,
for example, take a look at Milatos or Sisi, just a few miles round the
corner.
Go to extremes. Use that expressway and take yourself off to the eastern and
western coasts. Beyond Siteia, for example, in the far east, there is a
great chunk of idyllic landscape where even the guidebooks falter and grow
thin. Again, you need to be sensible. The one place to which you do not go,
not any more, is the famous palm beach of Vai. This is indeed one of the
Mediterranean's most perfect coves. Today, though, it is packed with beach
recliners made of plastic webbing and you must pay 50 drax to visit the
lavatory. I promise that you need drive only a few miles from Vai to find
empty sand beaches, waterside tavernas where your fish left the water only
minutes ago, secret olive groves and Minoan hill sanctuaries.
A bit further down the coast, you have the Minoan harbour palace of Zakros,
at the foot of a gorge and on the edge of the beach, with a spanking new
approach road to make it easy. Then you should head back inland, on to the
hills and down twisting lanes until you emerge again on the south coast -
and still never a sign of your fellow men.
My message is that Greece is indeed under threat but all is not lost. Until
the valley below Delphi is built over with retirement bungalows, or Crete's
Lassithi plateau becomes a golf course, damage will remain irritating but
superficial.
The essential Greece remains, for those prepared to look for it and to make
a few concessions in that search. But steer clear of Siteia's pelican. Avis
is still trying to scrub the mess off the roof.
Places are available on an FT tour of Crete from May 6-16, with
archaeologist Gerald Cadogan. The tour is being organised on the FT's behalf
by Cox &amp; Kings Travel (see advertisement on Page XII).
