FT  26 JUL 93 / Monday Interview: Doctrine of choice and sacrifice - John
Gummer, UK environment secretary
'THE JOB of the environment secretary is to win environmental goals,'
according to Mr John Gummer. With less than two months in the job, and no
easy goals in sight, it is clear that he faces a tough game.
The UK environment secretary's sprawling portfolio includes local government
and planning issues as well as 'green' questions. Last week provided Mr
Gummer with a reminder, if he needed one, that his environmental brief
threatens to give him some particularly nasty headaches.
The transport department's decision to widen the M25 motorway around London
to 14 lanes on its busiest section, against the vigorous protests of most of
Britain's green lobby, showed that conflicts are looming between the
environment and other government departments.
The Maastricht turmoil also reflects Britain's ambivalence over European
environmental regulation. Britain has called for tougher enforcement of some
EC directives. But ministers have also questioned whether water standards
are too demanding, and are resisting tightening acid rain targets as much as
their European neighbours would like, a move that could saddle Britain once
again with the tag 'the dirty man of Europe'.
More widely, industrialists are questioning whether environmental regulation
is a further layer of costs which the UK cannot afford and which could
jeopardise recovery.
Environmentalists, who have been sceptical of Mr Gummer's clout within the
cabinet, fear that his department will be on the losing side of any
ministerial tussles. Pressure groups have also been unsure of how his
pronounced views on many subjects - he resigned from the General Synod of
the Church of England last year over the issue of admitting women to the
priesthood - would translate into environmental policy. They feel he gave
few clues to his instincts as agriculture minister: they welcomed his
opposition to commercial whaling but felt he kept quiet on farms' pollution
of rivers.
Since he took the environment job, Mr Gummer has shown a campaigning
enthusiasm and a notion of direct action to match that of the pressure
groups. He has promised to plunge into the chilly, brownish seas off
Blackpool beach during the Tory party conference in the autumn in response
to the European Court of Justice's ruling that the water failed to meet EC
standards.
The roots of his environmentalist beliefs have also become clearer. 'It
isn't our planet,' he says: 'We didn't deserve it and we've been lucky
enough to inherit it.' He declines to answer whose planet he thinks it is -
his aides say he is scrupulous at not bringing religion into the office -
but claims authorship of Mrs Thatcher's now-famous phrase that the present
generation has no freehold on the planet, only a 'repairing lease'.
He believes those obligations entail sacrifices and now admits to 'a degree
of guilt, fighting battles for preservation of the whales - vast numbers of
people who wrote in were doing so because there was no downside for them'.
Mr Gummer places himself among those Tories who see conservation as a
central part of Conservative philosophy. 'These are fundamental views about
inheritance, continuity and handing on.'
At the top of his environmental priorities is atmospheric pollution,
particularly global warming and depletion of the ozone layer, 'two things
which I have to be a missionary about'. He says he thinks 'spending money on
the reduction of carbon dioxide (implicated in global warming) and sulphur
(a cause of acid rain) is more important' than rival claims such as water
quality.
Such priorities threaten to bring him into conflict with transport and
energy policies. Traffic pollution is one of the most intractable sources of
carbon dioxide, while coal-burning power stations generate most of Britain's
sulphur emissions.
'It is manifestly obvious that if you go on increasing the number of cars at
the rate we are doing between now and the end of the century you are going
to put more emission into the air than you can possibly bear,' Mr Gummer
says.
But while he declines to criticise the M25 decision, he adds: 'I am very
pleased that the minister of transport made the decision (not to put a new
highway through Oxleas Wood).' Asked why he did not air those views
publicly, he responds: 'If you are a minister you swap the advantage of
public statement for the considerable influence of private discussion.'
So far, his department's enthusiasm for tighter international sulphur
targets to be negotiated in Geneva next month has been reined back by the
department of trade and industry, which is anxious to preserve power
stations' demand for British coal. However, on nuclear energy, Mr Gummer is
likely to win a respite from the battle - the two departments could find
themselves in harmony.
A well-known supporter of nuclear power - he backed Sizewell B, which is in
his constituency - he says: 'There is a very strong environmental case for
nuclear power', because it emits no carbon or sulphur.
However, his judicial role in deciding the future of the controversial Thorp
plant at Sellafield shields him from having to comment on whether
reprocessing adds to the costs of nuclear power. Some in the nuclear
industry say privately that the costs of Thorp, if it is given the go-ahead,
will diminish the case for nuclear electricity, to be debated in this
autumn's nuclear review.
Other lower-profile battles loom: his consultation document last week on
sustainable development suggested he would take a hard look at the need for
recycling of building materials, an unwelcome move to the construction
industry. Environment department officials have tended, urged on by Treasury
colleagues, to regard the construction industry as out of bounds while
economic recovery is fragile.
In fighting these battles for environment policy, the charge most likely to
be thrown at Mr Gummer is the cost of going green. He says he accepts that
cleaning up the environment 'is tremendously expensive. It may mean that you
have to produce things or dispose of your effluent in a more expensive way'.
In sentiments unlikely to endear him to industrialists, he adds: 'Industry
has to realise that from now on 'the polluter pays' principle is becoming
the natural way of making law.'
Part of his answer to cost concerns is to set priorities for spending more
carefully, and in some cases to rethink environmental commitments. He
professes considerable sympathy for the case put by Mr Ian Byatt,
director-general of Ofwat, the water regulator, that water investment is
progressing too fast.
'I don't necessarily want to change the standards although there are some
which in retrospect would be the wrong ones,' but he questions 'the
timetable and frontloading' of the industry's spending programmes, which
could total Pounds 45bn this decade.
He argues, too, that there is an 'enormous business in environmental
technology'. This argument was employed by his predecessor, Mr Michael
Howard, and is often used by Conservative politicians to bridge the gap
between conservation instincts and a reluctance to hamstring industry.
However, many companies are sceptical that they derive any competitive
benefits from environmental investment.
Mr Gummer points to the growth of the water technology industry. He says he
gets support for his belief from 'even the simplest things' such as the
adoption of water-saving devices in urinals: 'Now it doesn't flush except
when it needs to flush. That's a huge water-saving activity, and many of
these machines are made in Britain - it's an important element of what we're
doing.'
To win the tough battles ahead he needs to convince other departments and
industrialists that the environment is a bearable and worthwhile cost. He
also needs to convince regulators and environmentalists that not all their
aspirations can be met. This can only be done by setting priorities. 'I want
to use this period when the environment isn't absolutely the top of the
agenda to try to get a degree of realism.'
PERSONAL FILE
1939    Born Stockport, Cheshire. Educated King's School Rochester and
        Selwyn College Cambridge.
1978-92 Member of General Synod of Church of England.
1983-84 Minister of state, Department of Employment.
1983-85 Chairman of Conservative party.
1984-85 Paymaster general.
1985-88 Minister of state, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
1988-89 Minister for local government.
1989-93 Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
