FT  29 NOV 93 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1993 (22): The fun
starts when users switch on - Analysis / How to avoid breaking the law is
just one of the many management issues surrounding office automation
THERE is a lot more to office automation than giving everyone a personal
computer (PC) and a word processing package. There is the worry about how to
avoid ending up in prison for two years - the maximum penalty for copying
softare. Or losing all the document files. Or seeing time wasted on computer
games.
These are management issues which, according to companies interviewed for
this issue of Software At Work, need at least as much attention as technical
matters such as building the office network.
The benefits of basic office automation systems, built round a word
processing package and a spreadsheet system, appear to be widely assumed, if
not accurately measured. these days. A UK survey carried out for
Computervision Services, a support services company shows that nine out of
10 managers believe office networks contribute significantly to productivity
 -but only one in 10 measures the gains.
Organisations expect an average increase of 65 per cent in the number of
office network users over the next year. But 40 per cent of companies and 80
per cent of public sector bodies do not make any business case for network
purchases.
A European study by research firm Ovum says sales of word processing,
spreadsheet, desk-top publishing and associated graphics software will
double between 1992 and 1997, growing faster than the software market as a
whole. Word processor sales will grow the most quickly.
'Many new word processing packages enable users to prepare high quality
linear text documents without the need for desk-top publishing,' says Dr
Heather Stark, author of the Ovum study report. 'So while word processor
sales grow, desk-top publishing sales decline.'
Dr Stark, too, sees rapid growth in networked office PCs, especially for
electronic mail - 'personal computers will become interpersonal computers,'
she says. 'Most people will use their computers to communicate with each
other.'
The take-up of office automation suggested by the Ovum and Computervision
surveys raises considerations which were highlighted by managers interviewed
for this issue of Software At Work. These managers put special emphasis on
management issues rather than on technical matters - perhaps reflected in
the fact that, these days, word processing, spreadsheet, graphics and
database software packages are bought in large numbers as commodity items
off the shelf, often over the telephone, from direct marketing companies.
Even the more technical network products are now bought in this way.
However, management issues arise from the fact that giving office staff PCs
and word processing packages also gives them the opportunity of bringing in
games software and other business packages. This raises the issues of
viruses - programs which can destroy files and slow down processing speed -
and of illegal software copying.
These risks, and how to avoid them, are covered elsewhere in this issue. But
it is worth underlining here that directors of companies found guilty of
copying software face up to two years in prison and unlimited fines.
WHAT also emerges from the Software At Work interviews is that proper
training is vital if these other risks are to be avoided and if the massive
investment in PCs and office software is to be fully exploited.
The Computervision survey highlights this, too. When asked to name the most
frustrating or irritating aspect of dealing with the company office
networks, almost 30 per cent of computing managers mentioned 'the users'.
Users were the biggest single problem, provoking more than twice as many
mentions as the second aspect, 'diagnosing problems'.
Respondents' comments here underlined the need for training: 'user-ignorance
causes many problems'; 'users pull plugs out by mistake and then complain
that their PCs are not working'; 'users interfere with the networks without
authority: for example, by disconnecting their PCs'.
One manager summed up these views when he said: 'The users cause the
problem, not the network: we need better education for our users.'
Every other 'frustrating and irritating' factor - generally technical issues
 -was mentioned by less than 10 per cent of managers. Indeed, 8 per cent
reported no frustrating aspects at all.
It is clear that getting over the technical issues of installing PCs and
word processing software is just the start. The fun starts when the users
switch them on.
