FT  11 OCT 93 / Arts: The power of prudence - Architecture
It stands like a blushing giant dwarfing its insipid neighbours. Alfred
Waterhouse's (1830-1905) Gothic palace for the Prudential Assurance company
has confidently gazed out on London's High Holborn since its arrival in
1879. This week the Queen is to take tea there to mark the completion of a
total refurbishment and rebuilding programme which the Prudential
Corporation initiated in 1989.
I have always thought that 'the Pru' was a wonderful building that guarded a
great secret. I recall vividly the excitement of glancing through the great
Gothic entrance gates as a child and seeing the dark silhouette of the
winged bronze angels on the war memorial. Two buxom lady angels dip their
uncovered breasts towards the limp and almost skeletal body of a dead
British soldier. Was he insured with 'the Pru', does he feel the sense of
confidence that emanates from these sturdy red walls? Part of the power of
the building comes from the power of 'the Pru'. Insurance companies became
very rich and powerful in the 19th century and their headquarters in the
City of London and their branches around the country were designed to exude
stability and, indeed, prudence.
It was natural for a company such as the Prudential to commission the
leading Victorian commercial architect, in the shape of Alfred Waterhouse.
He was rightly renowned for his clear planning and for his enthusiasm for a
free, picturesque Gothic style. His greatest works that survive are London's
Natural History Museum and the Town Hall in Manchester. His most successful
design was sadly never built. It was a competition design for the Law Courts
in the Strand which Waterhouse prepared in 1866. The competition was won by
George Edmund Street but Waterhouse's scheme was far more romantic, with
tall Gothic towers that would have rivalled the Palace of Westminster and
turned Thameside London into a second Camelot.
Waterhouse must have been a strange mixture. He came from a Quaker Liverpool
family, and yet was clearly a deeply romantic artist. His work combined the
two sides of his character: his plans were brilliantly workable and his
experiments with new materials and new forms of construction highly
successful, and yet no one designed more romantic skylines or painted more
delicate watercolours. He was that rare thing, the artist-architect who was
supremely practical.
Waterhouse gave the Prudential's head office the sense of reliabilty and
permanence that the company clearly wanted. The big, central Gothic tower
over the entrance to the inner court does not soar to heaven; it has a
solidity, despite its spiked pyramid roof. There is less detail here than
Waterhouse was to apply to the Natural History Museum and much of the
internal decoration, although good, is economical and repetitive. Faence
tiles and ornaments gleam after the refurbishment; their vivid colours,
especially the sharp yellow, are very vibrant.
In 1989 the great halls seemed not to suit the arrival of personal
computers. The days of thousands of clerks had passed. The company wisely
decided to restore and refurbish the best of the old buildings and to
redevelop the rest of the site over which they had spread, between Holborn,
Leather Lane, Geville and Beauchamp streets. Seen from the air, there is now
more new than old building on the site. The Prudential's own architects and
the firm, EPR Architects, have added two new buildings and four glazed
atria, providing many lettable offices as well as the streamlined modern
offices within the listed buildings.
There are big gains. Waterhouse Square is now at the centre of the site and
is a public right of way. It provides a quiet pedestrian square and an
opportunity to see much more of Waterhouse's original buildings. The view of
Waterhouse's glazed bridge is intriguing. What were his sources for this
glass bridge of sighs? And the architect's use of terracotta shows how
practical this material is for the damp northern European climate.
What of the new work? The Prudential's tradition of patronage continues,
particularly in the public spaces of the new offices. In their own main
entrance hall, the company has commissioned a work from a young sculptor,
Sally Matthews. 'The Dogs and the Peacock' is a free-ranging group of
lurcher dogs chasing a peacock across the reception hall and up to a high
balcony. It symbolises man's faithful friends chasing away vanity and pride.
I have to say that although the work is good of its kind, it does not seem
to work in this space.
The other new element of this project is the entrance hall to the
speculative offices called No. 2 Waterhouse Square. It has become almost the
norm for developers to invest a great deal of time and talent in the design
of a huge atrium or hall as an approach to what are essentially mundane
serviced office floors. This new atrium is no exception, an almost circular
space with a sweeping marble staircase that rises behind a ramped curved
marble wall. I had a distinct impression that I had somehow strayed from the
Victorian probity of Waterhouse's Gothic halls to some millionaire's marble
folly in Miami. I have to admit, however, that I was fascinated by the
centrepiece of this extravaganza which is a sculptural installation of a
great granite sphere which is constantly supported on a pad of water under
high pressure that allows it to spin freely, despite its enormous weight.
Waterhouse has been much blessed by this redevelopment. His version of the
Gothic does not seem a pale imitation of the medieval. It shines out in its
new surroundings as an intelligent, prudent and measured exercise of
Victorian civic architecture at its best.
I am sure the masters of the Prudential are familiar with the Titian in the
National Gallery that shows the triple human-headed figure of Prudence and
bears an inscription that could be roughly translated as a motto for this
redevelopment that has married past and present with some success: 'From
past experience the present acts prudently lest a future action be
vitiated.'
