FT  29 OCT 93 / RSI ruling casts doubt on future claims for damages
THE FUTURE of legal actions claiming damages for repetitive strain injury
(RSI) was thrown into uncertainty yesterday after a High Court judge ruled
that the condition was meaningless as a medical concept.
Judge John Prosser dismissed a claim by Mr Rafiq Mughal, a former journalist
with the Reuters news agency, that his work conditions for using computer
keyboards were responsible for injuries to his upper limbs.
Although agreeing that Mr Rafiq suffered pain in his hands, arms and
shoulders, the judge said its most likely cause was his emotional state. He
lacked confidence in his work as a sub-editor, took sleeping tablets and
felt he was being watched and even victimised by his colleagues.
'These factors more than anything lie at the root of his problem,' the judge
said.
His ruling goes against judgments in other recent RSI cases. In cases
involving both British Telecom clerical staff and manual workers employed by
Bernard Matthews, the turkey producers, the courts recognised RSI as a
medical condition and awarded damages to those injured at work.
Mr Mughal's case was the first in a series being brought by the National
Union of Journalists. Yesterday, the union said it was disappointed at the
outcome, but insisted it would continue with some 70 individual actions
against newspaper employers.
Several hundred RSI cases involving office workers who used computer
keyboards, such as secretaries and solicitors, are also due to come to
court.
In his judgment, Judge Prosser said RSI could not be recognised as an
authentic medical condition because, unlike tenosynovitis or tennis elbow,
no specific symptoms could be ascribed to it. The term had no place in the
medical text books and served only to confuse, he said.
He said no pattern existed between Mr Mughal's physical symptoms and his
working conditions and no causal relationship had been proved.
Reuters welcomed the ruling and said it took 'the very greatest care' of its
employees.
Mr Mughal turned down the offer of a Pounds 20,000 payment to settle out of
court. The NUJ was ordered to pay Reuters' costs which were described as
'substantial'. The union said later it was considering an appeal.
Yesterday's judgment was criticised by some medical experts. Mr Peter Wells
of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy, a specialist in upper limb
disorders, said RSI was not in medical textbooks only because of its recent
emergence as a problem.
The courts and RSI, Page 11
