FT  14 DEC 93 / The Russian Elections: Former satellites fearful of renewed
imperialism
The strong showing of the neo-fascists, Communists and anti-western
proponents of a new Russian Empire, backed by a powerful military, has sent
a frisson of nervousness through the recently liberated states of central
Europe and the Baltic region.
Only three months ago the Polish electorate felt sufficiently self-assured
to vote back into power parties with their roots in the communist past. But
foreign and defence ministers of the former Warsaw Pact states have since
been urging the west to resist what they see as signs of resurgent Russian
imperial designs in central Asia and the Caucasus and the dangers of leaving
an ill-defined 'buffer zone' between Russia and Germany.
Mr Geza Jeszensky, Hungarian foreign minister, has even spoken against what
Budapest perceives as a western policy of 'appeasement' of Russia. He called
on the Nato powers not to be conditioned by Moscow's restored hostility to
any future extension of the Nato security umbrella to the Visegrad 4 states
of central Europe.
Such fears were temporarily eased by President Boris Yeltsin's dissolution
of the communist-era parliament and storming of the building. But they have
re-emerged with the strong showing of anti-reform forces in the new Russian
parliament and the approval of a constitution tailor-made for Mr Yeltsin but
whose wide powers could conceivably be wielded in the future by Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky or others like him who emerged strengthened from the weekend
poll.
Signs that the Russian military voted strongly in favour of Mr Zhirinovsky
and other communist/nationalist candidates are particularly disturbing for
Latvia and Estonia who received a pledge from the former government that the
last remaining former-Soviet troops would be withdrawn next year. However,
Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serb leader, has been encouraged by the electoral
success of like-minded men in Russia as he himself looks forward to
elections next weekend. Serbia is a text book example of what unbridled
nationalism and an over-wheening military can do to destroy prosperity and
liberties.
The hope in central Europe last night, however, was that the final Russian
election results would still permit the formation of a government dedicated
to continuing the economic reforms required to create the prosperous social
base needed to underpin democracy. But central European governments know
better than most the difficulty of keeping reform on the tracks in the face
of the high unemployment caused by cutting back the old militarised,
socialist economy.
