FT  09 MAR 93 / US warned over drug budget cuts
THE US administration's targeting of the drugs industry could seriously
endanger America's role as a leader in biomedical innovation, according to
Mr Thomas Cueni, secretary general of Interpharma, the Swiss research-based
drug industry association.
The drugs industry had been the main focus for cost-containment, especially
as big multinational research-based groups were very profitable, said Mr
Cueni. The industry suffered from a lack of trust and credibility that was
partly self-inflicted.
'We have not been able to shift the debate from the cost of medicines to the
cost of disease and the value of modern medicines. Instead, we are often
portrayed as selfish, profit-maximising and cashing in on the plight of
people who are sick and need solidarity,' Mr Cueni told a Financial Times
conference.
The industry would have to tackle its image problem to defend its future,
said Professor Ernst-Gunter Afting, head of the pharmaceutical division at
Hoechst AG. Europe's pharmaceutical industry needed annual sales growth of
around 10 per cent if it was to justify present spending on research and
development of Ecu8bn (Pounds 6.54bn) a year.
The industry's defensive responses to reform proposals had added to its
unpopularity, Mr Franz Humer, executive director at Glaxo, claimed. Yet in
the US, 46 per cent of total healthcare spending was on hospital care and
about 8 per cent on drugs. In 1989 the sector spent Pounds 11.9bn worldwide
on discovering and developing drugs. Only three out of every 10 marketed
products generated revenues in excess of their research costs.
Dr Frank Douglas, executive vice-president, research and development at
Marion Merrell Dow, the US group, said the cost of research and development
was rising with some new drugs requiring larger and larger trials - some as
large as 46,000 patients.
Proving medicines' effectiveness in illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease
was difficult and costly, he added. There was also a danger that companies
would be forced to generate data on not only a medicine's safety and
efficacy, but also cost and benefit.
The industry must engage in political marketing, demonstrating that its
marketing strategies are beyond reproach, said Mr Cueni. 'Freebies to
attractive beach or exotic golf resorts should be a thing of the past,' he
said.
