FT  04 JUN 93 / Salinas pledges crusade against drug traffickers
MEXICO'S President Carlos Salinas has called for a 'national crusade'
against the drugs trade, promising to establish an elite anti-narcotics unit
to fight the war on all fronts, including money laundering and arms
trafficking.
His call on Wednesday came nine days after the killing of Roman Catholic
Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas Ocampo, who was shot, apparently by drug
traffickers, at Guadalajara airport.
The new unit, to be formed by the Attorney-General's office, is to be
equipped with the latest technology and trained in the most sophisticated
investigation techniques.
Mr Salinas also said he would launch constitutional reforms aimed at
toughening penalties against drug criminals and tightening procedures to
confiscate their property.
Meanwhile, the investigation into the murder of Cardinal Posadas unearthed a
large tunnel on Wednesday, apparently designed as a conduit for passing
drugs under the Mexico-US border.
The tunnel begins under a large warehouse by the Tijuana international
airport and runs for 350 metres towards a building site on the US side of
the border.
The tunnel was found as police combed Tijuana looking for gangsters who fled
to the border city after the Guadalajara killing.
Growing scepticism over the official explanation of the shootings at
Guadalajara, which claimed seven victims, is increasing pressure on the
Salinas administration to produce results.
Roman Catholic bishops, opposition politicians and political analysts
challenge the government's claim that the cardinal, who died from 14 bullet
wounds in the chest, was the accidental victim of drug traffickers who
mistook him for the leader of one of Mexico's most powerful drug gangs.
Mr Federico Estevez, a political scientist at the Autonomous Technological
Institute of Mexico, said such scepticism fuelled doubts about the
government's ability to reign in drug traffickers as well as to control
rogue former or present members of the security apparatus.
Drug-related violence has increased sharply in recent months, claiming the
lives of a former state prosecutor and magistrate and dozens of others
killed in shoot-outs between rival gangs.
Some observers speculate the cardinal's killing may have been a message from
elements in the security forces irritated by recent measures aimed at
combating corruption linked to drugs.
