FT  09 SEP 93 / Progress on EC steel restructuring
THE RESTRUCTURING of the recession-torn European steel industry took a step
forward yesterday when the European Commission agreed a loan scheme to help
producers make capacity cuts.
The scheme is a key element in the European Community's efforts to enable
the industry to shed 30m tonnes in excess crude steel capacity.
But steel industry observers warned last night that the much-needed
restructuring of the industry - most of which is losing money heavily in
spite of recent price increases - still faces big obstacles before it can be
implemented.
The Commission said it would provide loans to companies, grouped along three
product lines, which agreed to pool funds to finance capacity cuts made by
the end of next year.
The loans would be paid back by the companies which did not cut capacity.
Officials said the fund would earmark about Ecu1bn (Dollars 1.17bn) to cover
capacity cuts of 6m tonnes of hot-rolled coil and strip, 2m tonnes of plates
and 2.5m tonnes of heavy section.
The product-based loan scheme is one of the less controversial elements of
the steel restructuring plan. Even so, it is reported that approval has
already been postponed once because some commissioners queried what
repayment guarantees the steelmakers would give. But agreement on the loan
scheme could at least restore some momentum to the restructuring effort,
whose original timetable has begun to look unrealistic.
In February, the Commission gave steelmakers until September 30 to present
closure programmes to qualify for its rescue plan.
However, the original timetable has slipped because of the deadlock in the
summer in the Commission's negotiations over state subsidies, notably with
the Italian government in relation to the struggling Ilva steel group.
The Commission has still not resolved this case, or that involving the
Spanish steel industry. The sticking point is the amount of capacity, and
jobs, that producers are prepared to cut in return for receiving the state
subsidies.
But private sector companies want the subsidy issue resolved before
agreement can be reached on any capacity cuts they might offer. Some private
sector producers have become increasingly exasperated at the lack of
progress.
Last month, a select committee of the UK's House of Lords entered the debate
with a strongly-worded report that warned against further state subsidy to
support inefficient production. It said the restructuring plans could be put
at risk unless a strict timetable is enforced to settle outstanding
disagreements on state aids.
The report said restructuring of the EC steel sector was long overdue, and
warned that excess capacity hit profitability throughout the industry. It
said there was 'a real danger' that efficient private companies could suffer
at the expense of inefficient state producers. The subsidies issue will be
discussed by EC industry ministers on September 21. The ministers must also
review the loan scheme.
