FT  09 OCT 93 / High on hype: Ethical questions raised by the
personality-changing drug Prozac
When a drug becomes the butt of a joke in a Woody Allen film, its
manufacturers can be reasonably assured that it has become part of a
national culture.
Prozac's mention in Allen's latest comedy, Manhattan Murder Mystery,
confirms its status as the most successful psychiatric medicine in the US,
overtaking Valium both in terms of the value of sales and as the drug the
film world turns to as a symbol of the times.
The spread of the small off-white and green capsules has been debated on
prime-time US television shows. Now a book about the impact of the drug on
patients' personalities, Listening to Prozac by Dr Peter Kramer, a
psychiatrist at Brown University, Rhode Island, has made it on to the New
York Times's list of the top 15 non-fiction titles.
The drug's growth has been rapid. Only two years after its launch in 1987 by
Eli Lilly, the US pharmaceuticals group, doctors were writing 650,000 new
prescriptions a month for Prozac - a rate of growth from launch that drug
companies rarely achieve. To date, nearly 4.5m Americans have taken the drug
at some time. Elsewhere in the world, another 4m have used it. Global sales
totalled Dollars 1.1bn last year, making it Eli Lilly's biggest selling
product. Prozac was launched in the UK in January 1989, available on
prescription, and sales are believed to be growing rapidly although no
figures have been released.
Prozac's success is based not just on its efficacy as an anti-depressant; it
is regarded by the medical profession as no more effective than previous
generations of such drugs. Nor is it due entirely to its safety record,
which is significantly better than its predecessors: allegations by the US
Church of Scientology that Prozac was encouraging suicidal tendencies among
users were rejected last year by the US Food and Drug Administration.
Prozac's popularity with patients, and the resulting pressure on doctors to
prescribe it, is based above all on its apparent power to alter
personalities as well as cure depression.
Dr Kramer says in his book that the drug can, in a substantial minority of
patients, change personalities within a few weeks. It can boost social
confidence in the habitually timid, make the sensitive brash, and transform
the introverted into outgoing, loquacious people - rapidly achieving what
psychiatrists hope, and often fail, to accomplish by other methods over a
period of years. It can even, says Dr Kramer, improve business acumen.
The drug creates hyperthymia, a condition which makes people optimistic,
decisive, quick of thought, charismatic, energetic and confident. Dr Kramer
dubs the phenomenon 'cosmetic psychopharmacology'. If you can have plastic
surgery, or dye your hair blond, why not take this 'anti-wallflower
compound' to improve your temperament, he writes. 'Since you only live once,
why not live it as a blond? Why not a peppy blond?' asks Dr Kramer.
It sounds too good to be true. Prozac seems to have few immediate
side-effects and, as far as doctors know, is non-addictive. Unlike LSD or
alcohol, it boosts confidence and productivity without distorting
perception.
But critics believe the hype is overdone. Dr Joe Collier, consultant
clinical pharmacologist at St George's Hospital Medical School, London, said
clinical evidence showed that Prozac was no more effective than older,
cheaper anti-depressants. 'We've seen drugs hailed as 'transformers' before.
For example, when L-Dopa came out to treat Parkinson's Disease, people
claimed that it had all sorts of extra qualities - it was even seen as an
aphrodisiac,' he says.
'The idea that a drug can make you 'more normal than normal' worries me a
lot. Anything that makes you feel super-normal for a while may have serious
consequences in the end.'
Eli Lilly has deliberately not tried to exploit some of Dr Kramer's more
dramatic claims, pointing out they are not backed by scientific trials. The
company does not pretend that Prozac has miraculous qualities. Prozac is
only one of four drugs in the class known as selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors - chemicals that affect the process by which signals are
transmitted in the brain.
The others in the category are: Fluvoxamine, developed by Solvay of Belgium;
Lustral, known as Zoloft in North America where it is marketed by Pfizer;
and Seroxat, discovered by Novo Nordisk in Denmark and marketed in most
parts of the world by SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American healthcare
group. On medical criteria, other SSRIs may be more appropriate for
particular patients.
At the same time, no SSRI comes close to being a panacea. On average they
are effective for only about 70 per cent of patients. Prozac is no
exception.
Nevertheless, Prozac can prove a potent anti-depressant, as many in the US
have found. One mother of a depressed teenager who takes the drug says: 'The
amazing thing is that a kid who could not even hold a casual conversation,
would stay in her room and would become anxious just worrying about what to
have for dinner, now has a normal life. In a matter of months, she has
become socially confident, able to attend school and spend time with
friends. The change is phenomenal.'
The effects Prozac has on personalities raise ethical dilemmas. By affecting
the way the brain operates, Prozac and the other SSRIs go beyond curing what
doctors perceive as illnesses, to alter the kind of person a patient is.
Just as a surgeon can transform someone's appearance, Prozac changes
temperaments. Personalities become a collection of neurotransmitting
chemicals, subject to alteration.
Another dilemma is the question of whether doctors should prescribe Prozac
to healthy people who want to enhance their personalities, when teenagers
taking drugs such as ecstasy - which induces a near-instant feeling of
well-being - are frowned upon by governments.
The point at which a line should be drawn between acceptable and
non-acceptable use of drugs is hard to define; at some point, governments
might be tempted to prescribe the drug for criminals or those with
anti-social tendencies.
There is also the danger of over-prescription. Prozac's long-term effects
are unknown. Valium, for instance, was hailed as a cure for female
depression in the 1960s but was subsequently found to be addictive. Five
times as many women take Prozac as men.
Pharmaceutical research and development take many years and cost hundreds of
millions of dollars. Prozac and the other SSRIs are the product of
discoveries made 20 years ago. As the understanding of the brain's molecular
biology improves, so even more potent and selective mind-altering drugs will
become available. Solvay reckons there are more than 40 such
anti-depressants ready to be submitted to licensing authorities or in
development. The dilemmas posed by 'cosmetic psychopharmacology' will not
disappear.
Additional reporting by Clive Cookson
