FT  29 JUN 93 / Chips are down in the Japanese market: How computer makers
are coping with rapid change
RAPID changes in the computer industry are forcing Japanese manufacturers to
recognise even they cannot make everything on their own.
A growth in cross-border activity - illustrated by Fujitsu's recent decision
to use Siemens Nixdorf technology in some of its mainframes - comes as the
Japanese makers brace themselves for unprecedented change in their domestic
market.
Customers are shifting from powerful, expensive mainframe computers to
networks of personal computers that are smaller and cheaper, but in many
cases just as effective - a trend known in the industry as downsizing.
Downsizing has already forced western computer makers to restructure. But
until recently, Japanese manufacturers could watch with detached sympathy as
western competitors suffered from falls in demand for mainframes.
Japanese PC manufacturers used to keep a tight grip on the domestic market
through their proprietary systems. Prices stayed high because the difficulty
of processing the Japanese language helped to limit outside competition.
The spread of software that overcomes the language barrier and the move to
open systems are eroding this advantage by allowing competition from cheaper
US models.
'During the bubble years of economic expansion, both users and suppliers
said downsizing would never happen in Japan,' says Mr Koichiro Chiwata, an
analyst at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo. PC prices were still very high, nobody
in Japan had much experience of downsizing and there were fears about the
security of switching to PCs and workstations.
Japanese computer makers also knew their customers were locked into
proprietary systems, in which huge sums were invest- ed, making it difficult
to switch to cheaper and open systems.
'Of the top 100 companies in Japan, 98 are Fujitsu's customers. They have
built complicated information and communication systems (on Fujitsu's
mainframes) and this won't be transferred to new systems that quickly,' says
Mr Takashi Sekizawa, president of Fujitsu.
However, the forces of change which swept through the west have begun to
filter into Japan.
In the past year PC prices have fallen dramatically, due to low-priced units
from overseas. 'The period when only mainframes and terminals existed is
over,' admits Mr Sekizawa. 'Customers now have a wide range of choice in
information technology.
'They will be looking to integrate new systems with their existing systems
so mainframes won't disappear in five to 10 years, but their importance will
decrease.'
Fujitsu, which has more than 40 per cent of Japan's high-end and
medium-sized mainframe market, has seen its orders for the large machines
dwindle from 37 per cent of overall orders in 1988 to 26 per cent in 1992.
In the year to March, Fujitsu's revenues from its mainframe operations were
flat. Mr Phua Lee-Kerk, an analyst at Barings Securities, estimates that NEC
and Hitachi saw their mainframe sales shrink by 4 per cent and 14 per cent
respectively.
The sharp downturn in mainframe sales is in part due to the economic
slowdown in Japan, but the outlook beyond the current slump is no less grim:
The industry is unlikely to see renewed investment in advanced information
systems on the scale previously made by financial institutions, says Mr
Shigeru Yoshinaka, at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities in Tokyo.
The Japanese computer industry is no longer as protected as it used to be
from the forces that led users in western markets to shift from large
mainframe computers to PC networks.
The situation is forcing a review of strategy by Japanese manufacturers, who
have poured billions of dollars into the development of mainframes -
traditionally a high margin business.
Japanese companies regard retreat from a business as a sign of defeat.
Nevertheless, the grim prospects have already led Toshiba, Mitsubishi
Electric and Oki to opt out of the mainframe business, leaving four
principal players - Fujitsu, IBM Japan, Hitachi and NEC.
Fujitsu hopes to retain its edge in mainframes by meeting customers' needs
for faster, more reliable and cheaper products. But this may mean mainframes
will not be as profitable, says Mr Tadao Yoshihara, general manager of the
computer systems group at Fujitsu.
Even the strongest players in the mainframe market see the need to shift to
other businesses, particularly software and services - which many have begun
to charge for. The move has caused an uproar: in Japan 'service' means
'free' and customers were used to being provided with services without
charge.
Another area which Fujitsu believes is promising is the servicing of
multi-vendor systems, which are beginning to spread.
Fujitsu wants to increase the proportion of revenue it derives from software
and services from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. It is well placed to benefit
from expanding that side of the business. With IBM Japan, it commands 55 per
cent of the mainframe market.
Their financial strength places them at an advantage over specialist
software and service companies, which do not have the same resources.
'Japanese software houses have sent their staff to customers like temporary
staff,' says Mr Chiwata. 'But this means that the company is left without
any know-how.'
As Mr Yoshihara puts it, the key to survival in the mainframe market is 'to
see the impact of downsizing and create a system that incorporates its
benefits'. The large computer makers which move quickly to take the
initiative are best placed to win in the end.
Computer networking; separate section
