FT  04 DEC 93 / Kohl shrugs off talk of collapse
Chancellor Helmut Kohl last night rejected rumours of the imminent collapse
of his coalition in Bonn, denied that he wanted to become the next German
president, and insisted he would fight next year's general elections.
Galvanised by signs of revolt from within his own Christian Democratic Union
(CDU), and reports of rebellion from his coalition partners, the Free
Democratic Party (FDP), Mr Kohl turned on his critics in a hastily arranged
television interview.
'This coalition will survive,' he declared. 'It will do its job, and produce
an impressive record.'
He drily dismissed his long-standing rival in the CDU, Mr Kurt Biedenkopf,
the premier of the eastern state of Saxony, who had forecast a victory for
the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) in the general election.
'Even Professor Biedenkopf cannot predict the outcome,' he said, although
'he expresses himself very cleverly.' As for Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the former
economics minister, and alleged architect of an FDP revolt, he was simply
'peeved' because he was no longer a member of the government, Mr Kohl said.
His interview - a clear indication of how seriously Mr Kohl is taking the
rumours of rebellion - came as the latest unemployment figures showed a new
record jobless total in west Germany in November of more than 2.4m, an
increase of almost 28 per cent over the past year.
At the same time, industrial order figures showed continuing stagnation in
the economy, in spite of a more optimistic assessment of growth next year by
the Economics Ministry.
Mr Kohl admitted in his interview with SAT-1, the private television
channel, that the coalition was going through a turbulent patch, and that
the embarrassing withdrawal of Mr Steffen Heitmann, his hand-picked
candidate to be the next German president, had damaged him politically.
He denied rumours, however, that he was considering standing for the
presidency, saying he did not need any 'follow-on job', and had no intention
of quitting as chancellor.
He rejected calls for a round table of government, opposition, employers and
trade unions to resolve the economic crisis, just repeated by Mr Helmut
Schmidt, his predecessor as chancellor, as well as Mr Rudolf Scharping,
leader of the SPD.
There are no signs, however, that the economic and political crisis which
has severely dented the government's popularity is set to abate.
On the economic front, the latest unemployment figures show a jobless rate
of 7.8 per cent in west Germany, 1.6 percentage points higher than in
November 1992, and virtual stagnation in east Germany, with an unemployment
rate of 15.1 per cent.
Orders in west German manufacturing industry, which showed a recovery in
September, were down again by 0.5 per cent in October, according to the
Economics Ministry, in spite of a 4.5 per cent increase in orders from
abroad.
The ministry remains rather more optimistic on the prospects for 1994 than
the government's independent economic advisers, the so-called five wise men,
who expect zero growth.
Mr Johann Eekhoff, the state secretary for economics, told the finance
planning committee on Thursday that he expected an average growth rate of
0.5 to 1.0 per cent next year.
