FT  04 JUN 93 / US hand stirs controversy in Bolivian election campaign
AFTER months of peaceful but intense campaigning, Bolivia's general election
due this Sunday has been hit by last-minute controversy, write Chris
Philipsborn and agencies in La Paz. The American embassy in La Paz has gone
public in its attempts to force a parliamentary candidate from President
Jaime Paz Zamora's ruling coalition to stand down, alleging that he is
linked to prominent drug traffickers.
The embassy has alleged that Mr Guillermo Capobianco, a former interior
minister in the current government, received bribes, including the sum of
Dollars 100,000 (Pounds 65,000) in 1991, in return for freeing imprisoned
drug barons.
So far the candidate of the main opposition MNR party, Mr Gonzalo Sanchez de
Lozada, a mining executive with a degree from the University of Chicago,
leads in the opinion polls. However, his main opponent, the country's former
dictator General Hugo Banzer Suarez, the ruling coalition candidate, is
catching up fast.
The controversy over Mr Capobianco could have an impact on Gen Banzer
Suarez's campaign. Mr Capobianco is so far braving the US criticism - itself
a controversial and risky intervention in the region's internal politics.
An estimated 1.8m Bolivians will choose from among 14 different political
parties to elect a new president on Sunday. The leading contestants, along
with Mr Sanchez de Lozada and Gen Banzer Suarez, are two newer populist
politicians - beer magnate Mr Max Fernandez and Mr Carlos Palenque, the
owner of a national television and radio station.
However, Bolivia's quirky constitution means the man who gets the most votes
in the presidential poll may well not be the next president. If, as is
likely, no one candidate secures more than half the vote, congress will
decide by secret ballot in August who should be president from the three
leading contenders.
The campaign has so far been largely peaceful in a country once considered
the most unstable in Latin America. After 16 governments in 18 years of
military rule, ending in 1982, Bolivia has been run by elected governments.
The elections are also being billed as the cleanest in Bolivian history
after the naming of a new five-person electoral court with the backing of
all political parties. Heading the court is Mr Huascar Cajias, a prominent
lawyer, editor and founder of the Roman Catholic La Paz daily Presencia.
Previous courts, beholden to ruling political parties, were accused of
widespread favouritism and corruption.
Aware of the electorate's growing dissatisfaction with party politics, many
presidential candidates have made corruption, education and employment their
three main campaign priorities.
The new president will inherit a mixed economic picture. The government of
President Paz Zamora succeeded in keeping inflation down to 11 per cent last
year and to a projected 9 per cent in 1993. Growth was around 3.4 per cent
in 1992. Net reserves are now over Dollars 200m, up from Dollars 23m when Mr
Paz Zamora took office in 1989. The government has also passed progressive
laws, such as a new mining code facilitating foreign investment.
The state sector is another matter. A privatisation programme begun last
year has been disappointing because of the poor quality of the companies on
offer. President Paz Zamora has failed to reform the public sector,
particularly the state mining corporation Comibol. Depressed world prices
for base metals mean Comibol may have to close all but one of its mining
operations by the end of the year.
In part because of the delays in modernising the state, the government has
run a fiscal deficit averaging 4 per cent of gross domestic product during
the lifetime of the present government. Failure to keep the deficit in check
meant Bolivia could not keep to the terms of the fourth year of its extended
structural adjustment facility agreement with the International Monetary
Fund.
Some economists are also worried about a growing trade deficit; the 1992
shortfall of Dollars 410m was the largest in nearly a decade and the pattern
for 1993 suggests more of the same
Bolivia remains dependent on support from international financial
institutions. Thus any future government's room for economic manoeuvre is
limited - perhaps as a result of this the declared economic policies of all
the main candidates are strikingly similar.
Both Mr Sanchez de Lozada and Gen Banzer Suarez say they are are in favour
of what they call 'capitalisation' - the hiving off to the private sector of
minority stakes in larger state enterprises - rather than full-scale
privatisation. Yet all are broadly in favour of prolonging an austerity
programme now in its eighth year.
