FT  20 FEB 93 / Pretoria's environmental test: The battle near South
Africa's St Lucia game reserve
AT FIRST thought, it seemed an outrage. In the midday heat, I had stopped
for water on the long march up the slopes of the St Lucia sand dunes,
through darkly green tangled forest, home to the black rhino. Under the
spell of the surrounding bushveld, I could hardly bear to think of the plan
to strip-mine adjacent dunes for lucrative heavy minerals.
Surely it was sacrilege to allow Mammon's bulldozers to rip through the
dangling lianas and uproot the feathery thorn trees, to chase away insect
and mammal, to destroy the magical wilderness which had soothed my urban
soul?
South African nature lovers had all reacted similarly on learning that
Richards Bay Minerals, a South African company 50 per cent owned by RTZ and
one of the world's most profitable mining concerns, planned to mine near
Natal's St Lucia game reserve, and its extraordinarily beautiful coastal
dunes and coral reefs, saline lakes and marshes.
Some 300,000 people signed petitions to protect the site on the Indian Ocean
coast, an area designated under the 1971 Ramsar agreement (drawn up under
the auspices of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
signed by South Africa) as a globally important wetland.
An environmental impact assessment of the project by independent scientists
is to be released on March 18. It will be reviewed by a public panel headed
by a judge, but the government will have the final say.
Conservationists defend one of South Africa's few remaining wilderness areas
with zeal, urging the spiritual benefits of communion with nature against
the demonstrable returns of a mining project expected to generate R6bn
(Pounds 1.3bn) over 17 years from exports of titania slag, pig iron, rutile
and zircon.
Apartheid adds a further twist to the environmental dilemma: in the new
South Africa, with its desperate need for jobs and economic development,
nature conservation is often seen as a white elitist concern.
Conservationists have largely themselves to blame for this: they evicted
blacks from their ancestral homes to create game reserves from which blacks
were barred.
For the moment, the debate is largely between whites: Richards Bay Minerals
on one side and such internationally respected figures as Ian Player, the
Natal conservationist who saved the white rhino from extinction, and author
Laurens van der Post, on the other.
The company admits it was slow to defend its plans when it announced them
three years ago. Since then, it has built an impressive case in favour of
mining 1,400 hectares of sand dunes which are outside the nature reserve,
but within the area designated as a protected wetland under international
convention. (A government commission decided in the 1960s to create a
Greater St Lucia Wetland Park, encompassing the entire area, but the project
never happened.)
The company's defence relies on its promise to restore the dunes after
mining: to reshape them, replant them and return them to their original
fecundity.
Nature lovers can be forgiven for scepticism about such a quasi-divine
undertaking; but the results of RBM's dune rehabilitation project at nearby
Richards Bay are impressive. It is 14 years since the first dunes were
mined, the replanted forest can boast 250 plant species compared with 243 in
the original forest, and RBM scientists believe half the bird species common
in a mature forest are already present. Company scientists believe the dune
forests will reach maturity in about 25 years; and though they will not be
identical to the original forest, they will be equivalent in biological
diversity.
Ideological purists oppose the notion of mechanically rebuilding dunes
formed by natural forces; but little of the proposed mining area is pristine
forest. Two-thirds is covered in pine plantations, which are being
harvested. The Natal Parks Board plans to leave the area to regenerate on
its own.
The conservationists' main concern is that mining will disturb the hydrology
of the dunes: the underground channels which carry rain water to supplement
the fragile ecosystem of nearby Lake St Lucia, the focus of one of South
Africa's richest wildlife reserves and the biggest estuarine lake in Africa.
Player argues that, in droughts, fresh water from the dunes alone sustains
the lake's hippos and crocodiles (the hippo population is the largest in
southern Africa). Environmentalists fear the fragile saline balance of the
lake will be disturbed, both by destroying these channels, and by the extra
water used in mining. They say RBM should mine a nearby area which is less
environmentally sensitive - but which the company says would be far less
profitable.
The new South Africa is a harshly pragmatic place where economic development
is seen as crucial to a peaceful transition to democracy - and where the
prospect of R6bn in foreign exchange earnings could easily outweigh the
longer-term benefits of more sustainable jobs but much smaller revenues if
eco-tourism were developed in the area.
Indeed, with the impact assessment understood to stop short of predicting
definite damage to the area (while failing to promise there will be none),
mining will probably go ahead. Only time will tell whether future
generations will again enjoy the peace of the dunes - with a little help
from man.
