FT  28 JUL 93 / World Trade News: Pacific nations welcome US call for summit
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's plan to hold an informal summit of the 15-member
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (Apec) forum in Seattle in November has
won widespread support from Asian governments this week, to the surprise of
the US and its Asian rivals.
Only Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, who advocates a more
restricted group (known as the East Asia Economic Caucus) which excludes the
US, has turned down Mr Clinton's invitation.
Most other Apec members, after some initial wavering at a meeting in
Singapore between South-East Asian countries and their principal trading
partners, have fallen in behind the US.
'I predict it will be a very successful event,' Mr Warren Christopher, US
secretary of state, told a meeting of American businessmen yesterday.
Another US official said there was 'strong support and enthusiasm' for the
summit proposal.
Apec comprises the six members of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations or Asean (Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines
and Brunei), their main Asia-Pacific trading partners (the US, Japan,
Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South Korea) and the 'three Chinas'
(China, Taiwan and Hong Kong).
The main problem facing the Apec summit is Beijing's assertion that the
leaders of Taiwan and Hong Kong should not attend, as they represent
regional economies rather than sovereign states.
The US says Apec, which was launched four years ago and accounts for about
half the world's gross national product, will not be protectionist and will
facilitate contacts between the Pacific nations.
Dr Mahathir, however, believes the US will try to dominate the organisation.
Under a compromise reached among Asean members at the weekend, the EAEC will
become a caucus within Apec but will be able to act independently.
The compromise has left Japan and South Korea uncertain as to whether they
should join the EAEC at the risk of angering the US. 'We are still somewhat
puzzled by how it's going to work,' Mr Christopher said of the EAEC
compromise.
