FT  29 JAN 93 / Leading Article: The lessons of Lambeth
IF MANY of its local councils were like Lambeth, Britain would be better off
without local government.
Fortunately they are not. Nor is the 'unprecedented corruption' uncovered by
the south London borough's chief executive the tip of an iceberg of town
hall fraud and malpractice. However, Lambeth's predicament is but an extreme
and grotesque form of two ills which do afflict local government as a whole:
the inadequacy of arrangements for monitoring expenditure and efficiency;
and acute weaknesses in political leadership and control.
There is no simple panacea, but significant improvements could be expected
from four reforms: the use of proportional representation to elect
councillors; a strengthening of internal council procedures for monitoring
spending and efficiency; remuneration sufficient to attract to local
leadership people with successful track records in the world outside; and
the guaranteeing of a stable constitutional position for local government.
The case for PR is far stronger at the local than at the national level.
Local elections return not a government but a group of councillors
collectively responsible for running their authority. Moreover, while the
heterogeneous make-up of the national electorate almost invariably ensures
both a strong government and a strong opposition, the more homogeneous
territory of most councils makes the return of a numerous opposition less
assured. Barnsley currently has one non-Labour councillor. In eight of
London's 32 boroughs, three-quarters of the seats are controlled by one
party. For much of the 1980s, Lambeth had a far-left majority administration
endorsed by barely a third of its electorate.
Single-tier authorities
The Local Government Commission looks set to make relatively small,
single-tier authorities the norm for England, and similar proposals are in
play for Scotland and Wales. If implemented, the current electoral system
could prove still more damaging in the future than in the past. PR should be
introduced as part of the new structure, preferably in a form retaining ward
divisions so that electors continue to have named councillors at their
service.
Breaking single-party monopolies will itself help to improve internal
monitoring. But reforms to councils' internal structures are also needed.
District auditors and the Audit Commission have done commendable work in
promoting best practice and highlighting inefficiency. Within individual
authorities, however, few councillors have taken much interest in those
tasks, except when forced to by compulsory competitive tendering. The job
has mostly been left to officers, who should themselves be a principal
object of scrutiny.
Quality leadership
Councillors need to give monitoring a high priority. To encourage them to do
so, there should be a clear institutional separation between committees
responsible for voting money to spend - the 'policy and resources committee'
in most authorities - and committees (mostly non-existent at present)
charged with overseeing the expenditure and investigating value for money.
In short, they need mini-public accounts committees. Ideally, their
membership should not overlap with that of P&amp;R, and they should have their
own dedicated staff.
At the end of the day, a council is only as good as its members. The quality
of today's council leaders is mixed at best. Remuneration is part of the
problem. At present, not even the leaders of metropolitan authorities are
salaried, and the allowances available even to leaders of the opposition and
chairmen of principal committees are derisory. There is much to be said for
maintaining the tradition of voluntary service in local government; but not
for those posts carrying direct responsibility for budgets of millions.
Leaders of the larger authorities should be full-time and paid.
Yet money is not everything. Councils will only attract high calibre
recruits if they have a secure future. The government has declared a truce
in its war with town halls, but ministers continue to advance proposals to
strip functions from local authorities, while emasculating their autonomy
over spending. Restoring the integrity of local democracy will take more
than smooth words.
