FT  24 MAY 93 / HK offers third plan for funding airport: Chinese want to
see project built to schedule
THE Hong Kong government has passed to China a third set of options for
financing the colony's HKDollars 165bn (USDollars 21.2bn) airport and
related infrastructure developments. Officials gave no details of the new
financial plan but said it was given to Chinese government officials a few
weeks ago.
The timing of the proposal appears to have coincided with senior Chinese
officials' remarks that they wanted to see the airport built according to
schedule.
Since the first financial plan was given to the Chinese more than a year
ago, the airport has been hostage to an agreed Sino-British solution to Hong
Kong's political development.
News of the new plan comes amid signs of markedly better Anglo-Chinese
co-operation on economic aspects of Hong Kong's development which have
followed the resumption of bilateral talks about the colony's future
political arrangements.
Late last week the Chinese government approved three business franchises
which span June 1997, the date when China resumes sovereignty of Hong Kong.
There are also indications that Beijing may re-enter discussions on the
development of the colony's container port.
Last March the Hong Kong government presented its first financial plan to
Beijing for the colony's planned new airport.
It envisaged a small up-front equity injection into two government
corporations charged with building the airport and its connecting railway,
with the remainder funded by debt. An implicit guarantee to fund
unanticipated cash deficiencies, known as callable equity, was also
promised.
China rejected this financial plan, claiming that it breached a memorandum
of understanding signed in 1991 and placed a financial burden on the
colony's post-1997 government.
Last September, the government proposed substituting most of the debt
allowed for in its first plan with equity.
Beijing rejected this proposal and told the Hong Kong government to think
again.
Tony Walker adds from Beijing: China and Britain agreed to resume discussing
the wider issue of Hong Kong's future later this week after their third
round of discussions in Beijing ended yesterday without apparent
breakthrough.
A joint statement said that a fourth round would be held on May 28-29 in
Beijing. Sir Robin McLaren, Britain's ambassador to Beijing and head of his
country's negotiating team, described the atmosphere of the latest round as
good. 'The work we're doing is quite complicated,' he said. His remarks
indicated the two sides may have moved on to more substantial discussions.
The first two rounds were dominated by a Chinese re-statement of 'guiding
principles' for a resolution of the Hong Kong issue.
Beijing has charged that a proposal advanced by Governor Chris Patten for
Legislative Council elections goes beyond understandings reached with London
on Hong Kong's transition to Chinese rule in 1997.
