FT  21 JUN 93 / Sun in shadow attracts the bulldog's gaze: A UK insurer with
fresh reason to tackle its problems
In mid-1989, stock market enthusiasts were calling Sun Alliance the world's
greatest insurance company.
Record pre-tax profits of Pounds 372.4m in 1988  - on premium income of
Pounds 2.25bn  - and enviable financial strength made the company the star
of the UK insurance industry. Its solvency ratio  - the yardstick which
compares net assets to premium income  - climbed to 124 per cent by the end
of 1989, comfortably ahead of its rivals.
But three years on, the advantage has been lost.
Losses of some Pounds 500m on domestic mortgage indemnity policies and falls
in the value of its property and equity investments have cut its capital
base by nearly 50 per cent to Pounds 1.5bn.
And, camped on its doorstep, is Mr Donald Gordon, the South African who
gradually squeezed his way to control of Sun Life and now calls his 3 per
cent stake in Sun Alliance a 'strategic investment in embryo'.
Mr Gordon said earlier this month that Transatlantic Holdings, his South
African and French-controlled financial services group, would take a 'closer
interest' in the affairs of Sun Alliance.
'The image that comes to mind is of a bulldog. These guys won't go away,'
says Mr Tom Bennett, analyst with Banque Paribas Capital Markets. 'If I was
Sun Alliance, I'd feel nervous now,' says a merchant banker.
The situation presents a challenge to a management which has been accused of
over-confidence. In the 1980s conservatism served Sun Alliance well. It
avoided the kind of risky foreign ventures that ensnared Guardian Royal
Exchange in Italy and General Accident in Australasia. It eschewed the
trendy thinking about distribution which led both Royal and the Prudential
to buy loss-making chains of estate agents.
Instead the company focused on building up its share of the UK market for
home, life and motor insurance products. Its decision to invest heavily in
the domestic equity and property markets led to strong growth in its asset
base, as share prices and property values soared.
However market conditions changed at the turn of the decade and the strategy
quickly began to unravel.
The company's share of the home insurance market and its investment
orientation left it heavily exposed to two years of bad weather losses and
the rigours of the UK recession.
Worst of all, as the housing market slumped the company recorded
underwriting losses of hundreds of millions of pounds on domestic mortgage
indemnity policies, which insure mortgage lenders against the losses they
make on the sales of repossessed properties.
By the end of 1992, Sun Alliance's solvency margin had fallen to 54 per cent
 - much nearer the industry average. Mr Stephen Bird, an analyst with Smith
New Court, says: 'Sun Alliance was different and superior to other
composites. Now they are just one of the pack.'
Critics suggest that the company had not properly assessed the risks to
which it was exposed. One former manager says the group was 'obsessed' with
its building society connections, which generated high volume sales of home
insurance, while a decision in the mid-1980s not to buy reinsurance
reflected 'over-confidence. They thought the sun would never set.'
'They have coolly let go of Pounds 1.5bn by not managing the concentration
of risk on their balance sheet,' says another analyst.
While the downturn in the UK insurance industry led many of the group's
financially weaker competitors to introduce changes relatively rapidly, Sun
Alliance's financial strength shielded the company from these pressures and
delayed the pace of change.
It now insists that the problems are being addressed. Mr Arthur Hayes, who
co-ordinates global strategy and asset management, says the losses from
mortgage indemnity were an 'enormous blow', but that over the past 18 months
the group's problems 'have been tackled with a great deal of vigour'.
He points to the rise within the organisation of younger managers, such as
Mr Jim Rochelle, managing director of the group's UK non-life subsidiary,
and to a 14 per cent cut in staff numbers as evidence of a new mood.
The pace of change could heat up now that Sir Christopher Benson, the
property man and chairman of Boots, has taken the chair. Sir Christopher is
widely expected, for example, to urge a more open strategy for public
relations.
There are signs, too, that Sun Alliance is beginning to tackle its
dependency on the UK market. The acquisition of Denmark's Hafnia earlier
this year has helped strengthen the group's position in continental Europe,
which now generates about 23 per cent of its premiums.
However, Sun Alliance still attracts some harsh criticism. 'My lasting
impression is of a very top heavy management with a very old fashioned
style. They seem to have preserved a lot of features that other companies
have got rid of,' says one management consultant who recently worked with
the company. 'The feeling you have with the company is that it doesn't know
where it is going.'
This may be an extreme view, but critics question a number of features
within the group. 'There are pockets of excellence, but much of the business
is mediocre,' says one analyst. Problem areas include the quality of the
group's motor business, especially the portfolio of third party policies.
Other observers suggest Sun Alliance has been slower than some of its rivals
to exploit the trend towards direct telephone sales of motor policies.
'There are important changes in the way business is being done. We don't
think Sun Alliance is addressing these issues,' says Mr David Hudson,
analyst with Credit Lyonnais Laing. 'I wouldn't have thought at this stage
that they were more strongly focused than any other composite insurance
company.'
It seems the City has still to be convinced that the issues are being
addressed quickly enough.
