FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (11): The wrong sort of shooting - Attacks
on tourists have damaged tourism
This had been billed as a record breaking year. The tourism ministry had
pencilled-in possible receipts of Dollars 4bn from an expected 4m visitors
for the 1992/93 season, at least Dollars 1bn better than the year earlier.
The private sector was more bullish. 'The whole industry was shooting for
Dollars 5bn this year,' says Mr Taher el-Sharif, secretary general of the
Egyptian Businessmen's Association.
But, as any media watcher knows only too well for the tourism ministry's
liking, Egypt's tourism industry this year saw the wrong sort of shooting.
A bomb at the pyramids, one outside the Egyptian museum, a tourist shot dead
in Upper Egypt, two foreigners killed in a cafe bomb in downtown Cairo and
other attacks on tourist targets have devastated business.
Estimates vary of the damage done to the industry by the extremist Gama'a
al-Islamiyya's campaign - which aims to undermine the government by
attacking vital tourist trade earnings.
Mr Fouad Sultan, the tourism minister, reckons trade to be a fifth down on
last year, when 3m visitors poured in Dollars 3.2bn worth of business. By
the end of this year, he says, Egypt may have forfeited Dollars 700m in
potential revenues.
Others are gloomier, and suggest that business since Christmas has been
running at half last year's levels.
Some Cairo hotels in March were barely more than a third full. Others had
slashed room rates in an increasingly savage price war. Transmed, a private
charter airline, says business is down by at least 50 per cent. Egyptair,
the national carrier, says trade is 40 per cent lower and has postponed the
purchase of three A340 Airbus jets accordingly.
This is not the industry's first reverse in recent years. Tourists stayed
away in aeroplane loads after the 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking and riots by
Cairo security police in 1986.
No sooner had the industry recovered from those shocks than the Gulf war
stopped the industry dead - individual tourists could have the pyramids to
themselves at some points during the war.
But this time visitors are being deterred not simply by general fears of the
region's instability or volatility, but by a direct campaign against tourist
targets.
'The problem is we just don't know when this will stop,' says Mr el-Sharif.
'Unlike the Gulf war, when we knew there would eventually be an end'.
In the meantime, the tourism ministry has been working on several fronts to
restore in potential holidaymakers' minds the image of Egypt as a safe and
sunny idyll of pyramids, pharaonic treasures and feluccas.
Mr Sultan has been tireless in attending the world's tourism fairs. He has
hired Burson-Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations company, to
promote more positive stories about Egypt in the world's press. Saatchi &amp;
Saatchi has also been enlisted to promote Egypt's fairer face.
Security has been intensified anywhere tourists set foot. Policemen sit in
the entrances of popular restaurants, bags are searched at all hotels.
Tourist police, troops and helicopters have been deployed in Upper Egypt,
where the Gama'a began their campaign last summer by spraying gunfire at
tour buses from the cane fields next to the Nileside roads.
But finally, the restoration of Egypt's tourism industry will depend most on
the success of the violent crackdown by the security forces to eradicate the
extremist threat. A considerable amount rides on such success.
Many economists in Egypt, not least in international agencies guiding the
country's economic reforms, argue tourism to be its greatest hope. Before
the present crisis the industry was Egypt's biggest hard currency earner,
reaping Dollars 1bn or so more in 1992 than either hydrocarbon exports or
Suez Canal toll receipts.
Since Mr Sultan became minister in the mid 1980s, the industry has grown by
an average 17.5 per cent a year. 'Tourism is the future,' says Mr John
Stewart of the International Finance Corporation. 'Oil reserves are finite,
the Suez has limited potential and remittances are likely to stay flat.
Tourism is the only area where there can be real growth.'
Under Mr Sultan's tutelage the private sector has also been allowed rare
scope to flourish in the tourism industry. Tourist asset sales will also
form much of the advance guard in Egypt's tentative first steps towards
privatising its lumbering private sector; hotels and Nile cruisers
comprising 8 of the first 20 assets or companies to be sold off this year.
'We are still barely tapping the potential,' says Mr Sultan, who believes
the industry could draw an annual 5m visitors within a year or two; 10m - as
many visitors as Greece presently accepts - within a decade.
Indeed, the scale of present investment in the industry is exceeded only by
that of Mr Sultan's ambitions for the sector. In a programme which
anticipates the annual number of tourist nights in Egypt to double to 45m
from the present 22m within five years, as much as EPounds 10bn has already
been committed by the private sector to add new hotel rooms and attendant
infrastructure.
This will add at least 25,000 rooms to the country's stock of 55,000 by the
end of 1994. Fourteen new hotels are being built at the Red Sea resort of
Hurgada alone.
And it is in resorts like Hurgada, rather than more traditional Egyptian
holiday haunts such as Luxor, Aswan or even Cairo itself, that the boom in
capacity growth is taking place. Reaching out to attract mass tourism,
adding sea, sand and sun appeal to that of its iconic historical past, the
government has been handing developers large tracts of coastline to develop
in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Sinai.
Three mega-projects in these areas could alone see up to Dollars 3bn
invested in the next few years.
The Sahel Hashish Coast Development Company has won approval for a Dollars
750m scheme to build a tourist village on a stretch of Red Sea coast between
Safaga and Hurgada. A consortium of investors led by the Egyptian finance
Company, is sinking an initial Dollars 150m into developing from desert a
spit of land south of Hurgada into a full tourist complex, with hotels and a
golf course, in a project which some of its investors believe could finally
reach Dollars 1bn.
Dallah al-Baraka and a local Islamic bank are planning, in turn, a Dollars
1bn project to develop a strip of the Mediterranean coast between Alexandria
and Mersa Matruh.
So far none of these projects has been hurt directly by the recent spate of
attacks or the climate of uncertainty they have provoked. Some smaller
investors have pulled out of at least one of these projects, but they have
been replaced. 'Let's just say what's been happening is not helping,' says
one investor, with understatement.
And from the government's perspective it is vital that nothing should derail
these investments. The reason, as Mr Sultan is abundantly aware, is simple:
jobs. 'This is the only industry in the country which is capable of giving
the new generation in this country enough jobs,' he says. The minister says
that already one in 15 jobs in Egypt depends directly on tourism. After the
envisaged expansion, he says it will be one in 10.
A great deal, therefore, will rest on the prospects of peaceful months
between now and the real start of the Egyptian tourism season in October and
November.
'We believe time will prove Egypt is as safe as it was,' says Mr Sultan. But
that lies outside his hands.
