FT  09 MAR 93 / Cairo militants deny NY bomb link
ISLAMIC militants in Egypt yesterday distanced themselves and the man they
consider their spiritual leader - Sheikh Omar Abdul-Rahman, a New
Jersey-based preacher - from the bombing of the World Trade Centre in New
York, saying attempts to link them were a slur against the sheikh and Islam.
In a statement to news organisations in Cairo the Gama'a al-Islamiyya, or
Islamic Groups, said it did 'not target the innocent' and that Sheikh
Abdul-Rahman had 'no connection' with the February 26 attack.
The message added the warning that 'any defamation touching on Sheikh Omar
Abdul-Rahman will not pass peacefully'.
Mr Mohammed Salameh, the 26-year-old Jordanian national accused of being an
accomplice in the bombing, was said to have prayed at a New Jersey mosque at
which Sheikh Abdul-Rahman preached. But yesterday in New York Mr Salameh's
lawyer also repudiated links between his client and the Egyptian cleric.
The underground Gama'a al-Islamiyya has led recent attacks against foreign
visitors to Egypt, though the group claims to be attacking 'tourism not
tourists'.
Three visitors and one Egyptian have been killed in the attacks.
The same group has warned foreigners to leave Egypt and warned that it might
attack foreign investments in the country.
A Cairo military court will today open the trial of 49 alleged members of
the Gama'a al-Islamiyya accused of leading the attacks.
Maj Gen Mohammed Abdallah, military prosecutor general, said charges would
include intention to kill, possession of arms and explosives and economic
sabotage.
Six of the named defendants, who are among hundreds and perhaps thousands
rounded up by Egypt's security forces since the attacks began last year, are
being charged in absentia. Those found guilty face the death penalty.
Separately, Mr Amr Moussa, Egypt's foreign minister, said that Sheikh
Abdul-Rahman would face charges for incitement to violence and terrorism
should he be deported to Egypt from the US. Deportation proceedings against
the sheikh by New Jersey immigration authorities have been deferred.
