FT  24 JUN 93 / Survey of France (1): Cohabitation honeymoon - Edouard
Balladur's new centre-right coalition has a huge majority to push through
its programme of economic recovery - although the Socialist President
Mitterrand and commitment to the franc/D-mark parity may set constraints
Edouard Balladur, the prime minister, commented recently: 'One doesn't enter
government to enjoy oneself.'
A few weeks in office had brought him political headaches over deficits;
recession; general sniping from within his ruling coalition; and two
enduring migraines in the form of persistent unemployment at home and
France's awkward isolation in the Gatt world trade talks.
Mr Balladur knew it was not going to be easy. He had plenty of time to
prepare himself. It was obvious long before the March legislative election
that the conservatives would sweep the socialists out of power, though their
margin of victory - 484 seats out of a total of 577 - was even bigger than
most people expected.
It had also been obvious for a long time that the RPR Gaullists' former
finance minister was headed for the Matignon (the residence of French prime
ministers) because he was sufficiently emollient in style for President
Mitterrand to nominate, and sufficiently pro-European for the UDF, the
junior coalition partner, to accept.
In fact, the 'cohabitation' between the conservative premier and the
socialist president is one of the few areas where things have gone smoothly.
So far, the courteous climate between the two men bears no comparison with
the storms that accompanied the conservatives' first cohabitation - in
1986-88, with the more abrasive Mr Jacques Chirac as prime minister - with
Mr Mitterrand. The 76-year-old president is, of course, weakened politically
by the reduction of his Socialist party's parliamentary strength to one
fifth of its previous representation. Moreover, he is in uncertain health.
A smooth cohabitation is the desire of most French citizens, who also
evidently trust Mr Balladur's economic competence to pull them through their
present problems. The result is that Mr Balladur's personal rating is still
high in the opinion polls.
If the economy does not pick up, this honeymoon cannot last beyond the
autumn. By then, or by 1994 at the latest, France's politicians will be
positioning themselves to make their grab for the country's supreme
political prize, the presidency, in 1995.
Mr Balladur has less to fear from direct attacks from the Socialist
opposition than indirect sniping from his own camp. The Socialist party is
painfully trying to reorganise itself under Mr Michel Rocard, who is
expected to carry the party's standard in 1995 unless Mr Jacques Delors
tries to wrest it from him. The leaders of both government parties, Mr
Chirac of the RPR and Mr Valery Giscard d'Estaing of the UDF, stayed outside
the government in order to to be free to run for the presidency  - which in
practice means being free to distance themselves from Mr Balladur if need
be.
Mr Giscard d'Estaing has already seen the need. In early May he openly
criticised the prime minister for being too austere in announcing tax
increases. The fact that many Gaullist deputies agreed with the UDF leader
helped to push Mr Balladur into announcing, in late May, some reflationary
measures to fight unemployment. If the jobless rate continues to rise
remorsely into next year, then Mr Chirac, the prime minister's patron, may
want to mark his distance from the premier.
Given the state of the economy, this is quite likely - and it is liable to
cause serious dissension in Gaullist ranks. On the monetary side, all is
ostensibly strength and confidence. Foreign exchange has flowed into the
Bank of France, which has repaid debts incurred in the autumn-winter
campaign to defend the franc and has been able, too, to cut interest rates
seven times while the franc has strengthened inside the European exchange
rate mechanism.
But this is largely because economic activity in Germany has weakened even
more dramatically than in France. This does not say much for France. The
government forecasts that the economy will contract by 0.4 per cent this
year - and most commercial banks say the drop will be nearer 1 per cent.
Unemployment, standing at 3.1m or 10.9 per cent in April, will perforce go
on rising.
In fact it seems that France needs to grow by at least 2 per cent a year
just to keep the same number of people in work. Part of the reason is the
country's very high social charges on salaries - charges which bankroll its
welfare state. French employers welcome the start Mr Balladur has made in
lowering these charges - and they also welcome the other measures: to
improve the supply of labour (with more apprenticeships); and the demand for
it (with more spending on housing and public works).
But Mr Francois Perigot, the Patronat chief, has said that until they see
consumer spending rising, his members are not going to risk their precarious
finances by taking the initiative to hire more workers.
To help plug the budget deficit hole, the government has at least some
substantial assets to sell. It has the Socialist nationalisers of the early
1980s to thank for these. Some 21 industrial companies, banks and insurance
companies are now slated for privatisation in theory, over an indefinite
period. In fact the government must make some quick sales this autumn; it
needs FFr40bn in cash this year to cover its special 'recovery' bond issue.
At the same time, it must avoid over-burdening a frail domestic stock market
 -given that it wants control of most of the privatised companies to stay in
Gallic hands.
Indeed, on a broader front a certain xenophobia has taken hold in France.
Something of a national panic has set in about 'delocalisation', or transfer
of production out of France to cheaper regions of the world. A recent
alarmist Senate report (it claims that 'the fire is inside the house') has
sparked scare speculation about France losing a further 5m jobs to Asia,
eastern Europe and north Africa in years to come.
It ignores the fact that some French companies have actually been able to
expand jobs in research and marketing at home by shifting labour-intensive
production elsewhere.
But the reality of global competition is attested by industrialists such as
Mr Francis Lorentz, former head of Bull, the computer company,who
acknowledges that 'software made in India is cheaper and better made than
that made in France'.
The possibility of a Gatt deal compounds these worries for many French and,
after years of sulky inactivism from his Socialist predecessors, has brought
Mr Balladur out to fight France's corner. His decision to swallow the 'gnat'
of the EC oilseeds accord with the US, but to try to stiffen the Community's
resistance to the 'camel' of overall farm export subsidy cuts, is excellent
strategy.
But it may have come too late. For all the rhetoric (back in vogue) - about
strengthening 'Community preference' in trade, the European Commission
appears to be near a tariff-cutting deal with its important Gatt partners.
Yet the French premier may strike a more general chord with his partners
when he stresses that the Uruguay Round provides a key opportunity for the
12 to 'affirm their international identity,' as they pledge to do in the
Maastricht treaty.
In a quite different field, Mr Balladur has provided another chance for the
EC to assert itself, with his idea that it should initiate a European
security pact.
To prevent 'a second Yugoslavia' breaking out elsewhere, he suggests that
the EC, together with the US, should help central and east European states
negotiate good neighbour agreements on frontier and minority issues, and
that at the least, the Community should insist on eastern European countries
settling security disputes before they join the EC.
Thus France remains the main fount of new ambitions for the Community,
although Maastricht has fostered an anti-EC streak in French political life
 -as the parliamentary debate over giving independence to the Bank of France
showed - and even though France's new government takes a more cold-eyed view
of some of its previous European commitments.
One of these is the Schengen free-travel accord, negotiated by France and
its continental EC partners. Paris has shelved implementation of this while
it cracks down on immigration both legal and illegal, and narrows
eligibility for French nationality. These measures are seen as the handiwork
of Mr Charles Pasqua, the hard-line interior minister. But they also respond
to the new French mood.
