FT  24 NOV 93 / Business and the Environment: Making a splash in Japan -
Support for Greenpeace is growing
'Is the Sea of Japan turning into a nuclear waste dump?' screamed the
headline in a Japanese national daily after Russia dumped its nuclear waste
there last month. The disposal of 900cu m of low-level coolant and cleaning
water from Russia's nuclear submarines into the sea provoked widespread
anger.
However, at the same time it earned respect for Greenpeace, the
international environmental pressure group, which had uncovered the dumping.
Until the dumping, many Japanese were wary about Greenpeace's activities.
'The incident helped ordinary Japanese understand that Greenpeace wasn't
just a bunch of hysterical people bashing Japan about whales,' says Naoki
Ohara, director of Greenpeace Japan.
The aggressive tactics in Greenpeace's appeals over environmental issues,
especially over Japan's whaling, have alarmed ordinary Japanese, who usually
disapprove of direct confrontation. A collision last year between Japan's
plutonium- carrying vessel and a Greenpeace ship caused apprehension among
many people who thought this was 'going too far'.
As a result, Greenpeace has managed to attract only 800 members within the
country. Since the Russian episode, however, interest in the group's
activities has heightened. Greenpeace's information-gathering methods have
been praised as far more advanced than those of the foreign ministry.
Accounts of how the group discovered Russian vessel TNT-27 has been told and
retold in the media. Greenpeace says it predicted Russia's dumping from a
Russian government report which states that it would have to continue marine
disposal of nuclear waste until 1997. On October 7, the Greenpeace ship left
northern Japan and waited until the Russian vessel appeared on October 16.
The Japanese are especially sensitive to water purity because the eating of
fish, raw or cooked, is an important part of national culture. The dumping
of nuclear waste in the country's main fishing area revived memories of the
Minamata poisoning case, which began in the late 1950s. (Chisso, a chemicals
manufacturer, disposed of its mercury refuse into the bay of Minamata, on
the southern island of Kyushu, contaminating fish and poisoning the local
population.)
The widespread outcry over Russia's nuclear dumping has forced the Japanese
government to change its stance on the disposal of nuclear waste and to
support a proposal that would ban ocean dumping.
Between 1955 and 1969, Japan dumped 1,650 drums of low-level radioactive
waste into the Pacific Ocean. Although the government has refrained from
dumping low-level waste at sea since 1969, it has remained ambivalent over
the matter, hoping to keep ocean dumping as an option for disposing of waste
from its nuclear power stations.
However, while Japan supported calls for a complete ban on dumping of
low-level waste at the meeting earlier this month of the London Dumping
Convention, Japan continues to release waste water from its nuclear power
plants at sea. Japan disposes of at least 1,020bn tonnes of coolant from its
nuclear energy plants per year, although the radiation levels are said to be
lower than international standards.
Meanwhile, public awareness over environmental issues remains low. Ohara
says people reacted because the Russian dumping was in their 'backyard', but
issues such as the destruction of rainforests in southeast Asia for wood
exports to Japan have remained untouched. And many Japanese believe western
criticism of whaling is another form of Japan bashing.
Ohara blames the low awareness on the lack of school education on
environmental matters.
The media is reluctant to cover such issues, especially if there is a large
Japanese company involved. 'Japan has to realise its responsibilities as a
leading industrialised country,' he says.
