FT  19 FEB 93 / Salvation Army row gathers pace
TILEN Securities, the firm at the heart of an alleged Pounds 6m fraud, is
neither registered in Britain nor authorised to conduct investment business
here, regulators said yesterday.
Two individuals named in a writ filed by the Salvation Army, Mr Stuart
Christopher Ford of Birmingham and Mr Gamil Naguib, are also not authorised
to conduct investment business, the Securities and Investments Board stated.
The firm is also named in the writ.
According to the Charities Commission, trustees of charities are required to
conduct investment business only through firms authorised under the
Financial Services Act. The Salvation Army confirmed through its public
relations advisers Lowe Bell yesterday that one of its officers had been
suspended with pay pending the outcome of an internal investigation. The
charity declined to name the officer.
The Salvation Army has retained the accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand and
City solicitors Slaughter and May to investigate the disappearance of the
funds. It is believed a worldwide injunction freezing individual and
corporate assets is being sought in connection with the writ.
Last month the Salvation Army succeeded in obtaining an order to freeze
assets held in Luxembourg. Assets of about Dollars 520,000 (Pounds 366,200)
were frozen.
The Salvation Army has notified the Metropolitan Police and is preparing
documents, which are expected to be delivered to the police early next week.
Meanwhile, neither the Salvation Army nor its advisers know the whereabouts
of the individuals named in the writ, and private investigators have been
retained to assist in the search.
The Salvation Army has declined to give any details of the timing or nature
of the alleged fraud.
The charity, which is the largest provider of social services after the
government, last year had an income of almost Pounds 80m of which Pounds 12m
came from public donations. It is the sixth-largest UK charity - only the
National Trust, Royal National Lifeboat Institution, Oxfam, Imperial Cancer
Research Fund and Cancer Research Campaign are larger.
