FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: Hyundai Motor aims to double
capacity by 2000
HYUNDAI Motor, South Korea's largest maker of vehicles, plans almost to
double its production capacity to 2m cars and trucks by 2000.
The Won3,300bn (Dollars 4bn) project to build three factories and two
engineering centres would make it one of the world's 10 biggest producers of
vehicles.
Hyundai's expansion is a key element in the state-sponsored X-5 programme to
make South Korea one of the five leading vehicle manufacturers by the end of
the century. The programme is being supported by soft state loans.
Some analysts, however, question whether South Korea is heading for
overcapacity in vehicle production.
Hyundai Motor can now produce 1.15m vehicles a year at its facilities in the
south-east city of Ulsan, the manufacturing centre of the Hyundai business
conglomerate.
The new facilities will be built in the western half of the country as part
of the government's plan to promote balanced regional development.
The first factory at Wanju, North Cholla province will be completed in 1995
and produce 70,000 trucks and buses a year. It will be the centre for
Hyundai's production of large-sized commercial vehicles.
A plant at Asan, South Chungchong province, will go into operation in 1996
and produce 300,000 medium-sized cars annually for export.
The final phase of expansion will be a facility at Yeochon, South Cholla
province, which will begin producing 500,000 vehicles a year in 2000. It
will also include a research centre and test track.
The expansion coincides with efforts by Hyundai to increase sales in Europe
and Asia and reduce its dependence on the North American market. Exports
have been boosted this year by a 20 per cent fall in the value of the Korean
won against the Japanese yen.
Hyundai estimates that overseas sales will rise by 16 per cent to 330,000
vehicles. Significant growth in Asia has offset a downturn in European sales
due to the recession.
It is considering building two overseas plants, one in Europe, the other in
Asia.
