FT  12 AUG 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Norway digs deeper for North
Sea riches - The improving prospects for Europe's largest oil producer
NORWAY has reached midlife as a petroleum resource nation but the estimated
reserves in its oil fields have been upgraded, thanks to new seismic
acquisition and interpretation technology. The technology has also have
helped identify new fields outside the mature North Sea province.
The Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD), the industry watchdog, upgraded
its estimates of total recoverable petroleum resources by 12 per cent to
between 8bn and 12.5bn tonnes of oil equivalent. At current prices some
estimates put the value of the upgrade at around NKr450bn (Dollars 225bn).
The NPD's estimate puts undiscovered resources at 3.7bn tonnes, the
potential for improved recovery from existing fields at 500m tonnes and
discovered recoverable resources at 5.6bn tonnes.
The oil/gas ratio of potential new resources and improved recovery is
respectively 40 per cent and 60 per cent.
In the past Norwegian petroleum resources have been upgraded by an average
of about 30 per cent from original estimates. Given average annual oil
production of 80m tonnes and annual gas production of 25m tonnes of oil
equivalent, the country's oil will last for about 45 years and its gas for
about 200 years.
Norway is western Europe's biggest crude oil producer, with an annual output
of 2.4m barrels It is the third-biggest supplier of gas.
The continental shelf embraces an estimated 1.1m sq km of sedimentary rocks,
of which just 40 per cent has been opened for exploration drilling. The
shelf is divided into three areas; the North Sea, the Norwegian Sea and the
Barents Sea. The North Sea comprises all areas south of the 62nd parallel,
while the Norwegian Sea extends to intermediate areas between the North Sea
and the Barents Sea, which comprises areas north of Andoeya in the Lofoten
Islands.
The NPD says that on average, every third wildcat well drilled on the shelf
has produced hydrocarbons when tested. In the North Sea, for example, 320
structures have been drilled and 112 discovery wells defined. For the
Norwegian Sea the respective numbers are 70 structures and 17 discoveries,
while in the Barents Sea the figures are respectively 45 and 16.
'During the last five years resource growth has been slightly less than
production growth. Although we can no longer expect to find as much oil as
we produce, good opportunities will still exist for further interesting oil
finds,' the NPD. says
Norway's first licensing round was held in 1965, when 23 production licences
covering 80 blocks were issued, all in water depths of less than 150m in the
southern North Sea. Exploration in recent years has moved into water depths
of 300m and is heading into depths of between 500m and 2,000m.
Drilling technology has advanced to the point where it can meet deep water
challenges, the NPD says.
Norway's first two oil discoveries were made in 1967 and 1968. They were
followed by the discovery of the prolific Ekofisk field, but not until 33
wells were drilled to confirm its commerciality. The NPD likes to tell this
story as a reminder to oil companies thinking of giving up in frustration
with their lack of success in the Barents Sea.
Despite 25 years of intensive North Sea exploration, the NPD believes there
may still be a considerable undiscovered resource potential. In the last few
years several interesting small and medium-sized discoveries have been made
close to existing infrastructure and in reallocated blocks undergoing
renewed exploration.
The NPD estimates that about 25 per cent of total North Sea resources are
still awaiting discovery.
Earlier this year, Saga Petroleum, Norway's biggest independent oil company,
boosted estimates of the amount of oil found in its North Sea Snorre field
by 10 per cent to 890m barrels. Snorre came on stream last autumn and still
faces two further stages of development.
In the Norwegian Sea's Voering Basin, off the coast of mid-Norway and north
of the emerging Haltenbanken oil and gas province, explorers drilled
unsuccessfully for several years before three discoveries were made in
1990-92.
The NPD estimates total Norwegian Sea resources at 1,450m tonnes of oil
equivalent, of which 42 per cent is oil and 58 per cent gas. Its statistical
analysis shows a 95 per cent probability of finding 200m tonnes of petroleum
and a 5 per cent probability of finding 2,200m tonnes.
The recently confirmed Norwegian Sea Norne field, operated by Statoil, the
Norwegian state oil company, is believed to contain an estimated 400m
barrels of oil and the company aims to bring it on stream in 1996.
'The Norne discovery opens up the region's future potential. . . but we
struggled for a long time and drilled two dry wells before we struck oil,'
says Mr Kyrre Nese, Statoil's executive vice-president of exploration and
development. He believes it will take another decade before sufficient
exploration is undertaken in the field to reduce uncertainty over reserves
potential.
On Haltenbanken, Norske Shell recently announced an upgrade of Draugen oil
reserves by 160m barrels to 580m. Draugen is due to come on stream later
this year. Mr Einar Knutsen, a Norske Shell director, says three-dimensional
surveys undertaken in 1991 and 1992 triggered the possibility that Draugen
might contain more oil. 'I would not exclude the possibility of a further
Draugen upgrade,' he says.
Norske Shell is at present undertaking interpretative analysis of 3-D
surveys of two blocks south of Draugen with a view to commencing exploration
drilling next year to define the prospects. Mr Knutsen says that Statoil's
Norne discovery is encouraging news but cautions that the industry will have
to undertake years of drilling to gain sufficient knowledge of the region to
be confident over its resource potential.
'Excluding Norne, there have been no other discoveries in the region,' he
says, adding that his company will concentrate on maximising recovery from
Draugen and defining the prospects of blocks 6411 and 6412.
In the vast Barents Sea, Norway has found gas but made no commercial oil
discoveries. In the Russian part of the Barents Sea, Shtokmanovskoye,
believed to be the world's biggest offshore gas field, was discovered five
years ago. The Russians also found oil there. In mid-August Norske Shell
will drill the only well to be drilled this year in the Norwegian part of
the Barents Sea.
'We have expectations, but this is a crucial well. If it is dry it will mean
Shell has reached a crossroads in its commitment to the Barents Sea,' Mr
Knutsen says.
Mr Nese says the main challenge for Barents Sea explorers is to develop
exploration models that can lead to oil discoveries. 'We know there is
significant gas reserves there and gas marketing efforts are under way, but
the area is far away from gas markets.'
The NPD estimates total resources in the Barents Sea to be 1,380m tonnes of
oil equivalent, of which 14 per cent is oil and 86 per cent gas.
