FT  17 MAR 93 / Russia trying to isolate us, say Ukrainians
SENIOR Russian officials have cautioned east European countries not to form
closer political and military ties with Ukraine, according to officials in
Kiev and western diplomats.
A senior official in the Ukrainian foreign ministry warned that in the past
few weeks conservatives had taken over Russian foreign policy making, and
had now launched a campaign to bring Ukraine back under Russian hegemony.
The change in Russian attitudes towards Ukraine comes at a time when
hardliners in Moscow have been winning political showdowns with President
Boris Yeltsin, forcing him to take a less conciliatory line to neighbouring
states than he might otherwise adopt.
This month, for example, Mr Yeltsin called on the United Nations to give
Russia special authority to police disputes in the former Soviet Union,
eliciting protests from independent-minded republics such as Ukraine and
Moldova.
'Russia's attitude toward its neighbours can now be compared to Germany's in
1939,' the Ukrainian official said. 'This is a crucial moment when the west
must realise that the consequences of a policy of appeasement are as
dangerous as they were in 1939.'
Western diplomats in Ukraine say they are concerned about the new trend. One
said Russian officials were warning east European countries 'not to bother
building large embassies in Kiev because within 18 months they will be
downgraded to consular sections.'
Mr Sergei Stankevich, a political adviser to Mr Yeltsin, recently warned
Poland to limit growing political and military ties with Ukraine. Speaking
in Warsaw last month, Mr Stankevich said Ukraine and Belarus fell within
Russia's sphere of influence and Russia was opposed to the increasingly cosy
relationship between Ukraine and Poland in foreign and military policy.
In the past three months four Polish ministers, including the prime minister
and minister of defence, have visited Ukraine. A year ago Poland was the
first country to recognise Ukraine and it has signed a number of military
and political agreements with its neighbour.
Ties are also growing with Hungary, where Ukrainian president Leonid
Kravchuk travelled this month.
