FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (13): Escaping Islam's past - The role of
women in society
ONE OF the key reasons President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali is opposed to
granting legal recognition to the al Nahda (Renaissance) opposition party -
whose creed is Islam - is fear that such a move risks undoing what many
Tunisians regard as their country's proudest achievement since independence;
the corpus of laws which, in 1956, abolished polygamy and gave Tunisian
women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world.
The 'Personal Status Code' is, arguably, former president Habib Bourguiba's
greatest single achievement. It was promulgated the year Tunisia gained
independence from France, a year before the new constitution that abolished
the monarchy.
The rights of women were further consolidated last August by the national
assembly. In the case of divorce, for instance, custody no longer goes
automatically to the husband. Violence against women within the family is
punishable, women can request a passport without going through their father
or husband and the state helps divorced women to secure alimony.
Since 1956 a policy of family planning has been in place. In the early 1960s
free and confidential advice and prophylactics were made available to women.
Combined with efforts to promote health and education, these policies
reduced population growth from 3.2 to 1.9 per cent. The birth rate has
declined from 45 to 25.4 per thousand, mortality from 15 to 6.1 per
thousand. The illiteracy rate has been brought down from 87.7 per cent to 35
per cent, though the figure is higher among women in poorer country areas.
Women are increasingly visible in teaching, medicine, architecture - in
factories as workers, engineers, managers and owners. But Tunisian politics
remains very much a man's world, despite some remarkable exceptions,
including Fethia Baccouche and Hanoun Houda, who are deputies, two
secretaries of state and a handful of senior civil servants such as Fayza
Kefi, whose presides over the Union Nationale des Femmes de Tunisie.
Most educated women have no lost love for the teachings of radical Islamic
groups. Though al Nahda leaders have said they accept many of Mr Bourguiba's
inheritance, women are mindful of the often violent track record of some
supporters of the party, notably the throwing of acid in the faces of
university students on the campus in Tunis.
History teaches women that radical Islam has not been sympathetic to the
idea of equality between sexes or to their presence in public places.
The history of modern Tunisia suggests that the emancipation of women has
been a key factor in explaining the country's social and economic progress
since 1956.
Economic progress has provided a means of emancipation which is far from
negligible. When a new law in 1973 allowed joint ventures to be established
for the first time in Tunisia with offshore tax status, a string of
factories set up across the country, giving many young women their first
taste of freedom.
The simple act of walking to work a few hundred yards from home, away from
the all powerful mother, broke many taboos. These women were not well paid
but what little they earned allowed them to build up a dowry and gain a
measure of freedom in choosing their husband. Once married, many were able
to claim help from the state to buy a flat.
Women have 25 per cent of all jobs in Tunisia, 35 per cent of jobs in
industry, 22 per cent of jobs in the growing services sector, 40 per cent of
jobs in agriculture, where they manage nearly 10 per cent of all farms. They
are present everywhere, seldom veiled, and give Tunis and other major towns
a strong Mediterranean feel.
Last year's laws are ahead of the social mores of many Tunisians, yet they
also reflect the fast changing attitudes affecting many sectors of society.
About ten per cent of new companies are created by women, according to Aziza
Dargouth, who runs the Cabinet de Prospective Sociale consulting agency.
Hayet Laouni had her first job as secretary in a shipping company, 26 years
ago, after training to become a primary school teacher. She now owns and
runs Stumar, a company with turnover of Dollars 3m and is active in
stevedoring, conveyancing and forwarding. She concedes it has not been easy
for a woman to win acceptance in such a milieu, but as she moves around her
office, cigarette in hand, firing orders, inquiring whether a particular
container has arrived, the feeling Tunisia is undergoing a quiet revolution
is overwhelming.
Sarah Sahdallah owns and runs a porcelain factory, Ibtissem Kamoun has
become one of Tunisia's largest producers of ice-cream, Rashida Rouissi
exports fruit and vegetables. Scores of others are involved in textiles, ice
cream and software.
Such people would not quarrel with the policy of the Minister of Education,
the highly respected Mohammed Charfi, who is having references in school
text books that men are superior to women and adulterous women be stoned
expurgated. The books of Hassan El Banna, the founder of modern
fundamentalism, have been withdrawn from schools and public libraries. To
western critics of such moves, many Tunisians point out that wealthy Saudis
have, for the past two decades, been subsidising the printing and
distributing of books offering the most conservative interpretation of
Islam. Why should they be criticised for trying to promote more liberal
views?
Educated Tunisian women are well aware that some of their sisters support al
Nahda. They agree with attempts to liberalise the economy and are convinced
economic growth and a more broadly liberal society are the only serious ways
to fight radical Islam. They are fearful of the possible spillover effects
of events in neighbouring Algeria and Egypt.
