FT  25 FEB 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia announces talks on
unified CIS energy policy
MEMBERS OF the Commonwealth of Independent States are to attempt to agree on
the creation of an inter-state energy council to co-ordinate oil and gas
supplies.
The project, announced earlier this week by Mr Yuri Shafranik, the Russian
energy minister, is likely to be a central theme of talks planned between
CIS heads of state in the Russian oil region of Tyumen next month. It is
raised at a time when energy is at the centre of increasing tension between
Russia and the other former Soviet republics, particularly Ukraine.
Mr Shafranik said that the Tyumen oil production associations would welcome
foreign investment - including from the CIS states. He also said, however,
that Russia would move to world prices in energy trade with these countries.
Mr Yuli Yoffe, Ukraine's deputy prime minister, arrived in Moscow yesterday
for talks with Mr Shafranik in a bid to avert a threatened cut in gas
supplies to Ukraine. The Russian state gas corporation Gasprom has said it
is owed Rbs165bn (Dollars 286m) by Ukraine, and has demanded that the
country pay Dollars 85 per 1,000 cubic metres for future supplies.
However, Mr Yevgeny Suhin, first deputy chairman of Ukraine's state oil and
gas committee said yesterday that all bills had been paid to Gasprom up to
March 1. Ukraine has already warned that it might disrupt the flow of
Russian gas through its territory to third countries especially Germany,
France, Italy, Slovakia and the Czech Republic.
Mr Leonid Kuchma, the Ukrainian prime minister, is also due in Moscow
tomorrow - an indication of how seriously the threat is now being taken. A
Gasprom official, Mr Anatoly Vorotyntsev, was quoted by the official news
agency Itar Tass as saying that gas supplies would be cut off today and
piped to southern parts of Russia instead.
The Russian government faces continuing and deepening difficulties in its
exploitation of energy sources. Mr Georgy Khizha, a deputy prime minister,
said yesterday that oil production would fall by 50m tonnes this year, but
energy consumption was continuing to rise - by 14 per cent last year.
Turkey and Azerbaijan are discussing a route for a westward pipeline for
Azeri oil and Turkey hopes it will end on its southern coast, the foreign
ministry said, reports Reuter from Ankara. 'The technical level talks in
Baku (the Azeri capital) are expected to continue into March before a
conclusion is reached. . . Our wish is to see Turkey chosen as the route and
Azeri oil transported to the Mediterranean,' said ministry spokeswoman Filiz
Dincmen.
