FT  18 DEC 93 / Rugby award causes Commons ruck: Dominic Lawson finds that
when there are prizes to be handed out, controversy is not far behind
'Mummy,' says Deirdre Rawley to her mother, Lady Mortlake, 'I wish you
wouldn't encourage Michael with his political career. I'd so much rather he
did a job of work]' This characteristic piece of wit from John Osborne's
eminently revivable play, The World of Paul Slickey, came subversively to
mind as I read yesterday's Daily Telegraph.
According to the chronicle of all that is most peculiarly English in the
English way of life, no fewer than 16 members of parliament had signed a
House of Commons motion complaining that the British Broadcasting
Corporation had made England's rugby union players 'team of the year'.
There might be butchery in Bosnia, mass unemployment throughout Europe and a
fascist about to seize control of Russia, but we can trust British MPs to
get agitated about the things which genuinely matter. The motion, drawn up
by Labour members, went on to ask why 'more appropriate contenders' were
overlooked.
Apparently, some of the honourable members felt strongly - the only way in
which they do feel things - that the England World Cup-winning women's
cricket team should have been given greater consideration. Still, I suppose
we should be grateful that the motion was not drafted by loyal Conservative
MPs: they would probably have nominated the Cabinet.
All this, however, paled in comparison to the fuss stirred up in the tabloid
newspapers last week over something called the British Comedy Awards. This
event, held at the Dorchester hotel - how very pleasant - at the end of
November, gave the supreme accolade of 'top TV comedy actor' to Rik Mayall.
But, according to the front pages of several of the UK's most successful
newspapers, the award was a fix.
Mayall's name, they claim, was not even on the shortlist of candidates,
which consisted of people with real names like David and Richard and Michael
and Neil. It was 'a scandal', declared The Sun, and others seemed to agree.
Hardly a week goes by without a public debate over one award or another.
Typically, these awards are made by a group of people in one business to
another in the same line of work. They are simply a good excuse for a large
number of cronies to have a seasonal bash at the Dorchester at somebody
else's expense. Members of the publishing, newspaper and television
industries, masters of the expense account life, are particularly keen on
this sort of thing.
Such events should be of no concern to the public who are, quite reasonably,
excluded from these Masonic gatherings. In the case of the BBC team of the
year award, the business is not even settled by a ballot but decided by
executives. The MPs should mind their own business - or start up their own
award, which they could give to the English women's cricket team.
It is remarkable, though, how steamed up outsiders do get about awards. The
Booker literary prize never manages to create anything less than a full
scale controversy. But it is just a handful of writers trying to do a favour
to a friend in need. The amount of money involved is usually less than the
advance which the winner received for his work, long before it was known to
be any good.
The most lucrative of all the awards, and perhaps the one which started all
the rot, is the Nobel prize. Each of those is worth Pounds 100,000, tax
free. No wonder people become jealous, or outraged. The British complain
bitterly that Graham Greene or Anthony Burgess never won the prize for
literature, and moan incessantly when it is handed to a succession of third
world authors, few of whom write in God's own language.
But why should we care which obscure Egyptian poet was the compromise choice
of a panel of six senile Swedes? If the trustees of the estate of the man
who founded the modern explosives industry wish to spend the income from
Alfred Nobel's bequest in all manner of idiosyncratic ways, let them.
Meanwhile, the UK's elected representatives should find other ways to occupy
their time. I refer back to John Osborne's brilliant play. In answer to
Deirdre's 'I'd so much rather he did a proper job of work]' Lady Mortlake
remarks: 'I suppose he could take a few directorships.' Deirdre: 'But
darling, that wouldn't keep his 'mind' occupied.'
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator
