FT  12 MAR 93 / Murder of abortion doctor inflames America
THE murder of a doctor outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Florida, on
Wednesday has further inflamed passions in one of America's most divisive
and increasingly violent social confrontations.
Yesterday, Mr Randall Terry, national leader of Operation Rescue, the
anti-abortion movement, described the killing of the doctor as 'an
inappropriate, repulsive act'. He immediately went on to say 'we must also
grieve for the thousands of children that he has murdered'.
Ms Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortions Rights Action League,
countered by attacking 'the campaign of violence and intolerance' now being
waged by the anti-abortion forces.
Dr David Gunn was shot dead outside his clinic by Mr Michael Frederick
Griffin, who immediately surrendered to police. Mr Griffin, according to
another Florida anti-abortion activist, had on Sunday urged a church service
to 'agree with him that Dr Gunn should give his life to Jesus Christ.'
Yesterday Mr Griffin asked a court hearing that he be allowed to keep his
Bible with him in jail 'as a legal document.' His supporters began an effort
to raise funds for his family and his defence and spoke of him as a 'martyr'
in a just cause.
The murder of Dr Gunn appears to be the first recorded in an anti-abortion
demonstration. But it takes place against a pattern of increasingly violent
protest. In mid-February a clinic in Corpus Christi, Texas, was firebombed,
while earlier this week eight clinics in California were sprayed with
noxious acid.
According to the National Abortion Federation, there were 186 recorded
instances of violence against the providers of abortion last year, twice as
many as in the previous year. In the first two months of this year, a
further 27 incidents were registered.
Operation Rescue and affiliated organisations have been particularly active
in Florida, using what are known as 'impact teams' to harass both clinic
personnel and patients. In a letter to President Bill Clinton, Ms Eleanor
Smeal, head of the Feminist Majority Foundation, called such tactics 'a
reign of domestic terror'.
The advent of Mr Clinton, who believes in freedom of reproductive choice,
does appear to have driven opponents of abortion to greater extremes. He has
already rescinded several directives of Presidents Bush and Reagan which
denied federal funds to organisations which countenance abortion as a means
of family planning.
The Reagan administration had even issued a directive that the US could
grant political asylum to those claiming to be fleeing countries where
abortion was widely practised, as, for example, in China.
Anti-abortion activists like Mr Terry are also convinced that President
Clinton will make pro-choice convictions a litmus test for judicial
appointments, the exact reverse of the practice of President Bush.
