FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of the Philippines (4): Disruptions hit industry hard
 -Power failures
THE power-cuts that paralyse industries and households in the Philippines'
main island of Luzon for several hours daily have inflicted more damage to
the economy than any of the natural calamities that regularly hit the
country.
Losses in industrial production amounted to at least 20bn pesos in the first
three months of this year due to these power cuts (or 'brown-outs,' as they
are known locally), according to the 'multi-sectoral task force on power,' a
group that has been monitoring the problem since 1990. Mr Raul Concepcion,
task force chairman, says sales in the period fell by an average of 20-30
per cent. Most of those affected were small entrepreneurs, he adds.
In 1992, the economy failed to attain its target growth, due in large part
to the power failures which disrupted 258 of the year's 297 working days. If
the situation does not improve soon, economists fear that growth this year
could again suffer grievously.
The main problem lies in the shortage of sufficient reserve power capacity
to cope with shut-downs by the regular baseload plants, which are all old
and prone to systems failure.
The government has not built new plants since the start of the construction
in the late 1970s of the 620MW nuclear power plant in Bataan province. The
plant, which was to have supplied 15 per cent of the Luzon power demand, was
completed in 1986 but was mothballed by the previous government because of
protests arising from safety fears and allegations of corruption in its
construction.
Of the total national electric power-generating capacity of 6,000MW, the
Luzon grid accounts for 4,400MW. However, in practice only about 2,500MW of
the Luzon capacity is available because sections are under repair or being
refurbished, and others, particularly the hydroelectric plants, have
water-supply problems.
Given the peak demand of 3,200MW from its industrial and residential users,
National Power Corporation (Napocor), the state-owned generating agency,
already faces a shortage even before the day starts. Napocor thus has to
ration what it can generate to its consumers.
Every 100MW of deficiency in the supply translates into another hour of
power-failure a day. The deficiency has risen to around 800MW at the start
of the Philippine summer in March. Around mid-April, the shortfall stood at
about 500 MW.
In recent weeks, a variety of reasons have been given for power-plant
failures. In one case, imported spare parts reportedly 'did not fit'; in
another, a cooling tower in a geothermal plant was damaged by fire which was
blamed on 'faulty electrical wiring.'
Many companies have had to install their own generating sets, to reduce
losses from shortened operating hours or spoilage of goods during
processing, and the government estimates that total private generating
capacity now exceeds 800MW. Most of the generators use diesel.
Napocor has an ongoing 'fast-track' programme to install, under
build-operate-transfer arrangements with private groups, new capacities that
will lead to reserves of some 500MW by September and to 600 MWby end-1993.
The government hopes that the new plants will put an end to the power
failures by September this year.
However, there is widespread scepticism, because of Napoco's poor track
record.
The corporation had been seeking an increase in its rates, to be able to
meet profitability standards required under its loan contracts with the
World Bank. New financing is needed for its expansion plans, and any default
in its loan commitments could cripple these plans.
It was in this environment that Mr Fidel Ramos, the Philippine president,
sought 'emergency powers' from Congress. While his request was granted,
lingering fears over the 'emergency powers' used by the martial-law regime
of the late Ferdinand Marcos meant that the new powers won by Mr Ramos were
tamer than those he originally sought, and were only for specific
objectives.
One of these allows Napocor a higher return from its customers, a way of
skirting round a Supreme Court freeze on an earlier rates increase. The
extra powers should now pave the way for the construction of crucial
baseload plants which will enhance the Luzon grid's capacity by some
1,300MW.
These plants use coal or geothermal energy, rather than oil or gas, as in
the 'fast-track' plants which are being put up to bolster reserves. But the
use of gas turbine systems ceases to be economical over long periods, due to
added fuel costs. The move to construct baseload plants using cheaper energy
sources, therefore, is critical for the long-term health of the economy.
