FT  10 SEP 93 / Hurd hits at role of journalists in Bosnia: Success of
media-free Middle East negotiations gives diplomats food for thought
THE language was diplomatic, but the pique was thinly disguised. When it
comes to dealing with the delicate world of foreign policy, too much
openness - and too many journalists - can sometimes do more harm than good,
Mr Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, said last night, Gillian Tett
writes.
The timing of Mr Hurd's attack, made to the London Travellers Club, was not
entirely accidental. In recent weeks, the British government has faced
strong criticism in British papers over its cautious policy in the Balkans.
Today Mr Hurd is due to appear on German television in an effort to deflect
even fiercer attacks in the German press.
Meanwhile, the recent outwitting of the press corps over the secret Middle
East negotiations has given diplomats food for thought.
'There are some foreign policy subjects where absolute secrecy is possible,'
Mr Hurd said, pointing out that discretion had been crucial in Britain's
negotiations with Argentina after the 1982 Falklands war, or the 'two plus
four' discussions over the reunification of Germany.
Ignoring the media as earlier British prime ministers cheerfully did was no
longer possible, Mr Hurd admitted. He might have added that the British
government itself has lost little time in publicising aid initiatives,
culminating in the controversial 'Operation Irma' last month.
But with coverage liable to concentrate on horror spots, the 'something must
be done' syndrome left some journalists with much to answer for in Bosnia,
Mr Hurd claimed.
Some aid workers and diplomats in the Balkans might agree. The skill with
which UN relief workers have orchestrated the media in Bosnia has provoked
pique from low profile groups like the International Red Cross. Attempts by
the Bosnian parties to fight their propaganda campaigns through the western
press have rarely been welcomed by negotiators in Geneva.
Although the press was barred from Mr Hurd's speech yesterday, the Foreign
Office ensured it coverage by faxing his words to the newspapers.
