FT  12 JUL 93 / Survey of Belgium (7): Capital of EC is flying high / A look
at plans to modernise Brussels' airport
BRUSSELS has a state-of-the-art airport. Unfortunately for the thousands of
businesspeople and politicians who use it, the art is late-1950s.
Between 1958, when the terminal buildings were built for the World's Fair,
and 1988, no substantial work was done on the site, apart from the
construction of a small satellite terminal in the late 1970s.
But over the same period the city of Brussels has become the institutional
capital of the European Community and a magnet for international business
travellers and politicians. For these customers - who represent two-thirds
of the 9m or so passengers using the airport annually - the 1958 terminal is
a disappointment: cramped, shabby, and slow.
Perhaps Brussels airport's only advantage over its competitors is its
proximity to the city centre. It can take only 15 minutes to travel by car
from central Brussels to the north-eastern suburb of Zaventem where the
airport is built - but that is more a geographical stroke of luck than a
triumph of airport management, and it is let down by an out-of-date 'City
Express' train link.
Professor Pierre Klees, chief operating officer of the Brussels Airport
Terminal Company since January, admits that the airport's owners - a
combination of the Belgian state and private investors, including the
country's largest holding companies - should have done more to keep the
principal airport of the self-styled capital of Europe up to date.
Now, at last, the long-awaited improvements are being carried out. From the
window of Mr Klees's office, the finger of a long, new pier points out
towards the runways. Once complete, the extensions should allow Brussels to
handle an extra 21m passengers a year - more than tripling the present
capacity of 9.3m, to take account of estimated passenger growth forecasts of
between 4 and 7 per cent a year.
Posters on the approach road to the airport proclaim a completion date of
1993. In fact, following wrangles with contractors, consultants, the
government and the airlines, BATC is now estimating the new terminal, with
23 additional gates, will be open sometime in the second half of 1994. The
company says it will set a formal completion date in September.
The building of the new pier - to be followed, eventually, by a second
parallel pier linked by a tunnel - is the most obvious element of the work
under way, and the one which is creating the most headaches for users of the
airport. But BATC is simultaneously hoping to improve the efficiency of the
existing terminal so that when the wraps come off the new buildings next
year, the entire system will be quicker and easier to use. Automatic
signalling systems will guide drivers to spaces in the airport's car parks,
for example; a new integrated computer network, linking all airport services
in collaboration with the airlines, should speed check-in, border and
security controls; and BATC is also trying to persuade Belgian railways to
upgrade the airport's rail links with Brussels and Antwerp.
The improvements do not come cheap. BATC announced a net consolidated profit
of BFr283m in 1991, after tax, but it has had to raise BFr21bn, several
billion francs more than the original estimates for the improvements,
through a bond issue, to cover the cost of the new work.
Further cash will be needed to bring the new airport into line with the
requirements of the Schengen free-travel agreement, which plans to abolish
passport checks for travellers between nine continental EC countries from
December 1. BATC will be given longer to carry out the work necessary to
segregate intra-European passengers from international passengers, but
Professor Klees still estimates the cost at some BFr1bn.
Despite that, he says there is no way that the airport will rest on its
laurels once the improvements have been made. 'It's very damaging that we
didn't start work like Schiphol (Amsterdam's airport) or Paris 20 years ago.
I think all airports should have work in progress every day,' he says.
The airport's managers are still cautious about what the future holds. In
March, Mr Eric Kirsch, chairman of BATC and chief executive of the state
authority which owns 48 per cent of the group's shares, said that the
analysis of trends in aircraft movements, passenger and freight traffic in
1992 gave reason for 'moderate but definite optimism'.
But he also pointed out that Brussels was just one of a cluster of highly
competitive airports, all attempting to be the hub of international and
intra-European aircraft operations.
Brussels airport is certain to retain its head start over competitors as the
only airport serving the EC institutions, not to mention Nato and a host of
multinational company headquarters sited around Brussels. But an improvement
in Europe's high-speed rail network could draw passengers to other modes of
transport, and even entice them to use other hub airports as a way into
Europe. That would increase the pressure on the new terminal, and could chip
away at BATC's income, based on retail operations (40 per cent), airport
taxes and charges for use of pier facilities (60 per cent).
Eurotunnel, operator of the Channel tunnel, claims a combination of
high-speed train and tunnel will reduce the journey between Brussels and
central London to three and a quarter hours, possibly making the train an
attractive alternative to flying for some travellers.
