FT  23 OCT 93 / Howe gives damning account of Thatcher's last term at No 10
LORD HOWE has given a damning indictment of Lady Thatcher's last years in 10
Downing Street, accusing the former prime minister of governing as if her
personal interests were automatically identical with those of Britain.
In a detailed and caustic review of Lady Thatcher's memoirs published in
today's FT, her former chancellor and foreign secretary says she came to
regard criticism of her views as 'unpatriotic'.
He also accuses her of offering a 'comic' account of the 1986 Westland
affair, the row which set the stage for Mr Michael Heseltine's challenge for
the leadership four years later.
Lord Howe, whose resignation from the cabinet provided the trigger for that
challenge and Lady Thatcher's subsequent resignation, stresses that the
'triumphs' of her first two administrations should not be overlooked. But he
adds that he has 'no regrets whatsoever' about his damning resignation
speech after he left the cabinet in the autumn of 1990.
Characterising her style and approach to government in the period after
Westland, he says: 'For Margaret Thatcher in her final years, there was no
distinction to be drawn between person, government, party and nation . . .
Any criticism of her was an unpatriotic act.'
Reinforcing an attack yesterday by Lord Lawson, the former chancellor, Lord
Howe adds that collective cabinet discussion became for Lady Thatcher an
'irritating inconvenience'.
In his review of The Downing Street Years in the London Evening Standard,
Lord Lawson said that in Lady Thatcher's mind: 'The problem with her cabinet
was that at least some of its members had views of their own.'
Recounting the battle over the European exchange rate mechanism in which he
sided with Lord Lawson against Lady Thatcher, Lord Howe says the issue
became 'the epitome of Margaret Thatcher's 'I must prevail' syndrome'.
Lord Howe said: 'She was breaking with Europe . . . I had to break with
her.'
Triumph and tragedy, Weekend I
