FT  05 MAR 93 / Man charged over New York trade centre bombing
A MAN described as a Moslem fundamentalist was charged last night over the
bombing of New York's World Trade Centre last week.
The charge against Mohammed Salameh, 26, was made at a Manhattan district
court. Earlier officials said he was of Middle East origin, but his
citizenship was not disclosed.
The authorities indicated that other suspects were being sought. At a news
conference in Washington the acting US attorney general, Mr Stuart Gerson,
said: 'We're interested in more than the single individual who has been
apprehended.'
Earlier, authorities said they had identified a van rented from Jersey City,
New Jersey, as the possible vehicle used in the attack. Although the van was
blown up, authorities were able to trace it through a number on the chassis.
Police said that a man had rented a van in Jersey City and reported it
stolen on the day of the blast. He was arrested when he went to get his
deposit back from the rental company.
Unconfirmed television reports said the arrested man was a member of a
Moslem fundamentalist group with links to a mosque in New Jersey. The
reports said the Federal Bureau of Investigation was executing search
warrants in New Jersey and Brooklyn.
New York TV station WNBC said the suspect was connected with a Moslem group
linked to the killing of Meir Kahane, a radical rabbi who was assassinated
in New York in 1990. However, the FBI and New York police refused to
comment.
Last Friday's explosion at the complex killed five people and injured more
than 1,000. More than 50 phone calls were received by the authorities from
persons or groups claiming to have carried it out. Speculation has ranged
from Middle East Arab groups to factions embroiled in the Bosnian conflict.
However, Mr Gerson refused to comment on all such reports: 'We are most
concerned about a thorough, complete investigation,' he said.
The cost of lost business has been put at Dollars 800m (Pounds 550m) in the
first week alone. The 110-storey twin towers, which house hundreds of
financial firms and 55,000 people, are expected to remain closed until next
month.
