FT  21 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Tour chiefs embroiled in battle of brands -
Airtours' plans for a sharper profile for Owners Abroad
MR DAVID Crossland, chairman of Airtours, says he is not enjoying the
acrimonious exchanges in the wake of the company's hostile Pounds 217m bid
for fellow tour operator Owners Abroad.
'Sometimes it feels quite hurtful. I read about myself in the newspapers and
I think: 'I must be a really bad person. I must be the sort of person who
goes home and kicks the wife and the cat',' he says.
He concedes that he should perhaps have considered his personal sensitivity
before launching the bid earlier this month.
He does not, however, appear squeamish about attacking Owners Abroad's
performance, beginning with what he calls its 'misguided policy of brand
proliferation.'
The question of what brand names to give the holidays they sell is one of
the most striking differences between the two companies. Mr Crossland says
that if the bid succeeds he will reduce sharply Owners Abroad's brands,
raising the question of how successful he will be in keeping its customers.
Virtually everything Airtours sells carries the company's name.
It does sell self-drive camping and mobile home holidays under the name
EuroSites. It also last year acquired the Pickfords chain of travel
agencies, which continues to trade under its original name.
Otherwise, travellers buy Airtours holidays, whether they are going to the
Mediterranean or Florida. Most fly Airtours International, the
eight-aircraft charter carrier.
Most Owners Abroad customers probably have no idea which company sold them
their holiday. Its package tourists travel under a bewildering range of
brand names.
The company was created to sell airline seats to people with holiday homes
abroad. It still operates a small business selling seats under the Owners
Abroad name.
The 1990 purchase of Redwing, which was 50 per cent owned by British
Airways, brought in names such as Sovereign, Enterprise, Martin Rooks and
Sunmed. There have been several other acquisitions, adding names like
Tjaereborg, which sells direct to the public rather than through travel
agents. Owners Abroad's airline is called Air 2000.
Mr Howard Klein, Owners Abroad chairman, says the company has reduced the
number of its brands from 13 to nine. Several of the nine do, however, have
sub-brands.
Mr Klein argues that the advantage of multi-branding is that different
holidays can be sold to different markets.
Sovereign offers up-market packages, Martyn Holidays sells trips to Portugal
for older families, Twentys appeals to the youth market, Sunmed offers cheap
holidays to Greece and Turkey, Olympic sells more expensive holidays to
Greece.
Specialised brands appeal to people who do not like to see themselves as
part of the mass tourist market, Mr Klein argues.
Having several different names means Owners Abroad occupies more space on
travel agents' racks. It also means that if one brand suffers from bad
publicity it does not affect the rest of the company, he says.
Mr Crossland counters that the proliferation of brands is confusing; all
package tourists want is value for money. He refuses to specify what he will
do with Owners Abroad's brands, but he makes it clear that there will be far
fewer of them.
Many in the travel industry believe brands have limited effect. Most
holidaymakers have little loyalty to a particular name or company.
Mr Lester Porter, group commercial director of Thomas Cook, the travel
agents' chain, says his company has increased sales on some holidays by 30
per cent by putting its own name on them.
But then Thomas Cook, with which Owners Abroad intends to establish links if
the Airtours bid fails, is one of the best-known travel brands in the world.
Others make less impact.
Mr Porter says: 'Some customers will come in and ask us for a particular
tour brand. But probably the majority come in and say, 'I'd really like to
go to Spain next year and I'd like something on the beach. What do you
recommend?' They're looking for the right holiday rather than a particular
brand.'
Mr Crossland believes Airtours can hold on to most of Owners Abroad's
holidaymakers, even if it does get rid of most of its brands, although he
concedes that some customers will be lost.
The precedents, however, are not encouraging. When Thomson, the largest tour
operator, acquired Horizon in 1989, the enlarged group had nearly 40 per
cent of the package tour market. Last year, Thomson's share was about 30 per
cent.
Mr Crossland says that what Airtours will be buying, if the bid succeeds, is
Owners Abroad's destinations rather than its customers.
It will take over Owners Abroad's hotel beds, even if it sell them under
different brands. Mr Crossland argues that customers do remain loyal to
certain resorts and hotels.
But what of the hotel owners? When International Leisure Group, then the
second biggest operator, collapsed in 1991, many of its senior executives
were soon back in business, heading new companies. Owners Abroad executives
displaced by a takeover would almost certainly do the same. Won't hoteliers
prefer to sell their beds to the Owners Abroad contacts they have come to
know?
Mr Crossland says the hoteliers will switch to Airtours, recognising that it
had become a larger and stronger company. 'They are very sophisticated
individuals. They know exactly what's going on. You do them an injustice,'
Mr Crossland says.
