FT  09 OCT 93 / How to Spend it: Be bold - commission a gem of the future /
The nicest jewellery is hand-made and unique to you
BRITAIN seems to have been so busy in the last few years looking backwards,
indulging in a collective nostalgia for things past, that many of our most
talented contemporary designers must sometimes despair. Where, they must
wonder, are the Medicis, the Rockefellers, the Esterhazys of our day? People
who love and nurture the work of artists, who commit themselves to a raw new
talent, encourage it, support it and give it the environment in which to
flourish?
There are some new sources of patronage, of course - the great city
corporations, companies such as De Beers which has done an enormous amount
to encourage a range of fine modern jewellers, silversmiths, enamellers, the
livery companies and a few rich and enlightened private clients - but on the
whole life is tough for the artists and craftsmen of our day.
Those who love jewellery, who have an anniversary, a special birthday or
celebration on the way, might like to look at the work of some of our modern
jewellers. Instead of haunting auction rooms or antique shops, take a wander
round some of the galleries in the UK which do their best to support new
artists.
In London you would do well to make time to see an exhibition at the Lesley
Craze Gallery, 34, Clerkenwell Green, London EC1R ODU. In this unfashionable
part of London Lesley Craze, once an actress, has for years been supporting
the work of young jewellers.
For her latest exhibition - Today's Jewels, from Paper to Platinum - she has
the work of 57 jewellers on sale and on show. It is not intended to be a
comprehensive exhibition of everything that is happening in Britain, more a
personal selection of the work she herself likes and rates. The range,
vitality and sheer beauty of the pieces is staggering.
The jewellers range from well-established names such as Gerda Flockinger and
Wendy Ramsshaw to designers still, commercially speaking, wet behind the
ears. The materials range from the inexpensive and little regarded, such as
papier mache, aluminium, painted tin and acrylics, to gold, silver and
precious stones.
There is a lovely catalogue, with a single plate in full colour illustrating
the work of each jeweller, which would be a marvellous handbook for anybody
wanting a handy visual reference to a wide range of the best work being done
today.
Already there is huge interest in the exhibition. One large public funded
body is looking at the work in order to plan its buying for public
collections, and the London Arts Board has given a grant to subsidise the
catalogue. Those who cannot get to the exhibition, which is on until
November 5, can at least buy the catalogue for Pounds 10 on the spot or
Pounds 12.50 by mail.
Some of the work is remarkably well-priced - for instance, a beautifully
worked brooch, labelled Hearts and Minds, made by Trevor Forrester in
lead-free pewter with lacquered brass symbols is only Pounds 47. A
spectacularly colourful cuff bracelet, made from large ceramic stones, glass
and plastic beads linked with silver wire by Diana Laurie is Pounds 121.
Barbara Tipple has been designing fine modern jewellery for more than 20
years and has been the happy recipient of many awards, including two of De
Beers International Awards. There is nothing cheap or trendy about Barbara's
jewellery - it is made of the finest, most precious materials and is
intended to last forever.
She designs all the pieces herself but for some of the techniques she gets
experts to embellish the pieces - Fred Rich, for instances, one of our
finest enamellers, does her enamelwork and Robert Campbell-Legg her steel
engraving and inlay work.
She works with metals, both precious and semi-precious, bronze and all
manner of stones from the most precious of all, such as Sandawana emeralds
and the finest diamonds, to semi-precious tourmaline and even rock crystal.
She loves combining metals such as steel with 22 carat gold and then adding
the finest engraving or inlaid work. Most of her pieces are strong and bold
and one or two are almost monumental, with an almost primitive feeling which
is counterpointed by the extremely high quality of the finishes and
workmanship.
Most of her work is done to commission. She lives above her own gallery at
100 Marmion Road, Southsea, Hampshire PO5 2BB (tel: 0705-753025) where a
less expensive range of her work, from Pounds 20 upwards with an average of
about Pounds 150, can be seen.
At the moment some of her more precious pieces, such as the ones
photographed here, can be seen and bought at Kojis in the fine jewellery
department in Harrods in London, where there is an exhibition of her work.
Even there you could buy a silver ring for as little as Pounds 30. Other
pieces start at Pounds 100 and there is a biggish selection for under Pounds
500.
Finally, you might like to consider the work of Barbara Christie, head of
jewellery at the well-known Morley College in London who also makes
jewellery for private customers to commission in her studio at home. How To
Spend It readers may have seen her work at the many fairs at which she
exhibits such as the Goldsmiths Fair and Chelsea Arts Fair.
Her style, as you can see from the two photographs here, is spare, simple
and strong. She uses precious and non-precious metals and stones as well as
Chinese river pearls and gemstones. Her latest jewellery explores the theme
of 'boxes' - textured 'box' brooches which are divided into tiny windowed
compartments, each featuring collectibles such as gold or silver dust,
miniature jewelled hearts and corals. Then there is a collection of square
bangles with gold corners, diamond tipped rings, cufflinks, earrings and
chains all based on what she calls the 'Neo-Classics.'
For those who prefer to spend money on something really useful she also
makes a range of cutlery, napkin rings, paper knives, fruit knives and knife
rests. For chaps there is a collection of bar cufflinks in 18 carat gold on
steel.
Her prices start at Pounds 95 and the most expensive of her pieces is Pounds
850 but a really fine one-off piece of jewellery could be commissioned for
well under Pounds 200. Contact her at her home, 12 Dukes Avenue, London W4
2AE, tel: 081-994 3498.
