FT  13 SEP 93 / International Company News: Secret life of the rich and
well-connected - Profile of Hong Kong entrepreneur Mr Robert Kuok
Mr Robert Kuok Hock Nien is not a typical media tycoon. A Malaysian Chinese
who has based himself in Hong Kong for more than a decade, Mr Kuok makes
only rare public appearances and avoids any media contact.
He is typical of a select group of the region's overseas Chinese
entrepreneurs. One business associate summed him up with: 'He is very
private, very well-connected, very pro-China, and very rich.'
Mr Kuok has no expertise in newspapers, and his only media exposure is as a
passive 33 per cent shareholder in TVB, Hong Kong's largest broadcasting
station.
Mr Kuok's business empire stretches across national boundaries, encompassing
a complex web of private and public companies, mostly controlled by
relatives or trusts.
He earned his initial fortune in the commodities business, and is still
known as Asia's 'Sugar King'. He established his first sugar manufacturing
enterprise in Malaysia in the late 1950s, moving into sugar cultivation soon
after. With steadily rising prices, Mr Kuok amassed millions from his sugar
dealing in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Later, Mr Kuok expanded outside the region, forming a joint venture with the
French Cie Commercial Sucres et Denrees, the world's biggest sugar trader.
He became involved in the oil trading business, bought control of a
Singapore shipping line and, through his listed Perlis Plantations company
in Malaysia, started cultivating rubber and palm oil as well as mining tin
and iron ore.
As the commodities side of his empire was hit by low world prices, Mr Kuok
concentrated on expanding into other sectors, notably his Shangri-La group
of hotels. He now owns or operates 23 luxury hotels or resorts around the
world.
The Kuok group has also moved into investments in housing schemes, in
shopping complexes, and in beach resorts. Through all his business dealings,
Mr Kuok showed himself to be adept at making the right connections and
contacts - guanxi in Chinese.
Over the years he has built up a formidable network of regional business
associates, including Mr Liem Sioe Liong, controller of the Salim group of
Indonesia, believed to be the world's biggest Chinese controlled group of
companies.
'The Kuok empire is one of a handful of overseas Chinese companies that have
influence in virtually every country in the region,' says a Malaysian
analyst.
'The amazing thing is it's still, fundamentally, a family-run business with
the patriarch himself making the big decisions. And because its dealings are
mostly informal and secretive, no one really knows just how much it's all
worth.'
Mr Kuok, who is 69, this year officially retired from the day-to-day running
of the empire. In the traditional Chinese manner, the Hong Kong and
Singapore/Malaysian operations were divided between two sons; but equally
traditionally, Mr Kuok has kept a close eye on their activities and remains
at the core of the decision making process.
One of the keys to his broad-based business network has been his ability to
cultivate political contacts. He has made substantial contributions to a
wide range of political causes, and is close to the leadership in Malaysia,
Indonesia, the Philippines - and in China.
In 1976, Mr Kuok moved his headquarters from Singapore to Hong Kong, and
became a permanent resident two years later. He owns two prime hotels, and
his flagship company, Kerry, has been active in trading and stockbroking.
However, from the start his attention has been firmly focused on China.
In 1984, he made his first significant investment in China, the Dollars 480m
World Trade Centre in Beijing. His Hong Kong-listed hotel arm, Shangri-La
Asia, owns stakes in six mainland hotels, and he has committed billions of
US dollars in investments ranging from an oil refinery and port development
in China's Guangxi Province, to numerous property projects. Through these
investments, he has also built up an immaculate portfolio of contacts in
Beijing.
His only Hong Kong-listed vehicle, Shangri-La Asia, has mainland minority
shareholders which include the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and
Trade, and the Beijing office of China International Trade and Investment
Corporation (Citic).
Mr Kuok has been closely involved with the expansion of Citic's Hong
Kong-listed arm, Citic Pacific, in which Mr Kuok is now the second-largest
shareholder. He has a 13 per cent stake in the company, which has a stock
market capitalisation of HKDollars 30bn.
Recently, Mr Kuok's Kerry group secured a 15 per cent interest in the
HKDollars 7bn (USDollars 903.2m) Western Harbour tunnel, which will link
Hong Kong island with the new West Kowloon expressway leading up to the
airport. The consortium also includes Citic and China Merchants, another
leading Beijing company in Hong Kong.
It is these connections with Beijing, combined with his lack of media
experience, which will inevitably colour perceptions of his acquisition of
the South China Morning Post, his largest single Hong Kong investment.
In a written interview in 1991, Mr Kuok admitted he was 'averse to dealing
with the media'. He will undoubtedly remain a distant figure in the workings
of his newspaper, but few are prepared to believe that he will not provide
both editorial and business direction.
