FT  17 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Johnson caution with slight fall to Pounds
15.8m
JOHNSON Group Cleaners, the UK's largest dry cleaning company, yesterday
offered cold comfort to green shoot economists, saying it had seen no signs
of recovery either here or in the US.
'We are being very cautious until we see some tangible sign of uplift,' said
Mr Terry Greer, chairman. And just when that will happen, he said, 'well,
your guess is as good as mine.'
Mr Greer said Johnson had been adversely affected by the exceptionally cold
weather in the US, as well as by the continued severity of recession. 'We
are reading about signs of recovery there, but we haven't seen any,' he
said.
The statements came as the group reported a slight decline in pre-tax
profits from Pounds 16m to Pounds 15.8m for the 12 months to December 26, on
sales 2 per cent lower at Pounds 150.8m.
The decline at the pre-tax level was due to a Pounds 148,000 deficit on
property, against a profit of Pounds 130,000 last time, following a Pounds
638,000 write-down on the value of a factory.
Excluding property, Johnson reported a slight increase from Pounds 15.9m to
Pounds 16m.
The most significant factor affecting profits was a Pounds 1.4m decline in
interest payments to Pounds 1.6m. Gearing fell from 39 per cent to 23 per
cent.
The strongest performance came from the group's growing workwear rental
business, supplying uniforms and sundries to small and medium-sized
businesses.
Operating profits in this division were Pounds 270,000 lower at Pounds 8.7m,
on sales 7 per cent down to Pounds 41m. The decline in turnover reflected
the sale of a business in the US.
In the UK, where Johnson claims some 10 per cent of the workwear market,
operating profits and sales were slightly ahead, Mr Greer said.
The dry cleaning market on both side of the Atlantic continued to be
depressed. Margins and sales fell, with operating profit Pounds 1m lower at
Pounds 8.8m on turnover down from Pounds 110.3m to Pounds 109.8m.
Losses in Johnson's US franchise operation had increased from last year's
Dollars 250,000 (Pounds 176,000), in spite of efforts to control costs. Mr
Greer said there was little more that could be done, without economic
recovery.
The final dividend is maintained for the third consecutive year at 18.7p,
for an unchanged total of 25.7p.
Fully diluted earnings per share rose from 48.7p to 49.12p.
COMMENT
Johnson's larger competitors might take heed of the company's softly softly
approach to workwear rental. By focusing on smaller to medium-sized
customers, and avoiding the volatile catering and leisure sectors, Johnson
has managed to keep its bucket of business topped up and at margins
(reportedly as high as 20 per cent) which are only dreamed of by others. Now
Johnson intends to tackle larger customers on a national basis - although in
its usual cautious manner, says Mr Greer - while its rivals are moving down
the scale. Although Mr Greer traditionally downplays the outlook, analysts
are more enthusiastic and count on some recovery to begin this year.
Forecasts are for about Pounds 17.5m pre-tax, excluding property gains, for
a prospective p/e of about 16 times. Although this seems to be up with
events in the short-term, Johnson's mid-cycle prospects and solid record
might lead some to tuck this away for the upturn.
