FT  23 JAN 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: The pros and cons of Pibs issues -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu looks at a device used by building societies to raise
capital
LOWER base rates have caused many investors to see the attractions of
permanent interest bearing shares. Pibs are relatively new. The first issue
was launched in July 1991 by Leeds Permanent building society.
Pibs are not like ordinary shares which give investors a chunk of a
company's assets. They are instead a way for building societies to raise
capital and they form part of the loan structure of the society.
They are better compared with gilts than shares, but instead of being issued
by the government, they are issued by building societies. Like gilts, they
pay a fixed income and pay interest twice a year net of basic rate tax. They
are also exempt from capital gains tax.
Most gilts have a date on which the capital is repaid. But Pibs are
irredeemable, which means there is no repayment date. Investors can get
their capital back only by selling in the stock market and, like all stock
market investments, the price will fluctuate.
It is also worth bearing in mind that they are deeply subordinated. This
means that if the building society were to collapse, investors with Pibs
would be behind all other lenders, depositors and shareholders for
repayment. In addition, there is no compensation scheme to protect
investors.
Since the Pibs market is self-contained and small, Paul Killik of
London-based brokers, Killik &amp; Co, warns that, 'failure by one building
society in the Pibs market could do enormous damage to the others'.
Moreover the building society is under no obligation to maintain interest
payments. Nor does it have to pay skipped interest payments at a later date.
'People think that because Pibs are issued by building societies, they
cannot lose money. This is patently wrong,' said David Nugent of Pilling &amp;
Co, Manchester-based stockbrokers.
However, so long as investors understand that what they are buying is
similar to an irredeemable preference share rather than a fixed interest
building society bond, Pibs can be useful.
Their main attraction lies in the fixed yields which are substantially
higher than current variable rates of interest. The table shows yields and
prices of Pibs at mid-day Thursday.
The after-tax income that an investor receives is in the range of 8 to 9 per
cent, compared with variable rates of about 4.5 per cent net in an instant
access building society account. Non-taxpayers can reclaim the tax owed to
them.
As with government stocks, the yields and prices of Pibs have an inverse
relationship to each other. As prices rise, the yield falls and vice versa.
But once the Pibs are bought, the yield to the investor will remain fixed
forever, unless disaster befalls the building society.
The table shows that prices of Pibs have been rising since they were issued,
so people wishing to buy now get a lower, but still high, yield. Some of the
issues were aimed at the institutional market and will be beyond the reach
of most investors. But the minimum investment in many others, such as those
launched by Britannia and Bristol &amp; West, is Pounds 1,000.
So, who should buy Pibs? Johnson Fry, which runs a portfolio investing in 10
Pibs, says that 'A lot of elderly people, who do not care too much about
their capital, buy them to fix their income.' Killik believes that they have
a place in a fixed interest portfolio, but not on their own. He suggests
combining them with gilts and other preference securities.
There are several ways of buying Pibs. One is to purchase them through a
stockbroker. Pilling, for example, charges 1 per cent commission on the
first Pounds 10,000 and 0.5 per cent thereafter, while charges at Killik are
1.2 per cent on the first Pounds 10,000 and 0.4 per cent after that.
Pilling's Nugent believes that Pibs are attractive at the moment, but their
price could fall from September or October if inflation rises. Fixed
interest investments become less attractive when inflation is on the way up.
London-based broker, Dunbar Boyle &amp; Kingsley has put together five Pibs  -
Bristol &amp; West, Coventry, Leeds &amp; Holbeck, Newcastle and North of England -
with a National Westminster irredeemable preference share, to produce income
which is paid out 12 times a year.
The minimum investment is Pounds 14,000. There is an initial charge of 2 per
cent but no annual management fee. The portfolio currently pays an income of
about 8.3 per cent net per annum.
Johnson Fry's Pibs portfolio is based on a similar concept. It packages 10
Pibs to produce quarterly income. The initial fee is 4 per cent but there
are no other charges until the fifth year, when there is a quarterly
administration fee of Pounds 20 plus VAT. The minimum investment is Pounds
20,000 and the portfolio is currently paying net interest of about 8 per
cent.
Those who like the idea of Pibs but are worried about risks to their capital
may be interested in a fund launched last November by Exeter Fund Managers.
Exeter Balanced has a weighting of about 70 per cent in Pibs, with
investment trust zero dividend shares making up the balance.
The idea is that Pibs provide the high yield while zeros (which do not pay
income) provide capital growth for the fund. The yield for investors is
therefore much lower than on Pibs held as a single investment; it is
currently 4.7 per cent net. The minimum investment is Pounds 750 and there
is an initial 5.25 per cent charge with an annual management fee of 1 per
cent.
Since the Pibs form part of a unit trust, investors are protected by the
Investors Compensation Scheme. The fund is however, liable for capital gains
tax, but losses are allowable for CGT purposes.
