FT  17 AUG 93 / Sale ends Abbey National's Pounds 258m estate agency foray
ABBEY NATIONAL yesterday announced the sale of its 347-branch Cornerstone
estate agency chain for less than one-tenth of the price per outlet paid by
many buyers in the late 1980s.
The disposal will end a six-year venture into estate agency which has cost
the bank an estimated Pounds 258m.
Abbey is selling Cornerstone for Pounds 8m to two chartered surveyors who
are backed by Provident Life, the life insurance company. The deal will
create the UK's largest independently owned chain of estate agents.
The sale price is equivalent to Pounds 23,000 per agency, against prices of
about Pounds 250,000 per branch paid during the housing boom of the late
1980s as mortgage lenders and life companies competed to build up
distribution arms.
Abbey will still operate mortgage-selling units in 50 of the Cornerstone
branches and have mortgage business referred 'where appropriate'. The chain
will be tied to Provident Life for the sale of life assurance and pension
products.
Mr Tony Snarey, one of the purchasers, said yesterday: 'The price we are
paying is a bit of a watershed in estate agency values. They are realistic
and sustainable, and I think we have reached the bottom of the market now.'
Mr Snarey and the other purchaser, Mr Bill McClintock, were partners in two
independent estate agency chains bought by Royal Life in 1986, and took on
the running of Royal Life Estates before leaving this year.
He said the two partners would manage Cornerstone by encouraging initiative
in its managers. He added that ownership of estate agencies by mortgage
lenders had led to a 'culture clash' which stifled enterprise.
The sale expands the network of estate agency branches tied to Provident
Life to 1,100. Provident, the UK life arm of the Winterthur Swiss Insurance
Group, has achieved distribution through such deals rather than by buying
agents.
It said it had provided a 'quite small' loan to Mr Snarey and Mr McClintock
to buy Cornerstone, as well as supplying computer systems and staff training
to ensure that it complied with the 1986 Financial Services Act.
Mr John Finan, managing director, said the deal meant that Provident had
achieved its target for this year of acquiring distribution through more
than 1,000 branches.
Last year, Abbey made a Pounds 126m write down of 'goodwill' paid in
addition to the book value of agencies it bought to make up Cornerstone. It
also charged Pounds 12m in re-organisation costs, on top of losses of Pounds
90m accumulated over six years.
Mr Charles Toner, managing director of new businesses, said Abbey expected
to make a final write-down of up to Pounds 30m in the second half. It was
pleased to have sold the chain whole.
Lex, Page 16
