FT  18 SEP 93 / How we saved the rhino with rifle and chainsaw: Elizabeth
Robinson watches a desperate attempt to beat the poachers
THE CONVOY giving chase through the African bush was an assortment of
pick-ups, a Land Rover and trucks all being directed by a crackled message
from a scout helicopter, call sign Z-HOT.
Trackers had scoured the earth for clues and reported to the helicopter.
When the animal came within 30m of the chopper - the range of the full-bore
air pressure rifle on board - it was shot. In many cases, mothers and their
young were felled within metres of each other; sometimes the baby panicked,
ran off and collapsed as far as a mile from where its mother lay.
Rhino hunting in Zimbabwe has found new impetus. But take heart - these are
hunts to save the lives of a vanishing species, performed by vets using
sleep-inducing darts, not the AKs of the poachers. Poaching has wiped out
all but - at an optimistic estimate - 500 of Zimbabwe's rhinos; four years
ago there were more than 2,000.
The hunter's aim in both cases is the same: to remove the rhino's horn. A
successful poacher will get less than Pounds 100 for the horn, which is then
sold for as much as Dollars 20,000 (Pounds 13,000) in the Far East where it
is thought to enhance sexual potency, or to Yemen to be made into highly
prized dagger handles. A successful vet will hope that the dehorned rhino
has been given a stay of execution.
Zimbabwe has been dehorning its rhino population for a year, following the
example of Namibia. Mark Atkinson, a vet for Zimbabwe's National Parks
working almost exclusively on the dehorning programme, believes about 60 per
cent of Zimbabwe's rhino population has been dehorned.
He stresses that the programme is not a long-term solution to save the
rhino, but prefers to call it 'crisis management'. In other words, the vets
are trying to give the rhinos a respite from poachers so that the species
can build its numbers up to a comfortable level. By dehorning the few left,
the species may survive.
It costs between Dollars 500 and Dollars 1,000 to dehorn one rhino. It can
also take several days to track one animal, and a dozen or more burly men to
heave the captured rhino into a crate for transportation to a safer area.
With no dedicated rhino unit in Zimbabwe, the conservationists are desperate
for any help they can get. The British Army's Mozambique Training Team,
based in the east of the country, has been lending radios, trucks and muscle
to Zimbabwe's effort. They helped to move seven rhinos at Lake Kyle which
had been stranded when the rains came, and took part in a three-week
operation to dehorn about 60 animals in the Bushey Park area.
Under Lt Col Robert Martin, officers and senior NCOs from BMATT (British
Military Advisory and Training Team) joined the veterinarian team and
trackers at a private game lodge about three hours south of Harare. The vets
particularly wanted help in dehorning and moving the white rhinos, which are
more susceptible to stress than black ones.
Once the trackers and vets have sighted and shot a rhino, the convoy of
trucks with its winches and crates rushed to where the animal lay. A hood
was placed over the rhino's head to shield its eyes and ears. The removal of
the horn takes only a few minutes. Chainsaws cut through it as easily as
through a small tree; the vet takes longer to shape the stump so that it
will not become ingrown. Rhino horns regrow at an average of 8cm a year.
Small slivers of horn are barely distinguishable from a human fingernail.
Part of the exercise was to move the rhinos to a safer area - private
gameparks or farms. A truck winched down a crate to lie with its open door
facing the rhino and a rope was tied around the animal's huge snout. About
eight soldiers took up positions around the animal to push it into the
crate, while as many again were at the back of the crate ready to heave on
the rope and pull the rhino in.
Rather than shift two to three tons of deadweight, the animal was revived
with a sleeping drug antidote and water was poured into its ear to wake it.
As soon as it started moving, the heaving and pushing began until the door
of the crate was closed on a very irate and confused beast.
The crate was then winched on to the truck and the rhinos driven to a secret
location where they are released into a corral and monitored before being
taken to a safe area.
There are so few rhinos left that the vets keep detailed identification
details of each one they catch. As well as nicks cut out of their ears, age,
condition and distinguishing marks being noted, 'mug shots' are taken.
Seven rhinos were dehorned that weekend - one calf, at four to six months
old, had no horn to speak of.
Euan Anderson, a Zimbabwean vet, believes that since the dehorning programme
started in Zimbabwe, four to five dehorned rhinos have been killed by
poachers. This may be because when poachers have spent several days
following rhino spoor they may kill the animal to cut off its ears as proof
to their paymasters, or it may simply be that the poachers were not aware
until after the shooting that the rhino they had been following was carrying
nothing of value. To combat the latter, Zimbabwe has been advertising its
dehorning programme on Zambian television - it is believed that the poachers
come from Zambia, though some have hinted that the worst culprits are much
closer to the Zimbabwe parks.
Studies are in progress in Namibia and Zimbabwe to determine the long-term
effect on the rhino's behaviour of having its horn removed. Euan Anderson
believes that the rhino is not greatly affected. Even in self defence, as he
says, if a three-ton beast charges towards impact at full speed, it does not
much matter whether it has a horn or not.
More than one of the officers involved in the rescue observed that 'Civvies
would pay a fortune to do this'. Indeed, I felt privileged to be there to
see the magnificent animals sleeping, touch their skin that feels like
slightly spongy granite and stroke their ears, which on black rhinos are
fringed with long silky black hairs.
Zimbabwe had, in fact, investigated the possibility of selling 'rhino
hunting', particularly to the US. The idea was that for around Dollars
30,000 a hunter would be given the facilities to track and dart a rhino,
leaving the vets to do the rest, and take home the horn as a souvenir.
However, the proposal met with outcry and resistance in the US. Another idea
that the vets approve of is to flood the market with the huge stockpile of
legally-removed rhino horn, force down the market price and thus make
poaching unviable. They stipulate, however, that the revenues should be
ploughed back into rhino conservation.
Bushmen and vets in Zimbabwe are passionate in their commitment in saving
the rhino from extinction. While Mark Atkinson was busy with the chainsaw, a
vet from the US whispered: 'Your gardeners in England earn more than he
does.'
Earlier, on a walking safari deep in the bush of Hwange National Park, I was
nervously quizzing my armed guide about the procedure should an animal
charge (do not shoot until it is 10 feet away and approaching). And what if
your party of tourists should be charged by a rhino? I asked. He shrugged.
