FT  28 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Problem of growth in a shrunken market - As
Royal Doulton heads for a quote, Peggy Hollinger looks at the fine china
industry
JOSIAH Wedgwood, founder of the fine china company which bears his name, was
keenly aware of the dangers of industrial espionage. To thwart snoopers he
wrote down the results of thousands of experiments in a secret code.
Some things have changed in the 230 years since Josiah set up shop in
Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, but caution still rules the fine china
manufacturers. People seeking to evaluate the industry will find few global
figures or statistics.
The lack of information is one reason why the City is having such a
difficult time deciding how to appraise a quoted fine china manufacturer,
which Royal Doulton plans to become when it demerges from Pearson later this
year.
Mr Alistair Smellie, an analyst with Lehman Brothers, says investors will
have to take a broad brush approach to assessing the sector. 'With the lack
of information and limited quality available that is all one can do.'
What is clear, however, is that fine china manufacturers have come through a
devastating period of recession. Some estimate the market has shrunk by as
much as 20 per cent in the last three years.
Mr Kneale Ashwell, chief executive of Wedgwood, says that in spite of
widespread restructuring by most of the main players, the industry is still
beset by overcapacity.
To make matters worse, fewer couples are getting married. Wedgwood estimates
that the number of weddings - which account for between 40 and 50 per cent
of its and other UK manufacturers' sales - have fallen by 8 per cent in the
last two years alone. Today it is estimated that the international fine
china and porcelain market is worth between Pounds 500m and Pounds 1bn a
year.
That global market is divided between seven main players, including two of
the world's most famous and long-established names - Wedgwood and Royal
Doulton. The other five newer arrivals are Lenox of the US, Noritake of
Japan, and Villeroy and Boch, Heutchenreuter and Rosenthal of Germany.
While Wedgwood and Royal Doulton are marginally larger with annual sales of
about Pounds 200m, the rest are about the same size. Each holds a leading
position in its domestic market, with the exception of Noritake which,
besides a strong position at home, shares the number one spot in North
America with Lenox.
The challenge facing these seven players is how to grow in what is
undisputedly a mature industry. Although all seek to build stronger
positions outside their home markets, and exports form some 60 per cent of
the sales of the UK companies, manufacturers without brand advantage find it
difficult to meet the demands of different national tastes.
The expensive and laborious china-making process - taking more than three
days and up to 12 people to complete just one piece - means that the costs
of introducing completely different shapes and designs for different markets
would be prohibitive.
North America is one of the largest markets for fine china with annual sales
in excess of Pounds 300m. However, with the exception of the Japanese it is
also notoriously difficult for outsiders to break into. Tastes are for
simpler, more casual ware at lower prices. Here, the Japanese excel, says Mr
Ashwell. 'They have given superior quality at very, very low prices,' he
says. The slim margins have put other potential rivals under intense
pressure.
Germany, which rivals North America in terms of market size, presents
different problems. Lacking any real tradition of buying china, the Germans
prefer the porcelain manufactured at home. Although companies such as
Wedgwood and Royal Doulton have made some headway by playing on the cachet
of the brand names, the German manufacturers have a virtual stranglehold on
the market.
In the UK, efforts by the higher priced German manufacturers have largely
failed in a conservative and price-conscious market. Similarly, the Lenox
products do not appeal to more traditional English customers. Royal Doulton
and Wedgwood claim 26 per cent of the UK market by value.
Japan presents yet different demands. While English speaking countries buy
china mainly for weddings, the Japanese want to buy small gifts several
times during the year. Here, brand name, generally English, and packaging
are all important. Japanese tourists in the UK are also vital to the likes
of Wedgwood and Royal Doulton. Mintel, the market researcher, estimates that
tourists purchased some Pounds 156m of china and glassware in 1990.
Although the skilled nature of fine china puts some restrictions on the
ability of manufacturers to meet the needs of different markets, Mr Ashwell
is emphatic there are opportunities for growth. First, by speeding up the
manufacturing process. Although fine china will always be a craft-based
industry, technology is increasingly eliminating the need for skilled jobs
such as glazing and plate-making.
Second, china makers are moving towards more utilitarian giftware and point
to this market as one of the fastest growing parts of the industry. China
products such as clocks, playing card boxes and frames are a few products
recently introduced by Wedgwood to tap this market.
Third, the globalisation of brands means that differences in consumer taste
are gradually being eliminated. 'If you have some convergence as you had in
the fashion industry,' says Mr Kevin Farrell, chairman of the British
Ceramic Manufacturers Federation, 'that would be one solution to the problem
of what lines to carry.'
Finally, china makers are seeking to re-educate customers to use china every
day, instead of just on special occasions. This means they will have to
introduce more casual china and porcelain products.
There is a more controversial theory about where a few of the top seven may
find growth. 'I think we will see strategic alliances of various kinds that
will decrease the number of players,' says one industry insider. A single
alliance could result in a clear leader twice the size of any of the others,
he says.
One city analyst has already pinpointed a potential scenario. Lack of
knowledge about the industry could cost Royal Doulton a premium rating, he
suggests. Then, he says, 'a Japanese or continental competitor may see it as
pathetically rated and take it over.'
