FT  23 JUL 93 / Probe of VW officers widens: Discovery of data seen as link
with ex-GM executive
CRIMINAL investigations into alleged industrial spying by top Volkswagen
executives have been intensified after the discovery of copies of
confidential General Motors data.
Prosecutors in Darmstadt have widened the probe into possible links between
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who defected from GM to become a VW
director in March, and the data found in a Wiesbaden house.
Mr Lopez, head of group purchasing and production, is at the centre of
investigations which now involve two former occupants of the house, Mr Jorge
Alvarez Aguirre and Mr Ramon Piazza. Both men are ex-GM employees who
followed Mr Lopez to VW on March 22, after he abruptly left the US group on
March 15.
The announcement of the wider investigations came yesterday from Mr Georg
Nauth, a senior public prosecutor in Darmstadt. Responding to Mr Nauth, VW
issued a statement headlined 'No documents found in Wolfsburg' - the
company's headquarters.
The response was the second in two days in which the company appeared to
distance itself from the employees under investigation. It said the
documents had not been found 'at the disposal' of Volkswagen. Four boxes
found in the Wiesbaden house contained documents, overhead projection slides
and transparencies from Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, and the US
parent, according to the prosecutor's statement. Some of the data allegedly
related to Opel's secret small car project, code-named the O-Car. Other
information concerned sales strategies, cost-cutting plans and the Vectra
model.
Some of the slides and transparencies had been translated into German at the
express wish of 'the accused' - Mr Lopez - the statement added.
The prosecutor claimed that, while still head of global purchasing at GM,
having already discussed moving to VW with Mr Ferdinand Piech, the German
group's chairman, Mr Lopez asked for translations from English of around 150
slides containing details of purchasing and manufacturing plans. Their
discovery in the former home of the two former Opel managers, both of whom
now work for VW and have denied having documents, is the link with Mr Lopez
which the Darmstadt prosecutors said they were seeking.
In its response to the prosecutor's statement VW complained that the lawyer
defending 'the affected employee', who 'had again confirmed that no secret
Opel or GM documents had been found in his possession', had not been allowed
to see the papers.
The prosecutor's statement gave VW no reason to reproach Mr Lopez, it said.
Earlier this week VW claimed that a civil court ruling in a separate but
associated case concerned individuals while they were still employed by GM,
and was 'not Volkswagen's concern'.
Lex, Page 20
