FT  24 DEC 93 / Oh Lord, give us next year our daily bread . . .: Every acre
of England is in an Anglican parish. But the Church is facing big money
problems
The distance between regular Church of England congregations and once-a-year
churchgoers will be greater than ever this Christmas. Occasional, seasonal
visitors will notice nothing amiss. The cribs and carols will still be in
place in more than 16,000 churches throughout the land, blending holiness
with homeliness in the secure Anglican style.
More involved members of the church, however, will be asking how much longer
it is going to stay like that. The church faces unprecedented financial
problems on such a large scale that they could permanently change its shape.
Within a few years, a century-long trend of insufficient candidates coming
forward for ordination has been reversed. The Church of England now has more
clergy than it can afford. Suddenly, all the R-words that became commonplace
in industry during the 1970s and 1980s - retrenchment, rationalisation,
restructuring, even redundancy - are being uttered nervously in clerical
circles.
The problem's seriousness is illustrated by the view of Dr George Carey,
Archbishop of Canterbury, that finance, rather than the divisive question of
next year's ordination of women priests, is likely to be the most
significant issue of his period in office.
Matters came to a head for the Church of England with a decline in the value
of the Church Commissioners' income-producing assets from nearly Pounds 3bn
in 1989 to Pounds 2.16bn last year. Much of 1993 has been taken up with
investigation and painful debate over the commissioners' stewardship of the
church's assets and their devastating over-exposure in the property market.
An investigation found that the commissioners' assets committee had
compounded their problems by borrowing substantially to finance further
speculative property development, while failing to maintain adequate
managerial control. Bewildered members of the commissioners' board of
governors complained afterwards of having been denied information about
assets committee decisions.
The church has untangled the tragic cycle of events with impressive charity,
showing little of the collective desire for recrimination and scapegoats
that would have dominated the reaction of most institutions. Attention is
being concentrated on the consequences of the mistakes.
The Church of England has lived beyond its means for many years, relying on
the commissioners' investment income to finance the experience. Warnings
signs were evident in the 1980s as a new clergy pension scheme and other
costly, long-term commitments were taken on. Between 1981 and 1991, when the
retail prices index rose by 78 per cent, the cost of clergy pensions and
retirement housing increased by 226 per cent, and spending on church
buildings by 245 per cent. So the sharp decline in the commissioners' asset
values is not the single cause of the present problems; but it means
solutions must be attempted in an atmosphere of crisis rather than a more
gradual, planned way.
The commissioners pay for pensions and housing for retired clergy, and
contribute substantially to stipends. But the proportion of the stipend bill
met from their assets - 45 per cent in the early 1990s - will fall below 30
per cent by 1996. Some dioceses will receive still less.
It costs about Pounds 600m a year to run the Church of England. Last year
clergy stipends and housing cost Pounds 229m, worship and buildings Pounds
201m and administration Pounds 65m. Parishes generated the biggest slice of
income - Pounds 372m - and the Church Commissioners Pounds 161m. The decline
in the commissioners' investment income means an extra Pounds 50m a year
must be found elsewhere to meet running costs and pensions.
Churchgoers in the parishes are the only potential source of the extra
money. A 15 per cent increase in the Pounds 372m raised locally would
produce Pounds 55m and, if sustained annually, solve the problem. But the
church, like charities in general, has seen little real growth in voluntary
donations in recent years - they fell in real terms in 1990, and increased
by only 2 per cent above inflation in 1991. Getting an extra 15 per cent
from the parishes would be the equivalent of raising the entire voluntary
income of Oxfam each year on top of existing collections.
And, although there are signs that the rate of decline in church attendance
 -a social trend shared by the Church of England with other Christian
denominations throughout the post-war years - has slowed since the
mid-1980s, the church will be trying to squeeze more money from a diminished
base. About 1.1m people now attend Anglican churches regularly, compared
with 1.5m in 1970.
Some parishes will rise to the task of becoming self-sufficient, but in
doing so will expose a further problem. The Church of England may have
fallen on hard times financially, but it remains structured as a national
church in a very real sense. Every acre of England is in an Anglican parish;
its clergy are deployed around the country on a fair-shares basis related to
population and geography, and the church retains an elaborate central
decision-making and policy-developing structure. It maintains several
thousand schools; runs theological colleges; has responsibility for many
historic buildings and, through its boards and committees, contributes to
debates on religious and social issues.
In future, some parishes may have full-time priests - or continue to exist -
only if they can meet the costs locally. Moves in this direction are already
occurring in some dioceses. A consultation document in London, which plans
to pay its stipends without any Church Commissioners' support within ten
years, proposes that if a parish is unable to make an adequate contribution
to staff costs 'a careful assessment ought to be made concerning its
future.'
Unco-ordinated moves in this direction could have far-reaching consequences
for the nature of the national church. Parishes working hard to meet all
their own running costs would, influential figures such as Alan McLintock,
chairman of the church's central board of finance, believe, be reluctant to
contribute to the national 'head office' institutions that give the Church
of England so much of its distinctive character. Relationships between
clergy and congregations could change if priests felt wholly dependent on
their parishioners for continued employment. Vacancies would be filled on
the basis of available funding rather than priority needs, with clergy
skewed towards the suburbs and away from the inner cities and peripheral
estates which the church regards as important mission areas.
'Greater financial self-sufficiency need not mean the triumph of
inward-looking congregationalism,' Dr Carey told the church's general synod
last month. Such fears are, however, very much alive.
An alternative to such an every-parish-for-itself approach advocated by the
Rt Rev David Sheppard, Bishop of Liverpool - whose diocese includes many
relatively deprived areas that would find it impossible to meet full clergy
costs from local resources - is to encourage stronger church-going areas to
make more use of part-time, unpaid ministers, enabling inner cities and
other priority areas to retain substantial numbers of stipendiary clergy.
There are around 11,000 stipendiary clergy and another 2,000 non-stipendiary
ministers - ordained clergy who combine their ministry with secular
employment and do not receive a salary from the church. Increased reliance
on non-stipendiary clergy and lay workers is one probable consequence of the
financial problems.
The church does not set limits on candidates considered for ordination but,
says a new report by its Advisory Board of Ministry, it might become
necessary to restrict the number it can afford to pay. Those called to
ordination, says the report, should 'not themselves seek to impose
conditions as to whether their call is to stipendiary or non-stipendiary
work.'
Although the Church of England pays better than some denominations - a
Salvation Army officer starts on an annual Pounds 3,350, rising to a Pounds
3,990 maximum after 45 years - the financial rewards of the ministry are
modest by most secular standards. The average for a vicar is between Pounds
12,000 and Pounds 13,000.
Church leaders emphasise the need for appropriately motivated men and women
to offer themselves for ordination remains as great as ever. But today,
potential candidates are warned to set aside any notions of social standing
that may once have compensated for limited financial rewards.
Future clergy, says the Advisory Board of Ministry report, will find their
ministry very different from that of their predecessors. It will, it says,
'embody much of the insecurity and vulnerability that is characteristic of
our time.'
Canon John Stanley, a church commissioner and member of the general synod,
endorses this point. He says that declining church attendances, and the
increased secularisation of society, are leading to some clergy feeling
isolated, lonely and undervalued; he is concerned that worries about the
church's financial future will become an additional pressure on them.
Many clergy are worried that rushed solutions to the financial problems,
involving emergency cost-cutting against impossibly short timetables, could
spiral the church into local initiatives that would undermine its status as
a national church. Canon Stanley argues for a controlled response.
'I believe there is a danger of increasing the scale of the problem if
people rush at it too much,' he says. 'I know that raising individual giving
is not easy, but we must remember that if everyone gave Pounds 1 per week
more the problem would disappear. There is a need for a steady hand and
strong nerve.'
Church finances will be under further pressure next year when male priests
unable to accept women's ordination, leave and qualify for payments under a
compensation scheme. There are also dangers that the women priests issue,
allied to financial problems determining whether some churches close, could
upset the doctrinal ecology between the Church of England's high and low
church wings. Most of the defections of priests and parishioners over
women's ordination will be among Anglo-Catholics, while many of the parishes
proving most successful at raising money and attracting growing
congregations are evangelical.
One of the deepest concerns voiced by clergy and lay people is that the
church, shocked by the Church Commissioners' investment problems, might go
to the other extreme and be carried away by an obsession for budgetary
control.
'We cannot keep the Church of England alive by the contributions of
individual congregations alone,' says the Very Rev John Gladwin, Provost of
Sheffield cathedral. 'The Church Commissioners' originally obtained their
money from the reserves of the old cathedrals and bishoprics to help finance
the living ministry of the church. There is absolutely no point in solving
the problem in a way that enables the commissioners to balance their books,
and creates a sound pension scheme, but leaves no money to finance an active
ministry.'
Dr Carey told last month's synod that 'complacency and panic' were equally
out of place as a response to the financial problems. Nothing is more
certain, however, than that some will panic while others remain complacent.
For all its structure, much real decision-making in the Church of England
remains with individual bishops in 43 dioceses, while most of the clergy
hold their posts on freehold and cannot be moved against their will. In such
circumstances, steering a course of sound, rational management between the
twin rocks of complacency and panic will be unusually difficult.
