FT  06 NOV 93 / Keeping Jordan's extremists in line: The Islamists'
prospects in next week's election
ISLAMIC fundamentalists look likely to form the largest bloc in Jordan's
parliament after Monday's elections - the first multi-party poll in the
kingdom since King Hussein last year lifted a 36-year ban on political
parties.
Members of the Moslem Brotherhood, elected as individuals, constituted the
biggest bloc in the last parliament, with 40 per cent of the assembly's 80
seats. But while the Islamic Action Front, the Brotherhood's party, is
widely expected to win fewer seats this time - it is fielding 36 candidates,
in 16 of Jordan's 20 constituencies - they are certain to keep a strong and
tenacious voice in the legislature.
Accommodating Islamic fundamentalists has long been a characteristic of King
Hussein's rule. Even when political parties were formally banned, the
monarch courted members of the Brotherhood, offering them cabinet posts and
free rein in their charity and social service work in Jordan. By working
with the fundamentalists, he hoped to induce them not to work against him.
But over the past few months, King Hussein appears to have changed tack.
With an eye on Egypt and Algeria, where militants are waging violent
anti-government campaigns, the king has tightened the reins on Islamic
groups. While allowing them to run as a political party - as they are now
prohibited from doing in Egypt and Algeria - he has at the same time acted
to ensure their success in the polls will be limited, while stamping hard on
any manifestation of Islamic extremism.
In a move widely seen as curtailing their likely electoral success, the king
recently made a controversial change in the voting law restricting each
voter to a single vote, where in the previous 1989 poll they could cast as
many votes as there were seats in their constituency.
Action against extremism has been decisive. Ten supporters of the banned
Islamic Liberation party are currently on trial for allegedly plotting to
kill the king at a university ceremony in June. Last week, four men were
killed and five wounded in a shoot-out between the army and a trio of
Islamic extremists near Jordan's border with Israel. The extremists had
worked with Sheikh Omar Abdul Rahman, the spiritual leader of Egypt's Gamaa
al-Islamiyya extremist group who is at present on trial in New York for his
alleged role in the World Trade Centre bombing.
Moreover, in the run-up to the elections, King Hussein publicly criticised
the Islamic Action Front, while at the same time warning Mr Leith Shbeilat,
perhaps the most popular and outspoken of Jordan's Islamic MPs, that he
should toe the line.
Mr Shbeilat, who was last year tried but acquitted on charges of plotting
against the king, is highly critical of the government and has decided to
boycott Monday's poll.
For many Jordanians, the king's moves seem to overestimate the threat from
the kingdom's fundamentalists. And certainly, their ability to change
Jordan's political system in their favour has so far proved limited. Despite
having 30 Islamic MPs, the fundamentalists made very limited progress in the
last assembly towards their ultimate goal of installing Shari'a (Islamic)
law. Motions to ban the sale of alcohol, segregate sexes in schools and
universities and throw out the kingdom's International Monetary Fund
economic reform programme all failed.
Moreover, examples of Islamic violence or state-threatening militancy have
been rare in Jordan, which has long had one of the region's most effective
security apparatuses.
Nevertheless, both King Hussein and his western allies are keeping a close
eye on the Islamists. According to press reports in Amman recently, when Mr
Fayez Tarawneh offered his credentials to President Bill Clinton this summer
as Jordan's new ambassador to Washington, Mr Clinton warned against allowing
the Islamists to become too powerful through the elections.
King Hussein has powerful domestic and foreign policy reasons to keep the
fundamentalists in check. He must, above all, ensure that the
fundamentalists' opposition to the peace process cannot veto Jordan's
prospective peace agreement with Israel. The parliament to be elected on
Monday may well have to ratify any final agreement with Jordan's Jewish
neighbour.
Nevertheless, the king must also balance such concerns with his
determination that Jordan should produce a meaningful democracy.
It appears to remain his profound belief that fundamentalism is better
controlled within than outside the political system.
