FT  02 SEP 93 / UK calls for review of EC social legislation: Reforms needed
to cut cost of employment
THE BRITISH government is calling on European Community member states to
reform their social security systems to cut the cost of employment, and for
a radical review of all existing and proposed EC social legislation in the
light of its impact on job creation.
The proposals are contained in a UK Treasury and Department of Employment
document submitted to the European Commission. The Copenhagen summit of EC
leaders in June mandated Brussels to produce a white paper on growth,
competitiveness and jobs for the Brussels summit this December, and the
Commission yesterday began formal discussion on the subject in closed
session.
The UK call comes as EC countries including Germany, France and Belgium
search for ways to lighten the cost to business of taking on workers. These
are also the countries in the forefront of defending the EC's social charter
 -signed by all except the UK in 1989 - and the Maastricht treaty's social
chapter, from which Britain negotiated an opt-out.
The UK document starts by reminding its EC partners and Brussels that 'the
world does not owe us a living'. EC treaty objectives of a 'high level of
employment and social protection have to be earned; they are aspirations,
not entitlements,' it says.
Although it insists repeatedly that 'there is no question of abandoning
social protection', it argues that public social security and healthcare
expenditure - at twice Japanese levels and 60 per cent more than in the US -
have to be cut by more careful targeting of benefits, which should be scaled
to price people into jobs.
The document points out that in every economic cycle of the last three
decades, the underlying level of EC unemployment has increased, in line with
rising social security outlays. Labour markets are too rigid and are being
made more so by EC social legislation, it argues.
The UK calls for 'early proposals for lightening the burden of Community
rules,' and a Commission task force to re-examine EC social legislation. It
wants the Commission to 'introduce a system of cost-benefit analysis' for
its proposals.
Ironically, the UK was offered such an audit system at the December 1991
Maastricht summit, as part of a compromise whereby Britain would accept a
watered-down social chapter, but Mr John Major, the UK prime minister,
refused.
The UK now senses that the tide is turning in its favour in the debate on
social policy. 'There clearly is a link between high levels of social
protection and rising unemployment,' one UK official aid yesterday. 'This is
a door which is giving, and we've been pushing at it for a long time now,'
he added.
Europe's jobs crisis, Page 3
