FT  05 OCT 93 / International Company News: Industry bewildered by unlikely
trio - The spate of petrochemicals acquisitions
LORD Hanson, Mr Kerry Packer, and Mr Jon Huntsman form a surprising trio.
But during the last two months the English Lord, Australian entrepreneur and
Mormon maverick businessman have taken a punt on the troubled petrochemicals
industry.
In July, Lord Hanson acquired Quantum Chemical, the largest US producer of
polyethylene, for Dollars 3.2bn. Two months later, Huntsman, the
privately-owned US group run by Mr Huntsman, announced its largest
acquisition, buying Elf Atochem's French expandable polystyrene operations
for an undisclosed sum.
Six hours later, the same group in partnership with Mr Packer revealed a
still larger deal, purchasing Texaco's chemicals operations for Dollars
1.06bn.
The acquisitions left the rest of the petrochemicals industry bewildered.
They were unsure whether the trio were demonstrating superb timing by buying
at the bottom of a particularly bad downturn and would soon reap the benefit
of a recovery, or that the three - along with the rest of the sector - would
continue to suffer from continued over-capacity, poor margins and potential
losses.
Mr Huntsman, the chief executive of the largest US privately-owned chemicals
group, has bet his shirt before.
In 1983, one of the least propitious times to enter the commodity
petrochemicals business, he mortgaged his family's fortune and borrowed a
great deal of money to acquire a Dollars 42m polystyrene plant from Shell.
The Shell executives reckoned he would lose everything as well as the bank
loans. They gave him a bronze sculpture inscribed; Riverboat Gambler. From
your friends at Shell.
However, the gamble paid off. Within five years, Mr Huntsman's company had
acquired further facilities from Shell in the UK and Hoechst in the US,
generated pre-tax profits of Dollars 240m in a single 12-month period and
cleared its debts.
Huntsman's latest deals dwarf those of the early 1980s, and nearly double
the group's turnover to Dollars 3.1bn a year, an impressive achievement for
a company that did not exist 10 years ago.
Mr Huntsman explains: 'We don't buy companies to make profits out of the
cycle - that philosophy just does not make sense. We're looking to make
profits from day one.'
Huntsman group can make profits in commodity chemicals at the bottom of the
cycle because of its low cost base, says Mr Huntsman.
'As a private family-run company we just don't have the enormous overheads
associated with a public group,' he says. The group's running research and
development costs and those for sales and general administration are only
4.2 per cent of turnover. That compares with 9 per cent for the rest of the
industry.
Costs are kept down through the company's policy of running plants at 100
per cent capacity. That reduces costs per unit, and improves quality because
the plant is not stopping and starting.
'We've been waiting for the down-cycle to come. We've been planning for it,
while the others have been dreading it. It gives us the opportunity acquire
at reasonable prices. If we make money on the up-cycle - well, that's just
gravy.'
Mr Huntsman admits the group has its work cut out managing the increase in
the business's size. 'Managing growth is troublesome and I do worry about
it. There's a difference between managing 300 people in a family business
and a group employing 10,000 staff in 65 locations.'
Nevertheless, Huntsman managers are confident they can cope with the latest
acquisitions. They argue the purchase of three Hoechst polystyrene plants in
1986 was far more stressful because the deal tripled the size of the group
when there was no corporate structure in place.
As for the gravy offered by the cycle, Mr Huntsman reckons the outlook for
much of the industry remains grim. The cycle is on a more definite curve in
the US than Europe where he expects little light over the next two to three
years. In North America, polypropylene and polyethylene are at a low ebb,
but expandable polystyrene and polystyrene are in short supply and margins
are more healthy than at any time, he claims.
With little help from the market, Mr Huntsman's and Lord Hanson's management
skills will need to be well in evidence to avoid a long-haul to respectable
profits.
