FT  01 APR 93 / Auction of Pounds 3bn gilts receives strong demand: Bids
made for 1.96 times the bonds offered - Investors cautious on inflation
Pounds 3bn of the new 8 per cent gilt 2013 - was hailed as a roaring success
by dealers, who pointed to strong demand from institutional investors.
Investors themselves, however, remained cautious about medium-term prospects
for the gilts, citing concerns about inflation and the government's
borrowing requirement.
Yesterday's auction is the first since the March 16 Budget announcement
concerning changes to the funding rules and borrowing programme. The market
had been nervous that investor appetite for such a large amount of stock
might prove weak.
In the event, dealers said, the relatively high 'cover' - the ratio of bids
to the amount offered - of 1.96 times, and the very narrow range of
successful bids suggested there was good demand for the stock.
UK institutions said the success of this auction was not necessarily a guide
to the prospects for the rest of the year.
'The auction was very well covered, which is constructive for the market,
but there will be another auction next month, and yet another one the month
after,' said Mr Mark Rimmer, fund manager at Gartmore.
He expects long-term interest rates to rise over the next year, reflecting
concern about inflation, while short-term rates fall to stimulate the
economy.
One of the big fund management groups, which asked not to be named, said:
'Our attitude to the gilt market is one of caution with the exception of the
short end, where the possibility of further cuts in the base rate may boost
prices for two- and three-year gilts. We didn't participate in the auction
because we feel the market is over-valued and that expectations of higher
inflation have not been priced in. Furthermore, the prospect of heavy supply
is very worrying.'
Not all investors are so bearish about inflation prospects. Another UK fund
management group said: 'We think the long end looks good value in relation
to inflation, and we think that the market is too pessimistic in its
inflation forecasts. We also expect to see more retail investors buying
gilts as returns on savings accounts remain unattractive.'
Capital markets, Page 31
Lex, Page 24
