FT  18 JUN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: German rates unchanged
DEALERS continued to speculate that the dollar could break through important
new levels against the D-Mark yesterday, despite a host of data and events
that ought to have softened the US currency a great deal, writes James
Blitz.
The Bundesbank surprised some market participants by keeping its official
interest rates on hold yesterday. But that did not stop the dollar rising
1/2 pfennig in the wake of the news, to peak at DM1.6650 against the German
currency.
Later, in early US trading, the dollar lost much ground against the D-Mark
after the release of poorer than expected US economic data.
The US trade deficit grew to Dollars 10.49bn in April, its biggest total for
more than four years. The Philadelphia Federal Reserve's index of business
activity also showed signs of stagnation in the economy, with the index
falling to minus 6.5 per cent in June from plus 11.3 per cent in May.
Nevertheless, the dollar was not swayed too far off course by this data,
ending only  1/4 pfennig down on the day at DM1.6555. In New York it later
rallied to close at DM1.6594. 'The dollar is still on track for a convincing
break through the DM1.67 level,' said Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency
strategist at Citibank in London. 'The market is taking a positive view
towards the dollar, as is the fund manager community.' He believes that if
the dollar/D-Mark rate closes at or above DM1.67, that will be followed by a
strong push up to DM1.80.
The dissenters from this view remain strong. Mr Marc Hendricks, an economist
at Swiss Banking Corporation in London, said the dollar would remain under
pressure from weak economic data in the US. But he acknowledged, too, that
the German currency was facing significant weakness. 'If the dollar is to
break through to new ranges, then it will have to happen now,' he said.
Trading in European currencies was dominated by the growing weakness of the
D-Mark, which fell to minus 25 against its divergence indicator in the
European exchange rate mechanism. This is the lowest level that it has been
at in the recent cycle of weakness.
The German currency was softer against the French franc for much of the day,
but finished unchanged at FFr3.361. The Italian lira closed a little firmer
at L908.4 per D-Mark from a previous L908.6.
Sterling was the strongest performer against the German currency yesterday,
helped by indications that the UK economy was recovering. The pound rose 1
1/4 pfennigs immediately following the release of figures showing the fourth
successive monthly drop in UK unemployment and inflation staying at a
29-year low. It closed at DM2.5100, an increase of 1 1/2 pfennigs on the
day.
The yen softened against the dollar yesterday amid speculation that Japan
could be thrown into a new political crisis. It closed at Y106.65 from a
previous Y106.60, and finished at Y107.27 in New York.
