FT  13 OCT 93 / Countdown to Palestinian self-rule starts: The task facing
Israel and the PLO
ISRAEL and the Palestine Liberation Organisation today begin a complex
process of working out the details of how to implement the historic peace
accord signed one month ago in Washington.
The negotiations in Egypt mark the coming into effect of the Declaration of
Principles, a broad framework for a peace settlement, sealed at the White
House with a handshake between Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister and
Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman. The talks also start the tight nine-month
countdown to Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories with Israeli
military withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho to
be completed by April 13 and an elected Palestinian Council to take over
internal administration by July 13.
Two standing committees, which begin work today in Cairo and the Red Sea
resort of Taba, will over the next two months hammer out a lengthy agenda of
difficult and sensitive security issues ranging from the role of the
Palestinian police force to the release of Palestinian prisoners.
The overall liaison committee, led by Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign
minister and Mr Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), a senior PLO official, will meet
in Cairo. A committee of experts led by Major-General Amnon Shahak, Israeli
deputy chief of staff and Mr Nabil Shaath, adviser to Mr Arafat, will meet
in Taba to concentrate on the protocol for Israeli military withdrawal which
both sides have agreed to reach by December 13.
A third committee will meet in Washington to prepare a protocol for the
holding of Palestinian elections and detailing the powers of a Palestinian
Council. A fourth committee will concentrate on a crash programme of
economic assistance to the territories.
Both Israel and the PLO appear committed to thrashing out the problems and
keeping the peace momentum on track. But it is clear that many of the issues
will severely test the Palestinian side as hardliners in the occupied
territories continue to seek to sabotage the agreement and level charges of
betrayal against Mr Arafat.
The most difficult issues revolve around the security of Jewish settlers who
will continue to live in the territories throughout the five-year period of
interim self rule. Last weekend's killing of two Israeli hitchhikers by
Palestinian gunmen near Jericho has heightened Israeli concerns about
security. Mr Rabin has made clear that the security issue and Palestinian
guarantees will be the touchstone of the next two months negotiations.
The Taba committee will be the centre point for talks about security and its
location on the Israeli-Egyptian border will allow the negotiating team to
make site visits into the territories to resolve demarcation lines on the
ground. Any deadlock between the two sides will be referred up to the higher
level liaison committee.
Among the issues to be resolved in Taba are the extent of the hitherto
unspecified area around Jericho from which Israeli troops will withdraw; the
level of co-operation between the Palestinian and Israeli police forces and
in particular what right Israeli policemen will have to pursue Palestinian
suspects who commit crimes in Israel and flee across the border into the
territories.
The Taba talks must also resolve the extent of Israeli military protection
for Jewish settlers travelling on roads in the territories; what will happen
to Palestinians currently living under Israeli protection who have been
dubbed 'collaborators'; the conditions for the release of Palestinian
prisoners held by Israel; the right of passage for Palestinians crossing the
Egypt-Gaza border and the Jordan-Israeli border and the right of Jewish
settlers to pass through Palestinian controlled areas.
Israeli officials say they will arrive at Cairo and Taba today with a clear
agenda, working papers and a will to reach solutions within the next two
months. However, concern has been expressed in Jerusalem about the extent of
preparation on the Palestinian side. The PLO, however, come to he talks
buoyed by a vote in the PLO's central council in Tunis approving the peace
agreement by 63 votes to eight with 11 abstentions.
Although the negotiations are going to be difficult and lengthy, Israeli
officials believe it will be much more difficult to deliver on the
agreements when they come into force. They say that building confidence and
relationships between the two sides are as important as the details of the
agreements.
