FT  23 SEP 93 / Waldegrave denies arms deception
MR WILLIAM Waldegrave, Foreign Office minister between July 1988 and
November 1990, yesterday denied that the government had deceived parliament
about its policy on arms sales to Iraq.
However his insistence, at the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry, that government
guidelines restricting defence exports remained substantially unchanged
throughout his period in office was challenged by Lord Justice Scott and
Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, the inquiry's counsel.
Mr Waldegrave, who is now the public services minister, told the inquiry: 'I
don't remember thinking for a moment we had a frightfully secretive policy
of changing the guidelines. It would have been (politically) suicidal if we
had.'
In earlier evidence to the inquiry, Mr Mark Higson, a former Foreign Office
official who served under Mr Waldegrave, said the minister was among those
who had misled parliament by not announcing publicly a relaxation of the
strict export guidelines to Iraq.
Mr Waldegrave yesterday confirmed that after the ceasefire in the Iraq-Iran
war he had agreed to a change of wording in the original guidelines which
allowed certain defence exports to go through the licensing system. He said
this was only a marginal change.
But he was challenged with references to documents which appeared to
contradict him, including one Whitehall briefing note in December 1988 that
stated the guidelines had been modified quite substantially.
Mr Waldegrave defended his decision not to inform Mrs Margaret Thatcher,
then prime minister, of the change to the guidelines because the issue was
not of sufficient importance, and because she had her mind on other foreign
policy issues.
In a note sent at the end of 1988 Mrs Thatcher asked to be told of any
significant changes in policy governing defence exports to Iran and Iraq.
The minister told the inquiry that he could imagine what she would have said
if he had told her about the revised guidelines: 'Yes, William, why are you
taking up my time?'
Mr Waldegrave is to give further evidence today. He is expected to be
questioned over his statement that 'no dual-use exports were allowed if it
was believed they were to be used to produce weapons'.
