FT  10 SEP 93 / Many killed in US attack on Somalis: UN says action was last
ditch effort to save troops
US HELICOPTER gunships fired on a crowd of Somalis in Mogadishu yesterday,
inflicting heavy casualties in what United Nations officials said was a
'last ditch, last resort effort' to save encircled UN troops.
The battle followed an attack on a road-clearing patrol of Pakistani troops
under UN command, in which a UN armoured vehicle was set on fire by a 106mm
canon shell.
UN officials said there were 'sizeable' casualties among the Somali
militiamen who attacked the patrol. They said it was 'entirely possible'
that women and children who had swarmed around the armoured vehicles,
serving as cover to the militiamen, had been killed as well.
One Pakistani soldier was killed and five Pakistanis and three US soldiers
wounded in the battle, which took place in the same district of Mogadishu in
which seven Nigerian soldiers were killed by militiamen on Sunday, and 24
Pakistanis in an earlier ambush.
The battle took place as pressure mounted in Congress for President Bill
Clinton to pull US troops out of Somalia, or at least to lay down more
clearly what their purpose was.
The Senate yesterday debated a motion by Senator Robert Byrd, the senior
Democrat from West Virginia, urging that funds for the Somalia operation be
cut off on October 31 unless Congress approved US involvement.
'How long are we to chase around the Somali capital with helicopter raids,
seeking an elusive magic bullet solution to Somalia's political turmoil?' Mr
Byrd asked.
Members of Congress from various points on the political spectrum have
expressed mounting anxiety about different aspects of the US involvement,
ranging from the cost of the operation, to the president's failure to
consult Congress, to the UN command structure which places some US troops
under commanders of other nationalities.
'It is one thing to be there feeding people, but if you are out on an active
military mission I think Congress should sign off on it,' said Senator Mitch
McConnell, a Republican from Kentucky.
While US military forces have been greatly scaled back since the beginning
of the operation launched by former President George Bush, some 4,500 troops
remain, and have recently been reinforced by crack Army Rangers.
General Colin Powell, chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, yesterday
said it would be a mistake to 'cut and run because things have gotten a
little tough,' and said withdrawal would be 'devastating to our hopes for
the new world order and our ability to participate in multinational
organisations to deal with problems like this.'
