FT  08 FEB 93 / Management: Virtual factory takes shape
A new buzzphrase is entering the European lexicon of industrial jargon - the
'virtual factory'. The concept is already common among US management experts
to denote how companies can rejuvenate themselves by tapping sources of
external expertise, rather than duplicating it themselves.
Now, however, those high-powered researchers at Insead, the French-based
European Institute of Business Administration, have concluded that the
virtual factory idea could be one answer to the perennial problem of
Europe's global competitiveness.
Insead's just published bi-yearly survey* of manufacturing strategies -
based on data from 108 big European industrial companies - acknowledges that
companies have now absorbed the principles of customer-driven manufacturing
such as total-quality management or just-in-time practices.
The strategy has paid off in terms of performance improvements on the
factory floor. The big problem, though, is that it has not bolstered the
competitive position of European manufacturing.
Insead admits that the economic environment must be one reason why
manufacturing improvements have not been translated into profits or
increased market shares. But perhaps, it suggests, there is a more
structural reason.
This is that all manufacturers worldwide have adopted the same sort of
techniques - known collectively as 'lean manufacturing' and borrowed or
adapted from the Japanese - and are now fighting on a level field. Something
extra is required if a manufacturer is to gain competitive advantage.
'Finding this new way of manufacturing is perhaps less easy for Europeans
than in the past,' says Insead. 'We have got used to looking east for
examples of outstanding manufacturing. But even Japanese manufacturers do
not seem to have a clear picture of what looms beyond the horizon.'
According to the survey, the best of Europe's senior manufacturing managers
are now integrating manufacturing within the value-added chain, both with
other functions in the company and with suppliers and customers.
This is what Insead calls the 'virtual factory' - a factory which performs
its task of transforming materials and components into value for the
customer by using resources outside the manufacturing function itself. The
resources of the suppliers, marketing and sales, engineering, even the
customer, have to be mobilised.
According to Insead, its discussions with managers reveal concepts such as
virtual logistics. Responsibility for the flow of goods and organisation is
assigned to a virtual logistics manager, but without giving that person a
logistics organisation.
The implications for the manufacturing manager are significant. 'The concept
of a virtual factory requires that tasks get carried out by networks of
resources inside and outside manufacturing,' says Insead.
'These networks will not emerge spontaneously but require manufacturing
managers to pay attention more than ever to relations with their peers and
partners.'
Unfortunately, Insead's evidence suggests that most European manufacturers
are not yet ready for the task, which depends on three conditions: a clear
and shared vision throughout the organisation, an unambiguous commitment to
the improvements of human resources, and a reasonable willingness to
experiment with new manufacturing methods.
But, says the report, there seems to be insufficient investment in all three
areas to reach the ambitious goals of the virtual factory.
As with lean manufacturing, though, the big question may be whether European
companies can gain any competitive advantage from the virtual factory.
*Creating the Virtual Factory, by Arnoud De Meyer. Available free from
Insead, Boulevard de Constance, 77305 Fontainebleau Cedex, France.
