FT  17 MAY 93 / Political row to put peseta to the test
THE Spanish peseta's new level in the European exchange rate mechanism may
be put to the test this week as the political battle over last Thursday's
devaluation escalates.
In the run-up to elections on June 6, the ruling Socialists and the
conservative Partido Popular (PP) exchanged accusations over the weekend. If
the PP insists on further interest rate cuts - the Bank of Spain trimmed its
official rate from 13 per cent to 11.5 per cent the day after the peseta's 8
per cent devaluation - the peseta could come under pressure again.
With the PP and the Socialists running close in opinion polls, the markets
will be watching developments carefully.
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez accused Mr Jose Maria Aznar, the PP leader,
of precipitating the final speculative attack on the peseta by revealing
details of a conversation in which Mr Gonzalez had tried to seek a deal not
to attack the currency during the campaign. A few days later Mr Aznar had
said Spanish interest rates should fall quickly.
In an interview with the Financial Times at the weekend Mr Aznar rejected
this. 'Mr Gonzalez is beyond all shame,' he said. 'There was absolutely no
agreement on silence at all and no one in this country can say a single word
of mine has cost the country a single peseta of our reserves. What is more,
I have resisted many voices who are urging me to make the most of this
opportunity.
'The person responsible for the trouble Spain is in is Mr Felipe Gonzalez.'
Anxious not to hand the struggling Socialists a lifeline, Mr Aznar, who is
to meet British Prime Minister John Major during a visit to Britain today,
would not say whether he was satisfied with the scale of the devaluation and
the subsequent interest rate cut. 'I will be satisfied when the Spanish
economy begins to recover,' he said.
Nevertheless, there are few early signs that the PP has managed to turn
Thursday's devaluation - the third in less than nine months - to its
advantage.
Two nationwide opinion polls published yesterday put the Socialists ahead.
Although the polls were taken before Thursday, they demonstrate how well the
Socialist vote is holding up, despite the recession and divisions in the
ruling party. The polls also continue to show that Mr Gonzalez is more
popular than Mr Aznar.
