FT  01 MAY 93 / Battle against a moral imbalance: The arms embargo imposed
on the Bosnian Moslems is unacceptable
Another flurry of negotiations has started over Bosnia. They seem unlikely
to succeed. The west hopes to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to implement the
Vance-Owen plan, while refusing to do anything effective to change their
minds. In particular, the British government remains deeply attached to an
arms embargo that guarantees the Serbs and, to an extent, the Croats
military superiority in Bosnia.
Why is the government's support for the arms embargo so implacable? The
foreign secretary has already answered this question by condemning the
arming of the Moslems as merely providing a 'level killing field'. By its
actions and its words, the British government evidently prefers an unlevel
killing field.
Mr Hurd's position is, it should be noted, advanced as a moral one. He
argues against arming Bosnia's Moslems on the grounds that it would both
prolong and increase the killing. The obvious reply to this objection is
'yes, it might'. But what is desired by these means is not war for its own
sake, any more than that was the aim of the US in supporting the UK during
the second world war. The aim of fighting would be a better outcome than
surrender. Mr Hurd should be able to see this. He insists that what is
needed is a negotiated political settlement. But what can be the
precondition for such a settlement, other than a balance of forces on the
ground or the satiation of one side?
Participation by foreign ground forces would be more effective in bringing
balance to the battlefield than arming the Bosnian government. But, for
understandable reasons, the UK - along with France and the US  - does not
wish to undertake a large and open-ended commitment. With foreign ground
troops ruled out, it seems extraordinary that a recognised state should be
denied any effective means to defend its existence.
It is only because states provide a police force and an army that they are
entitled to insist that their citizens remain unarmed. Similarly, only a
commitment by the west to defend Bosnia's Moslems could justify depriving
them of their right to self-defence.
So what about the argument that providing these people with means of
self-defence may increase casualties? First, the west is not pacifist.
Countries such as the UK accept that the risks of resistance will often be
preferable to surrender. Second, the victims are being denied the right even
to choose whether to defend themselves. The west is imposing the preferences
of those not at risk on those who are.
To deprive both sides of means of defence is tantamount to willing the
victory of the side that started off better armed. The present stance is
pro-Serb. In feeding the victims, the British government has adopted a
conscience-salving gesture. But by choosing neither to defend these people
nor to help them defend themselves, it is an accomplice in 'ethnic
cleansing'.
Yet by its support for sanctions against Serbia, the government has
implicitly recognised that this is not solely, or even largely, an
inter-ethnic war within Bosnia. It has also recognised that one side is more
culpable than the other. Serbian action in Bosnia is made possible by the
support from Serbia. The aim of that support appears to be the creation of a
geographically contiguous, ethnically pure, greater Serbia.
The western reaction has been economic sanctions, which are unlikely to
work. What has happened since the Gulf war demonstrates the ineffectiveness
of the sanctions policy that many favoured before it started. As for the
Vance-Owen plan, it looks clever-silly. The fundamental objection is that it
conflicts with the aims of both Serbs and Croats, yet there is no force to
impose it.
Can sense be made of the British stance? Yes it can. The policy could be
expounded as follows, even if members of the government would not be willing
to admit this even to themselves: 'Serbia will win this war. It will win
because the costs of doing anything effective to stop it would be too high.
It would be best for everyone if that victory were as quick and complete as
possible. Giving military help to the Bosnian government would increase the
number of people killed, while just postponing the inevitable.
'We cannot admit this is our policy, since it contradicts everything we
supposedly believe in. We can also not ignore the disquiet of our
television-watching population. The commitment of a modest contingent of
soldiers for humanitarian purposes has at least stilled those calls and
saved lives, while doing little to postpone Serbian victory. Naturally, we
will not acknowledge this was our objective, for which reason the appearance
of sanctions will be maintained indefinitely.'
This policy is not indefensible, but it is hardly acceptable either. It
suffers from four disadvantages.
First, it is bound to appear to fail. The ostensible policy is to stop
Serbia, while the real policy is for Serbia to succeed. The contrast is
bound to make the west look ridiculous.
Second, the policy may even fail to minimise the killing. Effective
opposition is at least as likely to stop the Serbs as anything else. If that
opposition is not to come from western countries, then it must come from
those they are attacking.
Third, Bosnia is not the last word in this saga. Others will learn from the
success of this brutal attempt to unscramble ethnic omelettes by force.
Serbia itself will learn from the success of this attempt.
Finally, the western world is defined by moral values. To connive at
atrocities for reasons of realpolitik concealed under the cloak of
pseudo-pacifism is to bring it into disrepute.
It may now be too late to provide the Bosnian government with effective
means of self-defence. Given western reluctance to intervene effectively,
however, this policy would have offered a better chance of peace than
negotiating while giving Serbs and Croats carte blanche to change facts on
the ground.
