FT  01 SEP 93 / Rejoin Unesco in two years, US is urged
A TASK force has recommended that the US should rejoin the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, but suggested delaying
re-entry for another two years.
The task force, headed by Mr Douglas Bennet, assistant secretary of state
for international organisations, says Unesco has improved its management and
reversed its earlier politicisation.
State Department officials confirmed that the recommendation had been
forwarded to the White House National Security Council, but did not know
when President Bill Clinton might act on it.
The UK is also considering rejoining the organisation. The House of Commons
foreign affairs committee this month urged the government to do so.
The US withdrew from the Paris-based Unesco in 1984, complaining that the
organisation had 'extraneously politicised virtually every subject it deals
with; exhibits hostility towards the basic institutions of a free society,
especially a free market and a free press; and demonstrated unrestrained
budgetary expansion'.
The UK and Singapore followed suit a year later.
After a bitter political struggle, Unesco's controversial secretary-general,
Mr Amadou Mehtar M'Bow, was voted out in 1987 and succeeded by Mr Federico
Mayor, a Spanish former education minister, who has tried hard to persuade
the US and UK to rejoin.
State Department reports in 1990 and 1992 concluded that Unesco had made
little progress, but members of the US Congress from both parties said these
were dishonest assessments intended to justify a continued boycott.
Some senior members, including Mr Howard Berman, chairman of the House of
Representatives sub-committee on international organisations, have argued
for rejoining.
Finding the Dollars 65m annual US membership dues, from a foreign operations
budget that has shrunk by more than 20 per cent in two years, could be
difficult.
By delaying re-entry until October 1995, as the task force recommends, the
administration would be able to use money written into the budget baseline
for the next two years to pay off the considerable US arrears at the United
Nations.
