FT  10 JUL 93 / The G7 Summit: Uruguay Round deal 'top priority'
THE world's leading industrial countries yesterday threw their weight behind
a new effort to reach agreement on liberalising international trade by the
end of this year and called on other trading nations to make comparable
efforts.
At the end of this year's economic summit of the Group of Seven leading
industrial nations, the European Community, the world's largest trading
group, said it was 'determined to show leadership' to secure a completion to
the long-stalled Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
In their final declaration after the summit, the G7 countries - the US,
Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy, Canada - and the EC said that their
'highest priority' was a successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round.
Similar declarations have been made after past summits. But this time, the
leaders were able to anchor their aspirations in the progress towards a
market access package that was achieved earlier this week in Tokyo by
negotiators from the Quad group of countries - the US, EC, Japan and Canada.
The G7 statement welcomed the market access package to reduce and, in some
cases, eliminate tariffs on industrial goods and work towards opening
markets to services as a 'major step to the immediate resumption' of the
trade talks.
In their statement, the leaders urged comparable market opening measures by
other trading countries and declared that they were determined 'to curb
protectionism in all its manifestations'. They gave explicit backing to the
world's multilateral open trading system, saying countries should not have
recourse to initiatives and arrangements that threaten it.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, said he would go to Geneva on
Monday to tell other trading nations about the progress on market access in
the hope of being able to relaunch the Uruguay Round negotiations. European
governments are especially keen that the fast-growing economies of Asia join
in the market opening exercise.
Sir Leon said that if the EC received substantial offers of market opening
measures, it would respond in kind.
He said the negotiators of the Quad agreement had made progress towards
liberalisation measures other than the specific tariff cuts listed in
Wednesday's agreement.
Japan, for example, had improved its offer to open its market to foreign
financial services but the EC would ask it to go further. Sir Leon said the
US, in offering to cut its tariffs on imported high-quality textiles, had
offered only about half of what the EC had demanded, but this was a
'substantial downpayment'.
This week's progress on trade was welcomed by individual G7 leaders. Mr John
Major, UK prime minister, said it was 'clearly a significant step'. Mr
Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, said the progress on Gatt was
'encouraging'.
Even France, the most reluctant G7 participant in the trade liberalisation
process, gave the week's trade developments a guarded welcome. There was
'real progress in terms of procedure', President Francois Mitterrand said,
though only 'small openings' had been achieved in Tokyo.
The G7 said a successful and rapid conclusion of the Uruguay Round would
'boost the confidence of investors and consumers, and this would be an
important contribution to recovery and growth.'
In their final statement, the G7 leaders expressed great concern that more
than 23m are unemployed in their countries. The statement listed desirable
structural reforms to reduce barriers to jobs and growth.
