FT  15 APR 93 / Personal View: Morning after the beer bungle
Five years ago, British consumers enjoyed a great diversity of domestic and
imported beers and pub prices which were lower than in most other countries.
A rich variety of suppliers served the market, none with a high market
share. Yet the report by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission in 1989 found
pub prices to be 'too high', consumer choice to be poor, and viewed the
market as being dominated by big brewers.
The report attributed these problems to brewers owning most of the country's
pubs, where their own products were favoured, and to their offering low-cost
loans to independent pubs in exchange for beer supply guarantees. The
European Commission had found in 1984 that this system benefited consumers,
yet the MMC recommended that large brewers should dispose of most of their
pubs and that supply contracts backed by cheap loans be banned. These
measures would 'increase competition in brewing, wholesaling and retailing,
encourage new entry, reduce prices and widen choice'. Otherwise, it
believed, a few brewers would come to dominate the market.
The government partially enacted the MMC's proposals in 1989, but although
beer supply continues to be competitive, retail beer prices have risen
sharply, and several firms have quit brewing, including local producers whom
the measures were designed to protect. Brand rationalisation continues and
no new producers have entered the market. Indeed, the MMC cleared the
largest brewing concentrations ever seen, involving Grand Metropolitan and
Courage, and Allied Breweries and Carlsberg. Powerful pub groups are
emerging, but independent pubs have closed in large numbers. Since leading
brewers dominate beer markets in countries where tied houses are unknown,
and leading suppliers dominate other UK consumer markets, such outcomes were
always likely. So how did the inquiry produce such proposals?
The Fair Trading Act and Competition Act are both vague in defining the
'public interest'. MMC guidelines suggest that inquiries will focus on
issues of industry structure 'that operate or may be expected to operate
against the public interest'. No evidence of actual harm is needed.
Furthermore, similar evidence may be treated as harmful in one case, but
beneficial in another. Industry structure is presumed to explain and predict
public outcomes. This is a dangerous assumption. Real markets are too
complex to be understood by simple models, largely because they contain
dynamic feed-back effects - a leading firm's market share creates higher
profits that can be reinvested to drive its domination still higher. Such
feedback is common in many social systems, and has unfortunate effects - the
system behaves counter-intuitively and inconsistently, and resists simple
policy changes. This alone may largely explain the unfortunate outcomes of
the beer inquiry.
Problems originating in vague policy objectives and inadequate market models
are compounded by the secrecy of inquiries. Inquiries into beer and petrol
both spent three years collecting considerable data at great cost to firms
and tax-payers. Yet most of this data has nothing to say about the practical
interests of consumers. This omission leads to a largely false view of
industry processes and (for beer) misdirected suggestions for change.
Yet these dangers are not beyond correction. Policy objectives need
clarifying, with more attention being given to practical interests of
consumers, such as choice, quality, service and availability, as well as
price. The priority of inquiries needs to be reversed, placing the public
interest at the forefront, and relegating industry structure to be one
possible explanation of consumer harm, if such harm is proved. Data on
consumers' experiences need greater attention, as does the role of firms
other than those directly under investigation. Reports need to offer a clear
description of industry dynamics for open debate, and explain when and how
expected outcomes will occur, whether or not any change is proposed. An
explicit forecast of how the industry will evolve would focus public debate
on the realism of the assumptions behind the proposals. Finally, a
post-report period for public debate, combined with an open process and
balanced interim reporting, would allow the trade and industry secretary to
arrive at considered changes, rather than having to react quickly to what
might be poor-quality proposals.
The author, who is assistant professor of strategy at the London Business
School, has produced a paper, 'Competition policy and the consumer interest
 -a comparison of recent MMC inquiries', available from the London Business
School
