FT  13 APR 93 / International Bonds: Barclays gives upper tier two a twist
known in regulatory parlance as upper tier two capital - was given its
latest twist last week with a Pounds 200m issue from Barclays Bank.
However, although the paper is reported to have gone down well with
investors, there was little sign that other banks would rush to follow suit.
Upper tier two debt remains a difficult and expensive form of regulatory
capital for banks to raise. There has been no ready market for such paper
since the market for perpetual floating rate notes collapsed in the late
1980s.
Japanese companies became big buyers of floating rate paper with step-up
coupons after that, buying more than Dollars 3bn of privately-placed paper
from mainly Scandinavian, US and Italian banks. That private market also
dried up some two years ago.
Yet, under Bank for International Settlement guidelines, banks' need for
upper tier two debt continues unabated.
Lower tier two capital - dated subordinated paper, for which there is no
lack of investors, though at a price - cannot exceed upper tier two for
regulatory purposes. The two together cannot exceed tier one capital
(effectively equity capital and retained earnings).
The US domestic market remains one source of such capital. Australia and New
Zealand Banking, for example, last month went to this market for undated
debt, with a call after five years, although no step-up on the coupon, which
would have increased the chances of the call being used.
However, while dollar-denominated assets are an important component of any
internationally-active bank's balance sheet, non-US banks need to limit
their dollar-denominated capital otherwise the all-important capital/asset
ratio becomes vulnerable to foreign exchange adjustments.
UK financial institutions have been able to tap a growing sterling market
for undated capital, due in part to the growing involvement in recent months
of retail investors looking for higher returns as interest rates have
fallen.
According to Salomon Brothers, which has been involved in more than a dozen
such issues, there have been 25 in all, including last week's from Barclays,
raising over Pounds 2bn.
Around a third of this has come in a dozen issues of permanent interest
bearing shares for building societies since June 1991, with the rest from
banks and insurance companies mainly in the form of irredeemable preference
shares.
Within the past six months, both Barclays and National Westminster have now
each raised Pounds 200m through undated issues with extra twists to hold
down their cost of capital.
NatWest's issue last November was of undated notes convertible into
preference shares - which count as tier one capital.
The yield-spread on the paper, at 235 basis points over long-dated gilts,
tightened after the launch to around 180 basis points.
However, the notes have suffered in line with the preference share market
since last month's Budget changes to advance corporation tax, and the yield
spread has moved out again to some 210 basis points.
Barclays last week offered a yield premium well below this - 140 basis
points over gilts for the first 15 years, rising to 240 basis points over
five-year gilts after that.
The bank retains a call option after 15 years.
There is little in the capital markets that is genuinely new, just endless
reworkings of tried and tested formulae, and so it was with the Barclays
capital-raising exercise. However, in a sterling debt market which has seen
few long-dated issues from well-regarded credits offering a substantial
yield pick-up over gilts, the paper met a good reception from the market.
Most seemed willing to view the debt as 15-year paper, on the assumption
that Barclays would need to deteriorate rapidly as a credit to make it want
to extend the debt's life beyond the first call.
On that basis, the yield pick-up was generally reckoned to be some 50 basis
points over what investors could have expected on dated subordinated paper
from the same issuer, or 80 basis points over Barclays senior debt.
That was widely seen as an adequate premium for the risk that the debt would
not be called.
Compared with other undated paper, though, the bonds were seen as expensive
for investors - although the Barclays name is likely to guarantee them a
place in many fixed income fund managers' portfolios.
Liquidity risk, rather than credit risk, could prove the most dangerous
aspect of this and other undated issues, as investors with experience of
perpetual floating rate notes will be well aware.
'In 15 years' time, it is quite possible that banks won't be able to do
perpetuals,' says one investment banker with experience of this market. 'If
it isn't called, then look out: it means that there isn't a market there
anymore.'
The involvement of retail investors could accentuate that risk. According to
Salomon, up to a quarter of the outstanding undated paper is held by such
investors, whose purchases have often led to a tightening of yield spreads
in the period after an issue is launched. Once retail investors become net
sellers, then that process will go into share reversal.
