FT  09 JAN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture (Week in the markets): Chinese
buying lifts copper market
PERSISTENT Chinese buying helped copper prices to break into higher ground
at the London Metal Exchange this week.
A successful assault on resistance a little above Dollars 2,300 a tonne on
Monday took the three months price to a three month high, and the
announcement on Tuesday of an unexpectedly-large 26,625-tonne fall in LME
warehouse stocks encouraged a further rise that peaked just short of Dollars
2,400 a tonne. News of a 2.1 per cent rise in US construction spending in
November was another factor encouraging buyers.
There was a substantial shake-out on Wednesday but support levels held, with
Chinese buying reappearing on dips towards Dollars 2,350 a tonne.
Yesterday saw a Dollars 20 rally, despite disappointment at the announcement
of an LME stocks fall of only 875 tonnes, and the three months price closed
at Dollars 2,378.50 a tonne, up Dollars 70 on the week. The pound's strength
against the dollar this week meant, however, that in sterling terms the
weekly rise was only Pounds 19.25 a tonne.
Chinese buying was also an important factor in the nickel market's advance
early in the week. With extra interest being generated by news that
Falconbridge Dominicana, the Dominican Republic's 29,000-tonnes a year
producer, had suspended production until the end of March because of low
world prices, the cash price rose by a total of Dollars 380 on Monday and
Tuesday. But a wave of profit-taking, exacerbated by the operation of
stop-loss selling orders, trimmed back the gains and at yesterday's close
the cash price was showing a rise of only Dollars 212.50 on the week at
Dollars 6,172.50 a tonne.
Tin prices followed a similar pattern, the cash position losing all but
Dollars 100 of an early Dollars 262.50-a-tonne rise to end at Dollars 5,885
a tonne. Dealers said the rise on Monday and Tuesday was largely a
reflection of improved sentiment in the copper market. In the tin market
itself, they noted, trading had remained extremely thin.
An early rise in aluminium prices was snuffed out even more quickly,
following the announcement on Tuesday of a massive 51,975-tonne rise in LME
stocks. Technically-inspired selling emanating principally from the US kept
the market under pressure and by yesterday's close the cash position at the
LME, which had peaked at Dollars 1,236.50 a tonne on Monday, was down
Dollars 43 on the week at Dollars 1,184.50 a tonne.
At the London bullion market the gold price slumped on Monday to a
seven-year low of Dollars 329.15 a troy ounce; and it remained close to that
for the rest of the week, in spite of the Middle East tension that in times
past would have been expected to boost the yellow metal.
Monday's fall was attributed to selling by South African and Australian
producers, for whom the depressed dollar price of gold was made relatively
attractive by the extreme weakness of their own national currencies. As the
price slid Swiss and Middle Eastern speculators were reported to have
swelled the wave of selling.
The depth of the gold market's present depression was underlined towards the
end of the weak by its failure to respond positively to the growing unease
engendered by the approach of the allied powers' deadline for Iraq to
withdraw anti-aircraft missiles from the southern 'no-fly' zone. 'The
business with Iraq is not causing anyone to go long (buy gold for future
delivery) but it's having enough of an effect to hold off the would-be
sellers,' one trader told the Reuter news agency.
The other market that could have been expected to be buoyed up by the Iraq
crisis was, of course, oil. But here again bearish sentiment was too deeply
entrenched to be dispelled by the sound of Middle East sabre-rattling. With
stocks of oil products remaining very high and members of the Organisation
of Petroleum Exporting Countries still producing at above their allocated
levels the recent downward pressure on prices was still much in evidence. In
late trading yesterday the March futures position at the London
International Petroleum Exchange's crude oil market was quoted at Dollars
17.75 a barrel, down 61 cents on the week.
An accelerating fall in coffee prices at the London Futures and Options
Exchange took nearby positions about Dollars 90 lower by mid-week,
decisively ending the strong rally that had boosted prices more than Dollars
270 in the final quarter of last year. Mr Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI,
the London futures broker, suggested that the fall marked the end of a
classic squeeze in a market that was 'not rational'.
Others thought the London market was merely responding to a
technically-inspired fall in New York coffee prices, reflecting liquidation
by investment funds and speculators. One New York analyst, Ms Judy Ganes of
Merrill Lynch, said she remained convinced that the fall did not spell the
end of the bull run, which had been underpinned by constructive
fundamentals, particularly and an expected production fall in Brazil, the
biggest producer.
London prices recovered somewhat on Thursday and yesterday, but in New York
yesterday Thursday's sharp rally was more or less wiped out by
mid-afternoon. London traders said the market was delicately balanced and a
resumption of the decline looked possible in the short term before prices
started to move higher again.
 ------------------------------------
LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
 ------------------------------------
Aluminium  +8,000   to   1,586,625
Copper       -875   to     314,900
Lead       +2,850   to     230,050
Nickel       +648   to      72,030
Zinc       +5,700   to     493,300
Tin          +315   to      15,680
 ------------------------------------
