FT  15 NOV 93 / Monday Interview: Chips with everything - The trio at the
top of Intel, the world's biggest semiconductor maker, talk to Alan Cane
Intel Corporation, the company which gave style and identity to the
featureless, plastic-wrapped chips at the heart of most of the world's 100m
personal computers, is 25 years old and on a roll.
It dominates the global semiconductor business - the first US company to
break Japan's hold on the semiconductor business in almost a decade. The
numbers '386' and '486', which identify its most popular microprocessors,
are common argot thanks to the 'Intel Inside' marketing campaign and
relentless media adver-tising for Intel-based computers.
With revenues of more than Dollars 5bn last year, the company's brand name
is third in the value stakes, according to an annual survey of brand values
by US magazine Financial World, behind Marlboro and Coca-Cola.
However, intensified competition is the price it is paying for success.
International Business Machines, Digital Equipment and Advanced Micro
Devices are among the big companies determined to break the company's
dominance. Intel's response over the next few years will be critical for
maintaining its position. Its strategy is simple. It intends to out-spend,
out-innovate and out-perform its rivals.
The detailed execution of this policy is in the hands of three men who share
much of the credit for steering to Intel its present pre-eminence.
First, Gordon Moore, the chairman, who together with the late Robert Noyce
founded Intel in 1968. A consummate technologist, he deduced an eponymous
industry 'law'* which has so far stood the test of time in forecasting the
progress of chip technology.
Then there is Andrew Grove, 56, chief executive since 1987, a volatile
Hungarian noted for uncompromising business aggression. He is the public
face of Intel. Finally, there is Craig Barrett, 54, the chief operating
officer and a former materials scientist at Stanford University.
The three have worked together for almost two decades. All tell stories of
their personal fears about giving up secure jobs in the electronics business
to join the fledgling chipmaker.
They are hugely different in personality and focus: Moore, the courtly
long-term strategist; Grove, the driver, pushing the company forward and
facing down the competition; Barrett, the operations specialist concerned
about quality and efficiency.
If they quarrel among themselves, they do it quietly and in private,
colleagues say. Intel prides itself on an open, informal culture and
enlightened management attitudes. Grove, indeed, writes a management
question and answer column for a local newspaper.
This culture has nurtured the creativity that has made Intel a power-house
of innovation in semiconductors. It invented the high-speed memory (D-Ram)
used in every kind of computer system. It developed the microprocessor in
1971, and a decade later IBM chose Intel chips for its families of personal
computers.
The IBM link-up was to be the key to Intel's success, though few saw it as
such at the time. Grove said he barely remembers the details: 'I did not see
it as a big deal. Personal computers were not that much of a big deal then
anyway. I took more notice when IBM put our chips in its Displaywriter (an
early word processor) because there was one in our office. It was a real,
professional machine. I thought IBM might sell 50,000 personal computers.'
In the event, IBM's PC proved a global best-seller, rendering the
Displaywriter obsolete. The IBM PC was widely copied by electronics
manufacturers worldwide, each of which had to come to Intel for supplies of
the all-important central microprocessor. This was because IBM PC software
ran best on Intel's chips. Some 40m IBM-clone PCs are now manufactured each
year, more than the total global volume of passenger cars.
Intel's continued domination of the PC microprocessor market flows from a
strategic masterstroke in the 1980s. It refused to give other manufacturers
a licence to make its most powerful chips. This gave it a stranglehold on a
rapidly growing market, and underpinned its increasingly impressive
profitability.
A backlash was, of course, inevitable. Led by Advanced Micro Devices of the
US, some competitors have been building clones (functionally similar
versions) of Intel's market-leading designs without its permission. Other
manufacturers, notably Digital Equipment and IBM - in spite of the latter's
continued use of Intel chips - have launched their own designs of
high-performance chips in an effort to displace Intel's products as the
industry standard.
One consequence of this has been an avalanche of legal action and
counter-action in the US, as Intel strives to protect its intellectual
property. 'Nothing ever gets finished in this business,' bemoans Grove, who
has carried much of the load of representing Intel in the courts.
'Copying somebody else's designs is not how I would like to make my living.
If that is what you choose, however, the least you can do is be meticulous
in honouring the trade secrets and patents of the party you are going to rip
off,' he said.
Grove's anger is spurred by the cost of remaining at the cutting edge of the
semiconductor business. Intel will spend a total of Dollars 2.5bn this year
on research and development. The semiconductor industry has traditionally
invested more than 20 per cent of revenues on capital equipment, but
spending on this scale is exceptional. How long can it continue? Barrett is
sanguine: 'So long as our revenues are growing and our margins are good, it
can go on indefinitely.'
He adds: 'We will compete with the clone makers by staying at the leading
edge of microprocessor performance. It is the cannibal strategy. We have to
gobble up our older children - our current microprocessors - before the
competition does. We intend to move as fast as we can, ripping up the road
behind us.'
The chief hurdle, as Moore explains, is the physical problem of printing
smaller and smaller circuit images on silicon. The answer, some
technologists believe, is X-rays. 'That involves some fundamental problems
that need a lot of work,' Moore said. 'We will have to wait and see. In the
end, the chief problem could be the cost. That could slow things up. But
existing techniques will last until well into the next century - and after
that it is somebody else's problem.'
Meanwhile Intel is seeking new markets to conquer. Grove explains: 'We are
working to establish a presence in a related but different business which we
hope will contribute to revenues in the same way that microprocessors kicked
in when the D-Ram business slowed down.
'We are working on devices that will turn personal computers into
communication devices. Personal computer conferencing is probably the best
way to describe it.
'Business is about communications, sharing data and instantaneous
decision-making. If you have on your desk a device that enables you to
communicate and share data with your colleagues around the world, you will
have a strategic advantage.'
The first of these products is expected to be launched in the US within six
months; selected European countries will be targeted next, depending on the
speed with which Intel can get approvals from local telecommunications
authorities.
Intel has already proved itself in silicon memories and microprocessors; its
move in communications suggests that Moore, Grove and Barrett have lost none
of their hunger for the taste of innovation and success.
* Moore's Law states that the number of electronic elements which can be
written on the same size chip will double every 18 months.
COMPANY FILE
1968 Gordon Moore and Robert Noyce leave Fairchild Semiconductor and
     establish Intel.
1971 Intel introduces the world's first microprocessor, the 4004.
1977 Intel hires its 10,000th employee.
1981 IBM PC based on Intel microprocessor launched.
1984 Company breaks Dollars 1bn sales barrier.
1987 Intel returns to profit after its first ever loss in 1986.
1990 Intel's first Dollars 1bn quarter.
1993 Intel's first Dollars 2bn quarter.
