FT  27 MAY 93 / Free use of roads no longer feasible
BRITAIN'S MOTORISTS have had it too good, too long: sooner or later, they
are going to have to start paying for the dubious pleasure of driving up and
down the country's motorways.
That was the main message from the green paper on motorway charges published
yesterday. But alongside that well-trailed prediction came a surprise: the
suggestion that charges could be the first step towards the privatisation of
the motorway network, probably through a franchising process similar to that
being adopted for the railways.
The green paper starts with the proposition that the public purse is not
deep enough to build the new road capacity needed to accommodate likely
traffic growth. So if Britain is not to face the damage to its economy that
will result from worsening traffic congestion, it must tap new sources of
funds.
The government acknowledges that motorists already pay more in taxes than is
spent on the roads. However, it refuses to acknowledge a link between the
two, just as it refuses to acknowledge a link between the amount collected
in tobacco tax and the amount spent on smokers.
It suggests raising more money from motorists by introducing direct charges
for the use of the road network, saying this would have the added benefit of
encouraging people to think about whether journeys were necessary.
The government says it is not practical to introduce charges right across
the road network. So instead it focuses on the options for charging for
motorways, which account for more than half the cost of the Pounds 23bn
national roads programme. The options are:
Motorway permits. These could be bought from post offices or petrol stations
and would be stuck on the windscreen. They could be valid for a year for
regular users or shorter periods for occasional users or visitors.
Electronic tolling. Each vehicle would be fitted with an electronic tag
which would react to signals as the vehicle passed roadside beacons. Charges
would either be clocked up on a central computer and charged to the user's
account, or deducted from a pre-paid smartcard inserted into a device inside
the vehicle.
The green paper suggests that even fairly modest charges would raise
substantial amounts of money. A toll of 1.5p a mile for cars and 4.5p for
lorries (in other words, costing car drivers just Pounds 1.50 for the
100-mile motorway trip from London to Birmingham) would raise Pounds 700m a
year - adding more than 40 per cent to the the Pounds 1.7bn a year currently
being spent on motorway and trunk roads.
One advantage of the charging system over other forms of motoring taxation
is that it would apply selectively. Research carried out for the Department
of Transport shows that fewer than 50 per cent of drivers use motorways
regularly so many motorists would be unaffected by the move. Those who were
affected might take consolation from a commitment in the green paper - no
doubt hard won from the Treasury - that the proceeds from the charges would
be devoted solely to the construction and operation of the charged network.
But what of the drawbacks? The green paper plays down one of the more
obvious ones - the danger that motorway users might switch to unsuitable
roads to save money. Computer modelling carried out by the Department of
Transport, it says, indicates that the highest expected toll - 1.5p a mile
for cars and 4.5p a mile for lorries - would divert only 10 per cent of
vehicle mileage at peak hours.
The other main drawback is that electronic tolling, greatly preferred by the
Department of Transport, is at least five years away because the necessary
technology is not yet ready. That means that if anything is going to happen
in the interim, it will have to be the relatively primitive windscreen
sticker system - and even that will require primary legislation.
Whatever system of charging is introduced, the department sees acceptance of
the idea as an importance step towards another of its key objectives:
getting the private sector involved.
Once a stream of revenue starts pouring in, remuneration of the private
sector for providing parts of the road network can start.
Significantly, the green paper seems largely to dismiss earlier notions that
a network of privately operated toll roads could spring up. In most cases,
these are not viable, it concedes.
Instead, it suggests stripping responsibility for the motorway network from
the Department of Transport and giving it to a new, self-financing public
corporation. This organisation would receive all motorway charges and use
them to operate and expand the motorway network.
Private-sector companies would still build and operate parts of the motorway
network, but they would not charge tolls: the public corporation would use
the road charge revenues to pay the companies' fees according to the number
of vehicles their motorways carried.
More ambitious still is the idea that franchises might be awarded for
geographical sections of the country - say, London to Birmingham - and allow
franchisees to take responsibility for all motorway provision in the area.
The franchises would specify the level of service to be provided, partly in
terms of congestion measurements, and the franchisees would then draw up
their own plans for responding to increased demand - for example, widening
the existing motorway or building a new one. In this case, tolls would be
levied directly by franchisees, who would fund new construction out of
revenues from existing roads.
The idea is sketched out in only the flimsiest detail, leaving many
questions unanswered. But perhaps the most important ones may turn out to be
political rather than technical - not least, whether the country is in a
mood for such radical thinking so soon after the furore of the British Rail
privatisation.
Paying for Better Motorways: Issues for Decision. Cmnd 2200. HMSO. Pounds 9.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         CHARGING ON THE MOTORWAYS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Potential revenues                                                Yield
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Low target                                                  Pounds 250m
         Cars: 0.5p a mile or Pounds 25 a year - Trucks: 1.5p
                     a mile or Pounds 250 a year
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Medium target:                                              Pounds 500m
         Cars: 1p a mile or Pounds 50 a year - Trucks: 3p a mile
                         or Pounds 500 a year
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
High target:                                                Pounds 700m
       Cars: 1.5p a mile or Pounds 75 a year - Trucks: 4.5p a mile
                          or Pounds 750 a year
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
