FT  10 FEB 93 / Jobs: At last, a gleam of practical intelligence - Despite
evidence on what really makes for high performance, employers stick to
faulty measures
FOR all its own obdurate optimism, the Jobs column must bow to PA Consulting
Group when it comes to looking determinedly on the bright side.
After questioning 88 large employers in Britain, the group cheerily declares
that the freeze on the recruitment of university graduates is lifting. The
stated reason is that: 'Only 5 per cent of blue chip organisations surveyed
do not intend to recruit any graduates in 1993.'
How things have changed. It's not long since the opposite of a cheering
interpretation would have been put on the same survey finding, which could
equally well be re-worded to read: 'As many as one in every 20 big
organisations will be recruiting no graduates whatsoever.'
There is nevertheless little doubt that PA's happier wording will be thought
preferable by Britain's government. After all, its educational prescription
for the country's economic and social health is evidently to shackle
teachers ever more tightly to the task of getting their charges through a
succession of academic examinations, culminating in those for university
degrees.
True, no one has yet explained precisely how such exam-passing will increase
the nation's future well-being, and the results of past expansions of
degree-level study are hardly encouraging. But given ministers' enthusiasm
for expanding it still more, they must be comforted to see that 95 per cent
of big employers intend to take on at least one graduate.
Alas it may have blinded them to a couple of clouds no bigger than a man's
hand, which unlike the one made famous by the prophet Elijah are not
necessarily omens of good. The first cloud is represented by the appearance
of the Yale University psychologist Robert Sternberg at the Ciba
Foundation's recent London conference on human ability. The second is a
staff development programme at Nuclear Electric, the state-owned outfit
running nuclear power stations in England and Wales.
Professor Sternberg's research includes studies, in harness with
fellow-shrink Richard Wagner, into what makes for productive performance at
work. And one of the findings which he spelt out to the conference was that
results in academic exams are no guide to teaching or research ability, let
alone to practical and creative potential.
'Many people with high test scores at school will get good university
grades. But this doesn't indicate they will be successful in later life;
people with lower scores may be more successful,' he said. 'The bottom line
is that we need to recognise and think about giftedness in ways other than
just looking at academic standards. What matters at school doesn't matter
nearly so much in later life.'
The factor which does matter is what he calls tacit knowledge or practical
intelligence, which does not correlate with standard IQ. He defines it as
'knowledge that usually is not directly taught, spoken about or written
about, in contrast to knowledge directly taught in classroom' - the know-how
typically acquired in doing something for real. He and Dr Wagner have also
worked out methods of identifying same.
Now, one of the ways which history has shown to be least effective in
changing ingrained habits is to have them exposed as stupid by a professor
on the basis of cogent research. For example, the Jobs column described
Robert Sternberg's findings at length nearly eight years ago only to see
Britain's counter-productive obsession with exam-passing become more
compulsive still.
Even so, this time there is reason to hope the outcome may be different,
because Nuclear Electric has got into the act. It has taken the
Sternberg-Wagner ideas on the productive worth and indentification of tacit
knowledge, tested them carefully in the workplace, and - as was demonstrated
by the company's Max Choi at last month's British Psychological Society
conference - they work.
As a result, he said, 'our development programme is now focused on practical
intelligence.' And although Nuclear Electric is but one among many
employers, the intelligent step it has taken may point a better way to
greater well-being than all the graduate recruitment in the world.
MEANWHILE, whatever may become of PA's optimism about the employment
prospects of the next crop of degree-winners, its survey gives much
information about graduates of former years who not only found but are still
in jobs. As the underlying table gives only a sample of it, anyone wanting
the full report which is priced at Pounds 445 should contact Jenny Cambridge
at 123 Buckingham Palace Rd, London SW1W 9SR; tel (0)71-730 9000, fax
(0)71-333 5050.
My extract takes two sorts of employed graduates: one deemed adequate though
no more than that in the job, and the other considered a high-flier. The
table shows the typical pay of each sort after various lengths of time in 13
types of work. 'Accounting' covers the in-company variety as well as
professional practice, and the pay figures include bonuses in addition to
basic salary.
Where the types of work are ranked in the table is determined by the
differential which the high-flier enjoys over the adequate performer after
five years' service. The variances strike me at least as surprising, if not
downright bewildering. The range runs from nearly 32 per cent in the case of
production to a mere 2.2 per cent in chemical engineering.
