FT  07 JUL 93 / Business and the Environment: Think local, act global -
Battles between remote Russia and international investors
During the Soviet years, Russia's vast and beautiful environment scarcely
rated a mention on the political agenda. But today's investors in Russia
ignore 'green politicians' at their peril.
Some of the Russian environmental movement's most telling successes are at
the level of regional government, in local soviets or parliaments. Primorsky
Krai, a region facing the Sea of Japan, contains dense forests, rivers
teeming with salmon and endangered species including tigers and bears.
In common with many regional bodies, the soviet of Primorsky Krai has a
powerful environmental committee, which regularly fines local polluters. At
the height of communist power, local politicians toed the party line, often
dictated from as far away as Moscow. These days they are more independently
minded: 'Essentially, I am against the industrialist, technical mentality
which prevails everywhere,' says Anatoly Lebedev, deputy chairman of the
environmental committee.
Lebedev's constituency is Krasny Yar, a town little larger than a village.
Most of his constituents hunt and fish for a living in the surrounding
forests of the Pozharsky District.
Despite the remoteness of the region and his small constituency, Lebedev has
found himself at the centre of an environmental battle of international
dimensions. The moral of the tale is that investors should pay attention to
Russian politics on a very local level indeed.
In 1990, the Hyundai Group of South Korea formed a joint venture - Svetlaya
 -with two local logging companies. Svetlaya spent Dollars 70m (Pounds
46.6m) building a sea port, roads and a technical base around the coastal
town of Svetlaya, outside Lebedev's constituency.
But two-thirds of the 1m cu m of timber, which Svetlaya planned to cut
annually, were located across the political boundary in Pozharsky District,
Lebedev's political power base.
The joint venture had the public backing of the then governor of Primorsky
Krai, Vladimir Kuznetsov. The Russian government has long recognised the
strategic importance of Hyundai Group to the Russian economy. But in
Russia's state of constitutional confusion, it is no longer always enough
just to have friends in high places.
'Under Russian land use legislation, the real provider of natural resources
is the district soviet,' says Lebedev. In this case, that meant the soviet
of Pozharsky, a sub district of Primorsky.
'The Pozharsky soviet categorically refused to let us log on their land,'
says Vladimir Stegny, president of the Svetlaya joint venture.
Local people feared that logging on the hills around the source of the
Biikin River would damage the salmon-breeding waters which provide their
livelihood.
Lebedev's objections go further: 'This is one of the last pristine forests
left in the world. Their plan to 'clear-cut' (whole sections of) the forest
on steep slopes will create a desert.'
Nor is Lebedev impressed by the joint venture's plans to replant 3m trees a
year. 'They have some beautiful greenhouses, but there is no point in
planting young trees in a desert. They will die.'
The point was underlined by Greenpeace, which last October blockaded the
Svetlaya harbour, temporarily bringing exports to a halt. The confusion
surrounding the Svetlaya case has done little for the region's image abroad.
'Korean and Japanese businessmen often call me to ask about the latest
situation,' says Stegny.
Svetlaya challenged Pozharsky Soviet in court last June.
The regional court decided in Svetlaya's favour, but Pozharsky Soviet's
appeal to the Supreme Court of Russia showed the weakness of Russia's legal
system. The appeal judges failed to draw any firm conclusion, merely ruling
that there were 'deficiencies' in the earlier judgment. The legal position
is still up in the air.
'I believe that local people need us as much as we need them. They will come
round in a couple of years' time,' says Stegny. But he tacitly admits the
environmentalists had a point.
Svetlaya now selectively cuts trees. Its Dollars 70m investment assumed the
joint venture would be in profit by its fourth year. But reduced logging
means that break-even point is seven to 10 years away.
Elsewhere in Russia, environmental demands are important criteria when it
comes to issuing rights to develop natural resources. In general, this is
good news for foreign investors. Russian competitors often have a poor
environmental record.
One of the largest deals under negotiation is a project to develop gas
fields on the continental shelf off the island of Sakhalin. A consortium
known as MMMMS, including Marathon and McDermott from the US, Japan's Mitsui
and Mitsubishi, and the Anglo-Dutch Shell, hopes to conclude the Dollars
10bn deal soon.
'This is one of the most difficult projects in Russia, from an environmental
point of view,' says Galina Pavlova, a local Peoples Deputy and member of
the Sakhalin Soviet Ecology Committee.
'Environmental concerns have added considerably to the cost. But as an
ecologist, I am happy with the proposals, provided they do everything we
want.'
On the volcanic peninsula of Kamchatka, one of the poorest and least
developed regions of Russia, the local administration plans an international
tender for extraction of 90 tons of gold from the south of the peninsula. As
soon as the plan was announced, the governor of Kamchatka, Vladimir
Biryukov, went on television to say that the project would go to the most
environmentally clean proposal.
In Primorsky Krai, the environmentalists are girding their loins for the
next battle. The Ministry of Atomic Energy is funding a feasibility study
into building underground nuclear power stations in the far east of Russia.
In the late 1980s, Lebedev fended off a similar plan to build a nuclear
reactor near Krasny Yar. He does not think it will be an easy fight this
time round.
'The nuclear mafia in this country still have a great deal of resources and
influence,' he says.
