FT  11 SEP 93 / Lathe-maker hopeful in 'lousy market': Business reports
sluggish Continental sales
FOUR YEARS ago Colchester Lathe unveiled a range of products at EMO, the
world's largest machine-tool show, and sold 500 machines straight off the
stand. 'It was the best show we have ever had,' recalled Mr Tony Sweeten.
Next week, as this year's show opens in a very different business climate,
there will be more new products on the Colchester stand at Hanover, Germany,
but it will be a miracle if anything like that number are sold.
Colchester lathes and those of its sister company TS Harrison are made by
600 Lathes, in the 600 Group's machine-tool division, of which Mr Sweeten is
managing director.
He said 600 Lathes' sales in continental Europe had fallen by 50 per cent in
the past 18 months. 'Germany is the industrial powerhouse of Europe and the
recession there affects everywhere else.' But Mr Sweeten is not
down-hearted: 'We've given a reasonable account of ourselves in a lousy
market,' he said. 'We've held our market shares, and even raised them in
some cases.'
Continental Europe accounts for 30 per cent to 40 per cent of the group's
lathe sales, and has long been an important market for Harrison and
Colchester.
They both produce mainly 'centre lathes' - manual machines to make turned
parts that are stalwarts of machines shops and toolrooms.
Mr Sweeten said Harrison has been making metric machines for the European
market since 1972. The more upmarket Colchester has been particularly
successful in Germany, helped by good marketing and a high-tech product.
Mr Sweeten said the German market first started to decline 18 months ago,
and went into a steep fall a year ago - just when the devaluation of
sterling against the D-Mark was transforming the terms of trade for UK
exporters to Germany, at least in theory.
But its machine-tool market is running at less than 50 per cent of its
levels 18 months ago. The decline in German sales has more than offset the
benefits of devaluation.
It is not all gloom, however. German competitors had higher costs and found
it harder to cut them, Mr Sweeten said. In contrast, the 600 Group moved
quickly in 1991 to concentrate all its lathe manufacturing at one plant in
West Yorkshire. And for the business that remained in Germany, the UK group
could offer better technology than its competitors for the same price or
less.
So Mr Sweeten believes the lathe business will have improved its competitive
position when the Continent emerges from recession.
