FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Government Statements): Move to cut carbon
emissions - Fuel Tax
This section contains details of the government's planned tax changes which
were given in separate announcements from the Inland Revenue, Customs and
Excise and other government departments after the chancellor had made his
publication of the Budget details in the Finance Bill.
VALUE ADDED tax is to be applied to domestic fuel from April 1 next year,
and road fuel tax is to rise in real terms in future Budgets, as part of
measures to encourage more efficient use of fuels and reduce emissions of
carbon dioxide.
The chancellor also said that his changes in motoring taxation were in part
intended to ensure that transport would 'play its part in meeting the threat
of global warming, and achieving the CO2 reduction target by encouraging
greater fueleconomy.'
The rise was also intended to finance the abolition of car tax in the Autumn
Statement.
The chancellor said that the rate of duty on road fuels will increase by 10
per cent and the rate of Vehicle Excise Duty for cars, light goods vehicles
and taxis from Pounds 110 to Pounds 125.
'There will also be some small increases in a number of other VED rates, but
those for heavier lorries will remain unchanged.' The changes in vehicle
excise duty rates took effect at midnight.
The rates for around 600 'special type' vehicles, used to move exceptionally
heavy loads, will increase from Pounds 3,250 to Pounds 4,250 from Budget
day, and to Pounds 5,000 on the date of the first Unified Budget. A number
of other minor rates will change.
Changes in the rules covering the concessionary rates for vintage
motorcycles will result in around 1,000 motorcycles paying Pounds 15 vehicle
excise duty instead of Pounds 30. Vehicle excise duty rates for lorries
exceeding 12,000 kgs will remain unchanged.
The vehicle excise duty increases are designed to raise an extra Pounds 300m
in 1993-94.
VAT is to apply to domestic fuel and power at a rate of 8 per cent from
April 1994 and 17 1/2 per cent from April 1995.
The chancellor also gave a commitment to increase road fuel duties by, on
average, at least 3 per cent in real terms in future Budgets, building on
the 10 per cent increase announced in this Budget.
The Treasury said: 'His intention is to make a major contribution to the
UK's programme for limiting carbon dioxide emissions. This programme follows
the signature by the prime minister of the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change at Rio last year.'
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, said: 'Taken together with
measures that have already been announced, the UK now has in place policies
which should take us two thirds of the way to meeting the Climate Change
Convention commitments for carbon dioxide emissions, agreed at Rio.
'We expect to ratify the convention, together with other major countries, by
the end of 1993.'
The chancellor also announced that hydrocarbon oil duties are to be extended
to all fuel substitutes. Previously only petrol substitutes and road fuel
gases were subject to duty.
Customs and Excise said the intention was to apply duty to all substitutes
for oils used as motor fuel or heating fuel. Petrol substitutes and road
fuel gases are already charged with duty.
The principal commodities affected are orimulsion, a fuel oil substitute,
diesel fuel substitutes and some motor fuel additives. These will be charged
at the duty rate of the equivalent hydrocarbon oil.
A 10 per cent rise in rates of duty on hydrocarbon oils was announced.
Customs and Excise said the duty increases (including VAT) were equivalent
to: light oils (mainly leaded petrol), 3.3p a litre, 14.9p a gallon;
unleaded petrol 2.7p/12.5p; heavy oil used as road fuel (derv) 2.7p/12.2p;
gas oil (excluding VAT) 0.1p/0.6p; fuel oil (excluding VAT) 0.1p/0.5p.
A commitment was also announced to raise road fuel duties by, on average, at
least 3 per cent a year in real terms, as part of the strategy to return
carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
