FT  03 MAR 93 / Business and the Environment: Exploiting the rainforest -
Local indians, oilmen and conservationists have formed an uneasy alliance in
Ecuador
Down in the Oriente, Ecuador's Amazon rainforest, US oilmen and local
indians have decided to put aside their differences and enter into a
controversial partnership aimed at exploiting the environment without
destroying it.
After years of intense battling between oil companies, conservationists, the
Ecuadorian government and indigenous groups, Maxus Energy, a US oil company,
has been given final authorisation to develop block 16, a 200,000-hectare
government concession in the Oriente.
The reason for this controversy is that part of the Maxus concession lies in
Yasuni national park, one of the most pristine and biologically diverse
areas left in the Amazon forest. Also, block 16 is in the territory of the
Huaorani indians, one of the few tribes left in Amazonia living in relative
seclusion from the industrialised world. The park has been declared an
international biosphere reserve by Unesco.
The government's permission to build an access road and oil pipeline through
the rainforest is part of a new policy which seeks to exploit natural
resources even in protected areas, an activity permitted by Ecuadorian law.
The authorisation was one of the last hurdles for the consortium headed by
Dallas-based Maxus to overcome. Conoco, which originally headed the
consortium and conducted exploratory work, abandoned the field last year
because of government indecision, opposition by conservationists and fresh
opportunities elsewhere.
One driving force behind the environmental lobby, besides the area's
ecological and tribal importance, was the knowledge that oil companies
operating in the Oriente had previously caused enormous destruction and
distrust. A report co-authored by the National Resource Defence Council in
Washington DC documented the extent of river and soil pollution, excess
deforestation and catastrophic health effects on the indigenous people in
the Oriente. According to government estimates, up to 4,200 gallons of oil
per day are discharged into the environment, equalling 19m gallons in the
past two decades.
Against this background and under the requirements of a new federal law on
oil operations, Maxus proposed an environmental plan which it argued would
minimise the negative impact on the environment and the local people and
serve as a model project for rainforest areas.
By reducing the width of the access road from 100m to 25m, including a
subterranean pipeline, and using more synthetic materials and fewer tree
trunks for the road base, Maxus claims the usual deforestation rate for such
roads has been reduced sharply. It plans to minimise deforestation further
by using clustered well sites rather than having a separate site and road
for each individual well. A reforestation project is under way - seedlings
are being cultivated to replace the trees cut down.
A significant previous concern had been that oil companies moving into the
Amazon forest opened the way for settlers, who multiplied the deforestation
rate by slash-and-burn horticulture. Maxus plans to install guarded control
posts along access roads and river crossings to prevent settlers entering
the area.
However, until Maxus has had time to comply fully with the plan,
environmentalists will remain distrustful, remembering years of oil company
abuses in the rainforest. Also, questions remain over the long-term impact.
Will the pipeline have enough safety valves to minimise the repercussions of
a possible oil spill? Is a complete regeneration of the forest area
possible? Can the habitat of rare and endangered species be regenerated?
The local environmental group, Accion Ecologica, argues that the effect of
machinery noise and deforestation on many species that require specific
breeding grounds is unknown. Yet more mainstream conservationists, while
also opposed to the project, are trying to minimise the impact of the oil
operations by participating in the process.
'Seeing that the decision to exploit oil in block 16 has been taken, we are
now working to make the project as environmentally sustainable as possible,'
says Danila Silva of EcoCiencia, an environmental research group.
Maxus has overcome previous opposition to the project by some of the
indigenous groups whose livelihood depends on the forest. Through direct
negotiations between Maxus and certain groups of the Huaorani indians, both
sides have avoided political intermediaries and come to a working agreement.
Maxus will provide community services and infrastructure to the Huaoranis.
It will also limit helicopter flights over the area to avoid disturbing
wildlife, and prohibit employees from bringing in alcohol or pornographic
material.
Having experienced the first Maxus community projects, many Huaoranis see a
chance to benefit from the venture while preserving their culture. 'The way
to protect our way of life and our culture is by reinforcing our historical
awareness, our language and our customs,' says Enqueri, a Huaorani leader.
'Through the schools and health centres that Maxus builds, we have this
opportunity.'
However, further east, the Tagaeri tribe, which retains its semi-nomadic
existence and has refused attempts at contact, remains hostile to oil
companies and all development efforts.
For the more acculturated Huaoranis, the contingency plan developed in case
of an oil spill, says Enqueri, is to go en masse to the Maxus headquarters
to denounce their agreement with the company.
Of the Dollars 752m (Pounds 530m) that Maxus will invest in block 16, about
Dollars 50m is earmarked for environmental protection measures, says Boris
Abad, its government relations official. The government is investing 57 per
cent of the project's total cost, estimated at Dollars 2.2bn. Maxus expects
to produce 220m barrels of heavy crude over the next 20 years.
The initiative shown by Maxus so far in protecting the environment and
indigenous communities in block 16 is an improvement over previous oil
ventures in the Oriente. Yet whether it can be called a model environmental
operation in the rainforest will depend on an assessment of the area in a
decade.
