FT  09 DEC 93 / Progress on Ulster near: Dublin's demand for an all-Ireland
convention remains a crucial hurdle
The British and Irish governments yesterday voiced growing confidence that
they would agree before Christmas a joint declaration designed to persuade
the IRA to give up its campaign of violence in Northern Ireland.
But on the eve of the second meeting within a week between Mr John Major,
the British prime minister, and Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime
minister, officials conceded that Dublin's demand for a new all-Ireland
convention was a crucial stumbling block.
In London officials said they were confident that the proposed declaration -
likely to be finalised at a third meeting between the two leaders next week
 -would include firm guarantees for the unionist majority in Northern
Ireland.
Those guarantees would centre on explicit recognition by Dublin that any
change in the province's status could be achieved only by consent and a
commitment by the Republic to drop its constitutional claim to the north.
It is understood that Britain has agreed to recognise the legitimacy and
validity of the nationalist aspiration of Irish unity and to repeat publicly
the offer to Sinn Fein of a place in negotiations in return for an end to
violence.
Mr Major may also reaffirm that his government has no strategic interest in
maintaining Northern Ireland as part of the union, and signal its
willingness to accept separate referenda in the north and south on any
political settlement.
But the British side has rejected as unacceptable to the unionist parties
the establishment of an all-Ireland convention and is resisting Dublin's
demands to acknowledge publicly the right of self-determination across
Ireland.
The uncertain reaction of the IRA to any declaration was underlined by Mr
Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein.
At a party meeting in Belfast yesterday he defined the key issues for a
total cessation of violence as 'sovereignty, self-determination for the
people of Ireland, and the role of the British government in assisting in a
process of national reconciliation'.
He said Sinn Fein's involvement in political talks 'is not the main issue at
this time'.
He said the republican movement was not about to surrender, but added: 'We
have taken risks and are prepared to take further risks to achieve a lasting
peace . . . The opportunity for peace presented by the Irish peace
initiative remains intact if it is seized and built upon and if Dublin puts
the onus on Britain to deliver'.
