FT  17 SEP 93 / United Biscuits held to 1% increase
FIERCE price competition and a cost squeeze in the UK held United Biscuits,
Britain's largest biscuits and snacks manufacturer, to a 1 per cent increase
in pre-tax profits, before exceptionals, to Pounds 70.8m in the six months
to July 17.
The result, against Pounds 70m last year, was achieved in spite of buoyant
performances in continental Europe and the Asia-Pacific region, and a modest
recovery by Keebler, its troubled US subsidiary. The final pre-tax figure
was boosted to Pounds 133.5m by an exceptional Pounds 62.7m gain from the
sale of Terrys, the chocolate manufacturer, to Philip Morris, the US food
and tobacco group, this year.
Sir Robert Clarke, chairman, said trading remained intensively competitive
and second-half UK profits were unlikely to show any year-on-year
improvement. However, he expected a 'satisfactory' increase in group profit
for the year.
The biggest setback in the UK was at McVitie's, the biscuits division, where
operating profit fell 9 per cent to Pounds 36.6m from Pounds 40m, reducing
margins to 11.8 per cent from 14 per cent.
Mr Eric Nicoli, chief executive, said half the fall in margin was due to the
failure to recover higher raw materials costs and half to increased
marketing expenses designed to check an erosion of market share.
The market share loss, which had been in McVitie's own-label business, had
been reversed in the second quarter. However, UB expected lower margins to
persist for the foreseeable future.
UK operating profit at KP, the snacks division, rose 2 per cent to Pounds
14.1m while Ross Young's, the frozen foods business, lifted profit by 6 per
cent to Pounds 15.1 and increased its share of the British market. Total UK
operating profit fell 3 per cent to Pounds 59.9m.
Recent acquisitions boosted operating profit in continental Europe by 36 per
cent to Pounds 13.7m, while Smith's, the Australian snacks division
purchased last year contributed a Pounds 4.7m profit.
In the US, Keebler's operating profit rose 22 per cent to Pounds 16m. But
most of the recovery was due to Bake-Line, the newly-acquired US own-label
producer, and Keebler's sales of branded products fell.
An increase in turnover of 20 per cent to Pounds 1.84bn from Pounds 1.53bn
was mostly came from international operations, which contributed 55 per cent
of sales and 36 per cent of operating profit.
Earnings per share rose to 17p from 9.7p, but fell to 9.5p after adjustment
to reflect the exceptional gain from the Terrys' sale. The interim dividend
is unchanged at 5.5p
Details, Page 20
Lex, Page 18
