FT  05 AUG 93 / BNF forecasts Pounds 1.8bn earnings from Thorp
THE Thorp reprocessing plant at Sellafield, Cumbria, will earn Pounds 950m
for the UK and at least Pounds 1.8bn for British Nuclear Fuels in its first
10 years, the company said yesterday.
Those are the central claims of the 50-page report published yesterday by
BNF which sets out the economic case for the plant. The government's second
public consultation on the future of the plant, which runs until October 4,
will focus on economic and diplomatic questions. It promises to be as stormy
as the first consultation, which ended in January, and which addressed only
environmental issues.
Environmental groups yesterday criticised the government for not
commissioning an independent study of the economic case for Thorp. They
argued that the plant's profitability is likely to be much lower than BNF's
figures suggest. Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, said: 'The
documents published by the Department of the Environment do not demonstrate
that opening Thorp is in the best interests of the economy or the
environment.'
However, it was unclear yesterday how much consideration the government
intends to give to the responses to the consultation. Ministers made clear
that the decision to hold a second consultation was in response to the great
degree of public interest and was a matter of 'good governance'. However,
the government statement said that these wider economic and diplomatic
issues were 'not relevant' legally to the final decision.
Ministers said they are 'minded' to grant the plant a licence to start
operation on the basis of the first public consultation. The Pollution
Inspectorate, which published its conclusions from that consultation
yesterday, said it was satisfied that the proposed licence 'would
effectively protect human health, the safety of the food chain, and the
environment generally'.
In yesterday's report BNF put the cost of Thorp at Pounds 1.9bn, and at
Pounds 2.85bn including all associated facilities. The plant is intended to
take used or 'spent' nuclear fuel and recycle it so that re-usable uranium
and plutonium are extracted, leaving a smaller pile of unusable radioactive
waste.
The core of BNF's economic case is that Thorp will be worth about Pounds
950m to the UK in its first 10 years. This figure weighs the costs to the
country if Thorp were abandoned - loss of overseas revenue and storage costs
of nuclear fuel - against the savings. The estimate is in 1993 money - a
discount rate of 8 per cent, standard in government projects, has been used
to take account of the fact that much of the cost and revenue will not occur
for years.
According to Friends of the Earth, the projections 'are extremely sensitive
to changes in assumptions about costs'.
BNF's report identifies some factors which could diminish the value of Thorp
to the UK:
Doubling the costs of decommissioning the plant - which BNF has put at
Pounds 750m, or Pounds 1.2bn including all related facilities - would reduce
the value in 1993 money by some Pounds 30m.
Accelerating decommissioning by 15 years - perhaps because of insufficient
orders beyond the first 10 years - would cut off Pounds 10m. A 10-year delay
in starting the UK's proposed long-term underground store for radioactive
waste would cut off a further Pounds 10m. This project, run by UK Nirex, the
company owned by the UK nuclear industry, is currently scheduled to be ready
around the year 2007, but has been hit by delays.
Yet BNF argues that there is no reason to fear that the value of Thorp would
suffer from an overrun in general operating costs, even though the nuclear
industry has a poor record of overstepping its budget. In BNF's view, such
overruns are 'usually a feature of the construction phase'. It adds that
'even if there were to be unexpected operating cost increases, 60 per cent
could be passed through contractually to overseas customers'.
Critics of the proposals last night called for publication of the contracts,
without which, they said, it was impossible to judge that claim.
According to BNF, the estimate of Thorp's value is more likely to be too
low. In particular, it does not take account of the 'significant'
unemployment in Cumbria. BNF says that Thorp would support 5,450 jobs
directly and indirectly. A related plant to produce 'mixed oxide' fuel from
the reprocessed fuel, which cannot go ahead without Thorp, would support
3,000 construction jobs and 600 more in the long term, it said.
According to Pieda, UK-based economic consultants employed by BNF, the cost
to the UK of supporting redundant Thorp workers until they found equivalent
employment could add a further Pounds 500m to the value of Thorp to the UK.
The economic and commercial justification for Thorp - prepared by BNF.
Report on the Public Consultation. Both obtainable from Department of the
Environment, Marsham Street, London SW1P 3PY, and Ministry of Agriculture
Fisheries and Food, 17 Smith Square, London SW1P 3JR.
