FT  26 OCT 93 / Survey of Technology in the Office (17): High level of
vulnerability - Many companies fail to take basic precautions, despite the
high cost of computer fraud which may exceed Dollars 4bn a year worldwide /
Computer Security
A COMPANY director was visiting his doctor's surgery recently. He noticed
that the receptionist was away from her desk and the computer on the desk
was turned on. He pressed 'enter,' got a menu, chose patient records, and
called one up on screen. He could have amended it or printed it out, and no
one would have known.
The director in question happened to work for government computing
specialist Lynwood Scientific Development, and his intentions were not
malicious: he had in fact, called up his own record. But what if he had been
someone with a grudge against another patient?
Security on computers is becoming more, rather than less of an issue, now
that many organisations are using PCs and PC-networks instead of holding
their data in separate computer centres (see further report on this page on
IT business security issues).
Many companies, as in the above case of the doctor's surgery, do not
recognise the PC as a potential source of security breaches.
In financial terms, computer-based fraud is thought to cost up to Dollars
4bn a year worldwide. But as electronic purchase and payment transfers
increase with the advance of electronic data interchange (EDI) between
businesses, the financial targets for computer 'hackers' may also increase.
'Companies don't seem to have adjusted well to the changing pattern of
corporate computing. There is a feeling out there that 'it's only a personal
computer,'' says Keith Hearnden, lecturer in security management at
Loughborough University.
Mr Hearnden suggests that companies should work out what would happen if
that PC were stolen, or lost in a fire. Replacing it, he says, would not be
as simple as going to the high street and buying a similar model.
'You need the same operating system, configuration, software add-ons, and
communications set-up,' he says.
In addition, the loss of data held on it, could cause more financial damage
than the loss of the actual hardware - unless the precaution had been taken
to keep disk back-ups in another location.
David Cockarill, Lynwood's business development manager, advises that
common-sense measures should be taken in the office as a first line of
action.
A simple precaution that could have been taken in the doctor's surgery, for
example, would have been to use a key which blanks the screen, and turns off
the keyboard. The casual browser cannot read anything. Confidential memos
should be stored on floppy disks and locked away - 'You wouldn't leave a
typescript on the desk, so don't do it with the electronic version,' says Mr
Cockarill.
Mr Hearndon advises that staff should be told about computer security
issues: the best time to do this is on an induction course when they join an
organisation. He recently conducted a survey of 421 UK organisations, which
showed that two-thirds do not bother to take this precaution.
It is common for staff to write their password on yellow stickers, posted on
their screen. Anyone - clients or suppliers - visiting the office could see
it, and use it later to hack into the network to access files. Training
should include basics such as why staff should not reveal their password,
and how viruses can be introduced to a computer, as well as proper
procedures for taking disk-back-ups.
The best protection against viruses is simply to ban people from using any
disk other than one that has been checked by the systems department  -
computer games, brought in by staff to play on their perosnal computers at
lunch time, are a common hazard. Another sensible precaution is to forbid
the uploading software from bulletin boards.
ONE simple course of action against hacking is to be more strict on the
choice of passwords. According to Geof Soulsby, marketing manager at Racal
Datacom, 80 per cent of all passwords are contained in 100 known names or
words - 'it isn't difficult for a hacker to guess those 100 words,' he says.
They include the 10 most popular boys and girls names, a few swear words,
and several four-to-six letter words. 'Dog' and 'cat' are the third and
fourth most popular passwords.
David Clark, partner specialising in computer security at management
consultants Touche Ross, says that there are no statistics on the extent of
the problem of hacking, because few organisations will admit to it. But he
added: 'Fifteen per cent of the organisations I deal with have a concern
about hacking. They may either have experienced it or they are worried about
it.'
It therefore follows that where a computer system or network is carrying
information of high value to the organisation or its clients, something more
than a password is needed.
Encryption of the data is not necessarily the answer. Encryption makes it
impossible to read the data while it is travelling along the lines, but does
not prevent unauthorised access. Normally, encryption is part of a package
of measures which utilise other cryptographical techniques to protect
against and to authenticate the message.
Unauthorised access can be prevented by a 'challenge and response' system.
Staff are given an electronic gadget that looks similar to a calculator.
When someone logs on to the system, it sends back a challenge which appears
on the screen. The challenge is entered into the gadget, which uses
complicated mathematical algorithms to calculate a response, which must be
entered into the system. If the gadget has obtained the correct response,
the user is permitted to access the system.
Challenge and response systems make life difficult for hackers because the
codes are different every time.
Even if a hacker obtained one code, they would not be able to use it to get
in to the system. The algorithms used - known as DES - is licenced by the US
Department of State, and its use is strictly controlled.
Challenge and response systems are used by Barclays and Natwest banks, as
well as other commercial organisations, to protect sensitive payment and
order data.
They are also used where people are regularly dialling in to a system from
remote locations.
But the cost is not cheap. According to Mr Soulsby, the 'calculator' gadget
costs around Pounds 50, but a large organisation such as a bank might buy
10,000.
Authentication of messages is done using a digital signature - an indication
to the recipient that they have not been tampered with.
Mathematical algorithms scramble the characters in a message, and produce a
64-digit message string, which is then appended to the original text. The
recipient uses the same algorithms to decode the string. If the message has
been tampered with a different string would be produced.
Mr Clark recommends that a digital signature is used 'where it is vital that
the recipient is assured of the source of the transaction.'
Typically, this would be in a banking environment, where large sums of money
are involved.
