FT  04 SEP 93 / Tractor makers gain benefits of ERM departure
TRACTOR manufacturers are enjoying an increasing share of the windfall for
UK farmers' incomes provided by the exit of sterling from the European
Community's exchange rate mechanism last autumn.
Figures published yesterday by the Agricultural Engineers' Association show
that UK registrations of tractors above 40hp totalled 2,741 units in August,
up 40.6 per cent from the same month last year, taking the total for the
year so far to 11,983 units, up 24 per cent.
Mr Chris Evans, the association's economist, said the sharp rise had to be
viewed against the background of extremely depressed sales in preceding
years as farmers' incomes slumped to historic lows in real terms. Last year
UK tractor sales were the lowest on record, he said.
Reform of the EC's common agricultural policy had already brightened the
outlook for farmers before sterling left the ERM and the 'green pound' - the
artificial exchange rate at which EC-guaranteed farm prices are translated
into sterling - was devalued by 20 per cent, Mr Evans said. Although
subsequent revaluation of the green pound had reduced farmers' gains, many
still found themselves with money to invest in machinery for the first time
in years.
The rise in spending on machinery was exaggerated by the fact that much
machinery was overdue for replacement, Mr Evans said, while some purchases
might have been brought forward to benefit from a 40 per cent tax allowance
on farm equipment, which is being reduced to 25 per cent from the end of
October. He thought strong demand for tractors would continue at least until
then.
The National Farmers' Union agreed that the financial position of UK farmers
was better than for some time. It cautioned, however, that investment plans
should be considered 'with great care' in view of the uncertainties
associated with the progress of agricultural policy reform and the impact on
farm incomes of any eventual settlement in the general agreement on tariffs
and trade.
