FT  18 JUN 93 / Blue chip offers from Beijing: The first Chinese companies
to be partially sold in Hong Kong
China's new capitalists are nearly ready to go to market. It has been a long
haul and there is more preparation to be done. But by the end of next month,
up to four out of nine Chinese state companies should be ready to be listed
on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
The listing of the nine - among China's largest state-run companies - is a
milestone both for the Communist authorities in Beijing and for Hong Kong.
For China, it will give investment-hungry industries their first access to
foreign funds, while representing a victory for the country's economic
reformers, eager to show that Chinese companies can meet the demands of an
international market.
For Hong Kong, China's entry to the stock exchange adds substance to the
colony's claim that it is the place from which to invest in China. It will
also be a relief to those who feared Beijing might jeopardise Hong Kong's
economy because of the dispute with Britain over the conditions for handing
over sovereignty to China in 1997.
Under Hong Kong stock exchange requirements, China must put at least 25 per
cent of each company seeking a listing up for sale. It will do so by
floating 10 per cent for in each company on the Hong Kong exchange and 15
per cent on the Shanghai exchange. Control of the companies will remain with
the Chinese state.
If the flotations succeed, more will follow. The first four to be listed,
advisers say, will be Shanghai Petrochemical, one of China's largest
petrochemical manufacturers; Tsingtao Brewery, producer of one of China's
best known exports, Tsingtao beer; Beijing Renmin Machinery, a manufacturer
of offset printing equipment; and Guangzhou Shipyard, in southern China.
Each will have to meet international accounting standards, appoint two
independent directors to each of their boards and retain the services of a
foreign investment adviser for three years after being listed.
While the checklist should instil some common ground rules, they do not
guarantee good housekeeping. But China's Securities Regulatory Commission,
set up late last year, hopes the disciplines of western accounting methods
and the need to be responsive to outside shareholders will improve
efficiency and provide a model for other companies.
Investors have demonstrated a keen appetite for China-related new issues in
the past - earlier this year an initial public offering for a Hong Kong
company which holds mainland automotive assets was oversubscribed more than
600 times - and the expectation is that the nine will be no different.
Foreign investor interest is expected to be especially strong.
The reason is straightforward. The companies come to the market at a time of
enormous foreign interest in China prompted by Beijing's apparent commitment
to free market reforms, and by the economy's vigorous expansion: investors
hope China's high rates of economic growth will underpin strong corporate
earnings and dividends.
Says one US investment adviser: 'Investors want to diversify into emerging
markets especially in Asia, and China is seen as an hot area.' Yet it will
be hard for foreigners to know exactly what sort of company they are
investing in. The companies are unlike anything in which they might have
invested before and have no western equivalents. 'The task for the foreign
investor is to sift through a growing list of investment opportunities and
find the companies with management capable of making the change from the old
to the new business environment. That's not going to be easy; management in
many cases hasn't got the foggiest idea.'
A further aspect of the differences between Chinese and western operations
is the way they evaluate their corporations financially. In China, the
yardstick of financial success is output rather than profit. 'Chinese
companies suffer from the big is beautiful problem,' says Mr Meocre Li, a
partner with accountants Arthur Andersen, adviser to Tsingtao Brewery.
Attitudes differ too. One foreign adviser took a group of foreign investors
to see one the companies. The president outlined plans for a new plant. 'The
investors wanted to know what the break even was, what the new plant's
contribution to profits would be, and so on. The president dismissed their
questions with a wave of his hand, saying Li Peng, China's prime minister,
had personally authorised the investment so everything would be all right.'
Aside from the risks attached to investing in a different, and largely
unknown, environment, merchant bankers helping to bring the nine to market
express concern about their clients' attitudes towards raising foreign
equity.
'They view the flotation as providing them with a pot of money, and the
prospectus the price they have to pay to get it,' said one UK merchant
banker in Hong Kong working on a listing. 'If the man from the Pru turns up,
owning 5 per cent of the company, I'm not sure how they will deal with him.
The management of these companies just does not understand the long-term
consequences of raising foreign equity.'
In future, China's company managers will have to respond to the demands of
foreign shareholders, who may expect greater access to managers and to
information about how a company in which they have a stake is run.
Foreign shareholders and Chinese managers will have to adjust to each other
in what is likely to be a painful process. This was graphically demonstrated
last year when Shanghai Vacuum, a television manufacturer, became the first
mainland Chinese company to issues shares in Shanghai to foreigners. Instead
of focusing on television-making as it had promised minority investors, the
company used much of the foreign capital to speculate in property. When the
company tried to raise fresh capital through a rights issue, it flopped. The
foreign investors felt they had no guarantee about where their money would
go.
The regulatory standards in Hong Kong - including accounting standards,
rules on insider dealing and investor protection - might prevent cases where
foreign investors feel they have been abused. However, it is likely to be
some time before investment decisions by foreigners in China can be based on
much more than calculated guesswork.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
CHINA INC FOR SALE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Name                      Assets   Sales  Profit  Employees   Est market
                          (Yn/m)  (Yn/m)  (Yn/m)                   cap*
                                                             (HKDollars
                                                                    bn)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Shanghai PetroChem        5,487   7,340   1,532     70,443        15-20
Yizheng Chem Fibre        3,488   3,590     720     21,012        10-15
Maanshan Iron &amp; Steel     3,261   2,792      88     76,715         8-12
Bohai Chemical            1,788   1,760     180     39,314         5-10
Dongfang Electric            63      69       2      2,581          3-7
Tsingtao Brewery            127     138      28      2,829      1.5-2.5
Guangzhou Shipyard          218     634     100      9,600          1-2
Renmin Machinery            190     350      60      6,290       0.5-10
Kunming Machine Tools       112      65      12      5,402        0.5-1
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Zhonggang Jinji, April 1993. * Brokers' estimates based on the
flotation of 25 per cent of each company post-reconstruction.
Note: Figures are for 1991, and reflect mainland Chinese accounting
standards
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
