FT  31 DEC 93 / Sang froid in the heat of battle: Edouard Balladur, French
prime minister, is the FT's Man of the Year. He talks to David Buchan and
Andrew Gowers
Edouard Balladur has surprised everyone, including probably himself.
In his nine months as France's prime minister, he has proved more
consistently popular than any other political leader in the country - indeed
in the west - despite recession and record unemployment. Cohabiting
harmoniously with a Socialist president, he has embarked on a major
programme to privatise state industry. He has weathered a summer currency
crisis that seemed to dash France's hopes for European monetary union, but
emerged with his dignity intact and the franc back at its old rate against
the D-mark.
To cap it all, earlier this month he finessed the Gatt negotiations in a way
that gave the world its Uruguay Round trade agreement, saved the European
Union from a serious political crisis, and kept him in his job  - in the
process consolidating his position as the undeclared front-runner for the
1995 French presidential elections. If he goes on to win, this courteous,
somewhat ponderous man, who was appointed prime minister precisely because
he did not seem likely to become a power in his own right, will have changed
the face of French politics.
In a year-end interview in his elegant Matignon office, Mr Balladur allows
himself to revel a little in the unexpected nature of it all. 'It is
paradoxical that the French have evidently still a good opinion of me, and
yet apparently believe they are badly governed,' he says. He is still
scoring more than 55 per cent in opinion polls which, however, also show
that nearly two-thirds of the French are unhappy with the way the country is
run and more than two-thirds think things are getting worse.
Yet he is clearly beginning to think that the stars favour him. He is amused
at how he has bounced back after every punch: 'At the start, people said my
honeymoon would never last beyond the summer. Then came the August monetary
crisis. I thought it would be seen as a setback for the government, but it
wasn't. Then came . . . the unfortunate affair of the Air France strike,
which led to a torrent of criticism against me in the Anglo-Saxon press.
'Finally, there was Gatt. People outside France wondered if I was a
statesman with the courage to face down my own farmers and sign a Gatt
agreement, while others in France wondered whether I would have the courage
to . . . refuse to sign.'
But why the resilient poll ratings? When he was last in government, as
finance minister in the first conservative cohabitation with President
Francois Mitterrand in 1986-88, he was not popular and was mocked in the
press for a smug manner.
Tentatively, Mr Balladur offers two explanations. 'Maybe they're saying they
can see I'm not responsible for the current situation since I have not been
in government for very long. Perhaps, too. . . people see that cohabitation
is going well, that I keep myself a bit apart from daily political
squabbles.'
Such comments are typical of his low-key style. France does appear exhausted
by the left-right struggle of the last few years, and by the campaign for
the March parliamentary elections in which the centre-right parties, the RPR
and UDF, crushed the ruling Socialists. Mr Balladur's strengths are an
ability to appear above the fray; a fearsome appetite for technical detail,
which helps to deprive contentious issues of political sting; and a
pragmatism enabling him to perform effortless U-turns and, often, to sound
plausible in claiming victory out of defeat.
It is with the same sang froid that he has faced the crises of his first
nine months, and dealt with the unexploded mines - unsustainable economic
and monetary policies and Gatt - left behind by the Socialists.
He concedes he initially misjudged the extent of the French recession, which
saw a 0.7 per cent drop in gross domestic product in the first quarter of
1993. His main preoccupation was the dire deficits in the public finances.
'It seemed to me we could not let things carry on like that, because the
deficits were sustaining feelings of morosity and worry about the future.
There was an intimate psychological link between the recovery of economic
activity and the struggle against the deficits.'
Mr Balladur's first act, to cut spending and raise taxes in his May budget,
arguably deepened the gloom. But after a burst of criticism from within the
centre-right majority, he swiftly came up with the 'Balladur bond', a public
issue which raised FFr110bn (Pounds 12.6bn) to fight unemployment. He also
vigorously launched his privatisation programme, which with this year's sale
of Banque Nationale de Paris, two smaller banks and Rhone-Poulenc, the
chemicals group, has already realised some FFr43bn.
But Mr Balladur's moment of truth was the summer crisis in the European
Monetary System. After the Bank of France had lost its foreign exchange
reserves in a vain defence of the franc at its old parity, many foreign
observers concluded a huge hole had been blown in Mr Balladur's credibility.
But instead of burying his franc fort policy, he picked himself up and
behaved as if nothing much had happened.
Mr Balladur seems almost serene about that crisis now. It is not just that
he is pleased to see the franc back near its old rate against the D-mark. He
also appears philosophical about the disappearance of the EMS's old tight
fluctuation bands of 2.25 per cent.
He brushes aside theories of Anglo-Saxon conspiracy against the EMS. Then,
in a remarkable feat of monetary hindsight, he admits that the premise for
the franc fort policy was fundamentally flawed: 'To try to maintain
quasi-fixed parities with divergent monetary and budgetary policies is a
nonsense. It cannot last eternally.' The decision to widen the EMS bands to
15 per cent - made at his suggestion - can now be claimed as a victory for
common sense and Mr Balladur.
The prime minister bridles at charges that he has not taken full advantage
of France's new-found monetary freedom by not cutting interest rates more
aggressively since August. European governments are virtually obliged to
have similar interest rates - even cut-and-run Britain, says Mr Balladur,
sending aides scurrying to find charts showing UK short-term interest rates
not appreciably below France's.
Despite lower rates he is characteristically cautious about the prospects
for the economy, sticking to a forecast of 1.5 per cent GDP growth in 1994.
Will this be enough to reverse the rise in unemployment, which hit a record
12 per cent in October and is forecast to increase further. He hopes so,
noting he has already boosted the cash flow of French firms by speedier
refunds of Value Added Tax and by introducing tax incentives for
apprenticeships and training.
For Mr Balladur, there are no quick fixes for unemployment. Indeed, he
stresses that only through painstaking reform over several years can France
combat its structural labour market problems - difficulties his country
shares with most in western Europe.
He says the Delors white paper on growth, competitiveness and employment,
endorsed in Brussels this month, is only the start of a great debate. 'We
all - French, Germans, British, everyone in western Europe - have a big
problem: how can we maintain what we have achieved politically, socially,
even morally, in an increasingly competitive world? We . . . have built up
systems of social protection which are very necessary, but also very
costly.'
Where the French prime minister is weaker is in showing how France might
take a lead in tackling this problem. He rejects scrapping the country's
generous minimum wage, sometimes criticised for pricing less-skilled workers
out of jobs. To do so 'would be taken as a signal of social durete
(toughness), and I am not at all sure it would advance economic efficiency,'
he says, 'so I won't do it.'
This is typical of the social caution that marks his Gaullist RPR party out
from Anglo-Saxon conservatives. The same goes for his decision in October to
back down in the Air France strike. It leaves the prime minister with an
awkward precedent when he comes to rationalising other loss-making state
enterprises. But he remains unrepentant.
His retreat, he says, was motivated not - as is sometimes said - by the
memory of being Prime Minister Pompidou's industrial relations adviser
during the upheavals of May 1968 but by the fear of social fragility
resulting from unemployment, now at 3.24m.
'Each people has a certain mentality. We in France are very attached to the
principle of justice, and in the case of Air France, lower-paid staff were
being asked to bear more of the cuts (in bonuses). So I decided it was not
worth persevering . . . And if I had to do it again, I would do exactly the
same thing.'
There is almost certainly another reason why Mr Balladur defused the Air
France confrontation. It came as the controversy over the Gatt trade talks
was reaching its height. One crisis at a time was enough.
When he discusses Gatt, Mr Balladur becomes jubilant - and with good reason.
There was a danger that French opposition - notably French farmers - would
sink the Uruguay Round. And although Mr Balladur insists he was always
prepared to strike a deal on the right terms, his task was scarcely made
easier by the way his RPR had fought the parliamentary election on a
platform hostile to the understanding reached between the EU and US on
agriculture.
Mr Balladur's achievement was to turn these difficulties into a bargaining
chip.
When he arrived at the Matignon in April, he says he had two aims. One was
to prevent French farmers being made the culprits: from early on his
negotiating stance embraced a range of issues beyond agriculture, from the
defence of French culture to the overarching rules of world trade. The
second was to take the ideological heat out of the whole debate and get down
to technical nuts and bolts.
By doing this, and through personal diplomacy, he struck up some useful
alliances within Europe - and, he implies, stiffened the EU's resolve. He
acknowledges help from Germany's Chancellor Kohl, the Belgian presidency of
the EU, Sir Leon Brittan, the chief EU negotiator ('a very intelligent and
capable man'), and even the UK 'where some leaders supported our demands for
a new world trade organisation'.
His tough tactics may have won him more concessions than he expected -
though he refuses to admit the point: 'If I told you today that I obtained
more than I thought, I would be a very bad negotiator, because in the next
negotiation I would be given fewer concessions]'
Mr Balladur may yet be seen as the man who helped integrate France into the
world economy. 'I expect - but I could be wrong - that the French will see
that it is better to have a good Gatt accord than not to have a Gatt
agreement,' he says. He also hopes the EU will draw the right lesson: 'The
important thing is to know what you want. We showed that we're stronger
together than if we were alone.'
No less, the prime minister must be hoping his Gatt gamble will bear
favourably on his own political fortunes. For in pulling off an acceptable
deal, he has stolen the thunder of France's more protectionist politicians,
one of whom - Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of the RPR - happens to see himself
as a prime contender for the presidency. Praise for the agreement has come
from all sides, including Mr Chirac.
But what of Mr Balladur's ambitions to become president when Mr Mitterrand's
term expires in May 1995? He throws up his arms in unusual animation and
says: 'I'm not talking about that. I have never talked about it, and I won't
talk about it for the whole of 1994. And I hope that others will not speak
about it either.'
The trouble is that 'others' already have. Mr Francois Leotard, the defence
minister, and Mrs Simone Veil, both of the centre-right UDF which is in
coalition with Mr Balladur's RPR, have said this month that they think Mr
Balladur would make a fine president.
Mr Chirac will not be easily displaced from his control of the RPR. But
party workers read the opinion polls, and these put Mr Balladur ahead of any
other presidential candidate, even Mr Jacques Delors, the other undeclared
runner who shows up as the Socialists' best hope.
His growing support within the UDF also gives Mr Balladur something no other
RPR politician has - the potential to bring the two parties together into
the sort of conservative movement almost all other European countries have.
This is one ambition Mr Balladur does not shy away from. 'That is what I was
preaching back in 1988,' he says.
