FT  23 DEC 93 / Currencies' Summer of Discontent: Faultlines show in
Franco-German unity
The moment of truth for Europe's exchange rate mechanism came on Friday July
30 at a secret meeting of French and German ministers and officials in
Paris. David Marsh tells the story of this bruising encounter and of other
summer crisis meetings that reveal an extraordinary clash of policy and
psychology between two governments which were previously renowned for their
co-operation
When Mr Theo Waigel and Mr Edmond Alphandery, the German and French finance
ministers, sat down in Paris at secret midsummer talks to save the franc,
international currency markets were close to boiling over.
The D-Mark/franc exchange rate, the core of the 14-year-old European
monetary system, was rapidly melting under the impact of massive world-wide
sales of the French currency. At one stage, the Bank of France was selling
Dollars 100m a minute in borrowed foreign exchange in a frantic effort to
stop its currency falling through its floor of FFr3.4305 to the D-Mark in
the exchange rate mechanism.
Yet, as top delegations from the French and German finance ministries and
central banks struggled in vain to resolve the crisis, the mood in Mr
Alphandery's conference room on the banks of the Seine grew steadily
frostier.
The ERM's moment of truth came on Friday July 30 at Bercy in eastern Paris,
behind the closed doors of the French Finance Ministry's headquarters. The
meeting had been hastily arranged the previous evening at the personal
intervention of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the German leader, and Mr Edouard
Balladur, the French prime minister who had staked his political future on
upholding the franc.
The talks came 60 hours before European finance ministers, after a weekend
of emergency discussions in Brussels, announced a sharp widening of ERM
fluctuation bands to shield the system from currency speculation.
The story of the Bercy talks, and of other undisclosed crisis meetings
during the summer, has been assembled from conversations with participants
from both the German and French sides. It reveals an extraordinary clash of
policy and psychology between two governments previously renowned for their
monetary co-operation.
In the five months since the ERM flare-up, the French and German governments
have maintained their political support for Europe's efforts to develop the
ERM into economic and monetary union, in line with the Maastricht treaty.
Additionally, the link between the D-Mark and the franc has been partly
reforged. The French currency this month has regained its pre-crisis level
against the D-Mark, climbing back above its former floor in the previous
'narrow-band' ERM.
However, it will take longer to rebuild a political consensus between the
two countries on turning Emu into reality.
The ERM had already erupted several times in the previous 12 months.
Hitherto, the high point of unrest and acrimony had been in September 1992,
when Britain and Italy were forced to leave the system. Amid accusations
from the UK government that the Bundesbank had deliberately tried to scuttle
sterling's ERM link, Mr John Major, the prime minister, launched an attack
on 'faultlines' in the ERM. Even by the stormy standards of past ERM
tussles, the Bercy meeting was remarkably tense.
Mr Alphandery and Mr Jacques de Larosiere, the governor of the Bank of
France, wanted the four visiting Germans - including Mr Helmut Schlesinger,
the Bundesbank president - to pump lifeblood into the ERM.
Instead, the French bore helpless witness to the biggest one-day haemorrhage
of monetary reserves in history.
At the meeting, the French turned down Germany's suggestion of an immediate
suspension of ERM intervention. Instead, they proposed that the D-Mark
should leave the exchange rate mechanism. The suggestion was rejected by Mr
Waigel's team on the grounds it would 'singularise' the Germans as the cause
of ERM tensions.
European financial markets were already in a state of unusual turbulence
when the Germans arrived at the Finance Ministry at 10.30am on July 30. They
had endured an uncomfortable hour-long journey in a minibus, driving through
the Paris traffic from Villacoublay military airport south-west of Paris.
Two hours earlier, as the German delegation took off for Paris from
Bonn-Cologne airport in a 10-seater German air force Challenger aircraft,
the Bank of France had already started to borrow large amounts of foreign
exchange to sell for francs.
As the talks progressed in the Finance Ministry, a messenger arrived at
regular intervals, bringing up-to-the minute reports of the Bank of France's
sharply rising drawings on its large 'swap' credit from the German
Bundesbank. The bilateral credit had been operating at sporadic intervals
for at least a year.
By lunchtime, when the talks petered out without agreement, the credit - for
a total of about DM30bn - was exhausted.
By the end of the day the total amount of foreign exchange deployed by the
Bank of France to try to hold the franc's ERM parity is thought to have
exceeded FFr300bn. Heavy foreign borrowing, from the Bundesbank and other
central banks, wiped out France's foreign currency reserves, leaving the
bank with a net deficit of more than FFr180bn.
The dramatis personae at Bercy included some of Europe's most experienced
monetary officials. Apart from Mr Waigel and Mr Schlesinger, the German side
included Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank deputy president, and Mr Gert
Haller, state secretary at the Bonn Finance Ministry. Mr Tietmeyer has
subsequently taken over the Bundesbank helm, moving to the president's job
in October on Mr Schlesinger's retirement.
Accompanying Mr Alphandery and Mr de Larosiere (now president of the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development) were Mr Jean-Claude
Trichet, director of the French Treasury (now governor of the Bank of
France), and Mr Herve Hannoun, the bank's deputy governor. Two interpreters
were present, although part of the conversations were carried out in English
to ease communication.
Significantly, Mr de Larosiere led negotiations for the French side. Mr
Alphandery - who in June had irritated the Germans by making a rash and
counter-productive public statement calling on the Bundesbank to cut
interest rates - took little detailed part in the meeting.
The session at Bercy was the second top-level Franco-German get-together in
eight days. The two delegations had met at another, more productive, secret
meeting late in the evening on July 22 at the Hotel Marriott in Munich. They
agreed to increase the ceiling of the swap credit between the Bundesbank and
Bank of France, and to co-ordinate interest rate policies to help steady the
franc.
The next day, July 23, the Bank of France raised its key overnight borrowing
rate to 10 per cent - intensifying an already severe monetary squeeze and
heightening Mr Balladur's political problems caused by recession and 3m-plus
unemployment. The two governments issued a joint statement pledging support
for the franc's ERM parity.
If the Munich talks signalled the start of the countdown to crisis, the
Paris meeting marked the explosion. Just a day after widespread surprise
that the Bundesbank's decision-making council, at its regular fortnightly
meeting on July 29, failed to cut its key discount rate (then standing at 6
3/4 per cent) to assist the franc, Mr Waigel's delegation resisted French
pressure for fresh interest rate cuts and extra Bundesbank support
intervention.
The hastily arranged nature of the Munich and Paris meetings led to
inevitable mishaps and misunderstandings, adding to the difficulties of
reaching an agreement.
For the July 22 talks in the Hotel Marriott, which extended into the early
hours, Mr Schlesinger flew to Munich in a small private aircraft from his
holiday home in Greece. He arrived only at midnight, after hold-ups on the
journey. Through an oversight, the German government failed to arrange
transport at Munich airport to pick up Mr Alphandery and the other
high-ranking French visitors. They had to pay their own taxi fares to the
hotel in the Munich district of Schwabing.
Similarly, on July 30, there was no official French government reception
team on hand when Mr Waigel's delegation reached Villacoublay airport.
In view of the need for discretion, they were given neither limousines nor a
motorcycle escort. This was almost certainly not a riposte - as some of the
German delegation suspected - for the transport mix-up in Munich. However,
the lateness of the German team's arrival at Bercy did nothing to improve
the warmth of the talks or the likelihood of a meeting of minds.
At the outset, Mr de Larosiere asked the Bundesbank to agree interest rate
cuts for the following week on its securities repurchase agreements - the
main method by which it channels funds to the banks.
He also urged the Bundesbank to buy unlimited amounts of francs against
D-Marks to stop the French currency hitting its lowest permitted level of
FFr3.4305.
The Germans' response was acid. Although the Bundesbank the previous day had
left its discount rate unchanged, it had cut by  1/2 point to 7 3/4 per cent
the less significant Lombard rate, which sets a ceiling for German money
market rates. This, Mr Schlesinger felt, went slightly further than the
steps outlined at the July 22 meeting at the Hotel Marriott.
As for the request for unlimited intervention, Mr Schlesinger repeated the
Bundesbank's long-standing opposition to taking part in such so-called
'intra-marginal' support for currencies before they reached their ERM
floors.
The debate about intra-marginal intervention soon became academic. At
11.00am, half an hour after the talks started, the franc fell to its D-Mark
floor. This sparked off obligatory franc purchases by both central banks,
with the Bank of France able to borrow unlimited quantities of foreign
exchange under automatic ERM short-term lending facilities.
The Germans favoured lifting the obligation to intervene, which would have
entailed closing the official lunchtime 'fixing' of European currencies.
This option, which would have needed the agreement of all Germany's European
partners, had already been discussed informally with Mr Wim Duisenberg,
president of the Netherlands central bank, and chairman of the committee of
European central bank governors. It could be coupled, the Germans believed,
with a joint Franco-German declaration convening the European monetary
committee in Brussels the next day.
Such a move, the Germans argued, would save the French large-scale reserve
losses caused by foreign exchange intervention. The French, however, knew
that suspending the ERM in the middle of the trading day would be
interpreted as an overwhelming defeat for Paris. They responded that central
banks had a duty to maintain a market for the ERM currencies.
When the US exchange markets opened during the European afternoon,
intervention to keep the franc within its ERM band picked up momentum. As a
result, the scale of intervention to defend the franc at the end of July
appears to have been more than twice the estimated Pounds 16bn spent by the
Bank of England when Britain left the ERM on 'Black Wednesday', September 16
1992.
Immediately after the Paris talks, Mr Waigel and his three companions flew
to another secret meeting to plan the next steps with Chancellor Kohl.
Flying via Bonn and Frankfurt to Salzburg in two aircraft, they arrived at
about 5pm at the chancellor's rented holiday house in the Austrian village
of St Gilgen am Wolfgangsee.
At least one of Mr Kohl's summer visitors feared the chancellor might try to
persuade the Bundesbank to ease monetary policy to shore up the
Franco-German political alliance. Instead, Mr Kohl was unexpectedly relaxed,
agreeing with the idea - already voiced informally by the Bundesbank several
months earlier - that the ERM should escape the currency market storms by
moving to wider bands.
The following day, on July 31, the European Community's monetary committee,
linking Finance Ministry and central bank officials from the 12 member
countries, assembled to discuss the crisis in an anonymous European
Commission building in Brussels.
After a frenetic weekend search for compromise, finance ministers announced
in the early hours of August 2 that all currencies except the D-Mark and
Dutch guilder were abandoning their existing 2 1/4 per cent fluctuation band
and moving to 15 per cent.
Almost to the end of the Brussels meetings, France maintained its line that
Germany should leave the ERM. The Paris government consented to the wider
margins plan only after a telephone conversation between Mr de Larosiere in
Brussels and Mr Balladur in Paris, which took place between 11pm and
midnight on August 1. They agreed that the bands should be set at 15 per
cent.
This was greater than the original German suggestion of 6-8 per cent.
However, Mr de Larosiere told the Germans that setting the bands at a
narrower level would be like offering speculators 'slices of meat on the
table'.
Because of the pro-German solidarity of the Benelux countries, the French
plan to eject Germany from the ERM was doomed from the start. Already on
July 31, unknown to the French, the German and Dutch governments concluded
an agreement that, whatever happened, the guilder  - the ERM's second
hardest currency - would remain firmly bound to the D-Mark. Later, Belgium
and Denmark said they also wanted to follow the D-Mark.
The French thus ended up with the untenable policy of promoting a rump ERM
from which the strongest members would have departed.
As the Bundesbank never tires of pointing out, the Maastricht treaty's Emu
plan requires participating countries to display far-reaching political
solidarity in uniting not only their currencies, but also their economic
policies. In summer 1993, however, France and Germany put on a display not
of solidarity but of miscalculation and wounded pride.
Yet there was also a curious air of fatalism to the drama, as if both sides
were conducting a ritual with a pre-ordained outcome. As one participant at
the Munich and Bercy meetings observes: 'It was like a Greek tragedy. All
the characters were destined to play out a part. You couldn't really imagine
that they would do anything else.'
Another participant says the outcome could have been averted had a
full-scale realignment taken place in 1991 or 1992 involving a D-Mark
revaluation, an idea which had always been hotly opposed by the French (and
never put on the agenda by the German government). By July 1993, this
official believes, the narrow-band ERM was beyond repair.
Particularly because of the widespread feeling that the September 1992 ERM
crisis had been mishandled, the Germans were eager to show the French that
the Bundesbank would play a constructive role in assisting the franc. Yet,
when it came to the crunch, neither the French nor the Germans were prepared
to make essential concessions to maintain the narrow-band ERM.
At Bercy, and at the earlier meeting in Munich, the two sides wanted to
demonstrate that the alliance was still intact. As one German participant at
the Munich and Paris talks puts it: 'Each time we sought to resolve the
situation. We understood that it (the D-Mark/franc rate) was a cornerstone
of their policy.'
The Germans had self-interested reasons for seeking to maintain France's
firm exchange rate commitment. A sharp devaluation, of the sort carried out
by Britain and Italy, would have damaged further German exporters' already
poor competitiveness.
Both during the pressure on the franc which followed the Anglo-Italian ERM
exit, and during another squall in January 1993, the French and Germans had
invested large amounts of political and economic capital in preserving the
D-Mark/franc parity.
The level of contacts in July 1993 contrasted sharply with the lack of any
top-level personal exchanges between Britain and Germany in the crucial few
days before Britain's ERM departure in September 1992.
Another important difference with the UK was that - in view of France's good
anti-inflation record - both sides believed there was no need to make any
changes to the franc's central parity against the D-Mark.
There was, however, a critical sticking point. The Bundesbank was concerned
not to upset French feelings. But the fiercely independent central bank was
even more anxious not to lose anti-inflation credibility by being dragooned
into 'political' interest rate cuts.
Mr Schlesinger had especially sensitive memories of the weekend of September
12/13 1992, when Italy devalued the lira four days before leaving the ERM,
along with sterling. Over that weekend the Bundesbank decided to cut
interest rates to help persuade Italy to devalue. The episode was
interpreted, particularly in Germany, as infringing Bundesbank independence.
In the past the Bundesbank had made behind-the-scenes interest rate
concessions to accompany ERM realignments, notably on the occasion of the
ERM realignment in January 1987, which was the last time the D-Mark/franc
parity had been changed. However, the September 1992 affair was the first
time that such monetary deal-making had become public knowledge.
In his 41-year-long career at the German central bank, Mr Schlesinger had
developed a strong mistrust of the inevitable dilemmas created for domestic
monetary policies by fixed exchange rate systems.
When currency turbulence erupted anew in July, he was determined that,
whatever method was chosen for resolving the dilemma, it should not
jeopardise the Bundesbank's reputation for independence.
The Bundesbank's ambivalence about the monetary relationship with the French
surfaced in revealing fashion on July 29, the day before the talks at Bercy.
At the fateful meeting of its council that day, Mr Tietmeyer, more mindful
of Franco-German sensitivities than Mr Schlesinger, suggested a  1/4 point
cut in the discount rate, but was overruled by his president.
In a gesture to help the French, Mr Schlesinger did agree that, in addition
to the  1/2 point cut in the Lombard rate, the Bundesbank would allow its
money market rates to fall in coming days below the 6 3/4 per cent discount
rate.
Mr Schlesinger clearly feared, however, that, if this measure was given too
much publicity, it would have looked like submission to political pressure.
As a result he announced the potentially important step in an off-the-record
briefing, on the afternoon of July 29, with a small group of German
newspaper journalists, rather than through an open statement that would have
been relayed to the foreign exchanges by news agencies.
By the time the measure had become public knowledge the next day, it had
already been overtaken by the worldwide flurry of franc sales.
The summer discord between France and Germany throws shadows into the
future. Before he took over as president 2 1/2 months ago, Mr Tietmeyer told
a long-time colleague that the Bundesbank should have been 'more courageous'
in easing its interest rate policies during the summer.
Nonetheless, Mr Tietmeyer agreed it had become necessary to break
'illusions' about Germany's willingness to provide an automatic open-ended
commitment to the franc.
Now that European exchange rates have settled down after the summer storms,
France and Germany are likely to use their new monetary leeway to continue
interest rate cuts as a means of promoting economic recovery.
There is little prospect for a speedy formal return to ERM narrow bands. But
the German Finance Ministry believes the franc will remain firm in coming
months, especially since the dollar is likely to strengthen and the D-Mark
will remain burdened by worries about financing reunification.
Bonn officials hope a firmer franc, combined with a gradual European
recovery, will lower French pressure for an 'artificial' dash to monetary
union - a prospect viewed with distaste by much of the German electorate.
On this reading, the shattering of Franco-German illusions could have a
salutary effect. As Europe struggles to rebuild the project for monetary
union, economic reality has established primacy over political vision. The
chronicle of bruising encounters and spurned hopes of summer 1993
demonstrates that the dividing line between the feasible and the impossible
can sometimes be excruciatingly thin.
Editorial Comment, Page 11
