FT  25 OCT 93 / Arts: Pure melodrama - South Bank's Czech Festival
In the 18th and 19th centuries, 'melodrama' meant something quite specific:
spoken declamation over purpose-designed music. Mozart liked the idea, and
intended to explore it more than he found time to; Violetta's letter-reading
in the last act of Traviata is melodrama; at late as 1897, Richard Strauss
set Tennyson's Enoch Arden for recitant and florid piano.
Czech composers took to the genre with enthusiasm, and it has not been
forgotten in the South Bank's Czech Festival. In the Queen Elizabeth Hall on
Friday, the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment treated us to Georg
Benda's complete Medea, as fully cast, costumed and staged as this
three-quarter-hour piece requires. If it failed to draw the full house it
deserved, it excited the audience who were there. It made a rare experience,
fascinating and gripping beyond expectation.
Harriet Walter's Medea ' strong, angular, wracked by grief ' made an
indelible impression, with absolute fidelity to Benda's accompanying score.
Benda was ten years older than Haydn, but his score is astonishingly subtle,
flexible, succinct. One would never have imagined that his 18th-century
idiom could be deployed with the precision of a modern film or TV score. Nor
does it sound bitty: while the music gets to expand in its own right only in
a few places, it boasts an iron consistency and purpose, and more variety of
colour and character than many an opera of its time.
In John Abulafia's production, Chris Baugh's designs and Timothy Heywood's
costumes, lit by Clare Tattersall, the rest of the cast ' notably Vincenzo
Nicoli as the faithless Jason ' met the standard set by Miss Walter's
scathing portrayal. The orchestra, under Ivan Fischer's alert direction, let
nothing slip; what we saw and heard formed a seamless whole. Might not
Benda's orchestral music have expected a little more candid surface-emotion?
The OAE never indulged in string portamenti, for example (sliding from one
note to the next), though that was a standard period device. A few more
'Expressionist' touches would have been in order, without prejudice to
Classical decorum.
Two more Czech composers figured in the first half of the concert. Franz
Krommer's E-flat Clarinet Concerto was full of solo virtuosity ' knit-two,
purl-two stuff at manic speed, efficiently delivered by Antony Pay ' and
mindless good cheer. A G Minor Symphony by Leopold Kozeluch was spare,
shapely, original, harmonically adventurous (and extremely well played
here). Another real discovery, despite the fact that most of us have
probably heard a little Kozeluch on Radio 3; we must start paying him better
attention.
