FT  10 APR 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: Joanna romps in as top adviser - A
fee-based IFA has won a top contest
ATTEMPTING to assess financial advisers is not easy. They specialise in
different areas and have to deal with people whose personal finances often
differ radically. But a reliable system for judging the quality of advice is
central to any reform of the UK's financial services.
The IFA of the Year competition, run by the magazine Money Week, has made
such an attempt. Advisers were given detailed case studies of households and
required to produce a 2,000-word report recommending how best to manage
their personal finances.
The winner was Joanna Stone, who works for the fee-charging adviser Murray
Noble. The case study she was set, and her response, showed just how complex
personal financial planning can become.
Her case was that of Mr and Mrs Robertson, aged 41 and 40, with children of
16 and 13. The couple's annual incomes were Pounds 30,000 (including Pounds
7,000 in bonuses) for him and Pounds 20,000 for her (including Pounds 3,000
in bonuses). Both belonged to the company pension scheme, and the family
carried private medical insurance.
Most of the income was spent right away, due to mortgage payments of Pounds
1,050 a month and school fees of Pounds 7,000 a year. But the Robertsons did
have assets, including a French cottage and a share portfolio valued at
around Pounds 10,000.
They had asked for advice simply to assess their position. They believed
their budget to be very restricted, with no more than Pounds 100 a month to
spare.
While nothing much rings alarms bells there, Stone found several areas where
she felt the Robertsons needed to alter their finances radically.
She said the big problems were the school fees and the mortgage, which was
not protected by life cover, and she set out a plan to re-arrange the
family's cash flow.
In descending order of importance, the key aspects were:
Agree a new budget and
finance structure
Stone spotted that the Robertsons had an outstanding balance of around
Pounds 10,000 on various credit and store cards. This is a ruinously
expensive form of debt, and she pointed out that it was worth selling the
equities to repay the card bills. (An equity portfolio would have to be
chosen exceptionally well to manage a growth rate greater than a credit card
interest rate). She also suggested that they should rent their property in
France for Pounds 4,000 a year.
These two acts increased greatly the income available for spending each
month. She also recommended forming a profit-related pay scheme into which
the bonuses could be paid tax-free, and taking out a fixed-rate mortgage.
All of this would allow the Robertsons a sizeable cash reserve.
Arrange for further
life cover
Stone looked at what the company pension scheme guaranteed and found Mrs
Robertson's annual income would increase by only Pounds 8,000 after her
husband's death while her debts would increase by Pounds 6,389. So, she
suggested the family take out a protection policy to cover its Pounds
160,000 mortgage (at a cost of around Pounds 50 a month), plus term cover of
Pounds 120,000 for Mr Robertson to last until age-65 (costing about Pounds
54). She also suggested Mrs Robertson take out term cover (at Pounds 24 a
month) to cover her until age-60.
Replacement income
Stone worked out that if both could not work because of temporary or
permanent illness, their disposable income after 12 months (when their
employer's sick pay arrangements ran out) would be Pounds 5,777 a year. So,
she proposed that both take out permanent health insurance which would start
paying them an income once they had been unable to work for 12 months. (This
time lag kept premiums much lower than if the income payments began
earlier). Total annual premiums would be Pounds 500 (Pounds 700 if they
wanted inflation protection).
Once this groundwork was in place, Stone suggested the couple build up a
cash reserve and then invest in a regular savings scheme (probably the
National Savings Yearly Plan), making occasional contributions to a larger
portfolio when finances allowed.
What made Stone's work stand out? According to Keith Popplewell, who set the
case studies: 'The poorer candidates concentrated too much on the clients'
need for death benefit. This 'need' may not exist in practice beyond cover
for the mortgage and credit card balance . . . Surely an equal or even
greater need is for permanent health insurance, a possibility left
relatively unexplored by some entrants.'
His final comment was telling: 'To suggest, as many candidates did, that the
expenditure saved could be invested in monthly savings or pension plans was,
in my opinion, misguided. The immediate need for these clients was
protection.'
Stone's employer, Murray Noble, charges fees but not commission. Thus, it
has no incentive to force clients straight into a high commission-bearing
savings plan based on life assurance.
Amanda Richards, editor of Money Week, said the remuneration side was very
attractive, adding that the magazine had received many strong entries from
commission-charging advisers. But the award must cast doubt on the
complaint, made often by advisers, that customers will not pay a fee. Murray
Noble seems to charge them without difficulty, and the evidence of this
competition is that customers get good value for money.
