FT  08 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Guangdong set to put fire in 'little
dragon' - Simon Holberton on province's growth in electricity capacity
SINCE Deng Xiaoping, China's pre-eminent leader, visited Guangdong 17 months
ago the Communist party leadership of the province that borders Hong Kong
has set itself the task of catching up with Asia's 'four little dragons' -
Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea - in 20 years.
To do that, Guangdong will need a great deal more electric power: even
today, demand exceeds supply by at least 30 per cent and blackouts are a
feature of daily life.
The growth in installed electrical generation capacity in Guangdong has been
rapid. In 1981, the province had just 2,800MW of installed capacity; by the
end of 1992 it was 11,000MW.
Over the next 17 years the province hopes to increase capacity by a further
69,000MW to 80,000MW. By then it may have achieved installed capacity of 1KW
hour per person, up from its current installed capacity of 0.16KW per
person. Hong Kong has installed capacity per person of 1.42KW, Taiwan
0.85KW, and the US about 2.8KW.
Guangdong's spending on power plants has grown from USDollars 679m (Pounds
441m) in 1989 to Dollars 795m in 1991. Within that total, the share of
imports has risen from Dollars 220m in 1989 to Dollars 430m in 1991. Larger
expenditures are expected in the coming years, making the market for
electrical generation equipment, transmission lines and computer systems to
operate modern power plants one of the biggest in the world.
Western analysts in Guangzhou estimate the province's expenditure on power
generation and related equipment will grow at an annual rate of nearly 40
per cent over the three years 1992-1995, and imports by more than 50 per
cent.
Mr Michael Greene, a securities analyst with Warburg Securities in Hong
Kong, says: 'The place is crawling with people trying to sell them
electrical generation equipment. China has got to be the world's largest
market for power generation equipment . . . ever.'
Unlike many markets in China for imports, restrictive trade barriers for
power generation equipment are few. China's domestic manufacturers, located
mainly in the north-east of the country, are unable to supply Guangdong,
making it dependent on foreign suppliers.
The province has the autonomy to use foreign exchange for imports of power
equipment. According to one analyst in Guangdong: 'Because of Guangdong's
urgent need to import large amounts of electrical generating equipment,
import procedures are not a serious impediment.'
Neither is ownership. Although electricity generation is technically a state
monopoly in Guangdong, the local government has been prepared to allow
significant foreign ownership of power plants. Shajiao B power station in
Dongguan is owned and operated by Hopewell, a Hong Kong property company,
and the Zhujiang power station, under construction in Guangzhou, is 50 per
cent owned by New World Development, another Hong Kong property developer.
The province has also entered into inter-regional agreements with
neighbouring provinces to develop hydro-electric power. For example, it has
joined with Guizhou, Guangxi, and Yunnan to develop hydro-electric
facilities on rivers running through their territory.
Guangdong also has plans to increase the amount of electricity generated by
nuclear power, on current plans more than 20,000MW by 2010.
Mr Chen Wen Hu, deputy chief of section in the planning department of
Guangdong's Electric Power Bureau, says: 'By 1995 Daya Bay should be
producing 1,800MW, but 70 per cent will go to Hong Kong and only 600MW to
Guangdong. We have hopes to build three more nuclear power plants. We have
finished the preparatory work for the second nuclear plant and in 2000 the
first phase - 1,000MW - should begin.'
This would still leave nuclear fuels producing less than 30 per cent of the
province's needs by 2010. From now until then, the local authorities have
thermal power stations planned, or under construction, which will add more
than 50,000MW of installed capacity to Guangdong's grid.
However, the quality of coal received from northern China and the time it
takes to reach power stations are problems.
