FT  21 MAY 93 / Letter: Importance of whaling to Japanese society
Sir, Although Robert Thomson's several articles (Whaling ban wins strong US
backing, May 11; Whale sanctuary vote set for today, May 12; and Japan irked
by rejection of whale plan, May 14) were all informative and objective, I
nevertheless feel that additional information is needed in order to inform
non-Japanese readers about the tradition and importance of whale meat in
Japanese society.
It now appears to the average Japanese person that a fever called
'environmental protection' has dominated the International Whaling
Commission seminar in Kyoto.
Of course, Japanese people fully realise that the whaling ban proposal does
not stem from any hostility towards our race.
However, what we are uneasy about is the implicit lack of understanding of
our way of living.
Japan's fish catch was 96.9kg per person in 1991 compared to 14.9kg per
person in the UK and 19.8kg in the US.
Nevertheless, the level of imports of marine products in this country
exceeds that of our exports by more than three times.
Our daily calorie intake comprises 13.1 per cent of marine products,
compared to 17.7 per cent of meat such as beef, pork and poultry. (Seaweed,
which the Japanese love and consume in large amounts, has no calories.)
The consumption of whale meat in Japan can perhaps be likened to the
consumption of snails in France. Without snails no Frenchman would die, but
to take away this cherished foodstuff would no doubt cause great commotion
and much disgruntlement.
Japanese people realise that this peculiar dish is a speciality to a
particular country, but we would never consider doing away with the custom
of eating such a dish.
The Japanese are said to have a history of whaling dating back to before
Christ, although we only began eating meat roughly 100 years ago, after
centuries of abstinence for religious reasons.
Since the introduction of meat into Japan, our tastes have certainly
changed. We now consume more than twice the amount of meat that we did 20
years ago.
The opinion that the whale is a great symbol of nature and that the mammal
is some kind of higher form of animal seems strange to me.
I feel that the only hope of proceeding with discussions at the seminar in
Kyoto is to base them on a mutual understanding of different ways of living.
Otherwise the commission would simply be a witchhunt by culturally less
intelligent people who could not accept other peoples' values.
Fumio Yoshino,
associate professor of
economics,
Takasaki City University,
Takasaki,
Japan
