FT  03 MAR 93 / 'Hundreds die' as Serbs overrun Moslem enclave
BOSNIAN Serb soldiers were yesterday reported to have killed hundreds of
civilians after overrunning Cerska, the Moslem enclave which was the target
of US aid drops this week.
Last night Mr Ejup Ganic, Bosnia's vice-president, said parts of Cerska were
still controlled by Bosnian government forces. But Ms Lyndall Sachs of the
Belgrade office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
indicated that 19 hamlets, comprising much of the Moslem enclave, had fallen
to Serb forces.
The reports came as four US cargo aircraft, from an airbase in Germany,
completed their third air drop over eastern Bosnia, according to Yugoslav
air traffic controllers. In another development Russia said it would join
the US in the air drops, although Mr Les Aspin, US defence secretary, said
these might be halted temporarily.
At Cerska, in reports which could not be independently confirmed, local
radio operators said more than 500 civilians had been killed after Serb
forces seized the enclave.
One radio report said: 'The Chetniks (Bosnian Serb forces) are moving freely
around the town. They are burning houses, killing a lot of occupants . . . a
lot of civilians, women and children, mostly by slitting throats.'
'Dead bodies all over and people have nowhere to go. People cannot move,'
said the radio report, monitored by the representative of the UNHCR in
Tuzla, a Bosnian government stronghold in eastern Bosnia. 'People from
Cerska are crying for help and begging to be taken out alive. Others are
hiding in woods and ditches crying out for help.'
Another amateur radio report broadcast on Sarajevo radio said: 'Many are
trapped under rubble and being killed there.' The report said Serbian tanks
were moving through the area, razing villages to the ground.
Sarajevo radio said the Serbs were shelling routes by which people were
fleeing Cerska. 'The roads are crawling with injured and dead,' it said.
UNHCR officials were particularly concerned about reports of shelling in
Konjevic Polje where the refugees were fleeing and 1,500 wounded are
believed trapped.
Ms Sachs said even if a small part of it was correct, the situation was
desperate.
Belgrade television last night showed hazy pictures of what it said were
uniformed fighters on foot in Cerska.
In spite of pledges to allow aid to reach the besieged enclaves, believed to
house about 100,000 Moslems, Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader
who is in New York holding peace talks at the UN, has repeatedly blocked
overland convoys to Cerska and other strongholds. General Ratko Mladic, the
Bosnian Serb commander, yesterday refused UNHCR pleas for a fleet of 10
specially equipped lorries to enter the enclave and evacuate the wounded.
Amateur radio operators said 14 US aid pallets dropped on Sunday night had
been spotted at Cerska, but the heavy Serb artillery fire had made it
impossible to collect them. A radio operator in Zepa, the second target for
three US transport aircraft, said two parcels of medical supplies were found
in the snowy hills around Zepa.
Cerska, the target of the first US air drop of food and medical relief, has
been besieged since last April when Serb forces backed by the Yugoslav army
killed and drove out hundreds of thousands of Moslems from eastern Bosnia.
After the formal withdrawal of the army, which left the bulk of its
equipment and forces in Bosnia, the self-styled Serb republic controlled
most of the region except a handful of Bosnian government strongholds.
Cerska was left as the most vulnerable community, housing some 6,000
Moslems.
Russia backs drop, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 19
