FT  10 NOV 93 / VW may bar managers in compromise with Opel
SEVERAL top Volkswagen managers may be ordered temporarily to stop work if a
compromise, reached yesterday between lawyers representing the German
automotive group and rival Adam Opel, is approved by the two companies'
boards later this week.
Prospects of a deal, which could end one of the legal battles between the
groups, emerged after private negotiations in the back room of a Frankfurt
court.
An open court hearing, called to consider an appeal from Opel, the General
Motors subsidiary, that seven former GM group employees should be banned
from working at VW for a year, was adjourned after Mr Heinz Traub, the
presiding judge, recommended that the two sides should look for a
compromise.
An earlier attempt by Opel to win a temporary banning injunction was turned
down because, the court decided, the seven had been drawn to VW by the
'charisma' of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, a former senior GM
executive, who defected to Volkswagen in March.
However, further evidence has since emerged to strengthen Opel's claim that
VW systematically poached key GM group employees, mainly production and
purchasing executives.
According to sworn statements Mr Lopez personally approached about 17
people. Volkswagen is still bound by a separate injunction not to continue
this practice.
Closing yesterday's proceedings, Mr Traub said both companies had already
been damaged by the affair.
Under orders from the judge to keep strictly silent or risk endangering the
outcome, neither company would discuss yesterday's deal.
However, three or four of the seven, possibly including Mr Jorge Manuel
Gutierrez, head of VW production and Mr Lopez's closest colleague, may be
suspended from their normal work if the companies' boards approve the
compromise before the end of this week - a deadline set by Mr Traub.
Agreement to such a compromise is likely to be seen as acknowledgment by VW
that it was at least partly at fault.
Rejection will result in a full open court hearing next month at which Mr
Lopez could be called to give evidence. He spent yesterday waiting in an
hotel near the court but was not summoned.
Criminal investigations are continuing into suspicions that he, Mr Gutierrez
and a further two of the seven people involved in yesterday's hearing stole
secret GM data before leaving for VW. A probe into possible perjury by Mr
Lopez is also under way.
