FT  09 SEP 93 / Two of a kind: An architect of Maastricht edifice - Former
political leaders who advocate closer European integration / Giulio
Andreotti
Is this the face that launched a thousand summit communiques? Mr Giulio
Andreotti, seven times Italian prime minister, sits behind his crowded desk
in an elegant, ochre-coloured building near the Pantheon in Rome. He looks
unusually crumpled.
Mr Andreotti, 74, who started his governmental career in 1947, is part of
the backbone of Italy's postwar history - a veteran of the Christian
Democrat party and of its domination of four decades of politics.
A principal architect of the Maastricht treaty, he ranks as one of the
foremost Italian proponents of closer European integration. Ironically for
Mr Andreotti, the Europeanism which he has so long fostered provides a
principal reason for the new impatience in Italy about the country's
near-endemic political corruption. As the Christian Democrats slide from
their former pivotal position amid a tide of scandal, history is starting to
catch up on him.
Murky allegations of political impropriety have dogged Mr Andreotti
throughout his long career. So far, they have always been unproven. This
time, however, the accusations have been mounted more energetically. He has
been forced to waive his parliamentary immunity to answer charges being
pressed by magistrates in Milan, Palermo and Rome. They relate to
allegations of consorting with the Mafia, being responsible for the death of
a journalist killed in Rome 14 years ago, and organising illicit political
financing. Mr Andreotti has protested his innocence.
A mantis-like figure, clad incongruously in a blue cardigan under his smart
suit, Mr Andreotti clasps a tube of nasal inhalant in his right hand, and
takes frequent telephone calls with his left. Testifying to his impeccable
Catholic credentials, his small office is crammed with crucifixes.
Speaking before the most serious charges were raised this summer, he termed
the claims 'perfidious manoeuvres' by political enemies.
Mr Andreotti says Italy's internal upheavals reflect the still greater
changes in the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe. The Christian
Democrats' previous supremacy, made possible by the postwar necessity of
countering the Italian communist party, was part of the former stability of
Europe's cold war structures. 'We are seeing the long-lasting waves caused
by the end of communism,' he says. 'The old political truths have vanished.'
The ending of east-west division and the reunification of Germany spawned
the Maastricht treaty, aimed at accelerating west European integration. But
the Maastricht programme itself has been blunted by two years of economic
and political shocks.
These shocks appear to make European union less feasible. Mr Andreotti
thinks they also make it more necessary. 'The fact that Europe is not yet
strong enough to resolve problems like Bosnia, and the necessity to have a
monetary order - these are reasons why we should multiply our efforts to
find solutions.'
Recalling the atmosphere in which the Treaty of Rome (which set up the
European Community) was negotiated in the 1950s, he says: 'We who are old
can remember the suspicion towards Europe at the beginning. People said it
(the EC) was not possible. But Europe has worked well.'
He puts forward a particular reason for pressing on with the Maastricht
treaty: to accommodate a larger Germany within a united Europe. In 1984, he
won notoriety in Germany by saying he would prefer the Germans to remain
divided. Now that the nation is reunited, he believes Germany will
inevitably reshape its European policies in coming years.
Asked whether the next chancellor will be less interested in European union
than Mr Helmut Kohl, he replies: 'Perhaps not the next one, but his
successor.'
Germany can no longer be relied upon to continue its postwar policy of
balancing obligations and responsibilities to east and west, he says. He
evokes the names of Willy Brandt, the former West German chancellor, and
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, former foreign minister.
'Perhaps Germany will no longer be the Germany of Kohl nor of Genscher nor
of Willy Brandt. We don't know what sort of Germany it will be. It could be
a strong Germany, in an isolated and fractured Europe.'
Fears that Germany's western ties will be loosened explain why Mr Andreotti
has been in the vanguard of efforts to harness Germany and its D-Mark
through economic and monetary union. He played an important part in hatching
the Emu plan agreed at Maastricht in December 1991. In a discreet
eve-of-summit dinner with President Francois Mitterrand in a hotel in the
Dutch city, Mr Andreotti formulated the timetable for introducing Emu by
1997 or 1999.
'This preparation was the result of (our) personal contacts, as well as work
by our officials,' he emphasises. 'It wasn't improvised.'
Mr Andreotti parries the suggestion that Germany's post-unification
difficulties make this timetable unachievable. 'I don't think we can now
announce the defeat of Maastricht.'
On the other hand, even before last month's monetary upheavals, he was
resigned to the likelihood that his cherished plan would be delayed. 'Kohl's
fundamental idea is tha monetary union should not go forward without
political union. If for domestic (German) reasons, such as the additional
costs of unification, we should now have a less rapid timetable, that could
be agreed. Fundamentally there is no alternative but to make great efforts
to realise, at the least, the spirit of Maastricht.'
Accomplishing the spirit of Maastricht, rather than implementing its
content, may not amount to much.
But as Mr Andreotti contemplates his crucifixes, reviews his options, and
faces his enemies, it represents one last straw to clutch.
