FT  17 NOV 93 / Builders fear more spending cuts
THE LOW LEVEL of British investment in new construction compared with the
country's main European rivals was 'truly alarming', Sir Brian Hill,
president of the Building Employers Confederation, said yesterday.
He appealed to ministers not to cut public spending on construction in the
Budget, saying that this would only worsen the competitive position of the
country's construction industry.
Sir Brian, speaking at a conference in London, said that Britain accounted
for only 10 per cent of all European construction output. Germany accounted
for 23 per cent, France 15 per cent and Italy 16 per cent.
Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, speaking at the same conference,
warned the UK industry that no reasonable chancellor could ignore the
country's 'over-borrowing'. He said: 'It is not possible to imagine one
could overcome these difficulties in a way in which anyone could expect to
get out of it scot-free.'
Mr Gummer appealed to the industry to boost its profitability by improving
the quality of its performance and by reducing waste to make it more
competitive in world markets. He said that of the 400m tonnes of material
used each year by the building industry, about a tenth was wasted 'in one
way or another'.
Sir Brian told the minister that UK spending on construction in proportion
to the population was lower than that of Switzerland, Germany, France,
Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Sweden, Norway and Austria.
He said: 'Failure to invest in new buildings and the nation's infrastructure
must in due course impede or handicap the country's ability to compete both
in European and world markets.'
Sir Brian warned that any further erosion of the domestic construction
market due to public spending cuts would cause further job losses and
company failures.
The permanent loss of UK capacity would force customers to buy from abroad
when the industry recovered.
Sir Brian said: 'Industry at large and construction in particular will only
achieve sustained recovery if the chancellor underlines the government's
commitment to growth by taking such measures necessary to restore and
sustain confidence, to invest both at a personal and corporate level.'
