FT  27 MAY 93 / Protests as Bonn votes to tighten liberal asylum laws
GERMAN parliamentarians, some of them airlifted to the Bundestag over
demonstrators in Bonn, voted last night to tighten the country's liberal
asylum laws.
Most members of the opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) voted with
Chancellor's Helmut Kohl's governing coalition parties to back the curb on
asylum-seekers by 521-132, with one abstention.
The vote in the Bundestag, the lower house of parliament, easily produced
the two-thirds majority needed to dilute the constitution's guarantee of
political asylum, which has drawn a flood of asylum-seeking refugees to
Germany. The constitutional changes are also expected to be approved by the
Bundesrat, the upper house of parliament, representing the federal states.
The vote came after a day of turbulence in Bonn, with the sounds of
anti-racist rock bands and police helicopters shattering the city's normal
calm. With 5,000 young protesters blocking streets, several hundred
parliamentarians used ferries or helicopters to reach the chamber near the
Rhine.
The vote climaxes two years of fierce debate over proposals to tighten
Germany's asylum laws. Pressure to curb the influx of asylum-seekers grew
after a spate of violent attacks last year. These raised fears that the
issue might be boosting far right parties and damaging Germany's image
abroad.
Until now, the constitution has granted any refugee the right to seek asylum
in the country. The curbs will allow Germany to send back asylum-seekers to
neighbouring countries such as Poland and the Czech Republic.
Refugees have been applying for asylum at the rate of 1,400 a day since the
beginning of the year. In 1992, some 440,000 asylum demands were filed.
'Only if we control and limit immigration more effectively . . . can we
ensure peaceful and amicable co-existence,' said Mr Wolfgang Schauble,
parliamentary leader of Mr Kohl's Christian Democrats, during the emotional
debate. He denied Germany was erecting barriers and dumping asylum-seekers
on its neighbours.
The German vote comes as EC interior ministers are preparing to approve
tough measures to control illegal immigration across the Community at a
meeting in Copenhagen next week.
The measures include stricter checks on foreign students and residents
working illegally inside the EC; a crackdown on people without residents'
permits; and closer monitoring of short-term visitors and tourists.
Germany has two-thirds of all asylum-seekers in Europe. But the EC move on
illegal migrants has been given impetus by the new French government and Mr
Charles Pasqua, its hard-line interior minister.
Editorial Comment, Page 23
