FT  23 NOV 93 / Welsh council reform to be delayed a year
The government will delay the implementation of local government reform in
Wales for a year in what could be an embarrassment for Mr John Redwood, the
Welsh secretary.
Mr Redwood had intended to make a statement confirming the decision last
night, at the end of the Queen's Speech debate in the Commons on local
government reform.
However, protesting Liberal Democrat MPs prevented him from delivering most
of his speech as they forced a technical vote which used up the time he
needed at the end of the third day's debate on the Queen's Speech. Mr
Redwood said he was 'appalled by the unnecessary division'.
The delay in implementing the measures, which will create unitary local
authorities in Wales and Scotland, has been caused by pressures on the
parliamentary timetable for legislation.
The government originally proposed that its bill to reform local authorities
should become law in the spring, to be followed by elections to the new
shadow councils in Wales next June.
But although the bill will be introduced in the House of Lords as early as
next week, it is unlikely to be debated by the Commons before next February
 -leaving political parties with too little time to campaign for Welsh
elections in the summer.
Ministers expect the legislation to be enacted in the current session. But
government officials said yesterday the Welsh polls would probably take
place in 1995, with officers taking up their posts in 1996.
Speculation over the postponement dominated yesterday's Commons debate on
local government. The government plans to set up 21 new authorities to
replace eight counties and 37 districts in Wales. In Scotland, ministers are
planning 25 councils, replacing nine regions and 53 districts.
Introducing the debate, Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, said a
single-tier system would reduce the public's confusion over the services
that were provided by particular authorities.
However Mr George Robertson, in his first Commons appearance as shadow
Scottish secretary, accused the government of indulging in a 'gerrymandering
extravaganza' in the way it had drawn boundaries for the new authorities.
The Council of Welsh Districts, which has broadly welcomed the reform
proposals, said last night that it was disappointed by the postponement.
