FT  16 AUG 93 / World Bank scales down proposals to become more open
THE WORLD BANK has scaled back plans to increase disclosure of information
and to set up an appeals panel to review complaints.
The move has drawn criticism from non-governmental groups that have been
lobbying for greater transparency in the institution's operations.
Executive directors representing the World Bank's member countries discussed
draft policy papers on the disclosure of its studies and reports, and the
establishment of an inspection panel to review complaints about Bank-funded
projects last month.
But revised drafts scale down the degree of disclosure, and also aim for a
more modest inspection panel than once proposed.
In a memorandum attached to the disclosure draft, Mr Ernest Stern, the World
Bank veteran who is running the institution while Mr Lewis Preston, the
president, recovers from surgery, says the proposals are based on the
judgment 'that the bank should be more open about its policies and
activities and that broader dissemination of information will enhance the
quality of our work and strengthen public understanding of it'.
However, the new draft has eliminated all references to a reform which would
have led to the bank obtaining blanket approval from borrower countries for
the disclosure of documents relating to them.
Executive directors at last month's board meeting insisted on the need for
some confidentiality in order to ensure frank discussion with borrowers and
among directors.
Mr Stern says in his memorandum that the proposed disclosure procedures will
'maintain the presumption of disclosure while providing the governments
concerned an opportunity to review appraisal, country economic and sector
reports and identify specific issues of confidentiality'.
Blanket clearance has been a core demand for advocates of greater
transparency, including both environmentalists and campaigners for democracy
in areas such as Africa, where governments rarely disclose much information
to their citizens.
While environmentalists criticised the case by case disclosure policy, the
new policy would, nevertheless, expand the categories of document made
public by the World Bank.
Staff appraisal reports on individual projects, reviews of the overall
economy or of specific sectors in member countries, and summaries of audits
by the operations evaluation department would be made available.
However, a new 'project information document', intended to give advance
information on projects being considered for bank financing, is viewed by
environmentalist groups as inadequate.
Environmentalist groups are particularly critical of a proposal that the
panel's findings should only be made public after the bank board had decided
on them - too late for the plaintiff to have much influence on the decision.
However, it seems likely that executive directors will agree to the
disclosure policy at a board meeting on August 26.
