FT  06 MAY 93 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (9): Less passivity, more
activity - Quantitative management / Norma Cohen discusses index-matching
AFTER a year in which classic UK fund managers wildly outperformed the basic
stock index, it has become fashionable to question the future of
index-matching as a technique.
'Is Indexation Dead' is the subject of a recent seminar offered by County
NatWest Investment Management which has between Pounds 6bn and Pounds 7bn
under management in so-called indexed funds. Mr Rick Lacaille, associate
director of CNWIM, said that a widely-publicised set of figures from the
pension fund industry performance measurement services are partly to blame.
Combined Actuarial Performance Services (CAPS) found that the average
'active' manager outperformed the FT-A Actuaries All Share Index by 1.8
percentage points, returning 22.4 per cent on a UK equities portfolio
against a return of 20.6 on the FT-A. Similarly, WM Company, whose universe
includes more of Britain's larger pension funds who actually use indexation,
also found outperformance but by a much smaller margin.
Indeed, the CAPS figures show, active managers outperformed passive
'index-tracking' managers in two out of the last three years. In a market
which has never been hospitable towards mathematical approaches to fund
management, do the latest figures sound the death knell for passive
quantitative management?
Mr John Clamp, chief executive of CAPS, asks: 'Is indexation dead? I don't
think so by any measure.' CAPS data over the past 10 years, for instance,
showed that UK active fund managers, on average, simply equalled the FT-A.
Between active and passive managers, there is little difference in return
while passive managers offer the advantage of far lower fees. While the
active managers of balanced pools may charge 15 to 30 basis points of funds
under management, passive index managers charge no more than five.
Ironically, it has been the poor performance of active managers over the
past 10 years which has driven pension fund clients to consider passive
quantitative fund management at all. Mr Andrew Threadgold, former chief
executive at PosTel, the UK's largest pension fund which runs 60 per cent of
its Pounds 20bn in funds in a passive manner, said that the scheme was
driven to choose passive quantitative fund management by poor performance in
the late 1970s.
But overall, unlike the US, where quant has been a mainstream approach for
nearly 20 years, the pension fund market has been slow to follow. The staple
'quant' product has been an index-tracking mechanism in which the fund
manager builds a portfolio with all the equities in a given index in
proportion to each share's weighting in the index.
Mr Clamp estimates roughly 5 per cent of the UK pension fund market is
managed using index-tracking techniques against about 14 per cent in the US.
The largest index-tracking fund management firm in the UK is Barclays de
Zoete Wedd which has won a number of well-publicised mandates in the past
year.
However, the area of quantitative fund management earning the most interest
in the industry is not passive indexation but a style of management which
loosely falls under the rubric of active quantitative fund management.
And, while many of those firms offering the product are the same as those
who pioneered passive quantitative technique, the two are in fact worlds
apart. Quite simply, it is the marriage of analysis by traditional fund
managers with the computer technology of indexers. 'We try to replicate with
a computer what a traditional fund manager would do by hand,' says Mr Kevin
Rowe, partner at Buchanan Partners, an active quant boutique which
specialises in the use of equity derivatives. 'The difference is risk
control.'
Mr Peter Lockyer, partner at consulting actuaries Clay and Partners, says
that the market for active quant services has broadened significantly. While
there remains limited appetite for discrete products managed in that fashion
 -probably no more than Pounds 5bn is managed in this fashion in all of
Britain - the mainstream active fund managers are quietly incorporating the
approach into their own stock selection and asset allocation process.
Indeed, Mr Andrew Rudd, chief executive of Barra Inc, the largest database
provider for both active and passive quant fund managers, says that 18 of
the 20 largest fund managers in London are using his products. Among other
things, quant methodology can be used to check for unintended bias in the
construction of a portfolio such as an overweighting in small companies, he
said. Thus, the extent to which quant applications are gaining currency is
far larger than the funds under management suggest.
The basic active quant product involves the use of Tactical Asset Allocation
(TAA). According to Clay and Partners, this involves establishing benchmarks
showing how a fund's assets would be allocated among different asset classes
when all classes are priced fairly to each other. If mispricings occur, then
value can be added by making a tactical decision to move away from the
benchmark.
Similarly, firms are also offering stock selection products which require
breaking down components of a company's performance and isolating those
characteristics deemed most likely to emerge in stocks which outperform.
Managers may offer TAA, a stock selection product or some combination of the
two. Often the product includes a currency overlay intended to reduce the
risks from fluctuations.
While quant firms differ from each other in the system they use for stock
selection and the variables they focus on, most use some value-oriented
approach. What can make the difference between the success or failure of a
strategy is little more than the ability to pick the right variables.
But Mr Lockyer, whose firm has conducted an analysis of the relative
performance of several active quant managers, says that the problem is that
market conditions are subject to change. The variable which helped to pick
stocks in one cycle may become irrelevant in another. 'One of the points
about quant is that the world changes and then you have to re-think your
whole strategy.'
Moreover, many quant managers suffered from the absence of an actual
investment track record. Many have produced sales tools which hypothecate
how the fund would have performed over the previous five years. 'The truth
is that backtesting doesn't work,' Mr Lockyer said. 'Everyone's backtest
shows spectacular results.'
One firm which has successfully attracted clients is Hill Samuel Asset
Management which has been running a discrete product for five years and has
been able to outperform the FT-A in each of those years. However, five key
staff have recently defected to State Street where they plan to offer a
similar product and prospective clients may question the applicability of
the track record to present conditions.
