FT  09 NOV 93 / Survey of Australia (2): A place in the Pacific sun -
Tourism
INTERNATIONAL tourism has emerged from near obscurity to become one of
Australia's fastest growing industries in the past decade, but it heads
towards 1994 in a state of dichotomy. Although the industry is one of the
few defying world recession with solid growth rates, tourism remains
hazardous ground for investors, writes Bruce Jacques.
This reflects a 'two-speed' growth record in the past decade which has left
substantial imbalances in infrastructure, sapped confidence and increased
the perceived risk of tourism investment. But there are signs, boosted by
Sydney's successful bid to host the 2000 Olympics, that tourism is set for a
period of accelerated new growth.
International tourism burst on to an unsuspecting Australia amid the
financial boom of the mid 1980s, with overseas visits jumping nearly 200 per
cent to 2.25m in the half decade to 1988. Figures just released confirm that
growth in the half decade since has been a more modest 28 per cent for
visits of just under 2.8m in 1992-93.
This growth volatility has left some bad investment decisions in its wake.
Real estate estimates suggest that almost 10 per cent of the nation's three,
four and five star accommodation properties are now either in receivership
or under the administration of their banks. That is almost 70 properties,
covering about 10,000 rooms - enough to give pause to any investor.
Several other factors have added to the industry's roller coaster feel,
including:
the Federal Government's deregulation of the aviation industry and
subsequent heavy losses and rationalisation among the country's airlines;
the unique double failure of Compass Airlines - the new market entrant that
was touted as giving meaning to deregulation; and
postponement of the public float of Qantas, the country's international
carrier, from which the Federal Government hopes to raise more than ADollars
1.5bn.
But just as investors were caught by overestimating the industry's growth,
there are signs that those who continue to retreat will miss the next cycle.
Christopher Brown, executive director of tourism's umbrella body, Tourism
Task Force, believes some hard lessons have been learned.
target more rapid growth.
'You have to remember we've only been in the international tourism business
in a big way for just over a decade,' Mr Brown says. 'What we had in the
1980s was a marketing-led rather than product-led boom. Some of our early
marketing campaigns (notably the Paul Hogan 'shrimp on the barbie'
advertisements) were among the best in the world. But events since have
shown that the industry wasn't really able to handle the boom in overseas
tourists that followed.'
Mr Brown believes the industry tried to become too sophisticated too early.
'We thought we had achieved worldwide awareness, but we now know we didn't.
But the result is that, although some of it is under-utilised, we now have
some of the world's best tourism infrastructure.'
Mr Brown says that with the Olympics and increased government recognition
and funding for tourism, the industry is now targeting an annual rate of
around 7.5m overseas arrivals by 2000. The target would have been around 6m
without the Olympics, but both aims are considerably higher than estimates
of 4.8m arrivals by the government funded Bureau of Tourism Research (BTR).
While any of these estimates suggests strong growth, the industry still has
a task ahead in educating investors. Mr Brown says banks and institutions
are still far less adept at assessing investments in tourism than other
sectors. That ranks as a serious oversight given the scale of the industry.
While tourism is often proudly promoted as Australia's biggest export
earner, that description understates its economic importance. If the
international and domestic tourism components are taken together, the
industry is arguably Australia's biggest.
Judging by BTR figures, no investment institution of any standing can afford
not to have exposure to the industry. The BTR publication, Tourism and the
Economy, calculated that tourism accounted for 465,000 jobs, 5.6 per cent of
the country's gross domestic product and 10 per cent of its foreign exchange
earnings in 1992.
The BTR figures showed that domestic tourism expenditure, at ADollars
18.4bn, was almost 2.4 times the size of its international counterpart at
ADollars 7.7bn, for respective GDP contributions of 3.8 and 1.8 per cent.
Latest estimates suggest that in 1993 domestic tourism expenditure will
exceed ADollars 22bn, with international expenditure rising to ADollars
8.6bn.
Perhaps the clincher for the tourism industry in its push for a larger share
of investment funds lies in Australia's geographic location. Leading
stockbrokers ANZ McCaughan (AM) put the case well in a recent publication,
urging investment in Australian air lines.
'Australia is positioned on the edge of the fastest-growing tourism region
in the world - the Asia/Pacific,' AM analysts said. 'By the Year 2000, the
Asia/Pacific region with a 39 per cent share, is expected to dominate the
world's international air traffic.
'The other two major regions will be Europe (26 per cent) and North America
(23 per cent). For the remainder of the 1990s air travel in the Asia/Pacific
region is expected to grow by an average 9.4 per cent a year, almost twice
as fast as the US (4.9 per cent) and far faster than Europe (5.5 per cent).'
AM quoted a BTR break down forecasting that the proportion of Asia/Pacific
tourists visiting Australia will rise from 43 to almost 50 per cent by 2000.
'Japan, Asia, the US and Europe will be the key inbound markets by the year
2000,' AM said. 'The proximity of these countries to Australia, together
with relaxation of institutional constraints on travel, .. augurs well for
larger visitor numbers.'
