FT  05 MAY 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Malaysian group to pull out of
tin mining
MALAYSIA'S TIN industry, already suffering its worst production slump since
the second world war, has been dealt a body blow with the announcement that
Malaysia Mining Corporation, one of the country's biggest tin producers, is
pulling out of tin mining.
For years tin mining has been the core of MMC's activities and until
recently Malaysia was the world's largest producer of the metal.
The corporation has been producing a large part of the country's tin, but a
prolonged period of low prices, rising production costs and the depletion of
high grade tin reserves has forced the company finally to hang up its mining
helmet in Malaysia.
It announced the move along with its results at the weekend. After suffering
losses in its Malaysian mining division for the third successive year MMC
said it had little alternative but to cease its mining operations. Overall
company profits had fallen by 19 per cent to MDollars 42m (USDollars 16m)
last year.
The MMC results provided for a write off of MDollars 37m to close the
company's tin mines and a further MDollars 23m in investment write offs.
Last year Malaysia's production of tin-in-concentrates was 14,339 tonnes,
the lowest since 1946 and down from 20,710 tonnes in 1991. Mr Redzwan Sumun,
executive secretary of the Association of Tin Producing Countries, says that
as a result of MMC's move, Malaysia's tin output is likely to be halved over
the next year. 'I doubt the small mines can make up the slack,' he said.
MMC is only the latest tin operator to conclude that the industry in
Malaysia has a bleak future. In 1990 there were 141 tin mines in the
country. Now there are barely 50.
The critical year for MMC and the world tin industry was 1985 when the
International Tin Council's buffer stock operations collapsed and more than
100,000 tonnes of stockpiled tin came on to the market.
Ten years ago Malaysian tin was earning between MDollars 32 and MDollars 34
a kilogram; this week the price slumped to MDollars 14.
Malaysia, with its fast industrialising economy, is facing labour shortages
in many areas. Wages are rising and even the most efficient miners say tin
production costs are now at least MDollars 16 per kg.
China, Brazil, Indonesia and Bolivia - all of whom have lower wage costs and
more accessible tin deposits - have now overtaken Malaysia in the tin
production league.
MMC has successfully diversified out of its core business in Malaysia into
engineering and gold and diamond mining in Australia. But other smaller,
less well capitalised companies, have simply closed down operations and sold
their tin mining sites to be used for aquaculture, water sports, parks or
real estate.
This month the ATPC, which groups Malaysia, Indonesian, Australia, Bolivia,
Nigeria, Thailand and Zaire, is due to meet here to discuss the future of
the tin mining industry.
The association feels that two main factors are prolonging the slump in tin
prices: the absence from the market of the former Soviet Union, which at one
time was importing more than 20,000 tonnes of tin annually, and the
continued selling of tin stockpiles by the US Defence Logistics Agency.
Most producers feel that with more mines closing and world tin stocks being
gradually depleted, prices will rise. But MMC, along with many others, has
decided it can wait no longer. Mr Muhamad Nur Muhamad of the Malaysian
Chamber of Mines says there is as yet no indication that price trends are
being reversed.
'If prices and demand do not improve, it would be difficult for Malaysia's
mining sector to continue sustaining itself. More mines will have to shut
down,' he warns.
