FT  27 MAR 93 / Arts: Pale new light on Britten
IN 1898, when Henry James's The Turn of the Screw was first published, one
reviewer described it as 'the most hopelessly evil story that we have ever
read'. The subject of the corruption of children was an inflammatory one
even then, long before the days of the video nasty.
If it had been scheduled just a couple of days earlier, this production of
Britten's operatic version of the story by the London Royal Schools' Vocal
Faculty could have been included as part of the extensive Festival of
Britten. Instead it was a near miss - a verdict that might equally be
pronounced on the performance, in spite of the impact this opera always
makes in a venue of the right size.
In the Royal College of Music's Britten theatre the music sounded stronger
than it has for years at the London Coliseum. Michael Rosewell conducted and
a respectable student orchestra put the score across with vivid colours and
urgency.
This was in contrast to the paler impression made by events on stage, where
Julia Hollander's production only intermittently set up enough tension
between the characters to make the spine tingle.
From this academic year the Royal College and the Royal Academy of Music
have been pooling their resources so as to give their operatic productions a
wider choice of singers. This Britten opera was convincingly cast, if not
notably well sung. As the Governess, on whom the story's moral axis turns,
Marianne Hellgren was properly strict, outwardly cool, though the vocal part
invites the unleashing of resources as yet beyond her means.
Denise Mulholland's darker and a touch wilder soprano was well suited to the
infernal Miss Jessel. Walter Dixon portrayed an unusually corporeal Quint,
who was at times tempted away from singing the notes. Janet Fairlie played
Flora as a bossy big sister to Samuel Burkey's Miles, marvellously
impressionable and involving, as he had been at ENO. It cannot be often that
little Miles is the most experienced member of the cast.
The closing scene of Act 1, when the boy, half frightened and half intrigued
by the approach of danger, is being seduced by the ghost of the evil Quint,
was by far the most chilling of the performance. Watching it again in the
knowledge of the recent revelations about Britten's private life really does
shine a different light on the whole opera.
