FT  19 AUG 93 / Party rebels fail to shift Taiwan leader
TAIWAN President Lee Teng-hui, fending off a challenge from dissidents in
his ruling Kuomintang or Nationalist party, yesterday won another four-year
term as party chairman, Reuter reports from Taipei.
'Our party is today moving towards more democracy and modernisation,
creating a new beginning in the party's history,' Mr Lee told the party
congress after his victory.
In the first election by secret ballot for the post in the Nationalists'
99-year history, Mr Lee gained the votes of 1,686 delegates at the party's
14th congress.
But in a sign of unprecedented dissent among the Nationalists, 357 spoiled
ballots were cast. Rebel delegates opposing Mr Lee, accusing him of delaying
internal party reforms and failing to halt corruption, said they cast
spoiled votes.
No one ran against him. Dissidents cancelled plans to field their own
candidate after Mr Lee pushed through some internal reforms demanded by the
rebels.
These included the creation of four new posts, for party vice-chairmen, and
the new procedure for selecting the chairman.
'The elections for chairman were undemocratic. It is an inglorious victory
for Mr Lee. We did not field a candidate because there was too much pressure
on us,' said Mr Feng Hu-hsiang, spokesman for the rebel faction.
In a conciliatory gesture towards the rebels, Mr Lee yesterday named Mr Hau
Pei-tsun, a former premier ousted by the party's mainstream faction in
February, and judicial branch chief Mr Lin Yang-kang as two of the
vice-chairmen.
The other two are Taiwan Vice-President Li Yuan-zu and Premier Lien Chan -
close political allies of Mr Lee.
Mr Lee, 70, became chairman at the last party congress in 1988. He has
presided over a series of democratic reforms which began when his
predecessor, the late president Chiang Ching-kuo, lifted martial law in
1987.
He has also engineered a gradual easing of tensions with China, over which
the Nationalists have claimed sovereignty since they lost the civil war and
fled to Taiwan in 1949.
But Mr Lee's reforms opened the way for the Nationalists' unity, once
maintained through iron discipline, to crumble. He now faces a difficult
task in trying to heal deep internal divisions which have become the most
serious threat to the Nationalists' grip on power in four decades.
The Nationalists suffered a blow last week when a group of rebel legislators
broke away to form their own party - the first formal split among the
Nationalists since 1949.
