FT  21 JUL 93 / World Trade News: BAe chief warns of obstacles to joint
venture with Taiwan
OBSTACLES still remain in the way of the proposed Pounds 250m joint venture
between British Aerospace and Taiwan Aerospace Corporation (TAC), said Mr
John Cahill, BAe's chairman, yesterday. He warned that the deal must be
completed by July 31.
The plan to transfer production of BAe's regional jet (RJ) airliners to the
joint venture is fundamental to the restructuring and recovery of BAe's
loss-making civil aircraft business.
The deadline for the final conclusion of the venture had already been
postponed twice, said Mr Cahill. 'We have a mandate (from BAe's board of
directors) which expires at the end of July. I doubt very much that it could
be extended beyond the end of July.'
Mr Cahill said he nevertheless expected soon to 'receive the necessary
written assurances from the Taiwan government and financial institutions to
enable this joint venture to go ahead.'
He said one obstacle was that a plan to create a company for leasing the
aircraft was still not finalised.
A consortium of Taiwan banks have been asked to provide Dollars 400m (Pounds
267m) to finance the leasing company and Dollars 60m in working capital.
But the group, led by the Chiao Tung Bank, the state development bank, have
questioned the market outlook for the RJ and the risks involved in the
leasing operation.
Mr Cahill argued that the BAe executives had assured the local banking
community that 'leasing is a good business for banks to be in. It's a
profitable business.'
Mr Cahill also said TAC 'needs the support of the banks for a relatively
short space of time. Within two or three years, they will have established
their credibility as a good, sound, solid company and they can then borrow
on their own assets and reputation just as BAe can.'
Mr Charles Masfield, president of BAe's regional jet unit, said: 'Avro will
be profitable in its first year of trading.'
The reason for the link with TAC was to 'ensure maximum penetration' into
the rapidly growing Asia/Pacific market for aircraft with 'a partner with
full production capability, design, engineering and support capabilities,'
said Mr Masfield.
'By producing aircraft or significant portions of aircraft in this region,
we will be able to produce lower cost aircraft and be able to sell the
aircraft at lower prices, even with the profits Avro will be making.'
Mr Cahill said mainland China would be a big market for the aircraft, as
airline traffic in China was 'growing at about 30 per cent a year'.
BAe had been selling regional aircraft to China for 40 years and had already
sold 18 BAC-146 regional jet aircraft to mainland Chinese users.
He added: 'The size, payload and capabilities of this aircraft (the RJ) will
make it more suited to the PRC (People's Republic of China) market as
China's west opens up.'
Mr Masfield said BAe would be 'very disappointed if we don't sell more than
100 regional jets into the PRC'.
He did not set a time frame for the figure, although BAe anticipates
production of RJ and RJ-X aircraft to reach 382 by 2000 and 1,157 by 2011.
The size of the broader mainland China-Taiwan market will also be increased
by sales to Taiwan-based airlines flying to the mainland when direct air
links are estab lished.
Mr Cahill met officials of Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Chiao
Tung Bank, and legislators from both the ruling Kuomintang and opposition
Democratic Progressive party during his two-day visit.
