FT  25 OCT 93 / Survey of Germany (10): A story of births, deaths and
marriages - The population is getting steadily older. The implications must
be faced now
'THE Germans are dying out'. Back in the early 1980s, the slogan was
popularised by novelist Gunter Grass in the subtitle of his short story
Kopfgeburten. Ten years on, the prospect of a shrinking and ageing
population is moving closer to reality - and is beginning to become a
central preoccupation for Germany's chattering classes.
All over the land, people are marrying later, having fewer children and
living longer, with the result that the number of Germans has already been
declining for some time, to a current 72m out of a total population of 80m.
Within another decade, however, it is certain that Germany's overall
population will embark on a steepening decline.
Suddenly, the experts fear, Germany will face a structural crisis with which
it is ill- equipped to cope, as a shrinking working population bears the
burden of an increasing number of old-age pensioners and as Germans
themselves come to terms with the proportional increase of foreigners in
their midst. The far-reaching consequences could affect every aspect of the
way the country organises its political, economic, social and external
affairs.
'It is like having termites in your house,' says Meinhard Miegel, co-author
with Stefanie Wahl of a study of the demographic problem just published by
the Bonn-based Institut fur Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft*. 'On the surface
everything looks fine, but all of a sudden it collapses. This house looks
sound at the moment and will continue to do so for some time to come. Then,
in the early part of the 21st century we will face a crisis.'
Mr Miegel uses colourful metaphors for effect. In a sense, the challenge
confronting Germany is the same as that faced by most of the developed
world. In all the leading industrial countries, pressures on the welfare
state are growing as a result of falling birth rates, longer life- spans and
increasing immigration.
But Germany's problem is still more acute than that of its European
neighbours and its American and Japanese trading partners, for several
reasons. First, it is further ahead in the population cycle: the number of
Germans started to decline 20 years ago, while most European nations were
still in a phase of gentle growth; as a result, Germany already has a
proportionately higher elderly population.
Second, although the problem has been disguised up to now by waves of
immigration in the 1960s and late 1980s, that in itself has created
difficulties thanks to Germany's failure to integrate most of the new
inhabitants into its society. Such difficulties can only proliferate in the
years ahead.
Third, Germany's history in this century has seen to it that population
decline in the early decades of the next will seem especially acute. In the
Nazi years, there was a sudden surge in the birth rate as Germans were told
it was part of their patriotic duty to procreate. The offspring of that baby
boom are now getting on in years and in another decade will be starting to
die off in significant numbers.
The numbers can be stated with almost predestined precision, for they
reflect a secular trend of falling birth rates and diminishing family sizes
dating back (with the notable exception of the Hitler years) to the early
1900s (see chart).
By the early 1970s, the generation of German children was less numerous than
that of their grandparents and the number of deaths overtook that of births.
Since then the margin has widened: at the turn of the century, Mr Miegel
estimates, deaths will exceed births by 300,000 a year, rising by 2030 to a
staggering 600,000 - equivalent to eliminating the city of Frankfurt every
year. Between now and 2030, the number of Germans will decline by about 15m
 -not far short of the current population of eastern Germany.
This is not a trend, say Mr Miegel and Ms Wahl, that can be reversed through
some governmental magic wand. The individualistic Germans of today are not
going to be persuaded to breed either through diktat or economic incentive.
Even in eastern Germany - whose apparently more youthful population results
mainly from a higher death rate under communism thanks to poor health care
and difficult working and living conditions - the birth rate has plunged
since unification.
Nor does increasing immigration represent much of a solution. True, the
arrival over the last three years of some 3.2m new inhabitants - including
asylum seekers and 1.4m 'Aussiedler' of German origin, mainly from the
former Soviet empire - has served to compensate for the declining number of
Germans. But that is unlikely to continue. Germany has now tightened up its
asylum laws, and in any case is having severe difficulties integrating the
newcomers, many of whom end up on the unemployment registers or outside the
formal labour market.
Simply to make up for the continuing fall in the German population, the
country would have to take 1.5m immigrants in the 1990s and 13.8m more
between 2001 and 2030. It is inconceivable that German society, or the
country's political system, could handle an influx of this magnitude.
One consequence of all this is an already perceptible 'greying' of Germany.
Today, one fifth of the population is 20 or younger and another fifth 60 or
over. In 2000, the under-20s will still represent a fifth but the over-60s
will have reached a quarter of the total; by 2030, only 16 per cent will be
under 20, 46 per cent will be between 20 and 60, and 38 per cent over 60. In
short, within less than 30 years, a diminishing population of working age
will have to carry a roughly equal, and rising, number of people either too
young or too old to work  - at least under current laws.
The effects will be felt in every corner of society. School and university
rolls will fall; the shrinkage in the population between 20 and 60 will
dictate changes in government policies towards the labour market; the
country's infrastructure needs will alter. Above all, the shifting shape of
the population will entail significant structural changes in the economy,
and in particular in the role of the state.
The most obvious burden will be on Germany's social welfare system. A rising
number of over-60s - and indeed, thanks to medical science, of over-80s -
spells increased spending on health care, pensions and old people's care.
Nobody seriously believes that Germany will be able to afford this without a
substantial restructuring of the welfare state, involving some increase in
private-sector provision.
The economy will undergo other - subtler but no less significant - changes.
Property values could fall as elderly people sell off assets to fund their
service needs; the manufacturing sector will diminish in relation to
services; capital for infrastructure projects will tend be raised on a
shorter term basis.
Mr Miegel and Ms Wahl even suggest that Germany's population shrinkage will
over time serve to reduce its economic might: 'In two generations, Germany
might under realistic assumptions only be a medium-sized European power. Its
population may not be, as today, the second largest in Europe after
Russia's, but perhaps the fourth or fifth largest after Russia, Ukraine and
possibly also France and Britain ..And its population will be among the
oldest in Europe and the world.'
What, then, is to be done? There are no easy answers. Ideally, says the
study, Germany would - while coming to terms with a some measure of
shrinkage in its population - seek to offset it by adopting sensible
policies on immigration and on the integration of foreigners, for example by
allowing a greater number to become German citizens.
Unfortunately, nothing like this is remotely on the cards. The word
Bevolkerungspolitik (population policy) acquired an ugly ring in German
politics as a result of its abuse during the Nazi period, and the current
generation of politicians tends to regard these issues as too hot to handle.
Nevertheless, they will not simply go away. If Germany does not start
sensibly to debate the structural questions raised by its shrinking
population soon, then it will find itself grappling with them in a much more
polarised political climate 10 years from now.
*Das Ende des Individualismus: die Kultur des Westens zerstort sich selbst;
Verlag Bonn Aktuell; September 1993
