FT  20 JAN 93 / The Clinton Inauguration: Dealers prepared to give
administration benefit of the doubt - Wall Street
TODAY'S inauguration marks the end of a transition period that has been
surprisingly smooth for Wall Street, considering that financial markets face
Democrat rule for the first time since Jimmy Carter's departure in 1980.
During the hiatus the markets have marked time, passing judgment on
President-elect Bill Clinton's cabinet appointments and speculating on
whether the new team has the guts to tackle the structural and financial
problems plaguing the economy.
Overall the transition period has had little effect on stockmarket,
sentiment and the main economic cabinet appointments were generally well
received.
Mr David Hale, chief economist with Kemper Securities, says: 'Wall Street
has been satisfied with the balance (of the Clinton cabinet) because it
suggests that fiscal policy will be cautious and guided by people with a
proven ability to work with Congress.'
As for economic policy, what little has been gleaned from the transition
period has been duly digested by the markets. But it was a modest meal.
That Mr Clinton has appeared to retreat from some of his campaign promises -
most notably to halve the deficit in four years and to cut middle-class
taxes - did not surprise anyone on Wall Street. During the election campaign
the Democrats were widely criticised because their numbers on boosting
economic growth by increasing spending and cutting taxes, while
simultaneously reducing the deficit, never added up. As Mr Robert Brusca,
chief economist with Nikko Securities in New York, put it: Mr Clinton wants
to 'have his cake, eat it, and lose weight too'.
The gap between election and inauguration, however, has created a few
problems for Wall Street, not least for the bond market. Having enjoyed an
unexpected post-election boom - since November the yield on the benchmark
30-year bond has dropped more than 30 basis points to just over 7.3 per cent
 -Treasury investors got the jitters early this month when the Clinton camp
warned that, because the projected budget shortfall for 1993 would be larger
than expected, deficit reduction measures could be put on hold.
The scare was enough to send long-term interest rates up to almost 7.5 per
cent. Since then long rates have crept down again, thanks in part to talk of
Democrats introducing a nationwide consumption tax.
Statements from key Clinton appointees stressing the importance of long-term
deficit reduction have also helped to calm the market, as have rumours that
the fiscal stimulus package introduced in the early days of the Clinton
campaign will be nothing like as large as the financial markets originally
feared back in October 1992, when worries about what the Democrats would do
when in power sent bond prices tumbling and long-term interest rates
soaring.
Only on Tuesday, bond prices rose sharply on reports that Mr Clinton had
outlined a plan to boost economic growth with a programme of Dollars 20bn
(Pounds 13.1bn) in tax cuts and spending increases that, although widening
the budget deficit in the short run, would soon be followed by the
introduction of a broad-based energy tax that would take a large chunk out
of the deficit over the longer term.
Treasury investors, however, remain wary of the new administration and will
be Mr Clinton's toughest critics in his first few months as president.
In effect the bond market will be expecting the worst from Mr Clinton in his
first year. This means that if he behaves like a typical Democratic
president, remains beholden to Congress and political special interests, and
does nothing serious to tackle the budget deficit, Treasury investors will
not be surprised. As Mr Jeff Thredgold, chief economist for the New York
banking group KeyCorp, says: 'To the markets Mr Clinton is presumed guilty
until found innocent.'
The key feature of the transition period has been the performance of the
economy, which in the past few months has shown signs that it will post
solid, if unspectacular, low-inflation growth during 1993. It has been the
brightening economic picture that, more than anything, has made the
financial markets' pre-inauguration 'honeymoon' with Mr Clinton relatively
trouble-free.
While keeping an eye on the incoming administration, financial markets have
also been bracing for news of last year's fourth-quarter earnings.
'Results are likely to disappoint,' warns Mr Eric Miller, chief investment
officer at brokerage house Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, who forecasts
aggregate operating earning gains of 10-15 per cent. With the first batch of
quarterly earnings reports in, Mr Miller's forecast looks about right.
Over the longer term the outlook for earnings is more positive. A recently
completed survey of medium-sized companies by the American Stock Exchange
found that 85 per cent of chief executives expected higher revenues this
year. While that confidence is not so noticeable at the big industrial
companies, whose earnings are more exposed to weakening overseas economies,
there is little doubt corporate earnings are on an upward trend.
Ultimately, how the markets take to President Clinton will depend on whether
he can, as promised, lay the foundations for sustained economic growth
without letting the budget deficit balloon further.
Wall Street is still giving Mr Clinton the benefit of the doubt, although
some expectations are unsustainably high.
Mr Erich Heinemann, chief economist at Ladenburg, Thalmann, wrote this week:
'Perhaps Bill Clinton, a liberal Democrat, will fulfil Ronald Reagan's
formula for growth - work, save and invest. If (he) sticks to his game plan,
investors should do well.'
