FT  29 OCT 93 / Judge's ruling deepens controversy over RSI: What effect the
decision will have on future cases
DOES IT exist? The question will occupy the courts in a series of claims
that repetitive strain injury (RSI) should be a recognised industrial
injury.
RSI is the umbrella term for disorders with various symptoms, which include
swelling and chronic pain in the hands, arms and shoulders. The Health and
Safety Executive, the government watchdog, avoids the term as it implies
problems are only caused by repetition, and talks instead of upper limb
disorders.
Yesterday the existence of RSI was thrown into question when Judge John
Prosser dismissed a damages claim by Mr Rafiq Mughal, a former journalist
with the Reuters news agency, that his work conditions using computer
keyboards were responsible for injuries to his upper limbs.
In previous High Court rulings judges have accepted the existence of RSI. Mr
John Edmonds, leader of the GMB general union, said yesterday that his union
had recovered more than Pounds 1m in compensation for RSI suffers since
1987. He said: 'Does the judge think that companies like Slazenger, Birds
Eye, Findus and KP Foods have paid compensation to our members because of a
figment of their imagination?'
Resolution of the conundrum is of some significance to employers, many of
which have already paid significant sums in compensation. Among cases
awaiting consideration by the courts are 23 brought by employees and former
employees of the Financial Times Group, mainly newspaper journalists.
Doctors and RSI specialists are divided. The British Medical Journal
described RSI as 'often misdiagnosed and often not work-related'.
Mr Peter Wells, a specialist in upper limb disorders, said some doctors did
not believe in RSI - many said it was 'all in the mind'.
His 29 years of clinical experience was contrary to that, he said. But he
added: 'The only way we will convince people of its existence is to extend
the research. The fact that it has not been proven is not evidence that it
does not exist.'
Diagnosis can be difficult because there are many patterns of symptoms and
signs.
Dr Paul Davies, a senior policy official at the Health and Safety Executive,
said: 'Upper limb disorders can be caused in a number of ways - for example
sport injuries like tennis elbow - but there is good medical evidence that
relates them in some cases to the work people do.' There were a number of
causes from bad posture to repetitive movements over a long period.
The executive has published guidance for employers on how work-related
problems can be avoided.
Dr Davies said it was up to the individual to provide medical evidence to
satisfy the courts that the injury was a result of negligence on the part of
the employer and that there were no other causes.
He is supported by lawyers who argue that yesterday's judgment does not mean
future RSI claims are bound to fail. Mr Peter Woods, solicitor for the
National Union of Journalists, which backed yesterday's action, said all
claims would turn on proving a causal link between the injury and working
conditions. Whether RSI was a meaningless term in itself was a side issue,
he said.
