FT  09 JUN 93 / Survey of Sheffield (6): The omens are good - Groundwork
paves the way for further investment
ON PAPER, the Sheffield Development Corporation, established in 1988 to lead
the drive for new investment, has done well.
It has spent Pounds 65.6m, largely on land acquisition and reclamation, in
the last five years and has levered out Pounds 511m of private sector
investment. Around 9,000 full-time equivalent jobs have been created.
However, a large portion of this private sector investment has gone into the
Meadowhall shopping complex. This cost Pounds 270m to build and substantial
further investment was made on fitting out the centre. Meadowhall now
employs 7,000.
Planning permission for Meadowhall was granted in 1987, before the SDC was
designated by government, so it does not claim credit for it. Elsewhere on
the 2,000 acres of the Lower Don Valley covered by the SDC, the Don Valley
Stadium and the Sheffield Arena have been built. But these were initiated
and paid for by the city council for the World Student games in 1991.
However, Abbey National has taken up a some 60,000 sq ft of space in the
Carbrook Business Park, close to Meadowhall and Junction 34 of the M1,
although the company employs only 200.
Sheffield's two big relocations were long before the SDC's time - and
outside its area. The Manpower Services Commission - now the Training Agency
 -brought in 2,000 jobs, while Midland Bank set up a headquarters operation
in the late 1970s, which also now employs about 2,000.
The only significant recent job-creating relocation has been Norwich Union
in 1990, with 1,300 now employed. Also, the SDC received a blow last year
when the Royal Armouries museum - an important tourist attraction - looked
certain to relocate from the Tower of London to Sheffield but switched to
Leeds after failing to agree Sheffield's terms.
The overall result is Sheffield has clearly not done as well as other
northern cities out of Britain's buoyant economy and vibrant property
developments of the late 1980s. However, there are good reasons for this.
Sheffield had been a predominantly industrial town right up until the 1980s.
Service companies tended to go to Leeds or Manchester. There was, and
remains, a shortage of office space in Sheffield. Little was built
speculatively.
Moreover, the SDC did not have time to get sites ready to bid for the main
wave of government department relocations, which were decided on at the end
of the 1980s: it had far too difficult a job on its hands.
The Lower Don Valley had been the heartland of the old steel industry. It
was full of heavy, dirty, ground-contaminating factories. The land they
stood on was in widely fragmented ownership and there were still working
factories there employing 18,000 people.
The SDC had to spend its first years not only assembling land but also
reclaiming and servicing it.
So far, it has bought and assembled 430 acres, and reclaimed 290 acres. Some
80 acres have been landscaped. The SDC has also done something about the
internal infrastructure. Several kilometres of a spine road have been built.
Work has started on the first phase of the Pounds 240m Supertram project, a
light rail system running from Meadowhall to the city centre, which will
eventually form part of a citywide network.
Recession has also bitten: a proposed short-take-off-and landing airport has
stalled because the developer has gone out of business. However, much of the
work has been done on the project and there are hopes another developer will
take over.
NOW that the ground work has been completed what are the prospects for
Sheffield? The omens are good.
Mr Graham Kendall, the SDC's chief executive, estimates there is room for
7.5m sq ft of floorspace on the sites either prepared or being prepared.
A start has been made in speculative development. The SDC has an agreement
with Glenlivet Properties for a high quality office development close to the
city centre to be called Nunnery square. Eventually this could amount to
150,000 sq ft. This year Pounds 3m is being committed to the first 20,000 sq
ft.
Mr Kendall says: 'We feel high technology companies related to the steel
industry will be attracted because of the infrastructure and the skilled
labour.'
There is also a good chance back-office, white-collar jobs will come because
of the availability their kind of labour. Relocation
of the Norwich Union insurance company helps explain why.
The company was having difficulty filling jobs in Norwich. It was 1988, the
height of the economic boom. The Norwich was running out of labour: it could
already provide jobs for every school leaver in Norfolk with 3 GCSEs.
In Sheffield - fundamentally a blue-collar city with a relative imbalance
between manufacturing and service sector jobs - it found white-collar labour
in abundance.
Mr Stuart Reynolds of the Development Office says: 'Unlike Leeds and other
popular relocation cities in the 1980s the potential office labour had not
been mopped up.'
Also, the accommodation was cheap - Pounds 10 a sq ft. It is now Pounds 13 a
sq ft, which is substantially different to the current Pounds 19 a sq ft in
Leeds.
Mr Andrew Sabire, the chairman of Glenlivet properties says: 'We are hoping
to establish Pounds 15 a sq ft as a prime rent for Sheffield. Our
development will be only a minute or two from the M1 and there will be
plenty of free car parking. I feel that Sheffield could be the big people
provider of the 1990s.'
The SDC has had its lifespan extended by two years until 1997 to ensure the
regeneration process continues, much to the relief of Mr Hugh Sykes, its
chairman, who feels its task has proved bigger than the government first
anticipated.
The cost - at Pounds 10m of year of government funding - is modest, but the
impact ought to be telling. Mr Sykes is keen to improve some obvious
lingering eyesores, such as the canal basin end of the SDC's territory near
the city centre, where recession caused two false starts to attempts at
regenerating it.
He has also been a key influence with the city council on encouraging an
ongoing study of what to do about the city centre, which looks rundown and
shabby in parts. The two universities and the chamber of commerce are
involved.
Importantly, the city council and SDC now seem more of team than ever
before, the previous council regime having initially felt it should have run
any development corporation and giving the SDC only grudging acceptance.
Mr Sykes, a prominent Conservative with good government contacts, is a
central player in Sheffield with Mr Mike Bower, who became the Labour
council's leader only a year ago.
'It would be foolish to say everything will be choc-a-bloc by 1997,' Mr
Sykes says, 'but we will have changed the nature of the Lower Don Valley by
then. It certainly will not be derelict.'
