FT  29 DEC 93 / Management: Learning to read between the lines - A CV can be
economical with the truth
Years ago, CVs were dry, formal documents. Without much attention to either
presentation style or self-aggrandisement, people simply reported rather
mundanely and factually their biographical details.
This quaint, unselfconscious approach has, in the same way as British party
political broadcasts, been taken over by the ad men, the publicity gurus and
the public relations people. Politicians have learned the meaning and virtue
of the soundbite and the impression of the Italian suit versus the donkey
jacket.
The US influence of 'talking up' nearly all personal achievements means
selectors must be pretty subtle when reading between the lines. Likewise,
the general public are now offered the benefits of CV consultants to improve
the way they come across. No life is too ordinary, no work history too
boring, no pastimes too menial to be considered unworthy of the image
treatment.
CV consultants are strangers whose job is to take the details of a rich,
varied and complicated life and precis it into a carefully thought-out and
laid-out page of A4. There are those who believe this is really money for
old rope and they can happily, confidently and money-savingly do it
themselves. After all, they argue, they know the life history facts and the
purpose of the CV best of all.
Psychologists call the task of CV consultants 'impression management'. It
means quite simply 'attempts to change, alter and shape the impression that
others receive'. Through variations in dress, vocabulary and possessions, we
all try to create a favourable impression of ourselves to selected others.
If we put in so much effort at the job interview, it makes sense to spend as
much, if not more, time and money on the CV.
As a consequence of the professional treatment, the most dreary and ordinary
individual with a frankly mediocre, even failed work history can look like a
success. No one, it seems, can fail to benefit from the skill of the
impression management professional. Read a peer's CV and the way he or she
describes a modest achievement or mundane duty, and one can see the benefits
of being economical with the truth.
While this may be good for the job hunter, CV-manship certainly presents a
problem for the selection and recruitment specialist. If all students are
Einstein-like geniuses, all workers are productive Stakhanovites, and all
entrepreneurs are neo-Bransons, how can one distinguish between them?
There are three important clues in the modern CV. First what is left out.
Beware the CV which ignores or fudges chronological order: people may prefer
to ignore long periods on the dole, a failed early career, an unwelcome
start at one level. All sorts of important information may be omitted in the
interests of the applicant.
Selectors should perhaps have a checklist of information they really need
and obtain it from the applicant if the CV does not provide it.
Second, there are the grand generalisations. 'My department had a Dollars 2m
(Pounds 1.3m) budget' does not mean the applicant was in charge of it.
'Co-ordinated and facilitated staffing issues' could mean anything.
Third, can the information be verified? The more difficult it appears to
check, the more likely that it is a fudge. Beware the colonial experience
where applicants held impressive-sounding jobs, even if they were genuine,
in some far-flung outpost where their skin colour and ability to speak
English ensured them senior positions. Names and addresses of organisations
on the CV help a great deal.
The paradox of CV-manship is that there may well be an inverse relationship
between the CV and person behind it. Over-egging the pudding - glossy
brochures with career histories spanning several pages - suggests the
cumulative attempts of desperate outplacement consultants. The greater the
flourish, the more the prizes, the quicker the promotion - the more ordinary
the individual.
The author offers a modest CV and is based at University College London.
