FT  28 MAY 93 / Survey of UK Relocation (18): An affluent image problem -
Profile of East Kent
THE government's forthcoming announcement on assisted area status, with all
it entails in additional grants from the European Community, is awaited
particularly eagerly by business and local authority leaders in the less
prosperous parts of Kent.
Areas in the north and east of the county have an image problem. They are
within 70 miles or so of London and are widely regarded as being part of the
traditionally affluent south-east. Yet, east Kent, while beautiful and
well-heeled in parts, has many of the problems of the industrial north with
rundown basic industries, and a dearth of new employers choosing the area
for relocation.
Mr Tim Byles, director of economic development at Kent County Council, sums
up the general frustration at the way in which the area is stubbornly seen
by outsiders as part of the Garden of England - a perception has proved hard
to shift. 'East Kent is as badly off as any area in England, Scotland or
Wales, but because it is south of the Thames, the assumption remains it must
be wealthy.'
There is also an assumption that, because of its proximity to the continent
and the rest of the EC, all will be well when the European economic scene
improves. This is not necessarily the view of local authority leaders and
businessmen.
Mr Martin Hemingway, general manager of the East Kent Initiative, a pressure
group formed from local authority and private sector interests to
co-ordinate plans, believes that although the area has an attractive quality
of life, 'it will be doomed without substantial inward investment to create
new jobs . . . something must be done to save the region.'
Hence the application last year for assisted area status for six travel to
work areas in north and east Kent, four of which are in the Top 20 list of
deprivation in the UK. For example, only six of the 99 currently assisted
areas in the UK have a higher unemployment rate than Thanet's 16.5 per cent,
and unemployment on the Isle of Sheppey is over 18 per cent.
Assisted area status would encourage government and other public and private
agencies to point foreign companies in the direction of east Kent, and
provide grants to help build industrial estates and boost small companies.
In addition to long-term unemployment caused by the contraction or demise of
traditional industries such as engineering, bricks, papermaking and coal
mining, the area faces structural change from the introduction last January
of the single European market, and the proposed opening next year of the
channel tunnel. The single market is estimated to have taken around Pounds
30m a year out of the local Dover economy, an average of Pounds 1,000 per
head of population.
A recent study on the impact of the tunnel forecast a net gain in jobs for
Kent, but argued that these were likely to occur mainly outside east Kent,
and later than the big job losses expected over the next few years.
Economic handicaps are spread across east Kent, and not just the area most
affected by the tunnel. North of a corridor of prosperity centred on
Canterbury and Ashford, lies the district of Swale which includes Sheppey
and Sittingbourne.
To the north-east is Thanet with endemic unemployment in the faded glories
of Margate, Broadstairs, Herne Bay and Whitstable. Local unemployment is
exacerbated by the seaside syndrome. A shortage of tourists has led to some
hoteliers and boarding house owners taking in the homeless on social
security benefits. This puts strains on local authorities and does little
for the image of the resorts.
It would be wrong to paint too black a picture, though. The area is well
place strategically for Europe, there is ample development land, and there
is a skilled labour force available.
Mr Ken Welsh, responsible for economic development at Dover district council
and the East Kent Initiative, says: 'We have a plentiful supply of
relatively cheap land and we are the closest English-speaking area to the
heart of the single market . . . the potential is there but it has got to be
opened up.'
What has held development back in the past, and dissuaded many companies
from relocating to east Kent, has been the poor infrastructure. Work on key
roads is now well advanced, particularly the M20 from London to Folkestone,
and the Thanet Way to Margate and Ramsgate, and plans are in hand to upgrade
the vital link from the M2 to the swing bridge across to the rather isolated
Isle of Sheppey.
Sheppey is probably the worst blackspot, and the Swale district council was
disappointed last year when the Pounds 500m Lionhope development for the
island, including a new road and tunnel, was turned down by the government
on environmental grounds.
An amended plan is currently being drafted with the help of the environment
department, and private funding is being sought from local landowners to
expedite the design and planning stages.
Mr Bill Croydon, chief executive of Swale, believes the area's greatest
asset is the deep water port of Sheerness, the fifth largest freight port in
the country. To take advantage of its facilities and easy access to Europe,
it must, however, become more accessible.
The recently confirmed plans by government, local authorities and private
interests to develop the east Thames corridor should boost the image and
employment prospects of the area, particularly Gravesend and the Medway
towns, but only in the longer term.
Greater significance is placed on the decision to go ahead with the
long-delayed high speed rail link between the Channel tunnel and London,
with a main inter-national passenger station planned for Ashford, and others
to be placed strate-gically to improve the lot of the badly-served north
Kent commuters.
When the link is in place the journey time from Ashford to London will be
halved to 40 minutes. Connecting trains will put Ramsgate and and Dover
within an hour of London - a key factor for inward investment and general
prosperity.
