FT  08 DEC 93 / Pentagon to plan for new foes
The US is to change its military planning, equipment and intelligence to
deal with the likelihood that, even after the demise of the Warsaw Pact, its
future enemies are likely to possess some form of chemical, biological or
nuclear weapon.
Mr Les Aspin, the secretary of defence, said new measures were needed
because 'a policy of prevention through denial won't be enough to cope with
the potential of tomorrow's proliferators'.
The military services have been asked to examine their equipment programmes
and shift money toward better ways of tracking mobile missile launchers,
improving bomb penetration to attack buried weapons sites and developing
detectors and suits to guard against chemical or biological attack. Theatre
missile defence systems will also be a priority.
These new counter-proliferation measures could cost hundreds of millions of
dollars, and a senior defence official said budget realities meant that
money would have to come from other defence programmes.
At the same time, US intelligence efforts will be shifted to gather more
information that the armed forces might need to help protect themselves
against weapons of mass destruction in future regional wars. The number of
military personnel in the Central Intelligence Agency's non-proliferation
centre will be tripled.
While US forces have always been prepared for a Warsaw Pact enemy in Europe
who possessed both nuclear and chemical weapons, military planning for
smaller regional conflicts has largely ignored such weapons of mass
destruction.
But Pentagon officials say that Iraq possessed chemical weapons, even if it
did not use them against the US and its allies in Desert Storm, and that
virtually every other country that might be a likely enemy in the near
future is at least dabbling in such programmes.
A senior defence official said yesterday:'They are one of the few things
that could stand in the way of the successful application of our
conventional military force.'
The US preference, he said, was not to respond to another country's weapons
of mass destruction by using its own special weapons.
