FT  07 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Lonrho recruits Capel to rebuild bridges
LONRHO, the international trading conglomerate, has recruited James Capel as
its joint stockbroker to rebuild bridges with institutional investors.
Lonrho's financial advisers see the move as part of a campaign by Mr Dieter
Bock, joint chief executive with Mr Tiny Rowland, to establish better
relations with fund managers. Institutional shareholders, disenchanted with
the group's performance, had been heavy sellers during the last few years
before Mr Bock's investment.
Mr Andrew Skinner, director of James Capel, said it had been chosen because
of its strong relationship with institutions. Societe Generale Strauss
Turnbull Securities will continue to act as joint broker.
Lonrho has dismissed as 'speculation' reports that its efforts to seek a
rapprochement with the City are part of a longer-term goal of seeking new
funds via a rights issue. The group's shares yesterday rose 2p to 126p.
Capel's appointment comes more than a year after UBS, which had been the
main marketmaker in Lonrho shares, resigned in protest at Lonrho's lack of
consultation over its big deals.
UBS was particularly irritated by the group's failure to tell it of its
decision to sell a third of its holding in Metropole Hotels to the Libyan
government-controlled Libyan Arab Finance Company for Pounds 177m.
It is understood that James Capel has been assured that it will be notified
of the group's strategy before it is carried out.
In a separate move Krupp, Germany's diversified steel and engineering group,
said it was talking to Lonrho with the aim of buying back the conglomerate's
50 per cent stake in the Krupp-Lonrho trading company.
Krupp, formed through merger of the Krupp and Hoesch groups, returned a loss
of DM250m (Pounds 98.4m) in 1992.
Mr Bock has told his advisers that the sale of the stake in Krupp-Lonrho is
part of a wider strategy of good housekeeping and the relinquishing of some
of its bigger associates which have not helped cash flow.
