FT  13 OCT 93 / Nippon Steel asks staff to take pay cut
NIPPON STEEL, the world's largest steel maker, said yesterday it would ask
its 37,000 staff to take two extra days holiday per month on reduced pay.
This is the latest and most radical cost-cutting step in Japan's steel
industry, faced with declining demand from most of its main markets, plus a
recession at home.
It follows similar moves from NKK and Sumitomo Metal Industries and is
likely to add to the risk of labour tension at a time when many of Japan's
top companies are shedding jobs or considering wage and bonus cuts.
The two other leading Japanese steel makers are expected to follow. Kawasaki
Steel, which has already moved some workers out of steelmaking into other
divisions, said it was considering temporary holidays from next January,
subject to union approval. Kobe Steel was also studying temporary leave.
Unions will be unhappy about the Nippon Steel plan but will agree, predicted
Mr Minoru Udono, steel industry specialist at James Capel Pacific. He
estimated Nippon Steel has a 10 per cent labour surplus, as against an
average of 17 per cent for the Japanese steel industry.
Unlike European and US competitors, Japanese steelmakers have so far avoided
redundancies, considered socially unacceptable.
Nippon Steel, which recently forecast a loss for this year, says it will ask
all staff, including management, to take extra holiday during November and
continue every month until further notice. It last resorted to this step
from December 1986 to July 1989, to cope with the downturn in domestic
demand.
Japanese steel companies are also planning to cut output this month, in line
with reduced demand. Nippon Steel officials believe domestic demand will
fall to 24.2m tonnes this quarter, from 24.8m tonnes last quarter.
In one glimmer of encouragement for the steel industry, public works starts
rose 1.5 per cent in August against August last year. That was the ninth
monthly rise running and the best monthly result for a year.
It bodes well for demand for long products such as girders, wire and bars,
used in the construction industry, though demand for flat products like hot
rolled coil continues to be weak from the car and electrical goods
industries.
