FT  29 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Ferranti doctor gives up on his patient
AT FERRANTI's head office at London's Millbank yesterday, Mr Eugene Anderson
was stoical in defeat. A company doctor brought in in an attempt to save
Ferranti three and a half years ago, he had just agreed to sell the company
to GEC for a nominal 1p per share.
'There are several roots to Ferranti's downfall,' he said. 'One was firmly
Jim Guerin' - the now jailed boss of International Signal and Control, a
fraudulent US defence company which Ferranti made the disastrous mistake of
buying in 1987.
'Another is the fact that the defence business went south. We could have
probably handled either by itself, or even the fact that the com-pany wasn't
as well run as it should have been. But I'm not blaming anybody. I've been
here for three and a half years, and we should have turned it around.'
The basic problem, he said, was straightforward. 'The company has been
progressively weakened as losses have mounted. The only way out was through
additional business. But the weaker we got, the less credible we were in
bidding for big contracts. If you're trying to bid for a Pounds 100m
contract with net worth of Pounds 45m, you're bound to raise an eyebrow or
two.'
One such Pounds 100m contract was the so-called Delmon Eye deal, involving
an early warning system for Bahrain. In the past week, Mr Anderson said,
'we've been advised that we would have to re-price and re-scope that. The
last time we were told that, it took six months to get it back into the
Kingdom and onto the appropriate authority's desk.'
Ferranti did not have that long. The obvious question is who decided that:
the banks, for instance? No, Mr Anderson said. 'We had not breached any
covenants. But the board took the view that we had the responsibility to
trade lawfully. We could see that in the absence of major additional
business, we were coming up against a brick wall.'
Therefore, he said, there was no alternative to GEC's offer. 'The
fundamental business of Ferranti needs some finance and confidence put into
it. By this method, we'll save the bulk of the jobs. The shareholders suffer
badly, and I'm sad about that. The alternative would have been disastrous.'
So what happens to the company doctor now? Has he had any personal
undertakings from GEC? Absolutely not, he said. 'There has been no
discussion of my job or any of the other board members. It wouldn't have
been appropriate.'
