FT  28 SEP 93 / International Company News: Time Warner, Spiegel join forces
in home shopping
TIME WARNER, the largest US entertainment group, and Spiegel, a leading
specialty fashion retailer and catalogue company, joined forces yesterday to
create two new cable television channels in the fast-growing field of home
shopping.
The channels will focus mainly on women between the ages of 25 and 55 and
sell up-market clothing and goods for the family and home.
Television home shopping, after failing to produce exciting growth in the
1980s, is suddenly attracting strong interest among media and retailing
groups as the US prepares for an era of interactive, multi-media home
entertainment.
Investor interest in the sector quickened last December when Mr Barry
Diller, a leading film industry figure, became chairman of home shopping
group QVC Network, which this month launched a hostile takeover battle for
entertainment group Paramount Communications. QVC is also in takeover
negotiations with Home Shopping Network, the other leading company in the
sector.
One of the Time Warner/Spiegel channels, with the working title 'The Catalog
Channel', will be a 24-hour service offering goods from a wide range of
specialty catalogue companies. It will also provide entertainment, news and
interviews on fashion and home products. Customers will order goods in
traditional fashion, on the telephone.
Spiegel will include goods from its 500-page catalogue and that of Eddie
Bauer, which concentrates on up-market, active outdoor lifestyle goods. The
joint venture is discussing participation with other up-market catalogue
companies, each of which would have its own time slot.
The two companies said the second channel would be the interactive video
equivalent of a shopping mall. It would consist of a number of catalogues,
stored on video, which customers could call up on demand, view a variety of
goods in full motion, and then buy goods by simply pressing keys on a
television set remote control.
The second service, which requires advanced communications technology, will
be introduced next year in Orlando, Florida, where Time Warner is building a
commercial prototype of an interactive home video network.
Each catalogue company taking part in the channels would be responsible for
its own ordering, fulfilment of orders, billing and inventory. QVC and Home
Shopping Network handle these functions themselves.
The new channels will fill a different niche to QVC, but should provide some
competition to that network, which has been trying to move its merchandise
up-market. Home Shopping Network merchandise is relatively down-market.
The new services will also give Time Warner, which runs the second-largest
cable television service in the US, a substantial position in the home
shopping business.
Time Warner rival Tele-Communications Inc, the largest cable company in the
US, already has important ties to the industry through Mr John Malone, its
chief executive, who holds a controlling stake in Liberty Media, which in
turn has a large interest in QVC.
The Catalog Channel is to be launched in certain Time Warner cable systems
in the first quarter of next year, and expects to launch nationally later in
the year.
Mr Thayer Bigelow, president of Time Warner cable programming, said:
'Catalogue shopping is a Dollars 51bn business that is an excellent
opportunity for cable to create substantial new revenue streams.'
