FT  19 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Details of Channel rail link
revealed
THE GOVERNMENT faced severe embarrassment over the Channel tunnel rail link
last night when Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, produced a
document setting out controversial details of almost the whole of the route.
Mr Prescott said the government appeared to have come up with a cheap plan
which would have serious consequences for the local environment.
The document - a copy of an insert due to run in the Kent Messenger
newspaper next week - shows that listed buildings and attractive woodlands
will be affected as well as houses and commercial property.
The highly detailed account of the route through Kent paints a picture of
widespread disruption to landscape features, some of which have been
untouched for many years.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, had originally been due to
announce the route the day after this week's Budget, in which Mr Norman
Lamont, the chancellor, announced that the rail link would be financed
jointly by the public and private sectors.
The government had to postpone the announcement until next week, however,
following discussions with Labour, which was keen to avoid any delay in the
response to the Budget from Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor.
The leaked document spells out in full detail the entire route of the rail
link from the point where it crosses the Thames at Dartford to the entry to
the portals of the Channel tunnel at Cheriton on the Kent coast.
Examples of properties affected include commercial premises on Kent Kraft
Industrial Estate in Swanscombe, which will be lost, the clubhouse of Cobham
Park Golf Club, which will have to be relocated, and two listed buildings at
Brickton Farm, Charing Heath, which will have to be moved.
Other sites affected include Clay Ponds and Temple Woods, parts of a site of
special scientific interest, and the ancient woodland of Merrals Shaw, all
near Cobham, and the Donkey Shaw ancient woodland near Boxley.
Publication of the map in this fashion is likely to cause a furore in Kent,
where residents are acutely concerned about the effects of the line on their
property and the environment.
Mr Allan Prosser, editorial director of the Kent Messenger group, said the
article had been prepared with the co-operation of British Rail so readers
could be informed as quickly as possible after the government's announcement
how they would be affected.
He said the article was being prepared off-site by contract printers and was
the responsibility of Union Railways, the BR subsidiary responsible for the
rail link projects. 'No-one at the Kent Messenger group is responsible for
leaking that document,' Mr Prosser said.
Union Railways and the department of transport said they were not prepared
to comment until after Mr MacGregor made his announcement on the route next
week.
Mr Prescott put the cost of the leaked route at about Pounds 2.5bn, compared
with the Pounds 4.5bn previously suggested. The government appeared more
concerned with profit than meeting environmental considerations, he said.
He called for Mr MacGregor to make a Commons statement on the subject on
Monday.
