FT  26 APR 93 / Where the main thrust of the DTI's new competitive policy
will be focused ...: Innovation
THE DTI started taking seriously the subject of innovation about two years
ago under Mr Peter Lilley, when the department realised that boardrooms were
not showing the same enthusiasm for the subject as their technical
departments.
'We were putting too much money into funding research and development and
not enough into making people value it,' says one DTI official.
Earlier this year the department released the findings of an investigation,
conducted jointly with the Confederation of British Industry, which showed
only one in 10 UK companies could claim to be truly innovative.
Innovation is going to be a buzz word in the 1990s and the DTI, which
acknowledges that many people still do not know what it means, is at pains
to stress that it is not only for backroom boffins. Neither does it have to
cost money.
In Mr Heseltine's words, innovation is not necessarily about the sharp end
of high technology. 'Small, low-tech companies can innovate simply by
finding a way of doing something a bit better than they did it before. It is
a process of constantly seeking to improve performance.'
On his arrival at the DTI, he told his innovation team, headed by Mr
Geoffrey Robinson - brought in from IBM to be chief adviser on science and
technology - that he was minded to abolish the unit. Having taken their
breath away, he explained he merely wanted the entire department to assist
in promoting the innovation message, both within the DTI itself and
externally.
Mr Heseltine again decided to recruit outsiders with 'street cred' to help
with the job by talking to businesses and organising conference and local
working groups to stimulate best practice in innovation. Networking systems
designed to promote local technology transfer are also being encouraged.
The unit now has five industry secondees dedicated to spreading the
innovation message throughout the sectors sponsored by the DTI. Plans
involve the eventual recruitment of up to 30 secondees to establish a
national, innovation network involving companies of all sizes, educational
establishments and sources of finance.
But Mr Heseltine has to tread carefully. Mr William Waldegrave, minister for
public service and science, is responsible for science and technology policy
and is about to unveil white paper proposals for giving it a higher profile.
