FT  05 JUL 93 / Business leaders 'less confident'
CONFIDENCE IN Britain's economic prospects among business leaders has
weakened over the past two months, says the Institute of Directors' business
opinion survey today.
The sharpest fall comes from medium-sized companies and manufacturers.
The proportion of directors expressing optimism about the economy fell from
65 per cent in April to 55 per cent in June, indicating uncertainty about
the steadiness of the UK's economic recovery. It nevertheless remains at the
second highest level for almost five years.
Directors are happier about the prospects for their own businesses, with 66
per cent more confident than six months ago compared with 64 per cent in
April.
The survey, which is produced every two months, reports that more than two
thirds of directors say their company is doing well - slightly less than in
April.
Profitability continues to rise while order books remain unchanged. Profits
for the last six months were higher than for same period in the previous
year for 45 per cent of directors - up from 39 per cent in April. Twenty-one
per cent say that profits have fallen - down from April's 34 per cent.
These figures disguise sharp variations by industry. Mining and construction
companies show the biggest jump, with 49 per cent of directors saying
profits had risen, compared with 33 per cent in April.
By contrast, companies in personal and business services show falls in
profits.
The fall in confidence in the economy is most evident in the manufacturing
sector, where 49 per cent of respondents are more confident than six months
ago compared with 65 per cent in April.
Directors from companies employing 101 to 200 people show a sharp fall in
optimism from 81 per cent to 52 per cent.
South-east England will lag behind the rest of the country in any economic
recovery this year and next, says a review of regional economic prospects by
Cambridge Econometrics, the research group.
Continued job losses in manufacturing and services in London and the rest of
the region are to blame, says the report published today.
The West Midlands will also have a bad year, but is expected to join other
manufacturing regions in stronger export-led growth.
In the longer term employment will grow faster in the south of England, the
Midlands and Wales than in the northern half of the country but it will take
several years before jobs lost in the south during the recession are
regained.
The survey says East Anglia has the best prospects. The gross domestic
product of the region will rise faster than anywhere else in the country,
gaining 4.3 per cent next year, compared with 2.8 per cent for the UK as a
whole and 1.8 per cent for Greater London.
IOD Business Opinion Survey. IOD Policy Unit, 116 Pall Mall, London SW1Y
5ED.
Regional Economic Prospects. Cambridge Econometrics, Covent Garden,
Cambridge CB1 2HS. Pounds 1,750.
