FT  02 DEC 93 / Government Bonds: Post-Budget rally continues in London
UK gilts continued their post-Budget rally, rising by about 1 1/2 points at
the ultra-long end and outperforming most continental European bond markets.
The market has been cheered by the chancellor of the exchequer's forecasts
of a declining Public Sector Borrowing Requirement, his larger than expected
spending cuts and his optimistic inflation forecasts.
Long maturities posted the biggest gains, with the yield on the 25-year
benchmark nudging against the key 6.75 per cent barrier. The March long gilt
futures contract rose by 1 5/32 on the day to 117 1/32 .
Some traders warned the market could correct ahead of Wednesday's auction of
Pounds 3bn of 6.75 per cent gilts due 2004. 'The market doesn't want to own
new paper at this level,' said a gilts trader at a large UK bank. 'I expect
to see a decent correction before the auction.'
But so far, 'there's been no sign of profit-taking, and it would be
dangerous to be short right now,' said Mr Adrian James, European bond
analyst with NatWest Markets.
Gilts' yield spread over other European bonds narrowed dramatically. The
10-year gap over German bunds dropped to 76 basis points, from 96 before the
budget. At the ultra-long end, the UK 25-year yield gap over the French
30-year benchmark dropped even more sharply, to some 17 basis points from 44
two days ago.
German government bonds edged higher in thin trading as dealers looked to
today's meeting of the Bundesbank
In the morning, hopes of a cut in official interest rates were fuelled by
rumours - later denied by the Bundesbank - that it would announce a
significant downward revision in Germany's October M3 money supply numbers
today. But towards the close, the majority of dealers expected no change in
rates today.
The December Bund futures contract on Liffe ended at 99.92, up 0.15 points.
French bonds traded largely in line with bunds. The December notional bond
future ended at 124.20, up 0.20 points.
In the Dutch market, traders are looking to Friday's likely announcement of
the first government bond issue in the 1994 calendar. Most dealers are
calling for new 10-year bonds with a coupon of around 5 3/4 per cent.
'There's a real supply shortage in that sector - we haven't had any 10-year
paper since March,' said a trader.
Japanese bonds gave up some of their recent gains but remained relatively
well supported by hopes for further interest rate cuts to boost the flagging
economy.
Amid hopes for another cut in the 1.75 per cent Official Discount Rate, the
key three-month certificate of deposit rate plunged to 2.08 per cent from
2.22. per cent on Tuesday and 2.31 per cent a week ago.
Braced for a further sign of surging economic growth, the US Treasury market
breathed a sigh of relief when an important indicator of business activity
showed only a moderate advance.
By midday the benchmark 30-year government bond was  9/16 higher at 99 7/8 ,
to yield 6.254 per cent. At the short end, the two-year note was 1/16 ahead
at 100 1/8 , yielding 4.167 per cent.
Early trading was listless as the market awaited the November report on
business activity from the National Association of Purchasing Management.
Traders were expecting the worst after a sharp rise in the Chicago index of
purchasing managers during the previous session sent bond prices down.
In the event, the national index advanced moderately to 55.7 per cent from
October's 53.8 per cent and the market took the figure in its stride.
Meanwhile, dealers moved to cover their short positions when the expected
sell-off failed to materialise.
Also encouraging was a revision in the Commerce Department's estimate of
third-quarter gross domestic product to 2.7 per cent from an earlier
estimate of 2.8 per cent.
