FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: Lawmaker and courts rejoin ancient
battle - Gillian Tett analyses the latest skirmish in Lord Rees-Mogg's legal
campaign
WHEN Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker of the House of Commons, warned the
courts this week against trespassing on parliamentary rights, she was
following in a long tradition. British political life has long been
dominated by battles between those who make the laws and those who seek to
apply them.
Professor Trevor Hartley of the London School of Economics said: 'Usually
they take care to keep off each other's territory. But there is a tradition
going back to the last century of clashes between the courts and
parliament.'
In spite of the historical precedent, the legal status of Mrs Boothroyd's
attack seems questionable - not least because Lord Rees-Mogg's case, now
going through the courts, is primarily directed against the government
rather than parliament. Lord Rees-Mogg's reasoning could be interpreted as
an argument that parliament should enjoy stronger powers.
In theory, the relationship between parliament and the law courts is
relatively clear-cut. Parliament's role, under British political tradition,
is to create legislation; the courts are there to interpret and apply it.
This means, as the Speaker pointed out, that the courts have no right to
legislate over parliament - unlike in Germany, for example, where the courts
have a constitutional right to restrain the executive.
But British law is based on a mixture of statute and precedent. a court
ruling contributes to the definition of the law, not least because a ruling
is binding on lower courts.
In recent years this has led to accusations that the role of the Law Lords
has been expanding so that they are almost creating legislation.
But although parliament's unique right to legislate would seem to give the
House of Commons moral weight on a matter like the Maastricht bill, the
validity of Miss Boothroyd's attack in the Rees-Mogg case would seem
doubtful.
A problem with Miss Boothroyd's reasoning, says Mr Paul Craig of Oxford
University, is her use of article nine from the 1689 Bill of Rights, which
declares: 'The freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in parliament
ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of
parliament.'
She appeared to be suggesting that the courts did not have the right to
challenge parliament's right to ratify the Maastricht treaty. But, as Mr
Craig yesterday pointed out, article nine has usually been understood to
have two different implications - first, to ensure that parliamentary debate
enjoyed protection from court action; and, secondly, to ensure the courts
could not interfere in internal parliamentary proceedings.
In theory, the Commons could use the second of these arguments to argue
against a judicial review, but in practice the courts have long seen it as
part of their role to examine the validity and working of parliamentary
acts.
As Mr Craig pointed out, it is not only the Commons that can use the moral
weight of article nine - since the bill has long been law, the courts have
the right to interpret and apply it. If the House wishes to ensure that its
relationship with the courts is clarified further, it may have to start
again - and draft a new law.
