FT  02 JUN 93 / Kohl urges calm after protests: Third night of
demonstrations in Germany against racist violence
THOUSANDS of Turkish and German demonstrators took to the streets of German
cities again last night to protest against racist violence, in spite of an
appeal for calm from Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The continuing wave of anger followed the deaths at the weekend of two
Turkish women and three girls in an arson attack, blamed on teenage
skinheads professing neo-Nazi sympathies.
One youth was in police custody last night, and the authorities issued the
description of four more skinheads suspected of involvement in the attack,
in the steelmaking city of Solingen, north of Cologne. Later they withdrew
the description, saying it might be false.
Hundreds of angry Turkish youths went on a rampage for the third consecutive
night in Solingen. Shouting 'Turkey, Turkey' and 'Nazis out', they smashed
shop windows and taunted riot police.
Demonstrations also flared in other cities with a lot of Turkish migrant
workers, such as Bielefeld, Munster, Dusseldorf, Dortmund and Kassel.
Mr Kohl, who gave no immediate response to the deaths on Saturday night,
issued a joint appeal for calm with Mr Johannes Rau, the premier of North
Rhine-Westphalia and caretaker leader of the opposition Social Democratic
(SPD) party.
They expressed their understanding for the anger, as well as fear and
sorrow, which has exploded in Germany's 1.7m-strong Turkish community. They
also gave their support for peaceful demonstrations.
However, they urged the community not to react with violence. 'We must
prevent injustice causing more injustice,' they said. 'There is no
justification for violent excesses.'
They condemned attempts by 'small groups of Turkish fanatics' to settle
internal disputes under cover of the mass demonstrations, after several
incidents of faction-fighting. 'If German and Turkish rioters now career
through our towns, then that makes no contribution to the peaceful and
friendly co-existence between Germans and foreigners, even if these actions
are carried out in the name of the fight against xenophobia,' they said.
President Richard von Weizsacker announced that he would be attending a
funeral service at the mosque in Cologne for the five murder victims. On
Friday, Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, will attend the burial of the
victims in their former home, 125 miles north-east of Ankara.
German reaction to this atrocity has been both horror-struck and helpless,
as the authorities blame a rash of skinhead gangs for a spate of arson
attacks on foreigners. The attacks have sparked an urgent debate on
immigration law and naturalisation laws. The SPD yesterday repeated its call
for a dual citizenship right for those born in the country. Three draft laws
on the issue are before parliament.
French duo strike chord with Kohl, Page 2
