FT  29 APR 93 / Survey of Business Schools (1): Horses for courses - In the
1980s an MBA was increasingly seen as the passport to managerial promotion.
International demand for business schools rose and numbers grew, but the
1990s have brought recession and a more discriminating market
FOR BUSINESS schools, the halcyon days are long gone.
The rapid, almost wild expansion of the 1980s has given way to retrenchment,
greater competition, and strategies aimed at diversifying from the old
'staples' of off-the-peg management courses and the traditional Master of
Business Administration (MBA) degree.
Those beautiful upward curves adorning business school reports on 'growth' a
few years' ago have been redrawn, as deans strive anxiously to maintain
numbers and quality of intake.
For the discriminating consumer - from the supervisor after a cheap
part-time management diploma to the multinational buying a dozen tailor-made
courses for senior executives - it is a shoppers' paradise.
'At best the MBA market is static; in fact, it's probably declining, and
most deans are not being completely honest about what is happening,' says Dr
Robin Wensley, chairman of Warwick Business School.
Yet precise figures on the downturn are scarce. 'There is an absolute welter
of fibbing out there', says one well-placed US and UK observer -
particularly when it comes to ratios of applicants to places.
Mr Roger McCormick, director general of the UK's Association of MBAs,
estimates that this year's (1992-93) intake for MBA courses is down by about
15 per cent on last year. 'Some are doing far better than that; others are
purporting to show strength until you start looking at the rising proportion
of overseas students.'.
However, the biggest mistake in the book is to regard business schools as a
monolith. And not just with regard to their success in recruiting. As a
group, they differ as much as any other sub-set of educational institutions.
When it comes to sorting out the elite from the rest, few make the mistake.
Every would-be American MBA has her or his - predominantly his - list of
leading schools, in which Harvard, Wharton, Stanford, Kellogg and Chicago
invariably feature; he 'knows' that the London Business School, Insead and
IMD are Europe's top dogs; and the MBA fraternity within those west European
countries which take formal business education seriously - which is all the
larger states besides Germany - can name their own top few schools.
But when it comes to the world below the top table, to most consumers -
individuals and companies alike - it is an undifferentiated mass.
League tables, much in vogue, are of only limited help in differentiating.
This survey deliberately eschews crude rankings. There is no one single
yardstick by which to measure a school; even if you know the yardstick you
want, a simple ranking rarely gives more than a one-dimensional picture. For
an individual, the best course is to visit the institution - and wade
through the literature, not just for course descriptions and subjective
evaluations, but basic facts about duration, cost, placement success, and so
on. For companies, word-of-mouth, surveys and consultants go so far; but
there is no substitute for meeting deans and directors face to face. It all
depends what you want.
Take cost. Annual tuition fees for full-time US MBA courses currently vary
from about Dollars 19,000 (Pounds 12,600) at the likes of Columbia, Harvard
and Stanford to Dollars 12,000 (Pounds 8,000) or less at Lexington
(Kentucky), Terry (Georgia) and Austin (Texas).
But tuition fees are only the start: the difference between a one or
two-year MBA, or between a part-time or distance-learning course, also has
to be weighed in salary foregone, family relocated, social life neglected.
Another error is to think that business schools and MBAs are synonymous.
They are not. Schools cater for three principal markets: undergraduates, MBA
and other graduate students, and management training courses. Even for those
running high-profile MBAs, the bread and butter generally comes from
courses.
Few schools are active in all three markets. None of Europe's three
acknowledged leaders teaches undergraduates; nor do any of the US Ivy League
schools besides Pennsylvania's Wharton. Typically, it is more a matter of
history than conscious market orientation: most schools were set up in the
post-war years as dedicated post-graduate institutions, while those which
began life as departments of older universities often still take
undergraduates.
Wharton's undergraduate school, for instance, pre-dates its graduate school
by 40 years. Wharton currently has 2,500 business undergraduates against
1,500 MBAs and 300 doctoral students. 'Some companies are saying, why are we
hiring MBAs when we can get first degree business grads young and mould them
into our corporate culture; they also fear they are paying too much for what
they are getting for an MBA', says Ms Janice Mellace, Wharton's vice dean.
With applications for undergraduate business courses - unlike MBAs - booming
on both sides of the Atlantic, that refrain may soon become deafening,
although intriguingly, some 40 per cent of Wharton's business undergrads go
on to do an MBA at a later stage.
Distance learning is another unambiguous growth area. Britain's Open
Business School, a part of its Open University, accounted for one in eight
of this year's MBA enrolments in the UK; from next year it will be turning
out 1,000 MBAs a year, a number set to rise further.
As detailed in a later article, that is only the 'top drawer' of the OBS's
portfolio of management courses, which aims to reach those parts traditional
business schools have rarely reached - both downwards (to supervisors and
the like) and across (to the public sector and abroad, particularly mainland
Europe).
Britain, of course, is semi-detached from Europe. So are most of its
business schools (LBS is a notable exception), which preach
'internationalisation' but rarely have more than a smattering of mainland
European faculty, students, or teaching material. If you are after a truly
European school, you should think seriously about going there.
And 'there' is not just Insead (Paris) or IMD (Lausanne), but the numerous
other highly-rated institutions, not least Rotterdam School of Management,
Nijenrode University (also in the Netherlands), Spain's Instituto de Empresa
in Barcelona and France's Groupe ESC Lyon.
Ironically, English is now all but the official language of the leading
Dutch business schools. Barely a quarter of the MBA students at Rotterdam
School of Management, part of Erasmus University, are Dutch: other Europeans
make up a further third; Americans a fifth; 15 per cent are from Asia.
Moving further east, business schools are sprouting en masse. According to
Professor Derek Abell, research co-ordinator at IMD and actively engaged in
the former eastern bloc, central and eastern Europe now boasts more than 100
business schools. In Hungary alone there are more than 50.
'They vary tremendously in quality,' he says. 'There are probably a dozen -
one in each of the major countries - you would hold up to be doing something
intelligent; and a sea of others, some in joint ventures.'
However, for most western business schools, tending the home patch is the
all-consuming priority. That means a bevy of new products; strenuous efforts
to recruit senior executives to invest their time and prestige on 'advisory
boards' or as 'corporate sponsors'; and ever more frantic bids to present
oneself as different and better (hardly a dean in Britain or the US is not
claiming to be adopting new learning methods or to be 'fundamentally
rethinking' course curriculums).
For many, it is a raw question of survival. Professor David Ashton, chairman
of the UK's Association of Business Schools and Dean of Lancaster University
Management School, expresses a widespread view: 'I would be glad if the
market downturn led to fewer, stronger institutions. At the moment we (the
UK) have 92 institutions, with yet more planning to join the scrimmage.'
But, he notes, 'no machinery exists within which to discuss such a proposal,
so the market will have to do its work.' Unless, that is, new ways can be
found to expand the market. Notice the number of schools jumping on the
distance learning wagon.
It used to be a joke, Ashton remarks, 'that the only concept which business
schools taught their vice-chancellors was the concept of the cash cow.'
Perhaps the next lesson will be on ritual slaughter.
