FT  21 OCT 93 / Technology: Domain of the genes / A look at a breakthrough
in biotechnology
Richard Roberts and Phillip Sharp helped take the nonsense out of gene
research - literally. Without their work, for which they have just jointly
been awarded the Nobel prize in medicine, much of today's biotechnological
developments would not have been possible.
The award highlighted the importance of biotechnology in medical research by
giving formal recognition to a discovery in gene structure that has yielded
new product developments in the biotechnology sector and promises to lead to
many more.
The achievement of British-born Roberts and Sharp, an American, was to
overturn the idea that genes were arranged on DNA strands in a continuous
chain. Instead, they found that genes have distinct 'domains' or gene
sequences, separated by what have been called nonsense DNA or introns.
They made the discovery simultaneously but independently in 1977 by using
electron microscopes. It is credited with speeding up the biotechnology
revolution and paving the way for gene therapy, a nascent field in which
genes are used as drugs.
Genes are arranged along strands of DNA, which contain the blueprints for
the creation of life. To reproduce itself, DNA unzips into RNA messenger
strands, carbon copies of the DNA. The RNA then invades protein molecules
and imprints them with the genetic codes for development.
The laureates' breakthrough showed that the messenger RNA edits out the
introns between the gene sequences to form a clear genetic code that can be
read by proteins, the building blocks of life.
The discovery was applied immediately to the fabrication of certain
hormones, for instance the human growth hormone used to treat dwarfism. 'It
became clear after this discovery that if you were going to express a gene
for a hormone, you'd first have to remove the nonsense sequences,' says
Sharp. The discovery also yielded clues for research into cancer and certain
hereditary diseases which occur from mistakes during the DNA copying and
editing process.
'After the study, scientists were able to study genes in the cancerous or
mutant state and compare it to the normal state,' says Roberts, a researcher
at New England Biolabs. 'Before the discovery, we did not know what the
normal state looked like.' Sharp and Roberts did their work in 1977, but
some of the possible applications of the discovery are only now being fully
explored.
'It's not just that we realised genes were divided into sequences,' says
Joseph Davie, vice-president of research at Biogen, the biotechnology group.
'We realised they had separate domains for a reason, which was that they had
different functions. One of the important things to come out of this is that
we realised we did not have to create copies of molecules just as they were
found in nature. We could split up their functions and re-arrange them to
create our own, new molecules by combining part of one gene and part of
another.'
This technology is still in its early stages, but some biotechnology groups
say they are having success. Seattle-based Immunex is developing a bone
marrow stimulant which brings two gene domains together in a single
molecule. And Biogen says it is also working with 'designer molecules' to
target cancer, inflammatory, immunological and cardiovascular diseases.
'One area we've had success in,' says Sharp, one of the founders of Biogen
and now a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 'is in
making new antibodies by combining mouse antibodies with human antibodies.
This allows some of the mouse antibodies to be used by humans.'
Since 1977, scientists have been advancing their knowledge of how genes
work. 'The reason it's taken so long since the original discovery for
companies to start getting into mixing is because first we had to know what
individual gene domains actually do,' says Davie. 'Now we can become more
sophisticated in mixing them up.'
New sophistication in gene splicing has improved research methods. 'The
'gene knockout' technique, by which you eliminate certain genes in mice, is
now used widely to create mutations which are then used in research,' says
Laurence Lasky, staff scientist at Genentech. 'That would not have been
possible without the Nobel work.'
The discovery was also fundamental to advances in the complex field of gene
therapy. 'Unless you understand how a gene is expressed, there is no hope
for gene therapy,' says Dr Sharp.
According to Hubert Shoemaker, chairman of Centocor, the work was also
important because it stressed that when the gene message gets re-processed,
it may get mixed up. 'We need to take into account the stability of the
genes we create in the field,' he explains.
Sharp and Roberts stress that their work was just one step in a revolution
of new ideas which have exploded over the last two decades.
Several important discoveries followed on the heels of the Nobel laureates'
initial work. After the notion of gene domains was established, for
instance, scientists began to consider the possibility of using RNA as an
enzyme.
'We began to see that RNA molecules have a function besides the transferring
of information,' says Shoemaker. 'They can also function as enzymes and we
may see a whole new series of drugs based on RNA as enzymes.'
Researchers also began to consider using adhesive RNA strands as inhibitors.
'We have now adopted the concept that there is a single domain on the gene
which is responsible for binding,' says Lasky. Normally, we think of
peptides and other substances as binders, but RNA portions may also be used.
If they bind to a specific site, the activity of that molecule may be
inhibited. This could be used as a drug for a number of diseases including
Aids.'
Another key development is the discovery that introns serve as moderators in
the expression of the gene sequence. 'By including introns in the expression
of a system, we can get a much more effective protein,' says Patricia
Tekamp-Olson, director of research at Chiron.
'It's very likely that they will be increasingly used as enhancers for
recombinant proteins. Another theory is that they may provide information
which makes the gene tissue specific. For instance, we may be able to use
introns to target specific tissues within the body while ignoring others.
That would be a key advance.'
