FT  28 JUN 93 / Clinton hails strike on Iraq: UK and Germany back missile
raid as US reinforces Gulf presence
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton yesterday hailed the weekend missile attack on Iraqi
intelligence headquarters in Baghdad as a 'success' which was more than
justified by a 'cowardly and loathsome' Iraqi plot to assassinate former
President George Bush.
At a special session of the United Nations Security Council last night the
US defended its action by invoking Article 51 of the UN charter, which
accords a nation the right to self-defence. Washington also reinforced its
military presence in the Gulf by moving the aircraft carrier Theodore
Roosevelt and a cruiser from the Adriatic.
Pentagon officials said that was a warning to President Saddam Hussein not
to retaliate or to attack the Kurds in the north of Iraq. There have been
reports of a substantial build-up of Iraqi forces near Kurdish territory.
In the attack, US warships several hundred miles away in the Red Sea and the
Gulf fired 23 cruise missiles at the Iraqi intelligence headquarters in the
heart of Baghdad. Three went wide, demolishing three homes in a residential
area and, according to Iraqi reports, killing six people.
Mr Clinton regretted any loss of civilian life. Mr Warren Christopher,
secretary of state, said the damage was minimal compared with the loss of
life that would have resulted had the Iraqi bomb aimed at Mr Bush when he
visited Kuwait in April been detonated.
Mr John Major, the British prime minister, backed the US action, describing
it as 'a justified act of self-defence'. UK opposition politicians, however,
expressed severe reservations that the US had acted without consulting the
UN.
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, said US attack was the correct
reaction to 'a detestable terrorist attempt'.
Italy and France were more circumspect, limiting themselves to expressions
of 'understanding' for the motivation behind the raid.
There was criticism from Arab nations and from Iran. Egypt said it wished
the US would show the same concern for Moslems in Bosnia, and Jordan warned
that the US attack would only lead to more 'hatred, human and material
losses'.
The Arab League accused the US of applying double standards and expressed
extreme regret at the assault. Among Arab nations, only Kuwait voiced
support.
In Iran, the parliamentary foreign relations committee said the strike was
'an open international act of aggression which cannot be justified on the
basis of any international treaties and agreements'.
At last night's Security Council meeting US ambassador Madeleine Albright
displayed photographs which she said gave proof of an Iraqi attempt to
assassinate Mr Bush. The photographs were said to be of a car bomb and other
devices hidden in a Toyota Landcruiser smuggled across the Iraq-Kuwait
border.
Some of the explosive devices uncovered were found only in Iraqi components
and were not used by any other terrorist group, Mrs Albright said.
Other explosives which had been seized, including so-called cube bombs,
contained components built by the same people who had made similar devices
that were recovered previously from the Iraqi intelligence service.
Mr Nazir Hamdoon, the Iraqi delegate, flatly denied the charges, which he
called a Kuwaiti fabrication. However, those members who spoke during the
hour-long debate were clearly convinced US reprisals were justified and the
Council adjourned without taking formal action.
In Washington, Mr Christopher, Mr Les Aspin, defence secretary, and General
Colin Powell, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, praised the accuracy of
the US attack.
They said it was vital to strike against state-sponsored terrorism. The
secretary of state expressed particular concern that Iran, which he said was
also responsible for aiding terrorists, was acquiring and building weapons
of mass destruction. Some US allies were doing 'far too much trading' with
Iran, and he urged them to put up 'a stern front' against Iranian military
ambitions.
There was no discernible domestic opposition to the US raid.
In Britain, Mr Major's full backing for the US was in contrast to opinion in
other parties. Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, said he had 'grave doubts'
about the wisdom and legality of the missile attack.
Mr Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat defence spokesman, warned that in the
long-term the attack might be very damaging to the status and authority of
the UN.
US rallies behind Clinton's decision, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 15
