FT  20 FEB 93 / Markets: Glaxo fights for global crown - The Bottom Line
Pity Glaxo. Europe's largest drugs group is vying with Merck of the US to be
the world's number one pharmaceuticals group. The company markets Zantac,
the world's best-selling drug. Its underlying earnings growth in the six
months to the end of December was 13 per cent - a performance that almost
all companies during a recession would envy.
Glaxo appears to be doing everything right. Yet its shares have fallen from
814p last September to as low as 662p this week.
For the most part, the problems faced by Glaxo are those shared by the rest
of the pharmaceuticals industry. US investors, noting the pick-up in the
American economy, have been dumping defensive drugs stocks capable of
generating consistent earnings growth during recession. Instead, they have
been plunging into cyclical companies hit by the slow-down but capable of
impressive growth during a recovery.
The swing against drugs stocks has been exaggerated by fears about the
political outlook in the US for pharmaceuticals companies. The Clinton
administration has pinpointed healthcare as a key agenda item. Drugs
companies, many of which in the past have increased prices well above
inflation, are directly in the administration's sights.
Dr Ernest Mario, Glaxo's chief executive, admitted this week that the
outlook in the US looked extremely uncertain. Everything, he said, remained
up in the air.
Glaxo is in a better position than many to withstand the Clinton
administration. Glaxo has recently limited its US price increases to below
the rate of inflation. At constant exchange rates, only 1 percentage point
of its sales growth came from price increases compared with 12 percentage
points from volume. In addition, the group does not manufacture medicines in
Puerto Rico, so it would be less exposed to moves curbing the island's tax
haven status.
Nevertheless, doubts remain about Glaxo's continued ability to drive
double-digit earnings growth. Nearly half of its operating profits growth in
the first six months was generated by Zantac, the ulcer treatment. After
yesterday's results Goldman Sachs upgraded its 1995 sales forecasts for
Zantac to a massive Pounds 2.6bn. However, the better-than-expected growth
of Zantac underlines Glaxo's dependence on the drug. Glaxo faces challenges
to Zantac's American patents, which protect the drug from generic
competition up to 2002. If Glaxo loses, the drug could face such competition
by 1996.
Zantac faces an earlier threat, too. Its main rival SmithKline Beecham's
Tagamet is coming off patent next year. Cost-anxious US healthcare managers
may insist doctors prescribe cheap generic versions of Tagamet rather than
the more expensive, patented Zantac.
Glaxo's double-digit earnings growth is also becoming hindered by the
company's very size. If its new drugs turn out to be only moderately
successful Glaxo could face difficulties maintaining its growth. Goldman
Sachs believes earnings per share growth may slow to under 10 per cent
beyond 1995.
Glaxo's new drugs, such as its migraine treatment Imigran and its asthma
drug Serevent, are still in the balance. They have not yet, or have only
just been, launched in the US, Japan, Germany or France. Dr Mario warned,
however, that Imigran's growth would not be explosive.
Glaxo's shares could be boosted next Friday if a Food and Drug
Administration advisory committee review of Serevent is favourable. Also,
Dr Mario has calmed immediate fears about a rights issue to fund the
acquisition of a big company in the US over-the-counter, non-prescription
drug market.
The main problem Dr Mario faces is not persuading investors Glaxo is a
quality drug stock - it clearly is. Rather, he must convince investors to
plunge further into defensive stocks when the US and UK economies appear to
be recovering from recession.
