FT  29 JAN 93 / Technology: Cutting the cost of precision - A British
invention may bring accurate machining to a much broader market
What does a compulsive inventor do once he has turned an invention into a
commercial success? One answer is to turn his attention to the manufacturing
process that makes his product.
This is exactly what David McMurtry is doing at Renishaw, the metrology
company that grew from his invention of touch trigger measuring probes and
is now one of the UK's few high-technology manufacturing success stories.
At its factory outside Stroud, Gloucestershire, Renishaw has reduced
considerably the length of time it takes to machine the components that make
up its probes.
The company has done this by cutting sharply the cost of continuous,
unmanned manufacturing. It says it has slashed the time it takes to set up
machine tools to perform multiple engineering functions - thereby providing
hope for an escape from long machine runs which often lead to large amounts
of work-in-progress.
It is early days. So far, the company has applied the technology it calls
the Renishaw Automated Milling Turning and Inspection Centre (Ramtic) only
within its own factory. But Renishaw could be about to do for machine shops
what Alan Sugar, in his heyday, did for consumer electronics - bring
low-cost precision engineering within the grasp of a much broader market.
'We are bringing high-tolerance production to the average shop floor,' says
Ben Taylor, Renishaw's assistant chief executive.
What Renishaw is aiming for is a flexible manufacturing system at a fraction
of the cost of a conventional set-up. FMS units - or cells - are designed to
perform a number of machining functions that are numerically controlled by
computer instructions. But a bank of FMS cells can cost more than Pounds 1m.
Renishaw's approach was to take a standard vertical machining centre - the
most easily available system, that might cost about Pounds 100,000 - and
modify it.
These machines are not inherently highly accurate because they twist, expand
and bend during a machining cycle.
Renishaw, however, achieves what Taylor calls the 'final level of precision'
by placing next to the raw material that is to be machined a model of the
component. Before the machine is set up, this 'artefact' has been checked in
a co-ordinate measuring machine and its dimensions are known to a high
degree of accuracy.
While simple vertical machining centres are not highly accurate over long
cycles, Renishaw has shown that they do not change shape over short spans of
time.
Using indexable measuring probes, the machine tool is able to make an
immediate comparison between the machined part and the artefact. The exact
position of the tool relative to the machined part is fed to the computer
which modifies its instructions to the machine tool, if necessary. 'We have
removed the uncertainty of measuring on a machine tool,' says Taylor.
The system has other benefits. It is capable of continuous verification and
recording of the process without interrupting the manufacturing process.
With many FMS cells, a machined part would have to be removed to verify that
it had been made within acceptable tolerances.
The most striking improvements have been to cut set-up times, making it more
economical to run smaller batches. While it might take three to six hours to
set up a milling centre, with the Ramtic there is no set-up time, after the
carousels that carry the tools are kitted up. Renishaw's early experience in
cutting production cycle times is equally impressive. This is up to three
times faster partly because Ramtic's tools are changed less often than an
FMS.
Taylor says that as a result, Renishaw should be able to do without the
stock room. Batches of components for its own probe products would be made
to order 'like a short-order cook'. 'Our plan is just-in-time production,'
he says.
Word of Renishaw's work on its manufacturing productivity has had a mixed
but limited reception. Japanese and American companies have beaten a path to
Renishaw's door after the company introduced the technique at Birmingham
Mach' 92, the industry trade fair. And engineers from the US Department of
Defence's weapons complex at Los Alamos have shown great interest in
Ramtic's ability to monitor precision engineering.
Some manufacturers of FMS systems have yet to be convinced that Renishaw is
really bringing a new technology to bear. They also wonder whether the
system might only be relevant for manufacturers who would like to have short
manufacturing runs.
By the summer, Renishaw may be able to answer the sceptics. It hopes to have
put a ring of patent protection around its use of artefact comparison and is
considering whether it will then sell or license the Ramtic hardware and
software.
If Renishaw has made a breakthrough in the cost of precision, the ripples
could spread rapidly through the engineering industry. Renishaw would also
have another market - the Ramtic process relies on a number of its products.
