FT  27 JUL 93 / Survey of Ghana (1): Determined to press on - Ghana has
blazed a trail in Africa, implementing economic reform while managing the
transition to civilian rule. The toughest test may lie ahead, as the
government seeks domestic and foreign investment vital for export-led growth
IN a continent full of strongmen propped up by sclerotic regimes, Flight-Lt
Jerry Rawlings, Ghana's leader since 1981, stands out for his shrewd ability
to adapt to changing times - which may explain his enduring popularity.
Last January Mr Rawlings effected the transition from military dictator to
elected president with the same apparent ease as he abandoned revolutionary
Marxism a decade ago to become the model pupil of the International Monetary
Fund. His timely conversion to democracy spared Ghana the suspension of
international aid that which has crippled other, less-adaptable African
nations. But Ghanaians could be excused for believing that little has
changed.
They have the same president, almost the same government team and economic
policies as before. The new parliament, dominated by Mr Rawlings' National
Democratic Congress (because there is an opposition boycott), has yet to
prove it can be an independent counterpoint to the president's authority.
And many of the democratic safeguards enshrined in the new constitution,
such as a human rights commission and an independent press council, have yet
to be put in place.
Most western observers judged the election to be relatively free and fair,
but some Ghanaians, particularly the educated elite in Accra, argue that
donor governments, desperate for a success story in Africa, turned a blind
eye to unfair rules of the game that gave Mr Rawlings an unbeatable
advantage. The electoral register, inflated by more than 1m names, was
seriously flawed, and the opposition had been legalised barely six months
before the election - hardly enough time to organise an effective campaign.
It was a contest, they say, in which Mr Rawlings was the star player,
linesman and referee. In protest, the four main opposition parties, ranging
from the socialist followers of Ghana's founding father, Kwame Nkrumah, to
the conservative New Patriotic Party (NPP), boycotted the parliamentary
elections in December. It is a decision they now deeply regret. Their
self-exclusion from parliament has left them almost as voiceless as they
were under military rule. Furthermore, seven months into the new regime they
are still bickering among themselves over how to survive in the political
wilderness.
Some, such as Mr Bernard Joao da Rocha, the NPP chairman, favour a policy of
reconciliation with the Rawlings government. He asked, and obtained,
permission to submit his party's views on the 1993 budget to parliament.
'The fact that we boycotted the parliamentary elections does not render this
government illegitimate,' Mr da Rocha concedes. 'Our only hope of
influencing policy is to establish a dialogue with the party in power.'
But Mr da Rocha's pragmatism jars with the bitterness harboured by other NPP
stalwarts. Professor Adu Boahen, the NPP presidential candidate, refuses to
accept the results of the contest he lost. 'I will never recognise Rawlings
as a legitimate leader. I have no wish to accord respectability to his
government,' he says.
If Ghana's democratic transition requires a leap of faith, then greater
faith still is needed to believe that after a decade of economic reforms,
the country is ready to make the qualitative leap into accelerated,
export-led growth.
Having spent the past 10 years trying to repair the damage caused by
socialist mismanagement in the 1960s and 1970s, Dr Kwesi Botchwey, Ghana's
veteran finance minister, believes the country is sufficiently recovered to
shift its focus from reform to active development.
His accelerated growth plan, unveiled at a Paris meeting of donors last
month, is bold in conception. The target - to achieve 8 per cent annual
growth rates by the turn of the century - is ambitious. Ghana is hoping to
model itself on the newly industrialised nations of south-east Asia.
If it succeeds, 10 years of liberalisation, deregulation and devaluation
will have been vindicated. And the World Bank and the IMF, struggling to
convince sub-Saharan Africa of the benefits of structural adjustment, will
have a new development example on the continent.
For the plan to work, Dr Botchwey is betting on a revival of manufacturing,
believing that a leaner, export-oriented manufacturing sector can rise from
the ashes of structural adjustment.
The accelerated growth plan calls for non-traditional exports (everything
that is neither cocoa, gold nor timber) to grow by 29 per cent a year
throughout the 1990s. Investment and domestic savings ratios will have to
improve substantially to sustain higher growth rates. And the sluggish
agricultural sector, which has suffered from the collapse of cocoa prices
and erratic weather conditions, will have to be prodded into greater
productivity.
Dr Botchwey's plan was overwhelmingly endorsed at the donor conference,
which pledged a further Dollars 2.1bn in assistance over the next two years
 -almost half a billion dollars more than the government had bargained for.
There are reasons for optimism. Since Ghana began to swallow the IMF
medicine in 1983, gross domestic product has grown by an average of 4.9 per
cent a year, more than twice the sub-Saharan average of 2.1 per cent. It
follows a decade during which real incomes per head in Ghana fell by 30 per
cent.
Yet Ghana remains desperately poor. Its average per capita income was only
Dollars 400 last year. Low wages have led to an exodus of Ghanaian
professionals. There are fewer doctors in Ghana now (one for every 15,000
inhabitants) than in 1975. The World Bank estimates that at current growth
rates, it would take 20 years for the average poor Ghanaian to cross the
poverty line.
Hence the urgency to push for accelerated growth. A recent World Bank
strategy document entitled 'Ghana 2000 and beyond - setting the stage for
accelerated growth and poverty reduction', estimates that if growth rose to
8 per cent, then the average poor Ghanaian could cross the poverty threshold
in 10 years.
Ghana's fast-track development plan has a second, equally important
objective: to wean itself off aid dependence by attracting new foreign
investment and diversifying exports. Dr Botchwey says there are 'real
signals' that this is already happening. 'A number of multinationals who
quit in the 1970s are coming back,' he argues. 'They are looking at the
comparative labour costs and are interested in producing on a large scale
for export. There is tremendous scope for rapid expansion in agro-processing
industries and in wood processing.'
And yet Ghana's private sector success stories in export diversification
remain limited.
One company accounts for 90 per cent of Ghana's furniture exports. Another
company produces most of Ghana's fruit juice exports. Pineapples are proving
to be a lucrative alternative to cocoa, but only because they have been able
to displace the more expensive produce from neighbouring Ivory Coast.
Some multinationals which are encountering quota problems in the Far East
have expressed interest in setting up manufacturing plants in proposed
industrial incentive zones. But few investments have yet materialised.
While the private sector in Ghana agrees with the broad thrust of the
government's policies, there is much scepticism over its implementation. 'If
we think that small manufacturers can suddenly become exporters, we are
dreaming,' says Mr Ishmael Yamson, chairman of Unilever Ghana. 'We need to
attract multinationals on the basis that they can come to exploit our cheap
labour and natural resources.'
Local manufacturers, Mr Yamson says, have little knowledge of export
markets. They lack managerial skills and are starved of long-term domestic
sources of finance. The government's Export Promotion Council has been
ineffective in selling Ghana abroad, while a couple of venture capital funds
set up last year have yet to lend a single cedi to budding entrepreneurs.
Mr Yamson places more hope in a new trade and investment programme launched
by US aid and other donors, which aims to provide the services and know-how
that potential exporters need. The government, for its part, is introducing
'a new agenda of activism' that will target investors with special
incentives. 'Picking winners is a hazardous thing,' Mr Botchwey concedes, so
he has asked the private sector to draft guidelines for the selective
protection of infant industries.
'The protection measures will have to be time-bound, the criteria clear and
transparent, to avoid charges of political favouritism,' he explains.
Whether all this can add up to accelerated growth remains to be seen. Much
will depend on the government's ability to maintain a healthy macroeconomic
environment.
Last year, as Ghana prepared for the presidential election, the government
was frightened into granting large pay increases to striking public servants
who were on strike. The government's wage bill rocketed to 50 per cent of
public revenues, derailing the delicately balanced budget. Inflation rose to
10.1 per cent in 1992 against a 5 per cent target. The World Bank and
co-financing donors withheld Dollars 170m of development assistance. And
overall economic growth slowed down to 3.9 per cent.
Dr Botchwey moved swiftly to close the budget deficit by imposing a new
'killer tax' on fuels in January. Meanwhile, the Bank of Ghana (central
bank) sharply jacked up its discount rate to bring the money supply under
control.
Inflation, however, is not expected to fall below 20 per cent this year.
1993, therefore, is being billed as a year of belt-tightening and
retrenchment. Western diplomats in Accra do not expect the economy to take
off again before 1995.
But the determination is there to press ahead. And while the ink may still
be fresh on Ghana's accelerated growth plan, the document marks a
psychological turning point in the nation's history. By underscoring its
faith in its own potential, Ghana is shedding its image as a victim of an
unjust world economic order.
