FT  16 APR 93 / Review of English fuels education row
STRICTER standards for spoken English in schools and tougher requirements
for teaching Shakespeare are features of radical revisions proposed for the
English national curriculum.
The proposals, announced yesterday by the National Curriculum Council, could
affect all teaching of English in England and Wales. They streamline the
curriculum currently in place and include exhaustive lists of recommended
reading for children up to the age of 16. The number of attainment targets,
or requirements, that children must satisfy during their schooling has been
cut from 159 to 99.
However, the review has added fuel to the confrontation between the
government and teachers' unions over tests for the national curriculum,
which are due to start in June. Opposition politicians attacked the timing
of the proposals, which come only a week after Mr John Patten, the education
secretary, announced a review of the full national curriculum.
All pupils will now be required to read one Shakespeare play between the
ages of 11 and 14 and another by the age of 16. Teachers complained that
that was unrealistic for less able pupils.
There were also doubts about the rules for spoken English. Under the
proposals, primary school teachers would be expected to correct pupils at
Key Stage One (between the ages of five and seven) for making ungrammatical
comments such as: 'We was robbed', and 'We winned at football'.
By Key Stage Two (for 11-year-olds), pupils should be proficient in
'standard English' and should not make mistakes such as: 'Pass me them
books', and 'We haven't seen nobody'.
Mr David Pascall, chairman of the NCC, said: 'By standard English we mean
correct vocabulary and grammar spoken in any accent, with clear diction.'
He added that a command of such English would benefit children in their
'social and professional development', and that the move had been made
necessary by falling standards.
'Does anyone have any serious doubt if we listen to the English in the
playground, in the street and sometimes in the media that we have to raise
standards?' he asked.
Mr Patten said: 'The new proposals will simplify the present English
curriculum by reducing the number of requirements to be satisfied. But they
will increase rigour by making those statements more precise and amenable to
assessment.'
But Ms Ann Taylor, Labour's education spokesman, called for a moratorium on
all changes to the curriculum until the full review had been completed.
There will now be three months of public consultation, and the resulting
guidelines will be introduced in schools between 1994 and 1995.
