FT  11 JUN 93 / Brussels to take tougher line on fraud
EFFORTS to combat EC fraud are being hampered by staff shortages in Brussels
and lack of co-operation from member states, the European Commission claimed
yesterday.
Mr Peter Schmidhuber, the EC commissioner responsible for fraud prevention,
told MEPs that the Commission was seeking to improve co-ordination between
its own departments and member states.
He pledged to be tough on member states that did not meet deadlines for
notifying cases of potential fraud. At the moment, he said, only about 10
per cent of cases were notified on time, even though member states were
supposed to bear the brunt of investigating and punishing EC fraud and
recovering money lost.
The Commission's 1992 report on fraud, released in April, said reported
fraud totalled Ecu269.9m (Pounds 213.8m) last year, 44 per cent of it
related to farm subsidies.
But the Commission admitted that the scale of fraud was much higher than the
figures reported by member states and only about 10 per cent of the money
lost was ever recovered.
'In future the Commission will make sure that the member states do respect
their obligations,' Mr Schmidhuber told a public hearing of the European
Parliament's budgetary control committee. He added that Brussels was
examining whether to pay rewards for information on fraud, or offer
performance-related bonuses to investigators.
Mr Michel Jacquot, responsible for managing the EC farm budget, said many
member states failed to notify fraud to Brussels because they were ashamed
to admit it.
But Mr Schmidhuber said an increased flow of data about potential fraud
involving EC funds could never be a substitute for extra personnel. He
pointed out that about 121 Commission staff were working to fight fraud, 35
in the special fraud unit, known by its French acronym Uclaf.
Demands for a further 35 fraud-busters have had to be shelved because of a
general financial squeeze and the effective devaluation of the Ecu, in which
the EC budget is calculated, against the Belgian franc, in which most staff
salaries are paid.
The Commission has just helped uncover a large fraud in Italy, involving the
disappearance of at least Ecu77.7m worth of surplus EC grain, following a
similar fraud in Greece.
Mr Jacquot told MEPs the Commission was assisting grain fraud investigations
in two other EC countries, which he declined to name.
Brussels has already asked all member states to be on the look-out for
cereals fraud.
