FT  06 NOV 93 / Cross-party talks clear way for sale of Deutsche Telekom
TOP-LEVEL talks between the German government and opposition yesterday
cleared the way for the privatisation of Deutsche Telekom, the state-owned
telecommunications monopoly.
Deutsche Telekom said it would now prepare for the sale of a first tranche
of shares, estimated at DM10bn-DM15bn (Pounds 4bn-Pounds 6bn) in 1996. The
amount is consistent with an earlier government plan to sell 25 per cent of
the company's equity in the first tranche, and a second similar tranche in
1998.
The cross-party deal follows two years of difficult talks between the
government and the opposition Social Democrats (SPD), to secure the
amendment of the constitution necessary for Germany's largest privatisation.
The bill is likely to go before parliament within two months.
Mr Wolfgang Botsch, the German post and telecommunications minister, said
the government and SPD had agreed to turn all three arms of the postal
service - Telekom, the mail service Postdienst and the savings bank Postbank
 -into private companies by 1995.
The government will retain a majority ownership in Deutsche Telekom until
1998, when the European Community will begin liberalising telecoms
monopolies in Europe.
Bonn had to concede to the opposition that a significant portion of the
proceeds from the privatisation would go to pension funds for the 700,000
employees in Deutsche Telekom and the lossmaking postal bank and mail
service. The government originally pledged all proceeds from the
privatisation would be re-invested in Deutsche Telekom.
'We could not have accepted a privatisation plan which had not given
provisions for pensions costs for all three companies,' Mr Hans-Gottfried
Bernrath, SPD negotiator, said yesterday.
Mr Bernrath said the pensions requirements for the three companies could be
as high as DM100bn. Deutsche Telekom's pension costs stand at DM3.5bn a year
for the next five years.
The sell-off agreement also envisages an independent regulatory agency, and
a holding company which will own the state shares of Deutsche Telekom, the
post service and postal bank, but will not have direct control over daily
operations. The government approved these arrangements to satisfy SPD
demands for some state supervision over the privatised companies.
But the agreement gives the company the right to veto the holding company's
decisions. Deutsche Telekom expressed relief that the holding company would
not seriously hamper its future operations.
Talks on telecoms 'supercarrier', Page 12
