FT  28 SEP 93 / Shevardnadze blames defeat on Kremlin
ABKHAZIAN rebels in the former Soviet republic of Georgia seized the Black
Sea port of Sukhumi yesterday, routing the defending forces who were
commanded by the country's leader, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, Reuter reports
from Tbilisi.
Mr Shevardnadze blamed Russia for the defeat in a bitter statement in which
he claimed Moscow could have prevented the final attack - the culmination of
an 11-day offensive.
The former Soviet foreign minister's whereabouts were not immediately known.
Sources close to the government said he had moved from his Sukhumi
headquarters to a safe location near the resort of Gulripshi, 12km to the
south.
'Sukhumi could have been saved even yesterday. Only Russia could have saved
it. We asked Moscow to do it,' Mr Shevardnadze said in a statement
distributed in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi.
'Georgia has been brought to its knees, but unfortunately that was not
enough. One reason for Sukhumi's fall is that external forces played the
card of betrayal well.'
Mr Shevardnadze said hundreds of people had been killed and many houses
destroyed in 'barbarian actions'. Efforts to evacuate civilians had failed
completely. Iprinda news agency quoted the Georgian defence minister, Mr
Georgy Karkarashvili, as saying the rebels were allowing retreating Georgian
forces to leave Sukhumi unmolested.
The Abkhazians issued a statement from the rebels' stronghold north of
Sukhumi saying they were offering Mr Shevardnadze safe passage out of the
area. 'It is still impossible to solve this problem by force. We have to
seek peaceful solutions,' Abkhazia's acting president, Mr Vladislav
Ardzinba, said. The head of Abkhazia's rebel parliament left for peace talks
in Geneva and said his side was offering a ceasefire to begin on Friday.
Mr Shevardnadze had refused Russian offers to evacuate him throughout the
siege. Fighting had raged in Sukhumi for several days, with pitched battles
waged around the railway station before the city fell.
The Georgian leader said he had done everything possible to allow Russia to
help his outnumbered forces, including agreeing to the dispatch of extra
Russian forces and to Georgian membership of the Commonwealth of Independent
States. 'God knows I did all I could so that this terrible day would never
come. I was unsuccessful,' his statement said. 'May I be forgiven by my
contemporaries and those who come after me.'
Earlier in the day, as the rebels closed in on the Sukhumi, Mr Shevardnadze
issued a desperate message saying the city would fall unless reinforcements
reached it quickly.
Mr Shevardnadze, one of the chief architects of the Soviet perestroika
reforms alongside Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, had gone to Sukhumi after the
collapse of an earlier ceasefire, which had ended more than a year of
fighting that cost thousands of lives.
