FT  02 JUL 93 / City gives cautious nod to Taurus replacement: Bank of
England outlines simpler system for Stock Exchange business in wake of
earlier disaster
PLANS FOR an electronic settlement system to replace the failed Taurus
project received a cautious cheer from the City yesterday.
Institutional fund managers, brokers and custodians said they generally
welcomed the plans to move as quickly as possible to a speedier form of
settlement and gave a thumbs-up to the significantly less ambitious outline
of the new settlements project.
The costly failure of the Stock Exchange's Taurus project is widely seen as
the result of an excessively complex system being devised in an effort to
satisfy too many competing commercial interests.
Mr Richard Weir, director-general of the Institutional Fund Managers
Association, a trade group of leading investors, said: 'We are very pleased
because they seem to have met our greatest concerns - speed of settlement
and sponsorship by the Bank of England.'
Mr Weir said the fact that the Bank would play a guiding role in setting
specifications for the new system and could possibly operate it, at least
initially, 'should restore confidence in the City of London.'
Elements of the task force's plans, however, are causing consternation among
some City practitioners. Mr Stuart Valentine, director of research at
ProShare, an organisation promoting individual share ownership, said there
was concern about pressures to push private clients into registering the
ownership of their shares in the names of nominees. The task force said this
might be necessary to allow private clients to enjoy the benefits of a
shortened settlement period.
Mr Valentine acknowledged that some private investors benefited from the
inefficiencies a 14-day settlement period offersed. 'There is no question
that some investors exploit the account settlement period.' The change might
reduce private investor activity, he said.
Some custodians expressed concern at the ability of the system to adapt to
five-day rolling settlement in a system still requiring bits of paper to be
transmitted to various institutions.
