FT  23 MAR 93 / Arts: Love's Labour's Lost - Theatre
Ipswich's Wolsey Theatre enjoys a high reputation in East Anglia for its
Shakespeare productions. This year it has ventured a new angle on Love's
Labour's Lost by bringing in nine European actors to perform the play's most
obviously European roles. The point is to reveal the international nature of
the play. But the stumbling-block is that, in four cases, the actors'
foreign accents are so strong as to render numerous lines impenetrable.
When the Princess of France speaks 'beseemeth' with the stress on the first
syllable, when her companion Maria says of Berowne 'Not a word with him but
a chest' (not 'jest'), you know that Love's Labour's Lost, a play stuffed
with wordplay, is going to flounder. Don Armado's verbosity seems odd, not
funny, in a Spanish accent; even a pompous line like 'Does thou infamonise
me among potentates?' sounds merely peculiar.
The pity is the more because the pacing and tone of Antony Tuckey's staging
is of a rare sensitivity. The war of wit and instinct is always alive, the
tension between intellectual rigour and sexual desire always exciting.
Shakespeare frequently celebrates wit, but seldom does he so plainly show
wit discomfited as here. For that reason, one can talk about this play in
the same breath as The Double Dealer, Mansfield Park and A Woman of No
Importance.
Two further flaws, however. It is a mistake to put Love's Labour's into
Edwardian attire. Shakespeare's plays belong in the period he set them
and/or the period he wrote them and/or the period we live in. To set them in
some interim period is to bypass Shakespeare for the sake of irrelevant
nostalgic prettiness. And it is cheap to have English actors occasionally
add 'Je suis' or 'N'est-ce pas?'.
The best contributions from continental Europe come from Sebastian Baur
(German/Italian) as Longaville and Birgitte Ohsten (Danish) as Jacquenetta -
not just because their words are always lucid to us but also because they
make Longaville's earnest/merry wit and Jacquenetta's flirtatious/used
situation unusually clear. As the King of Navarre and Princess of France,
the French actors Patrick Forster-Delmas and Carole Franck will make a
similarly keen impression if ever their words grow clearer; I never doubted
that they had an intelligent understanding of what they were saying. Ferran
Audi is a dolorous, unfunny, posey Don Adriano who nonetheless brings out
the character's impoverished and lovelorn pathos.
Not surprisingly, the audience falls gratefully on the British contingent.
Best is Robert Benfield, who ideally realises the curate Nathaniel's sweet
love of learning. Steven Mann has just the right merry attack for Berowne,
the play's hero of wit; Richard Cant is a somewhat refined Costard - never
the 'clown' Shakespeare calls him - but his sunny, gentle humour brings out
the tenderness of tone behind the play's rapierwork.
At the Wolsey Theatre, Ipswich, until April 10
