FT  10 APR 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Time to put a stopper to cork - It is humble,
archaic and prone to failure. Is there anything better?
WHAT YOU are going to see will strike you as primitive. 'Is there not
another way?' you will wonder. 'Yes there is, and it will eventually be
implemented.' This was how the export director of the world's biggest cork
company prepared me for the second half of a tour that had not, even up to
that point, been distinguished by sophistication.
Amorim &amp; Irmao's cork processing plant just south of Oporto in Portugal is a
hangar the size of 16 football pitches. Hanging in the dark rafters is the
sweet smell of boiling cork bark for, before anything else happens to it,
each man-sized strip of bark is boiled for 90 minutes in ancient, blackened
cauldrons to soften it and, it is hoped, eliminate the harsh elements and
any taints.
On the rough earth floor are steaming piles of cork bark, covered with
patches that can look alarmingly like mould. After drying, these coarse
strips of bark are then picked over by keen-eyed factory workers, graded,
and neatened up, just as they were a century ago, in preparation for the
next stage in the process: the manual, popgun punching of corks from strips
of bark which Antonio Affonso de Barros is so anxious to modernise. All it
will take is a bank of laser scanners and an awful lot of Escudos.
The wine cork business is in turmoil, and it has nothing to do with how
corks are punched. The wine world is kicking up a stink about the
unreliability of its traditional stopper.
Modernists object to grappling with a corkscrew and a bit of bark. Everyone,
including those who mutter about cork trees being stripped too young, feels
that the incidence of 'corked' bottles - containing wine rendered
undrinkably smelly, presumably by a tainted cork - is too high. Some reports
put the incidence at one in 12, which is surely an exaggeration.
No more than one in every 50 to 100 bottles I open shows any corked
character, although I have noticed an increase in the incidence of 'cork
police' - as in 'this wine's a bit corked, isn't it?' And once the
suggestion is made, it is difficult to resist . . . especially if resistance
implies that your nose is less sensitive than the cork policeman's.
Research has isolated the chief suspect, a substance called TCA for short,
which results from an unhealthy blend of chlorine, moisture, mould and
phenols and turns a wine's aroma into an odour. However, it has also been
found in uncorked liquids, presumably as a result of chlorinated water and
less-than-clean storage containers, thus providing the cork manufacturers
with a little defensive ammunition.
'We are fully aware that the cork is a very unwelcome element in the wine
package,' Affonso de Barros told me, wearily, 'but look at the alternatives.
Is there really anything that can be made by machine, offers a reliable
seal, is inert to wine and is also easily extractable?'
Top contender on all these counts is the humble crown cap - the one that has
to be levered off beer bottles - so humble I am not even sure how it is
known in the closures trade.
It is considerably cheaper than cork but fails principally on aesthetic
grounds, probably because, I would suggest, the yanked elbow is an action so
much less elegant than the sommelier's current graceful arc.
The screwcap has the advantage of being resealable, but cannot offer a
perfect seal in the first place if temperatures rise. And the plastic cork
substitute surely combines the worst of all worlds, except that it should be
much easier to keep free of TCA.
The cork industry has been slowly wielding a new broom to push TCA out of
antiquated warehouses. Most producers offer hydrogen peroxide treatments in
place of the old chlorine bleaching which, as monitored by David Ramey of
Chalk Hill, one of California's most scientifically rigorous winemakers, has
virtually eliminated the problem of 'corkiness' now that cork producers have
reduced the amount of hydrogen peroxide used.
However, cork producers continue to offer both chlorine bleached and
hydrogen peroxide-treated corks, and according to Affonso de Barros, many of
the cork brokers on whom the wine trade depends have been slow to accept the
new, chlorine-free model.
Amorim is also perfecting a special non-chemical heat treatment, although so
far this is available only for champagne - sorry, sparkling wine - corks.
I have long argued that the gap between the cork trade and the wine trade
was unnecessarily wide - too wide to permit vital communication between the
two. Affonso de Barros did actually spend eight 'fascinating' years of his
working life working for the other side, as a director of purchasing for the
huge Seagram organisation in Oporto and thus as a big buyer, rather than
seller, of corks.
He claims - but then he would, wouldn't he - that much of the problem lies
in wine producers' treatment of corks. They tend to be shipped around the
world in large plastic bags which should be stored within fairly narrow
ranges of temperature and humidity.
He has seen them stored under a hot tin roof in Australia, for example, and
would like to see cork cosseting included in the syllabus of all winemaking
courses. 'Many of these problems could be avoided if the wine industry was
willing to co-operate in depth with the cork industry by exchanging views
and taking advice.'
During current hostilities, this seems all too unlikely. But is the wine
trade really prepared for life without a pop?
