FT  09 DEC 93 / Growth edges upwards in France
The French economy grew by 0.2 per cent in the third quarter of this year,
confirming official forecasts of a stabilisation in activity but underlining
the fragility of recovery.
The rise in gross domestic product, announced yesterday by the Insee
statistics office, was given a guarded welcome by economic officials in
Paris.
'We have reached the bottom of the decline,' said a spokesman at the
economics ministry. 'But we do not expect any significant recovery until
next year.'
The release of the GDP figures came as the French franc rose strongly to
return to its previous narrow trading bands within the European exchange
rate mechanism. The rise in the franc, to FFr3.424 to the D-Mark was the
first time the currency had traded above its former ERM limit of FFr3.4305
since the summer's currency crisis forced a widening of trading bands within
the exchange rate system.
Currency analysts in Paris said the franc's strength was more a reflection
of D-Mark weakness and optimism about a successful conclusion to
international trade negotiations than a reappraisal of French economic
prospects. They added that the monetary authorities were likely to continue
their policy of cautious cuts in borrowing costs.
The increase in third quarter GDP, which follows a similar rise in the
second quarter and a sharp contraction in the previous two quarters, was
partly due to stronger than expected consumer spending. Household
consumption rose by 0.7 per cent on the previous quarter in spite of
increases in the CSG social security tax.
Exports also increased, rising by 0.8 per cent in the third quarter after
three consecutive quarters of decline. The housing market showed signs of
life, with sales of new houses rising by 2.5 per cent compared with the
previous quarter.
However, the bright spots were offset by evidence of continued weakness in
industrial confidence. Investment, which declined by 1.3 per cent in the
second quarter, contracted by 0.5 per cent in the July-September period.
The French government said the statistics were in line with its projections
of a contraction of GDP of 0.8 per cent this year and growth of 1.4 per cent
in 1994. But private sector economists believe these projections are
optimistic and some argue that evidence of a weakening in consumer spending
since September could result in a contraction in GDP in the current quarter.
Currencies and Money, Page 35
