FT  27 APR 93 / Patient responds to a successful prescription: The company
has changed much in the past four years
THE LEGACY that Mr Robert Bauman and Mr Henry Wendt, respectively SmithKline
Beecham's chief executive and chairman, hand over to their successors will
be very different from the one they inherited four years ago.
At that time, the two groups that merged, SmithKline Beckman of the US and
Beecham of the UK, were also-rans in the pharmaceuticals industry. Mr Bauman
explains: 'Back four years ago, we were told the merger would never work. We
were told we didn't have a drugs pipeline. We were told we couldn't fuse a
trans-Atlantic organisation and we were told our marketing wasn't up to the
job.'
Mr Bauman claims the group he intends to hand over to Mr is now a
firmly-established leader in the industry, with an increasingly convincing
pipeline of drugs, new product growth, and a firm control of costs. A sign
of the company's improving fortunes is the attitude of SB and analysts to
the expiry in May next year of the US patents of its best-selling product,
Tagamet. A few years ago, the expiry would have been a significant cause of
concern. Analysts believe its annual sales in the US are about Dollars 600m
(Pounds 389m) and could fall 50 per cent during the first 12 months.
That decline, however, should be more than offset by the growth of SB's four
new products: Paxil, an anti-depressant also known as Seroxat; Engerix B, a
hepatitis vaccine; Kytril, an anti-nausea drug; and Relafen, an
anti-arthritic. Analysts believe these products could add sales of Pounds
400m this year - an impressive achievement by SB's combined salesforces.
The group is further protected by its particularly strong position in the
rapidly-growing American managed healthcare sector where it has about 40 per
cent of its US sales. The company was forced into the managed sector because
of competition against its existing drugs, but now sees it as a strength
rather than a weakness. It expects that proportion to increase to 80 per
cent by the end of the decade.
'Bob (Bauman) is a very modest person,' says Mr Leschly. 'Who would have
anticipated at the time of the merger that 50 per cent of pharmaceuticals
growth would come from new products, and the other 50 per cent from volume
growth of existing medicines? It's a remarkable achievement that we're
generating such growth without any price increases.'
Analysts' concerns have also been allayed by the group's strengthened
pipeline of new drugs, which has been rationalised by the group's Australian
R&amp;D director, Dr George Poste. The company has focused its resources on
fewer but potentially more financially successful medicines. Analysts point
to the group's anti-herpes compounds, penciclovir and famcyclovir, which
should challenge Wellcome's best-selling product, Zovirax, as well as
enlarging the overall market.
With its stronger pipeline and impressive marketing clout, the group is
facing the expected US healthcare reforms in the US with equanimity.
Any measures to control prices will have little effect, since the company is
already cutting prices in the US. Last year they fell by more than 2 per
cent. The company also has little exposure to any changes in the tax relief
on manufacturing in Puerto Rico.
But not all has gone to plan over the past four years. Mr Bauman admits it
took longer than expected to sell Yardley-Lentheric, the cosmetics division,
which was eventually disposed for Pounds 110m. That meant debt was higher
than expected for some time.
He also remains disappointed that the price between the US and UK stocks has
not remained within the 5 per cent range he targeted.
Other disappointments include the unsuccessful European launch of Relafen,
the anti-arthritic medicine, and the slow development of Kytril, the
anti-nausea drug.
Mr Bauman says the European launch of Relafen started before the merger and
demonstrated the need for the merger to be carried out. The drug's more
recent US launch, which involved more than 110,000 visits to general
practitioners in a single month, was highly successful, he claims.
As for Kytril, he agrees the development took longer than it should. Glaxo
has recently agreed to pay royalties for marketing its competitor compound
Zofran in anti-nausea treatment, because SB discovered its use in nausea
first. Kytril, which is licensed in only about 20 countries, had worldwide
sales last year of only Dollars 55m. Zofran has been licensed in 63
countries and generated worldwide sales of Pounds 163m during the last six
months of 1992. However, Mr Bauman says the lessons have been learned and
the later stages of development accelerated.
Mr Leschly believes Mr Bauman's influence will continue to live on after he
leaves.
Given the likely difficult environment for the industry over the next few
years, Mr Leschly must prove he can further consolidate the group's
achievements.
