FT  27 AUG 93 / VW and the Lopez espionage affair: Shy investigators relish
the limelight - The Prosecutors
The raids yesterday by German police and prosecutors on Volkswagen's
headquarters and other facilities in Wolfsburg marked an extraordinary
day in the history of the German car industry. Officials in Bonn did not
hide their concern over the potential political and economic damage
which could ensue from the battle 'between two great German car
companies'.
Christopher Parkes examines the personalities and issues in what one
German judge said could be 'potentially the biggest-ever case of
industrial espionage'.
IT TOOK almost two months and a jump-start for German public prosecutors to
get down to the real work of investigating Adam Opel's suspicions of theft
and industrial espionage against Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and
several of his colleagues.
But as yesterday's raid in Lower Saxony demonstrated, things have moved on
apace since then.
Opel first laid its suspicions before the economic crimes division in the
Darmstadt prosecutors' office at the end of April. It followed up as
requested with more information and written sworn testimony from Opel
employees in nearby Russelsheim and GM staff in Detroit, documenting
allegations of systematic data collection.
In the meantime, Ms Dorothea Holland, the investigator in charge of the
case, took a holiday.
Even when she returned, Opel was frustrated by the lack of apparent
movement, although the nature of criminal investigators' work - in Germany
as elsewhere - militates against transparency. However, after a little
judicious prompting through the good offices of the Hesse state justice
ministry in late June, Ms Holland and her team had their heads down and have
had them down since.
What a German judge recently described as 'potentially the biggest-ever case
of industrial espionage' and what is persistently proclaimed a 'unique'
probe in local media reports, has clearly caught the imagination of the
office's 70-odd investigators.
Accustomed to a low profile and little media interest, they now seemingly
welcome the attention. Mr Georg Nauth, a senior prosecutor and spokesman for
the team, has become a common sight on television.
He, too, has polished up his act after an uncertain beginning. He even
appears to have bought a new tie. Although his repertoire of rigorous 'no
comments' and occasional drip-fed details remains the standard fare, he
seems to enjoy mildly teasing clamorous journalists, and is not afraid of
speaking his mind.
It was specifically in response to the clamour that he issued an explosive
press release in late July. This revealed that documents which should have
been restricted to the top management of General Motors and its German
subsidiary, Adam Opel, had been found - 'where they did not belong', Mr
Nauth noted - in boxes left in a house, apparently by colleagues of Mr Lopez
who had followed him to VW.
The VW production director was also declared to have had a direct connection
with some of the other data.
Charges from Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, that the statement was
one-sided - on the grounds that only Opel people had been asked to identify
the data - were rejected by Mr Nauth as 'incomprehensible'. Why, he
wondered, would anyone ask Opel's arch-rival to identify what seemed to be
secret Opel property?
Meanwhile, his press statement noted, the probe would continue with
particular emphasis on the interrogation of VW employees. Since then, Mr
Carl Hahn, former chairman of VW, Mr Daniel Goeudevert, a recently-ousted
board member, and Mr Klaus Liesen, head of the VW supervisory board, have
been to Darmstadt.
But the most promising recent witnesses appear to have been far more junior
employees, including computer operators who might have inserted Opel data
into the VW system.
Ms Holland has remained throughout unapproachable and silent. But Mr Nauth,
separated from the central investigation by a 'Chinese wall', continued to
spice his permitted briefings with his own commentary.
Just over a week ago, for example, when VW was launching its own private
investigation of its files and data bases, he appeared almost scornful. The
prosecutors' office was in possession of more information than was available
to independent auditors. It also had more powers. The VW team could not
question sworn witnesses, nor could it confiscate documents, he said.
The prosecutors demonstrated some of these powers in yesterday's swoop. Mr
Nauth, meanwhile, leaves for holiday today heading for a Tunisian beach with
a good book.
See Editorial Comment and Lex.
Volkswagen results, Section II
