FT  27 JUL 93 / International Bonds: Relative safety of sterling market
encourages issues
AS pressure in the exchange rate mechanism continued to unsettle other
European markets, the sterling bond market provided a focus for activity.
Two straight bonds and two equity-linked financings launched yesterday
benefited from the perception of European investors that the sterling market
is one of the safest choices available.
Anglian Water launched a Pounds 65m issue of bonds with equity warrants,
only the second sterling warrants deal this year. Anglian has a relatively
high dividend yield so it was more economical for the company to issue bonds
with warrants than to launch a convertible bond offering since convertibles
are priced according to dividend yields and warrants are priced according to
the share's volatility, according to lead manager J Henry Schroder Wagg.
About half the proceeds of the issue will be used to refinance the
acquisition of the Nordic Water group of companies in February 1993,
initially financed from surplus core funds, the other half for general
corporate purposes.
The five-year 6 1/2 per cent bonds, issued at 11.5, were bid at 111 at the
end of trading.
Coats Viyella, the UK's largest textiles group, launched a Pounds 75.6m
offering of convertible bonds due 2003, which will be used for general
corporate purposes including the repayment of short-term borrowings.
The deal was priced at the tighter end of indicated levels, with a
conversion premium of 19 per cent and a coupon of 6 1/4 per cent. However,
the deal met strong demand from continental Europe, according to lead
manager Merrill Lynch, and was bid at a  3/4 point premium to its par issue
price.
On the fixed-rate side, both Sweden and Hewlett-Packard, the US computer
company, launched five-year offerings, taking advantage of the swap
opportunities available for bonds maturing at the end of 1998, due to the
shape of the yield curve.
Sweden has been able to set progressively more aggressive funding targets
this year as worries about its weak economy and heavy funding requirements
have subsided. Yesterday's Pounds 250m five-year issue allowed the AA2/AA+
rated sovereign borrower to achieve sub-Libor funding.
The deal was launched at a spread of 36 basis points over the 7 1/4 per cent
gilt due 1998. By the end of the day, the spread was 38 basis points over
the curve, on the bid side.
Hewlett-Packard Finance launched a Pounds 100m five-year offering, priced to
yield 30 basis points over the same reference gilt. Some dealers said the
pricing was on the aggressive side, but lead manager Goldman Sachs pointed
out the borrower's strong rating (AA1 by Moody's and AA+ by Standard &amp;
Poor's) and the paper's rarity value, adding that the deal had met strong
retail demand overseas. The issue was swapped into floating rate US dollars.
Elsewhere, dealers reported renewed talk of a Dollars 150m bond for Morocco
and a smaller issue for Philippine Airlines.
The Bank of England plans to liberalise the rules governing the issuance of
sterling commercial paper and medium-term notes.
On Friday, the Bank issued a consultative document detailing proposed
revisions to existing regulations, and asked market participants for their
comments on the proposals by September 15. The proposed changes involve the
removal of the minimum maturity of seven days for commercial paper and the
maximum maturity of five years for medium-term notes.
