FT  19 MAR 93 / Japanese brokers cut forecasts
JAPAN'S top 14 brokerages yesterday sharply cut their profit projections for
the year to the end of March, reflecting the fall in share prices and
trading volume on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Daiwa Securities highlighted the
brokers' miserable forecasts by predicting pre-tax losses of Y8bn (Pounds
46.8m), the first time it will have been in the red since 1964.
However, the Big Four houses, Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko and Yamaichi, said the
rally in Tokyo prices over the past two weeks could mark a turning point for
the industry and the market, which has been falling for the past three
years.
The depth of the brokerages' problems was underlined by Yamaichi saying it
expected net losses for the year of Y48bn - in stark contrast to its
previous forecast, made at the half-year stage, that it would break even.
Last year Yamaichi reported net losses of Y52.3bn.
Losses will be particularly severe among the 10 second-tier brokers, under
pressure because of their dependence on commission income and their rapid
expansion during the late 1980s. Kankaku Securities expects net losses of
Y50.3bn, New Japan Securities Y39.5bn, and Sanyo Securities Y30.2bn.
The brokerages have been assisted by the Japanese government's campaign to
support stock prices until the close of the financial year. Each of the
houses will be required to write off appraisal losses on stock portfolios,
after having won a reprieve from the ministry of finance for the close of
the first half in September.
In another apparent attempt to bolster the Tokyo market, the ministry hinted
that the amount of public funds available for investment in stocks could be
increased next fiscal year. The ministry was echoing demands made by members
of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
Even with the government intervention, Nomura admitted its expected net
profits of Y2bn would come only after a Y18.48bn special profit on the
planned sale on March 29 of a building to its subsidiary Nomura Land and
Building. The sale will help cover an extraordinary loss of Y23bn.
Details, Page 24
