FT  18 MAY 93 / Technology: A hearing aid for ultrasound - A technique to
improve image quality
The first photographs in the albums compiled by proud new parents are often
taken before the birth. They are images of the foetus in the womb, obtained
using non-invasive ultrasonic diagnostic equipment.
Yet it usually takes the expert eye of an obstetrician to pick out the tiny
human form from these murky grey images. Medical ultrasonic images, which
are also used to diagnose abdominal, urological, vascular and heart
problems, can be made significantly clearer by a new technique developed by
Acuson, the leading US manufacturer of medical ultrasonic equipment.
The use of ultrasonic systems in medicine has grown rapidly over the past
five years with 50.3m ultrasonic examinations performed in the US last year,
up from 29.6m in 1988.
Since medical ultrasonic imaging was introduced in the mid-1970s, there have
been several incremental improvements in the performance of the systems.
Acuson claims, however, to have achieved a 'breakthrough' with the
introduction of its 'acoustic response technology'.
ART 'will open up new vistas of what we are able to investigate with
ultrasound', predicts Barry Mahony, director of ultrasound diagnostics at
the Swedish Hospital in Seattle, Washington.
'I have been able to see structures that were not visible, especially in
obese patients,' says Mahony, who has tested the Acuson technology alongside
existing state-of-the-art equipment. Using ART, the doctor was able to see
the four quadrants of the heart and the internal structure of the brain of a
foetus in the womb, detail of the layers of the bowel and even the layers of
skin on a foetus.
ART is a computer-controlled method of refining the images obtained from a
medical ultrasonic diagnosis system. It involves shaping the frequency
spectrum of the ultrasonic signal to minimise distortions as it passes
through the human body.
The principle of ultrasonic imaging is simple. High frequency sound waves
are transmitted by a transducer placed on the patient's skin. Some of the
sound waves bounce off the soft tissues of the body as 'echoes'. The echo is
picked up by a detector and transformed into electrical signals that are
used to form an image of the internal structure of the body on a computer
screen.
However, ultrasonic signals are also attenuated as they pass through body
tissues. Lower frequency signals penetrate further than high frequencies,
just as drum beats can be heard from a further distance than the sound of a
bell ringing.
Thus ultrasonic imaging systems have to compensate for the distortion of the
signal as it passes through the body. This decreases the resolution of
images making it more difficult for a doctor to see structures deep inside
the body.
'We have known for years what the body does to ultrasonic echoes and it was
an effect we thought we'd always have to live with,' says Samuel Maslak,
Acuson president and chief executive. By applying computer control to all
parts of the imaging system, including the transducer, the signal and the
detector, ART improves image quality.
'These are not just aesthetic effects we are bringing to the diagnostic
image. There is a significant increase in information content that will be
extremely helpful in making difficult diagnoses,' says John Freund, Acuson
executive vice-president.
Sales of diagnostic imaging equipment in the US totalled about Dollars 4.2bn
(Pounds 2.7bn) in the US in 1991, the latest figures available. This was,
however, less that 0.6 per cent of total healthcare spending of Dollars
738.2bn.
In an era of rising health care costs, improved diagnostic techniques will
help to save money, Acuson maintains. 'At least five times as much is spent
on treatment as on diagnosis in the US today,' says Maslak. 'Yet every
dollar spent on early, correct diagnosis saves dollars downstream.'
