FT  03 APR 93 / Employers are checking out from check-off: David Goodhart
looks at a new weapon in industrial relations
BRITISH COAL'S decision to stop deducting National Union of Mineworkers'
dues from miners' pay highlights the way the check-off arrangement is
increasingly being used as an industrial relations weapon.
During the past 25 years unions in many industries have come to rely on
check-off arrangements, under which employers collect union dues for them,
as a cheap and efficient method of collection. Individuals are also far less
likely to question their union membership if, after granting initial
permission to check-off, they are not being asked every week or month to
think about whether it is giving them value for money.
The current system is, in any case, being changed by the employment bill now
passing through the House of Lords and due to become law before parliament's
summer recess. The law will then require unions and employers to seek
employees' agreement to check-off at least every three years. Some unions
fear that could hit membership by up to 20 per cent.
But even before the proposal to change the law several employers, especially
in the public sector, had withdrawn or threatened to withdraw from check-off
arrangements.
In 1988 the Home Office withdrew the arrangements from members of the Prison
Officers Association in response to a dispute. The effect in prisons was
actually to strengthen the union and increase its membership, all of whom
now pay their dues by direct debit.
The Prison Officers Association's job was easier than it will be for general
unions because it has a good record of where all its members are.
The effect on the NUM in the 38 pits which joined yesterday's one-day strike
is, similarly, likely to be small. The union members are geographically
concentrated and the union has a well-structured branch system.
Most of the 20,000 NUM members affected by the decision are likely to go on
paying the Pounds 3 a week to their branch which will pass it on to the NUM
regions, where most of the money is supposed to go.
Other unions will find the withdrawal of check-off much more difficult. When
the RMT rail union recently threatened a strike on London Underground the
threatened withdrawal led to a peaceful settlement.
RMT is financially stretched. Many of its railway members have strong union
loyalties, but they are often dispersed over a wide area and rarely have
contact with branch officials.
For that reason some British Rail officials were yesterday speculating that
withdrawal of check-off might be part of a tougher response to a second
one-day strike on the railways.
