FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of IMF World Economy and Finance (22): The limits of
perfection - United Kingdom / Although all the key indicators are pointing
in the right direction, Emma Tucker says seasoned watchers are wondering if
the good news will last
THE UK economy is enjoying a perfect recovery; output is up, unemployment is
falling, and price increases are at their lowest levels for 30 years.
That, anyway, is the story told by official figures. But many seasoned
watchers of the UK are not entirely convinced that the good news will last.
Twelve months out of recession the cynics are sceptical that the next few
years will bring a sustained economic recovery with inflation firmly under
control.
As it emerged from the economic downturn of the early 1990s, the UK had a
head start over the rest of Europe. Official data shows the recession ended
in the middle of last year, but the incipient recovery was accelerated by
the massive monetary easing that followed September 16, 1992, when the UK
was ousted from the European exchange rate mechanism.
Interest rates were cut from 10 to 6 per cent and sterling devalued by about
13 per cent, providing a kick to most sectors of the economy, but mainly to
manufacturing industry.
Manufacturing, which was almost 2.2 per cent up on a year ago in the first
half of the year, fuelled a 0.4 per cent rise in gross domestic product in
the first quarter, followed by a 0.5 per cent increase in the second.
The depreciation of sterling, which made UK goods more competitive at home
and abroad was one factor behind the rise in manufacturing. Restocking by
wholesalers has also picked up as has capital spending by companies.
Consumer spending progressed more cautiously. It improved only modestly in
the first six months of the year apparently held back by fear of
unemployment, continued high levels of debt and a squeeze on real wages.
Jobless data took economists by surprise, falling for five consecutive
months in the first half of the year. A number of explanations were put
forward for the unusually early drop in unemployment. These included:
The more flexible labour market following the scaling down of union power
during the 1980s;
A possible over-shedding of labour towards the end of last year as companies
took a pessimistic view of the economy. They are now having to re-hire after
the substantial relaxation of monetary policy that followed the UK's exit
from the ERM.
A reduction in the jobless total due to government policies to get
unemployed workers on to training schemes.
News on inflation has also been encouraging. In June the retail prices index
 -the headline rate of inflation - dropped to 1.2 per cent, its lowest level
for 30 years. The underlying rate of inflation, the RPI excluding mortgage
interest rates, has dropped to below 3 per cent, within the government's
target range of 1-4 per cent.
Although inflation has since crept upwards, there are few pressures on
prices. The combination of a slow recovery in domestic demand, low unit
labour costs, and a recent appreciation of sterling probably means that
underlying inflation will stay within the government's target range this
year. Furthermore, manufacturers have apparently been able to absorb the
higher cost of imports following devaluation, mainly because the cost of
labour has been easing at the same time.
Recent trade figures show some improvement in the UK's trade performance. In
the first quarter the current account deficit was Pounds 4bn, little changed
on the previous quarter, but more recent data on non-EC trade (which
accounts for just under half the UK's total trade) show that in the second
quarter the non-EC visibles deficit was Pounds 2.3bn, Pounds 1.1bn lower
than in the first quarter.
The outlook for the economy, according to the consensus among economists, is
that GDP will continue to grow at roughly the same rate in the second half
of this year, but will slow next year. The official Treasury forecast, made
in March, is for growth of 1.25 per cent this year, although the Treasury
has hinted this forecast will be revised upwards in the November budget.
Certainly the consensus is slightly higher at about 1.6 per cent.
Next year, the Economist Intelligence Unit believes the economy will grow by
2.2 per cent, slightly less optimistic than the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development which puts it at 2.9 per cent. The official
forecast is for the economy to grow by 3 per cent in the first half of 1994.
Why though, given the encouraging story told by current figures, are
forecasts for growth next year relatively lacklustre? The caution among
economists reflects awareness of a number of factors that could act as a
restraint on activity. These include:
Tax increases. In the Spring budget Mr Norman Lamont, the then chancellor,
announced tax increases to raise Pounds 6.2bn in extra revenues, to come
into effect in 1994/95. Further fiscal tightening is likely to be signalled
in the autumn budget as Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, grapples with the
public sector borrowing requirement, forecast to reach Pounds 50bn in this
financial year.
Recession in Europe. Although interest rates in Germany are gradually being
reduced, economic activity in Europe is sluggish. With more than half of the
UK's overseas trade accounted for by the European Community, exporters face
a tough struggle to sell their products, even after the devaluation.
Debt overhang. Household debt is still about 100 per cent of the annual flow
of disposable income, and although the savings ratio has dropped, personal
saving is still high. Survey evidence suggests consumers are either
generally unable or unwilling to take on new debts.
Not all economists are as cautious about medium-term prospects. The
optimists argue that excess capacity, resulting from reduced output during
the recession, will allow for strong non-inflationary growth.
Much depends on the behaviour of the government. In its latest report the
EIU said it remained 'convinced that the government's medium term aim of
bringing inflation down to the bottom of the 1-4 per cent target range will
be forsaken in favour of stronger economic growth'.
Such a strategy would help bring unemployment down in the short run but as
Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, warned in a recent
interview: 'If we go for rapid expansion now, which brings back inflationary
pressures very soon, we will experience what we had in the past which was a
period of good years followed by three or four lean years.'
With the latest 'bust' behind it, the UK does not appear to be heading for
another boom. But the perfect recovery may yet be derailed by an unpopular
government struggling to keep a particularly small parliamentary majority
happy.
