FT  16 AUG 93 / Bright spots among the tourism gloom: The industry's patchy
upturn
YOU KNOW the tourist industry's recession is over when lunchtime restaurant
customers run into double figures, says Mr Martin Cummings, owner of the Inn
on the Lake, in Godalming, Surrey.
Mr Cummings said that his 20-room inn and restaurant had just started
achieving lunchtime double figures. Room occupancy was up 5.2 per cent on
last summer.
Like their colleagues in the manufacturing sector, managers of tourist
establishments report an upturn but say that it is patchy.
Some say they could not survive without North American visitors, others that
the North Americans do not seem to have arrived this year.
The English Tourist Board said that it had heard contrasting stories of
success and gloom from different hotels in the same street.
Meanwhile Mr Brian Hughes, managing director of the St Andrews Golf Hotel in
St Andrews, Fife, said the recession in the south of England had led to a
sharp fall in guests from there. Business from the US and continental Europe
had been excellent.
At the other end of the country, Mr Cummings said that another of his
properties, the Amberley Castle country hotel, in Amberley, West Sussex, has
enjoyed a 37 per cent increase in occupancy in the past three months
compared with the same period last year.
Most tourism managers agree that business is better this summer than last,
although they have different views on how much better. Mrs Jane Randall,
tourism services officer for Stoke-on-Trent, said inquiries at the local
tourism information centre were running at 1,000 a day compared with 500 to
600 last summer.
The different experiences of tourist businesses partly reflect the uneven
nature of the upturn. They also reflect the fragmented nature of the UK
tourist industry.
Most companies are small and attract different types of visitor. Some
operate in markets which are less vulnerable to recession because their
clients are so well-off. Mr Hughes in St Andrews said that American and
continental European golfers tended to be wealthier than their UK
counterparts.
'You don't have to be well-off to play golf in Britain,' he said. 'The
British golfer tends to golf cheaply.' Foreign golfers come to Scotland in
good economic times and bad. 'Two points up or down in the exchange rates
doesn't affect them,' he said.
Stoke-on-Trent, home to ceramics companies such as Wedgwood, also tries to
attract high-spending foreign visitors. Mrs Randall said there were more
high-spenders this year than last. In 1992, the year after the Gulf war,
there were many cheap flights on offer in the US and the Americans who
visited the city did not have much money to spend.
She said wealthier Americans appeared to have returned this summer, along
with an increasing number of continental Europeans and visitors from as far
away as Venezuela.
