FT  19 JUL 93 / Austrian retailers fiddle sell-by dates: New EC-compatible
regulations brought into effect
AUSTRIA, the country that a few years ago shocked the world by lacing its
wines with anti-freeze (ethylene glycol) has now taken to fiddling sell-by
dates on packaged foods, especially meats.
It emerged last week that Austrian food retailers routinely take packets of
sausages and sliced ham off their shelves when they reach their sell-by date
and simply repackage them with a new sell-by date.
The practice seems particularly widespread in Tyrol, the heart of Austria's
alpine resort region. Last September the national food testing laboratory
made some routine tests of 29 specimens of packaged meats from supermarkets
there and found that 20 were obviously older than the sell-by date
indicated.
A further test in March revealed similar results.
What happened as a result of these tests is rather murky. The food examiners
claim that they alerted Mr Michael Ausserwinkler, the health minister, of
the abuses as early as October.
Mr Ausserwinkler, something of a health and fitness fanatic himself, claims
he received the first indications of trouble only in April, but did not
inform the public immediately because he wanted to gather material for a
proper prosecution.
The legal position is also vague. The existing regulations, dating from
1973, permit repacking and redating foods, provided that they are not
rotten. The practice of publishing sell-by, consume-by recommendations is
only voluntary.
A new, tougher law, to bring Austrian practice into line with that in the
European Community has been passed but the compulsory package labelling
rules were not to come into force until the end of next year. Meanwhile,
tests carried out in other areas of the country revealed similar abuses in
Styria, Carinthia and Vienna and implicated all the main supermarket chains.
The Vienna tests of 148 samples revealed that 45 per cent of packaged meats
were either rotten, dangerous to health or bore false labelling.
Mr Ausserwinkler has reacted by bringing the new EC-compatible regulations
into effect immediately in respect of meat products. He has rejected calls
for his resignation and won a full endorsement from Chancellor Franz
Vranitzky on Friday.
Data published that day, however, indicated that the abuse extends to fish,
dairy and bakery products.
Although the Austrian media have shouted outrage about the scandal, ordinary
Austrians seem phlegmatic about it all. 'No one has been killed or become
ill,' one Vienna businessman said with a shrug.
