FT  21 APR 93 / The Queens's Awards for Export Achievement 1993: Who said
pigs don't fly? - Breeding for the table
THERE IS something irresistibly comic about the idea of flying pigs. But
when British pigs go to market abroad, they do fly - by jumbo jet.
The UK leads the world in pig breeding, and two of the three leading UK
companies have won Queen's Awards for Exports. The Pig Improvement Company
(PIC), the world's leading supplier of breeding pigs, has used jumbo jets to
send stock out to China and the US, among other destinations. The National
Pig Development Company, which hit the headlines last year with its
introduction of a Chinese line into its stock, last year sent a jumbo jet
containing more than 800 pigs to the US every six weeks.
PIC, based in Fyfield Wick, near Abingdon, Oxfordshire, last year celebrated
the 30th anniversary of its foundation by a small group of Oxford farmers.
The company was bought by Dalgety in the early 1970s, and now employs 170 in
the UK and more than 1,100 worldwide.
It won its first Queen's Award for Exports in 1975 for a pioneering project
to re-equip the Bulgarian pig industry.
Turnover this year is expected to reach Pounds 120m. The company has 25 per
cent of the UK market for breeding gilts (sows that have not yet borne a
litter), but also has a network of worldwide outlets and expects to sell
around 1m animals in 29 countries this year. World sales are claimed to be
as big as the next five competitor companies combined.
Mr Richard Clothier, chief executive of Dalgety, said that PIC had increased
its exports of breeding stock from the UK steadily year by year.
Among recent successes has been a three-year programme to improve production
in the Ukraine. This involved not only the export of 2,000 breeding stock,
but also an exchange programme which sent company staff out to the Ukraine
while Ukrainians were trained in the latest techniques in the UK.
The company also secured a Pounds 1m deal with Cuba by agreeing to accept
sugar in return for pigs.
But in addition, said Mr Clothier, PIC had seen strong growth in earnings
from its overseas subsidiary companies, which account for 80 per cent of
turnover.
PIC has wholly-owned subsidiary companies in the US, Germany, Mexico, Spain,
Portugal, France and Holland as well as 14 franchise companies. The US
subsidiary is the single largest pig breeding company in the world.
Mr Clothier believes the world market for breeding stock has the potential
to double and possibly treble over the next 10 years. The US has been slow
to develop improved pig breeding, but demand now far exceeds the industry's
capacity to supply. China, another huge potential market, has not yet
started to improve its pig farming.
He believes the UK has become the world leader because it made an early
start in the application of the principles of genetics in pig breeding. UK
breeders had 'devised a commercial approach which worked much more
innovatively than government breeding schemes,' he suggested. Competition
was pushing the technology ahead.
One of PIC's competitors is the National Pig Development Company (NPD), of
Driffield, East Yorkshire. NPD was founded in 1969 by Mr John Curtis, who
was anxious for his two sons to be able to earn a living from farming.
The company now employs 250 people and has an annual turnover of about
Pounds 20m, of which nearly half is accounted for by exports. However, the
company has launched a franchise agreement every year for the past six
years, and now has deals in the US, Canada, South Africa, the Philippines,
Holland, Italy, Spain and South Korea.
The search for a better pig is a high tech business. NPD claims to have the
largest computer record for breeding pigs in the world as statistics are
collected not only from the 24 farms it owns, but also from the franchise
operations. Mr Stephen Curtis, managing director for production, said that
computers had increased the accuracy of breeding selection by 15 per cent.
Last year the company was the first to produce a commercial hybrid from the
Chinese Meishan (pictured), which has long been admired for its
astonishingly high reproduction rate.
The sow has up to 20 teats, compared with 12 to 14 in a British breed, and
regularly delivers 16 piglets.
But when fully grown the Chinese pig is all fat and bone with little lean
meat - hence the Chinese passion for sucking pig. Mr Stephen Curtis believes
that NPD's 20-year drive to produce pigs with a high lean meat content are
behind its success in harnessing Meishan blood.
The Manor Meishan hybrid was launched on to the UK market in some style at
the Cafe Royal in London last May. Its heirs should be airborne within a
couple of years.
