FT  22 JUN 93 / Survey of Power for Europe (7): Smoke gets in their eyes -
Bronwen Maddox hacks her way through the spreading jungle of green
regulations
ELECTRICITY generation, one of the main causes of air pollution, has been
one of the central targets of environmental regulation for decades. However
the justification for 'green' measures is increasingly questioned both by
industrialists and politicians as the costs of further improvement keep
rising.
The debate about how much to clean up the energy sector has been fiercer
than many other environmental battles because electricity generation
produces some of the most troublesome kinds of air pollution.
Burning fossil fuels - coal, gas and oil - yields sulphur dioxide and oxides
of nitrogen, considered to be root causes of acid rain and urban smog and a
factor in some respiratory diseases. In 1990, the EC's electricity
production was responsible for 63 per cent of SO2 emissions and 22 per cent
of nitrogen oxide emissions, according to the 1992 EC report on the state of
the environment. Fossil fuels also produce carbon dioxide, which has been
recognised in the past decade as a separate, worrying problem. Although not
a pollutant in the conventional sense - it is present in the atmosphere -
the rising concentrations are thought to bring the risk of global warming.
EC figures say that in 1990 electricity production was responsible for 31
per cent of CO2 emissions to the air.
There are considerable national and regional variations in these figures. In
France, for example, electricity generation is responsible for less than a
third of sulphur dioxide emissions as nuclear power - which emits none of
these gases - is predominant. But nuclear power produces radioactive waste,
and its long term storage brings further costs, environmental problems and
political pressures.
Attempts to tackle air pollution have resulted in layers of regulation. The
World Health Organisation has guidelines on tolerable levels of sulphur
dioxide and nitrogen oxides, many of which the EC has adopted within its
environmental directives.
The United Nations' Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) - most of the
countries in East and West Europe plus the US and Canada - has separate
guidelines and protocols, and national governments have their own
legislation.
Many of the earliest regulations were directed at sulphur because of rising
public concern in northern Europe about dying forests. The 1985 ECE protocol
on Transboundary Pollution called for a 30 per cent reductio on 1980
emission levels by 1993. As a result, German power companies have fitted
flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) equipment to almost all power stations, and
are embarking on cleaning up the East German stations.
Britain has fitted FGD equipment, which costs some Pounds 200m per 1000MW of
power generation, to only two stations so far, although the Department of
the Environment argues that this will put the UK on course to meet
commitments made at the electricity privatisation three years ago. However,
the protocol is currently being tightened; following the UK's recent
decision to extend the life of some coal pits, it is unclear whether its
sulphur emissions will fall quickly enough to meet new standards.
The most ambitious of the air pollution treaties affecting the electricity
generating sector is last year's Rio Earth Summit convention to curb
international emissions of carbon dioxide. But energy taxes - the most
commonly proposed tool for curbing demand for energy and reaching the Rio
targets - are running into political difficulty on many fronts. US President
Bill Clinton has been forced by Congress to withdraw his first proposals for
such a tax. The recent session of the European Commission's economic and
finance committee failed to reach consensus on its plans for a tax weighted
towards those fuels with the highest carbon content.
Environmentalists argue that although the regulatory measures of the past
decade are welcome, they do not go far enough. Many pressure groups,
including the Europe-wide Friends of the Earth, argue for an expansion of
the use of renewable energy - wave, wind and solar power - which at the
moment makes up only a few per cent of EC energy use.
However, the cost of most renewables is considerably higher than electricity
produced using fossil fuels or even nuclear energy. A report for the UK
government in November concluded that electricity from renewables cost two
to three times as much as that from existing sources. It put the cost of
electricity from coal, gas and nuclear at between 2.2p and 3.5p per kwh,
although it these figures do not reflect all start-up and environmental
costs.
The report argued that expansion of renewable energy sources was possible
but that it would take considerable government help and subsidies. On that
basis, it said that renewables could 'plausibly' contribute between 5 per
cent and 20 per cent of 1991 levels of electricity supply by the year 2025,
saving around 6 per cent of current emissions of carbon dioxide.
Industrialists, however, are increasingly concerned about the cost of
environmental regulation and the effects on companies' international
competitiveness. Mr John Cox, of the UK's Chemical Industries Association,
says: 'we are particularly concened about the cost of electricity in the UK,
which can be greater than that for Belgian or Italian companies. We support
environmental protection if it is clearly going to improve the environment
but anything which increases the cost of electricity puts UK companies at a
greater disadvantage.' The proposed EC energy tax would be 'an ineffective
gesture unless you get the measure adopted at the same time in the Third
world'.
As the European economies struggle to climb out of recession, they may pay
closer attention to the costs of environmental regulation than in the past.
