FT  13 AUG 93 / Spain's recession easing, say banks
THE BANK of Spain and one of the country's biggest commercial banks said
yesterday they believed Spain's recession was easing. They predict that the
decline in gross domestic product will slow slightly in the second half of
the year, indicating the economic downturn may have bottomed out.
The Spanish central bank says in its latest economic bulletin it expects GDP
to fall by 1 per cent in the second half, compared with the official 1.1 per
cent fall in the first half.
Banco Central Hispano (BCH) said the slide in GDP had stabilised at minus
1.1 per cent since March, which it took as a sign that 'the fall in economic
activity may have touched bottom.'
BCH said the brake in recession was because of strong growth in exports
following three peseta devaluations since last autumn, and a sharp fall in
imports as internal demand has withered.
BCH said it expected a further slowdown of the fall in output. However, both
BCH and the Bank of Spain insisted that any stop to job losses would also
depend heavily on the success of current efforts by the government to agree
a three-year incomes policy, with the unions agreeing to freeze wages next
year and employers promising to freeze dividend payments at their present
levels.
The unions argue strongly against a wage freeze, and they say a dividends
freeze is pointless while so many companies are making losses.
Spain's economic planners blame high wage growth for the country's inability
to hold inflation down and the central bank said it was 'worried' about the
growth of prices and wages in the first half of the year. It said further
interest rate cuts would depend on the success of wages talks and the fiscal
discipline shown in the 1994 budget.
The Bank recently cut its benchmark lending rate to 10.5 per cent and is
thought to be reluctant to make another cut at its regular auction of
repurchase agreements today as July inflation figures due out late in the
morning are expected to be poor.
