FT  24 APR 93 / The rebels who were silenced by the syringe: Under Soviet
rule, psychiatry was transformed into an instrument of repression. The rules
are changing, but Lori Cydilo finds that hospitals remain grim, backward and
deeply feared
ARKADY Stepanchuk will never forget the cold November morning in 1961 when
he was arrested by the KGB. He was just 16. His crime? Going to the French
embassy to seek information about relatives who had fled to France during
the second world war.
KGB agents then searched the one-room apartment where he lived with his
parents and discovered a diary in which he had written: 'Why do we need the
cult of Lenin if we have Jesus Christ?' He was charged with 'anti-Soviet
agitation and propaganda' and confined to a ward reserved for dangerous
patients in a Moscow psychiatric hospital.
There, he was diagnosed as schizophrenic and placed on the psychiatric
register. This - one of many methods used by the state to keep track of its
citizens' mental health - recorded all patients who received psychiatric
treatment and often was used to deny people jobs, flats, a university
education and the right to travel. 'It stripped me of practically all my
rights at the age of 16,' Stepanchuk says. 'I became a prisoner of this
diagnosis.'
In 1966, he requested another evaluation, thinking he would be found healthy
and could resume a normal life. Instead - 'just to be on the safe side,' as
Stepanchuk recalls, bitterly - the commission ruled he was psychopathic.
'They said: 'Who can guarantee that you won't go to the embassy again'?'
Frustrated and angry, he had no way of knowing that he would spend the next
27 years in and out of psychiatric hospitals.
Stepanchuk was released for the last time in 1988. A frail, withered man who
looks older than his years, he says no one, including the psychiatrists who
treated him, ever questioned his sanity.
'It was all deliberate,' he says. 'They never believed that I was mentally
ill. They told me that I was being held to keep me from resuming my
activities.'
Under the communists, hundreds, perhaps thousands, of political dissidents
were forced to have 'treatment' in psychiatric hospitals as a way to silence
them. They were not the only ones. Many whose cases were never publicised
suffered the same fate.
Yuri Nuller, a psychiatrist at the Bekhtereva Psychoneurological Institute
in St Petersburg, explains: 'If someone was in someone else's way, if he
argued with his boss, for example, his boss would say, 'Well, he is
obviously schizophrenic' and order him to undergo a psychiatric evaluation.'
This, invariably, proved he was mentally ill and in need of compulsory
treatment.
In spite of such abuses, leading reformers in Russia and Ukraine insist that
the system is to blame, not individual psychiatrists. Under Soviet rule,
psychiatry underwent a Kafka-esque metamorphosis in which it was transformed
from a branch of medicine into a covert method of social control.
'It was a brutal, primitive system,' says Stepanchuk, who was injected
forcibly with various drugs including sulfazine, a powerful agent used
widely on dissidents that causes fever, temporary paralysis and excruciating
pain. 'They didn't beat you. They used syringes instead.'
Semyon Gluzman is an internationally-renowned psychiatrist and dissident who
spent seven years in labour camps and three in exile for protesting at the
misuses of his profession. Now living again in his native Kiev, he says: 'It
is okay to sit here with you now and talk about these things but, back then,
I went to prison and ruined my life. It was a cruel system. A person who
wanted to work honestly had to pay for it by going to prison.'
Reformers say the psychiatrists, seemingly the masters of the game, were all
too aware that the rules could change, and the tables turn, at any moment.
Stepanchuk bears his tormentors no ill-will because, as he puts it: 'If they
hadn't done what they did to me, the same would have been done to them.'
Laws intended to protect patients against these kinds of abuses have been
passed in Russia already and similar legislation is being debated in
Ukraine. The Russian law, based on US statutes, is the first ever to grant
legal rights to the mentally ill and gives them the right to 'due process'
of law before a decision is made on whether they should be sent to a
psychiatric hospital for compulsory treatment.
It also places responsibility for this commitment with the courts, where
reformers say it belongs, rather than leaving the decision solely to
psychiatrists. It limits a patient's hospital stay to eight days while the
case is being decided, and allows him legal recourse if he disagrees with
the court's decision. Previously, it was not possible to appeal against a
psychiatrist's ruling. .
The old system mirrored 19th century America when the criterion there for
involuntary commitment was a vague 'need for treatment' as decided by one or
two doctors, and there was no limit to the time a patient might spend in a
psychiatric hospital. Statistics show that, until recently, patients
committed involuntary to psychiatric hospitals across the former Soviet
Union stayed for long periods. According to Aleksandr Karpov, the former
chief psychiatrist of the Soviet Union, the average stay in 1973 ranged from
56 days in Sverdlosk Oblast to 248 days in the Udmurt Autonomous Republic in
east-central European Russia.
Although the new law is an important step toward broadening the civil rights
of the mentally ill, changing the bleak reality of their daily lives will
require more than just legislation. Many psychiatric hospitals, particularly
those built before the revolution, come straight from the pages of Gothic
novels. Dark and cavernous, with double steel doors and thick iron bars on
the windows, they look like prisons.
In the geriatric ward of Moscow's Psychiatric Hospital No. 14, the stale air
and the smell of urine create a stench that is overpowering. Several of the
patients, mostly men in their 60s, look emaciated and seem to drift in and
out of consciousness.
A number lie amid their own excrement, their eyes vacant. One frail, wasted
man with skin the colour of plaster moans, through hollow cheeks: 'Mama,
mama.'
When asked how long they have been there, many say they do not know; the
days are so similar that they have blurred together. Many have forgotten
what it is like to breathe fresh air, or to take a walk and feel the warmth
of the sun on their skin, for they are not allowed to go outside.
I saw a psychiatrist intercept a patient and his mother about to slip
outside, stopping them just as they were about to open the door. 'Where do
you think you are going?' she bellowed. 'You're not going anywhere. You're
not allowed to take a walk.' The man looked at the floor, removed his jacket
silently and walked slowly back to the room he shares with 16 other men.
Asked why he was not permitted to take a walk, the psychiatrist replied: 'He
might run away.'
In another ward, an orderly told a patient to sit down. When he did not
comply immediately, the orderly - a sturdy, buxom woman - yelled at him and
shoved him into a chair.
In the insulin therapy ward of Moscow's Clinical Psychiatric Hospital No. 4,
which was built in 1905, there are 11 patients, all young men in their early
20s. Their hands and feet are tied to their narrow metal beds with strips of
cloth. Insulin therapy is a brutal, painful treatment method which has gone
the way of the lobotomy in western countries but continues to be seen in
Russia as a miracle cure for schizophrenia.
Some of the men cry out in pain as the insulin enters their systems.
Psychiatrist Nikolai Izyumov explains, matter-of-factly, that since none of
the men is diabetic, the insulin causes them to go into shock before lapsing
into a coma. The men also become hypoglycemic - that is, having an
abnormally low level of glucose in the blood - because of the treatment.
As he is speaking, a stone-faced nurse and orderly come into the room and
untie a patient named Slava. Wordlessly, they lift him up, prop him up
against the headboard and hand him a bowl of gruel and a small slice of
bread. Their movements are automatic; they seem to have lifted hundreds like
this. Task completed, they leave the room as silently as they entered.
Slava dips the bread into the thin, white gruel. Angry, red welts cover his
tremulous wrist. Asked about them, Oleg Papsuyev, the hospital's director,
replies: 'They simply tied him up incorrectly. Unfortunately, we do not have
any other method to prevent the condition of agitation which may occur
during this treatment. The agitation may be so extreme, so violent, that it
would be impossible to hold patients down, simply impossible. They thrash
about and try to run away, but their thinking at this moment isn't
completely clear. They do not know what they are doing. Therefore, we tie
them down.'
Such ignorance of modern techniques for treating mental illness is a
formidable obstacle to change. Gluzman says claims of recovery are a 'fraud'
because mental health care professionals have not been trained properly.
Electro-shock therapy - known as electro-convulsive therapy (ECT) - is
administered without anaesthetic, which is unsafe and inhumane. And while
sulfazine has been banned in Ukraine, it is still legal and used widely in
Russia. A survey of 568 psychiatrists in Ukraine revealed that 90 per cent
believe it possible to treat psychosis with hypnosis, while 16 per cent
think lobotomy is acceptable.
In spite of the efforts of reformers, many of those who run psychiatric
hospitals now were responsible, either directly or indirectly, for abuses
under the communist regime. Few show signs of remorse or a willingness to
adapt to new circumstances. 'They have neither honour nor conscience,' says
Stepanchuk. There is, too, a resistance to changes, particularly those which
threaten to impose limits on their autonomy.
Aleksandr Kucherov, director of Hospital No. 14, says: 'Our psychiatry has
been overly humanised and we are now reaping the fruits of this. There are a
lot people who need treatment, but a psychiatrist is limited now. In the old
days, you could have forced such a person to get treatment and this would
have served the patient, the family and society, but now this has changed.'
Although the new laws protect people from arbitrary incarceration, anyone
still can be subjected to a psychiatric examination. 'Informing still takes
place today,' says Mikhail Raboklyach, vice-president of the Association of
Ukrainian Psychiatrists. 'On certain occasions, one must report that a
person may be mentally ill. If someone at work, let us say, notices some
deviations in your behaviour, he is supposed to report it to his superior,
who is required to inform a psychiatrist, in writing, who is then supposed
to come and examine you.'
On February 7 1992, President Boris Yeltsin declared that Russia had closed
a dark chapter in its history by freeing the 'last political prisoners' from
the notorious Perm-35 camp in the Urals. But no one knows just how many
healthy people, or those committed wrongfully, remain behind the walls of
psychiatric hospitals. Yuri Savenko, president of the Independent Russian
Psychiatric Association, says: 'Only the former KGB knows the exact number.
This is a very serious problem which has not been resolved to this day.'
Unearthing all the abuses of the past, and making reparation, will be an
arduous task. But allaying the fear and mistrust of psychiatric hospitals
which remains rooted deeply in the national psyche could prove to be the
most daunting challenge. Andrei, a fifth-year law student who is a voluntary
patient in a Moscow psychiatric hospital, admitted that going there was a
decision with which he wrestled for more than a year. 'Everyone is afraid of
ending up in a psychiatric hospital,' he said, adding: 'Some people say it
is better to die than to become mentally ill.'
