FT  01 APR 93 / British Tourist Authority gets temporary chairman
A TEMPORARY chairman is to take charge of the British Tourist Authority
today because the government has not found a permanent head nearly two weeks
after it was given a shortlist of four suitable candidates.
Mr John Lewis, a solicitor and director of several leisure companies, will
serve as interim chairman of the authority for up to two months while Mr
Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary, attempts to find a replacement
for Mr William Davis, whose tenure ended yesterday.
Mr John Jarvis, chairman of the Jarvis hotel group, will replace Mr Davis as
the chair-man of the English Tourist Board on a temporary basis.
The government had hoped to have a new joint chairman of the two bodies in
place by today but it is understood Mr Brooke has not yet interviewed the
candidates put forward by headhunters Tyzack Accord. The two-day-a-week job
carries a salary of Pounds 35,000. Mr Jarvis and Mr Lewis will each spend
one day a week running the two organisations.
Mr Brooke said: 'It is vital that we get the right person with the right
skills and experience. Until then, the appointment of Mr Lewis and Mr Jarvis
will ensure that the two organisations continue to work effectively.'
Mr Lewis and Mr Jarvis are members of the respective boards of the
organisations they will head.
The BTA will also need a new chief executive to replace Mr Michael
Medlicott, who is leaving next Thursday to become European vice-president of
Delta Air Lines, the US carrier. Tyzack, which had also been asked to look
for a chief executive, is thought to have given the government a short list
last week. Candidates are believed to have been interviewed on Monday by Mr
Davis and other BTA board members.
Travel executives have expressed concern that the delay in appointing
replacements for Mr Davis and Mr Medlicott will weaken the UK tourist
industry's promotional efforts in the run-up to the summer season. They have
criticised the government for not ensuring the new appointments were
announced earlier.
