FT  11 NOV 93 / Technology: Tapping into convenience - High-street habits
are changing with the advent of computerised shopping
It is summer a few years' hence and you want to lay on an outdoor grill. You
call up the American barbecue page on your computer screen and the system
linking your home with the local supermarket asks whether the meal will be
for two, for several people or for a party.
You give your answer. It asks what sort of drinks, appetisers, main courses,
side dishes and desserts you want, even whether you want to use a food
processor. All screen options are illustrated, some with videos. You tap in
your preferences and recipes with ingredients and brand names and prices can
be called up and printed out.
You order the shopping electronically with a simple barcode scanning device
or direct from the screen. The goods are delivered through a secure entry
point, or 'hole-in-the-wall' in your home, or to a collection point at, for
example a nearby petrol station.
It all sounds blissfully effortless, if somewhat soulless. However, a US
study has shown that 64 per cent of people dislike going to the supermarket
for their basic shopping, as many as hate going to the dentist. The figure
is quoted by Andersen Consulting which has opened a Dollars 5m (Pounds 3.3m)
retail centre in the UK to demonstrate how technology can be applied to meet
the pace of change in the industry.
Named Smart Store Europe and located in Windsor, west of London, it shows
some of the gadgetry and computer systems which are becoming available to
the retail, distribution and manufacturing sectors. As well as shopping by
screen, it gives an idea of what the automated, computerised store of the
future will look like, from the check-out counter to the manager's office.
John Hollis, a partner in Andersen Consulting's UK practice and director of
the Smart Store, believes the retail sector is about to experience a
tremendous shake-up. 'I see us going through such huge, turbulent changes in
this industry in the next few years that just talking about it is not
enough. There are real fundamental issues that the boards of companies will
have to work through.'
Evidence of change is abundant. In Germany, the Karstadt and Hertie store
groups are discussing a merger to combat the effect of the shift in consumer
tastes to niche and discount retailers.
Competitors are crowding in to the UK. Costco, the US warehouse club
operator, plans a big, cut-price outlet in the east of England. Discount
retailers such as Aldi of Germany and Netto of Denmark have invaded the food
market. US-style factory outlet malls are also coming to the UK. Aware that
their high profit margins cannot last, UK supermarkets have now embarked on
a price-cutting wave.
Such developments will make a big difference to the way people do their
shopping. So will the changes in the telecommunications and entertainment
industries, mainly led from the US; these have implications for shopping by
television (already a reality in the US), video links to the home and
multimedia services combining sound, pictures and computers.
If people can have their basic purchases delivered, will they want to go
shopping at all? Some will not. But most will want to see some of the goods
they buy. Shops and stores are also places of social activity, the
difference being between 'replenishment' and 'enjoyment' shopping. In
future, a person could enjoy a drink or a snack while browsing through lists
of items on a screen and ordering by scanner. Shopping trolleys will have
video information about goods on offer and where they are to be found, as
well as games to keep children amused.
Advice on anything from building a conservatory to clothing will be
available from in-store computers. Managers' offices will also become more
electronic. The one in Andersen's Smart Store has a terminal with
information about sales trends; this is duplicated on a pad computer which
managers can carry around the store.
'Managers don't have to be in the office,' says Tamar Herman, a consumer
products manager with Andersen. 'The idea is for them to get close to the
customer and manage the workforce better.' The computer would tell managers
when they needed to order more of a certain product and help work out labour
schedules.
With better data, managers would be able to make more marketing and strategy
decisions, says Herman. 'A common problem is that information gathered at
the store goes up to the central office and comes back down in a stack of
paper two weeks later.'
The first company to visit the Smart Store in Windsor - there are others in
Chicago and Sydney - was Marks and Spencer, the UK clothing and food chain.
The visitors' list also includes Nestle, the Swiss food producer and
Hachette, the French publishing group.
Some companies have longgrasped the value of keeping ahead in technology.
ICA Handlarnas, the Swedish co-operative food retailing group, has spent
SKr500m (Pounds 42m) on streamlining its distribution system by using
computers to link its 2,800 member stores; it has shut half its distribution
sites. Stores are also being equipped with new scanning equipment, so that
up-to-date sales information can be used to help purchasing and analysis.
Hollis sees scope in the UK for store groups to save money by pooling their
distribution efforts. If direct ordering from the home really does take off,
goods could be delivered from the warehouse without ever being in a
supermarket. This could cut prices by some 5 per cent, depending on how much
of the savings are kept by suppliers.
At a time when flat population trends mean retailers can only grow in many
countries by eroding others' market share or expanding abroad, the way they
use technology will have a powerful influence on their success in improving
service for shoppers while keeping prices down.
This is what consumers are coming to expect. Many have become used to the
convenience of automated banking and buying insurance by telephone, notes
Hollis. 'People have changed some of their habits to quite devastating
effect on the high street.'
