FT  05 JUN 93 / Books: Life and times of an unusual Tory - Malcolm
Rutherford on Alan Clark's diaries
DIARIES by Alan Clark Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Pounds 20, 421 pages
Thursday 31 May, 1990
I am getting a marvellous press.
Last week I had lunch, privately, at the FT, and sparkled. A highly
complimentary piece followed on the Saturday - 'one of the most attractive
(Hullo]) as well as one of the cleverest of Mrs Thatcher's Ministers'.
I remember it well. Most of my colleagues had never met a Tory like Alan
Clark before: iconoclastic, but seemingly on the traditional right wing of
the party. The subsequent decision to make him 'Man in the News' in the
Saturday paper was taken at short notice. A call was put in to the Ministry
of Defence who said he was somewhere in Scotland but promised to try to find
him. Clark rang in from an expensive address (I think it was Gleneagles) and
asked if we could call him back because, we would understand, he was quite a
poor man.
Other profiles followed in other papers, including the fashionable accolade
of an interview in Marxism Today. For Clark was then at the height of his
political powers: as minister for defence (procurement), he was assembling a
fundamental defence review for Mrs Thatcher ('never let her hear that term',
said even sympathetic officials). He would have liked to have been defence
secretary himself, but this was the next best thing.
Nothing much came of the review. It was stymied by the defence ministry and
the real secretary of state, Tom King. Shortly afterwards Mrs Thatcher, whom
Clark adored, ceased to be prime minister, and that in effect was the end of
his political career.
The really interesting questions are why he went into politics at all and
why, when he did, he shunted round at such a relatively low level. Clark had
most of the attributes admired by Jane Austen: wealth, intelligence, looks.
Yet, despite sometimes appearing arrogant, he seems ultimately to have
lacked self-confidence.
These Diaries provide only part of an answer. For a lot of the time, he
seems much like any other politician: anxious for promotion, interested in
who's in, who's out, and retailing second-hand gossip. The entry for 5 June,
1983 reads: 'A new Conservative Government. Will I be in it?' On another day
he meets a fairly junior MP, whom he does not like, on a train and picks up
the gossip from him. There is very little here that gives the inside story
of affairs of state.
Again, to anyone who knows Clark, however remotely, there is not much new
about the man. The sexual indiscretions perhaps, for which he makes no
apologies, but these are merely distasteful: for example, the reference to
'the golden summer of 1955 when I was running Anne, Marye and Liz, all of
them living within half a mile of each other'. There is always a vulgar side
to Clark to set off the civilised.
It is the same with money. Half the time he boasts about being rich. 'How
awful to be worried about one's pension]' he says about Patrick Jenkin, who
was sacked from the cabinet. The other half he complains about being poor:
too poor to have servants and scarcely up to the cost of entertaining -
'it's so expensive, with good claret at Pounds 100 - minimum - per bottle'.
And yet there is an endearing side to him. He loves animals and only the
forceful intervention of Mrs Thatcher prevented him from pushing a bill
obliging traders to label furs and skins from beasts that had been caught in
leg-hold traps. He weeps when he kills a heron to protect the fish but - the
contradiction again - confesses that he would have had no remorse about
killing a human intruder.
Some of his judgments are conventional. He admired David Owen as well as Mrs
Thatcher. He shared the distaste of the grey set for letting Michael
Heseltine become party leader. On the other hand, he could not stand his
near namesake, 'that podgy life-insurance-risk', Kenneth Clarke and
preferred the old rough Labour Party style to the new men in suits.
Like most politicians, he believed he had a better feel for the 'politics'
of a subject than anyone else. He also admits to devotion to the 'beloved,
magical electric aura' of the Chamber of the House of Commons. At one stage,
he considered leaving junior office and arguing for Toryism a l'outrance
(his French is good, as he often says), but (convention returns) 'bang would
go the K'. With more self-confidence, he might have done it. Enoch Powell
did.
He contemplates his work to come: 'Tories and the Nation State 1922-74'. At
a meeting in London he was talking about this when my colleague Samuel
Brittan asked, 'What is the nation state?'
'If you don't know what The Nation State is,' said Clark, 'you're decadent.'
Clark is quite decadent himself, but he should write the book.
