FT  23 MAR 93 / Train route to the Channel must cross credibility gap: The
difficulties facing the latest plan for a tunnel link
MOST people who have followed the saga of the Channel tunnel rail link have
lost count of the versions of the project that have appeared over the past
five years. So the big question arising out of the Pounds 2.5bn scheme
announced yesterday is: can this be the real thing?
When international express train services start running through the tunnel
next year passengers will experience very different travelling conditions on
either side of the Channel.
In France the express trains will run on purpose-built high-speed lines at
up to 200mph. On the British side they will have to mingle with commuter
trains on existing tracks and could be lucky to average 60mph.
British Rail has been trying since 1988 to even things up by building a
high-speed line on the British side of the tunnel. Two obstacles have stood
in its way. First, the objections of property owners in this
densely-populated corner of England, and second, the sheer cost of embarking
on what would rank as one of the biggest UK construction projects of the
century.
BR's opening attempt to get the line built came in July 1988, when it
produced a choice of four routes from the coast to the capital. This
provoked uproar in the Tory heartland of Kent, and the cost of the project
soared as BR accepted the inevitability of putting more and more of the line
in tunnel.
The following year BR narrowed the options down to a proposal for a southern
approach to the capital with terminals at Waterloo and King's Cross. But the
government baulked at the Pounds 3.1bn cost and asked for private-sector
involvement to bring the project under control. The result was the creation
of Eurorail, a consortium consisting of BR, Trafalgar House and BICC.
By spring 1990 Eurorail had produced a plan to build a line similar to BR's
but for Pounds 500m less. Even with that saving, however, the project failed
to produce a commercial return. So the consortium asked the government to
give it Pounds 900m in cash grants and Pounds 1.1bn in interest-free loans
to get the scheme under way. The government angrily refused and threw the
project back to BR.
Another year passed as BR went through the motions of reassessing all the
route options. To no one's great surprise, it eventually concluded that the
route it had always favoured was the best, and asked the government for
Pounds 3.5bn to build it. This time the government not only refused the
money but threw out the route. It told BR to go away and draw up plans for
an eastern approach to the capital that could be funded entirely by the
private sector.
The fruits of that exercise came yesterday, when Union Railways, the BR
subsidiary in charge of the project, produced its Pounds 2.5bn plan. But
even before the ink had dried on its proposals the government had embarked
on another U-turn, conceding that a private-sector scheme would need a
'substantial' injection of public-sector cash.
So will the government come up with the money? One obstacle is section 42 of
the Channel Tunnel Act, which forbids the British and French governments
from subsidising Channel tunnel rail services, on the grounds that this
would provide unfair competition for the ferries and airlines.
The government can get around this by paying grants in recognition of some
of the domestic benefits the line will bring - first, through the
introduction of new, fast Kent commuter services, and second, through the
regenerative effects it will have on the east Thames corridor.
Union Railways calculates the potential commuter benefits at Pounds 1.1bn,
while the environment department calculates the potential regeneration
benefits at Pounds 500m.
That should be enough to tip the project into profit. The only questions
remaining are where the money is to come from and when it is going to be
paid.
Unfortunately these are very big questions, and Pounds 1.6bn is a very big
sum - particularly in the context of present constraints on public spending.
Given the Treasury's unwillingness to put its hand in its pocket each
previous time the Channel tunnel rail link has come up, there is unlikely to
be widespread confidence that things will be very different this time.
Most will believe the project is going ahead when they see the first sod
cut.
