FT  26 APR 93 / The City Bombing: Lord Mayor in the spotlight
'EXCUSE ME for a minute,' said Sir Francis McWilliams, the Lord Mayor of
London, breaking off our interview yesterday. 'The Japanese Ambassador is on
the phone.'
It was just one among several dozen calls that he had received, at his
office in Ironmonger Lane in the City, which became the centre of operations
to help prepare for business again today.
'The Japanese banks are a very important market for us,' said Mr Michael
Cassidy, chairman of the City corporation's policy committee, during the
pause. 'We do need to reassure them that we are doing everything we can.'
Mr John Major, the prime minister, had called to offer condolences and
promise a meeting early next week. Sir Francis had spoken to the US
ambassador and put in a call to the Saudi ambassador.
By mid-afternoon he had also talked to 'the major ratepayers' and others
affected by the bombing or involved in attempting to restore normality,
including the heads of the Stock Exchange, Lloyd's, Mitsubishi, Barclays,
NatWest, British Rail, London Transport and British Telecom.
'I was bloody angry,' said Sir Francis. 'It's so pointless. It's not going
to change anything or improve things in Belfast. But everybody is coping
remarkably well.'
The ancient wood-panelled rooms, ornament-covered mahogany desks and
servants in maroon tailcoats carrying bringing tea in silver pots stood in
stark contrast to the urgency of the day.
A constant stream of officials from the Corporation of the City of London
passed through the office for strategic meetings to help co-ordinate
reaction to the blast.
The Commissioner of the City of London police and other uniformed senior
officers rushed through at lunchtime. A few minutes later came the City
engineer, with helmet and luminous hazard-jacket, nervously pulling out a
comb to smarten his hair before ascending to the Mayor's office on the first
floor.
A few hundred yards away, the Corporation of London's headquarters at
Guildhall had been besieged since 5am with keyholders wanting passes to
allow them and their contractors into the cordoned-off area so that they
could assess the damage to their buildings.
The central area of damage remained sealed off even to contractors as police
forensic experts examined the site of the blast, and engineers inspected
buildings for safety.
The City was not slow to capitalise on yesterday's recovery action. It said
its swift response showed the effectiveness of the Corporation government,
while the action by St Bartholomew's hospital in dealing with casualties
added fresh weight to the case against closure.
