FT  13 AUG 93 / China closes down 1,000 local development zones
THE Chinese government, stepping up its drive to stop wasteful spending and
curb the country's overheated growth rate, yesterday announced the closure
of most economic development zones established by local governments to
attract investment.
Xinhua, the official news agency, said 1,000 zones in southern coastal areas
had been shut down, and the remaining 200 were being inspected with a view
to further closures.
The measure will have no effect on special economic zones authorised by the
central government to promote economic reform and growth, such as Shenzhen,
just across the border from Hong Kong.
The zones being closed were set up by local officials who were attracted by
real estate profits and offered tax breaks and other unauthorised incentives
to match the attractions of authorised investment areas.
Mr Hu Ping, director of the Special Economic Zone Office, said the State
Council, China's cabinet, had approved only 30 economic and technological
development zones in the coastal areas.
He said only 10 per cent of the unauthorised zones had been beneficial for
the local economy. One-fifth were waiting for money to start planned
projects. They tied up scarce farmland, slowing agricultural production, he
added.
'The objective is to stop land which has little prospect of development in
the near future from being cordoned off when it could be used for crop
growing,' Mr Hu said.
Profligate spending and corruption among local officials are particular
targets of the campaign of Mr Zhu Rongji, vice premier and central bank
governor, to curb money supply and inflationary growth.
According to China Focus, a publication of the Princeton China Initiative in
the US, Mr Zhu recently criticised officials in Guangxi province, in
south-west China, who had ploughed over and fenced off 15,000 square
kilometres of farmland of which 1 per cent had so far been taken up by
construction.
Calculating that developing the land would cost the entire national
development budget for six years, Mr Zhu is reported to have asked them:
'Just let me know where the money is coming from. . . What is the rest of
the nation to do meanwhile?'
Xinhua yesterday said officials in Beihai city, Guangxi province, had
approved dozens of questionable property schemes, including casinos.
China's trade deficit was Dollars 4.62bn in the first seven months of 1993,
although trade officials are confident the current austerity measures will
help achieve a surplus for 1992 by the year-end. Exports were up 4.7 per
cent to Dollars 44.78bn over the same period of last year, and imports up
25.7 per cent to Dollars 49.4bn.
