FT  27 FEB 93 / Arts: The essence of Matisse - Even if you went to the New
York exhibition - go to Paris
AMID THE critical debate that has lately erupted, at least in Britain, as to
the relative worth of the current product of the avant-garde, it is salutary
to be reminded that there is rather more to the modernist tradition than a
urinal, a set of bricks, a fish in a tank or a bloody frozen head. It was,
after all, not so very long ago - around Christmas 1945 - that the
liberation of Europe was opportunely celebrated at the V&amp;A by a joint
exhibition of the work of Picasso and Matisse, to hoots of derision and
letters to The Times.
Picasso at his most mischievously cynical was summoned only the other day to
further the case the modern was never more than the exploitation of the
gullible, an argument to which his work has always given the lie  - witness
the magnificent exhibition of his still-lifes that was in Paris only last
autumn. Now it is the turn of Matisse, whose vast retrospective at the
Museum of Modern Art in New York over the winter was described as the
exhibition of the century. To my chagrin, it was a show I was unable to see,
but now the Centre Pompidou in Paris happily offers a more than compensatory
alternative.
Indeed it is the measure of the Paris exhibition that one wonders a superior
were possible. For this is no truncated version of the New York show: rather
it is a substantial study, concentrated and distinct, of the young Matisse
in his early maturity, as he moved from tentative experiment to magisterial
authority. It was a transition achieved in barely ten years and, in marking
that achievement, we discover the essence of Matisse. Those who did get to
New York would not find a trip to Paris a waste of time. This is a very
different exercise.
But, the young Matisse? It is always hard to think of Matisse as ever
exactly young, and this show starts with him already 34. He had been active
in Paris some ten years, showing regularly at the Salon des Independants,
but his work was more remarkable for what we now know would come of it than
for what it was - a serious, well-ordered and strongly-modelled but somewhat
academic post-impressionism. We pick him up at Saint Tropez and back in
Paris in 1904, and still he is the creature of external influence - now of
pointillisme and colour theory, now to some extent of Gauguin. By the
following year and his trip to the south, this time to the little port of
Collioure, he is entirely his own man.
The shift may not seem over-dramatic. The colour remains clean and bright
within its comparatively limited range of reds and yellows, greens and blue,
and the brush-mark as distinct and direct as ever. But yet, but for the odd
painting of 'le port d'Abaill', that is a true throw-back to the pointillist
systems of the year before, there is a new confidence in the spirit of this
more clearly radical work, a new certainty in the statement of the image,
and a renewed simplicity in the working of the surface, no matter how rapid
or direct. A view over the roofs of Collioure and across to the far side of
the bay marks the change, with its positive, spade-like strokes of the
brush, its clarity of colour and the broad simplicity of its drawing. The
drawing is the painting: the painting is the colour: the colour is the
image. Here suddenly is the true fauve at large.
This may not be the most obvious shift in the course of Matisse's career,
but none is more significant. Through all the changes that would follow, of
interest, scale or practice, these would remain constant: the simplicity and
directness of the drawing; the simple certainty of the composition; the act
of drawing itself inseparable from the act of painting; and the authority of
colour as colour, used not as mere function of reference or record but
celebrated for what it is - black as black, red as red, green never so
green.
The 'Red Studio' of 1911 is a broad, flat, rich field of unmodulated indian
red, yet filled with space and light by the artist's own paintings on the
wall, the pile of frames in the corner, and the pots on the table. The
'Porte-fenetre' of 1914, by coincidence again at Collioure but so close in
spirit to the Paris studio paintings of earlier that year, is as simple as
any Rothko with its vertical bands, blue, grey, green and black, black as
night. Yet the space is there, and the sense of the space out in the night
beyond, and all achieved by the simple device of the narrow strip of a
darker grey that runs along to mark the floor at the angle of the open
window.
And what do we then make of Matisse? Why is he so important, so great an
artist? What is the point of him? But then to chase influences and effects
is really to miss the point, just as it would be with Titian, or Rembrandt
or Velasquez. We can only say: Matisse is simply Matisse. There he is in his
Collioure self-portrait of 1906, in his striped vest, cropped hair and full
set, looking into the glass and out at us: and there is the paint on the
surface, full and rich, and there the bold, simple line, and simple,
monumental image, oh, so deceptively simple. And why did he do such things?
Because it interested him do so, for its own sake. Look at the work.
Henri Matisse - 1904-1917: Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, until June 21:
sponsored by the Fondation Elf
