FT  10 FEB 93 / Autobahn drivers face annual fee
GERMANY'S ruling coalition yesterday approved plans to privatise its 7,000
miles of motorways and charge foreign and domestic motorists for using them.
Under the plan, German motorists are to be charged an annual fee for using
the country's autobahn network. Foreign motorists passing through will have
to pay a fee and display window stickers to drive on an autobahn.
The fee is to be introduced next January, and will be in addition to the
normal car tax paid by German motorists.
A commission headed by the transport ministry has until March 10 to examine
the users' fee. Last Friday, Mr Gunther Krause, the transport minister, drew
sharp criticism when he said he was considering a fee of up to DM400 (Pounds
166).
The move to charge for using German autobahns, which lie at at the heart of
Europe's high-speed road transport system, is expected to run into
resistance from ordinary motorists as well as the German car industry.
Plans to introduce a similar system for trucks was abandoned last year after
opposition from Brussels and the motor industry.
The government, which is struggling to reduce a large deficit and find funds
to rebuild east Germany, is pursuing privatisation to raise additional
revenue.
The move is intended to help finance the urgently needed restructuring of
the loss-making railways. The German rail system, which has recorded profits
only once since the second world war, is expected to be DM60bn in debt by
the end of the year. Its 1992 loss is estimated at around DM14bn.
'To finance the reforms of the rail system, the coalition parties have
agreed to the eventual privatisation of the motorway network,' said Mr
Dieter Vogel, government spokesman for the three-party coalition.
The government hopes a levy will encourage travellers to switch from
motorways to trains.
Although no details were released about when or how the government would
privatise the national road network, a government official said the first
step would be to ensure that projects for modernising motorways in the east
were privately financed.
Last year the government discussed what it called a 'concessionary' model,
in which private groups could finance and build rail and road projects on
the government's behalf.
