FT  17 NOV 93 / Moi under fire over tribal violence
AFRICA WATCH, the human rights group, yesterday warned that ethnic conflict
in Kenya could degenerate into civil war unless President Daniel arap Moi's
government took immediate steps to end the violence, Leslie Crawford writes
from Nairobi.
In a report on Kenya*, Africa Watch accuses the government of instigating
tribal clashes in which 1,500 people have died and hundreds of thousands
have been driven from their homes since the advent of the multi-party system
in 1991.
'There is clear evidence that the government was involved in provoking this
ethnic violence for political purposes and has taken no adequate steps to
prevent it from spiralling out of control,' the report says.
'The conflict has been deliberately manipulated and instigated by President
Moi and his inner circle and has undermined attempts to create an atmosphere
conducive to political pluralism in Kenya.'
'The culture of violence that is taking root has made real the alarming
possibility of civil war in Kenya,' the report says.
The majority of the victims of the ethnic clashes are peasant farmers of the
Kikuyu tribe, the largest and wealthiest ethnic group in Kenya, who are
distrusted by President Moi, a Kalenjin, and his coalition of minority
tribes.
The report comes at an embarrassing time for Kenya, which is due to meet
donors next week to discuss the restoration of financial aid.
Although President Moi recently announced a Dollars 20m (Pounds 13.4m)
programme to resettle displaced victims, co-sponsored by the UN Development
Programme, Africa Watch urges Kenya's donors to continue withholding aid
until the government takes effective steps to curb the violence.
'These steps should include, at a minimum, the full and public investigation
of allegations of the involvement of government officials in the violence,
and the bringing of charges where there is evidence of wrongdoing,' it says.
*Divide and Rule: state-sponsored ethnic violence in Kenya, published by
Africa Watch, 485 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10017-6104, tel: 1 212 972
8400.
