FT  24 APR 93 / Referendum fails to inspire St Petersburg: Russia's second
city is no longer a bastion of support for Yeltsin
THEY were there again last night, as they are every Friday evening outside
St Petersburg's pillared city hall: 300 or so mainly elderly men and women,
voluble with anger.
A similar or larger crowd has assembled in the centre of Russia's second
city every week for three months to protest about an affair that has been a
central talking point locally in the run-up to Russia's national referendum
tomorrow: the disappearance of millions of roubles of pensioners' assets in
an investment scam.
Up to 450,000 of St Petersburg's 5m people are believed to have been hit by
the scandal, involving misappropriation of share vouchers by two self-styled
'investment firms' whose directors have absconded.
The affair has not enhanced the reputation of President Boris Yeltsin's
economic reforms, or of the city's mayor and one-time prominent Yeltsin
supporter, Mr Anatoly Sobchak. On the contrary: St Petersburg - Imperial
Russian capital, cradle of the October Revolution and traditional home of
Russia's intelligentsia - is not the solid bastion of support for the
president it was during the failed communist 'putsch' of August 1991.
Today, a mood of sullen apathy has descended on the city's moth-eaten
elegance, enlivened only by shrill cries from the president's multifarious
critics.
On one of the main roads Democracy Wall - once plastered with posters
proclaiming support for reform - has been taken over by fly-sheets urging a
niet vote tomorrow. In front of it throngs a crowd anxious to explain why.
'I'm not a communist but I'm against him,' says Tamara Afanasiva, 49, a
philosopher by training who now works as a travel agent.
'Yeltsin is a communist, a party hack, and is only in power now because he
carried a party card for 30 years. These people are stealing from our rich
country and selling it off. They're building capitalism on the backs of
people.' She hands over a leaflet showing a tottering Yeltsin, bottle in
hand, captioned sarcastically: 'Support the President'.
Over at the local headquarters of the Russian Communist Workers' party comes
opposition of a more predictable kind. 'There's absolutely no point in this
referendum,' says Mr Yuri Tereniyev, party secretary, sitting beneath a
brocaded banner portraying Lenin.
'No matter what the results are Yeltsin will use them for his purposes.'
In the face of these assorted barrages, St Petersburg's lively community of
artists and intellectuals, who overwhelmingly support Mr Yeltsin, has
something of a beleaguered air.
All this does not mean Mr Yeltsin will be defeated in St Petersburg; not
even his fiercest critics predict that. More likely is a very low turnout.
Perhaps the best pointer to the prevailing mood is the behaviour of the
increasingly unpopular Mayor Sobchak. He has complicated matters by adding a
fifth question to tomorrow's ballot asking whether St Petersburg should seek
the status of an autonomous republic - an attempt to give himself a freer
hand in introducing reforms and attracting foreign investment.
And this week, as the referendum approaches, has Mr Sobchak been manning the
barricades? No: he has been enjoying himself in London at the annual meeting
of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
