FT  01 APR 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Selling on the sofa
 -Americans are hooked on television shopping
In the minds of most Americans, shopping by television still conjures up
images of tacky kitchen gadgets being hawked by an invisible announcer. The
announcer (always a man) barked out the wonders of Veg-O-Matics, a vegetable
slicer, and a toll-free number to call for orders.
But television shopping, once a joke, appears to be on the threshold of
becoming big business. Now, instead of the crude commercials on late night
TV a decade ago, whole channels - on cable - are devoted to it seven days a
week, 24 hours a day. Increasingly it is becoming a legitimate way to market
a variety of better-quality goods, including relatively high-priced
jewellery, fashions and computers.
The industry's two dominant companies, QVC (standing for Quality, Value and
Convenience) based in West Chester, Pennsylvania, a Philadelphia suburb, and
Home Shopping Network, based in St Petersburg Florida, had combined revenues
of more than Dollars 2.2bn (Pounds 1.49bn) in 1992, an increase of 76 per
cent from the Dollars 1.2bn of 1989.
HSN, the 11-year-old pioneer in the industry, reaches some 60m homes, while
six-year-old QVC, reaches 47m.
The selling approach and the target markets of the two networks differ
considerably. QVC, as one Wall Street analyst put it, 'is your friend in the
livingroom,' using a soft sell for higher spending consumers. Whereas, HSN
uses more high-pressure tactics - 'Your time's running out' - and aims at
the market's more moderate and lower end.
The popular conception of TV shopping's audience consists of retirees,
housewives, insomniacs and assorted social misfits without much of a life.
However, Craig Bibb, an analyst with PaineWebber who follows the industry,
said he was surprised to learn that Wall Street portfolio managers and other
investment professionals watch QVC and make purchases. 'They say it's good
value,' he observes.
A recent Deloitte &amp; Touche study showed that overall the TV shopper is not
markedly different from the average US consumer. The average household
income of a TV shopper is Dollars 34,900, compared with the Dollars 38,000
for the market average. But while there are more TV shoppers earning less
than Dollars 30,000 a year, the reach into the upper echelons of the
consumers is about the same. While 9 per cent of the market average earn
over Dollars 75,000, 8 per cent of TV shoppers do too.
One notable difference - and a possible clue to the direction of TV shopping
 -is that 44 per cent of TV shoppers buy from catalogues, compared with just
12 per cent in the market average. It is widely speculated that TV shopping
could dent catalogue merchandising.
TV shopping succeeds in selling largely for two reasons, according to
Stephen Hoch, professor of marketing and behavioural science at the
University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. It uses amiable hosts
to make a personal connection with viewers which reduces their resistance to
persuasion. By putting the product in the consumer's living room, TV
shopping induces them to act impulsively.
And once it gets a customer, TV shopping tends to keep him or her. Peter
Siris, an analyst at UBS securities, says: 'They have generated a high
percentage of repeat buyers, perhaps the highest in any retail business.'
The rate of repeat buyers at QVC is nearing 60 per cent. Those repeat
customers also spend more per year, Dollars 502 compared with Dollars 52 for
one-time customers.
The companies make their profits from a mark-up of about 100 per cent, but
because they buy in bulk they can still undersell retail stores.
Television shopping's respectability recently received a sizeable fillip
with the entry of one of America's stars of entertainment programming, Barry
Diller, once chief of Paramount, the Hollywood studio, and most recently
chairman of Fox television, which he built into America's fourth largest
network.
Last December, Diller was persuaded to invest Dollars 25m in QVC and become
its chairman by John Malone, chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc
(TCI), the biggest US cable company, and Brian Roberts, president of
Comcast, the fourth-biggest cable company. TCI and Comcast had already
bought into QVC and were looking for a way to upgrade it.
Diller's programming genius is expected to lift television shopping to new
heights. One rumoured first move is that he will capitalise on the American
obsession with fitness and diet by dedicating a new channel (QVC already has
two) to selling health and food products. But Diller refused to confirm this
and said there was a long menu of thematic choices 'every one of which we're
looking at'.
Another indication of TV shopping's growing cachet was the announcement in
early March that Saks Fifth Avenue, the department store chain, had agreed
to become the first big retailer to market through QVC. And top names in
high fashion, including Diller's friend Calvin Klein, say they are willing
to consider selling on QVC, a notion that would have prompted a derisive
laugh a year ago.
How far TV shopping will go remains unclear as the industry is still in
flux. TCI, part owner of QVC, also controls, through its Liberty Media
subsidiary, HSN. A merger proposal between HSN and Liberty Media is on the
table and there is speculation about combining QVC and HSN.
Meanwhile, technological advances could boost the business over the next
several years. As the number of cable channels multiplies nearly tenfold,
many more are likely to be devoted to shopping. Television is also likely to
become more interactive, some day allowing shoppers to, for example, see
clothing in their own sizes.
In addition, the US industry, looking to expand, is casting its eye on
Europe, where - if the success of France Telecom's Minitel is any indication
 -the concept of electronic shopping seems viable.
Minitel attaches a small screen to a phone for database display of retail
offerings, including groceries.
Nonetheless, even in the US, most people still seem to prefer going to the
store and TV shopping hardly qualifies as a regular fixture of American
life. But, then, neither did telephone answering machines or VCRs a decade
ago.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WHAT KIND OF PEOPLE ARE TV SHOPPERS?
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        Market
                              TV shoppers %          average %
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Married                                  44                 49
Widowed                                   8                  8
Single                                   27                 25
25-34 years                              26                 24
35-44 years                              22                 21
65 and over                              11                 16
Professional                             13                 18
Business manager                         11                 12
Labourer/driver                          12                  9
Homemaker                                11                  9
Salesperson                              10                  8
Retired                                  12                 16
High school graduate                     34                 31
1-3 years of university                  27                 30
Household income             Dollars 34,900     Dollars 38,000
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Deloitte &amp; Touche
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
