FT  09 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Supply fears push cocoa prices
to three-year highs
COCOA PRICES surged to their highest level for over 3 years in London
yesterday fuelled by continued fears that the Ivory Coast's harvest will be
lower than expected, leading to a shortfall in world supply.
The price spike came on the eve of the International Cocoa Organisation's
talks in London on the operation of its new producers' agreement, which will
try to bring supply and demand more closely into line.
The price of the December cocoa futures contract on the London Commodity
Exchange rose in hectic trading by Pounds 31 to Pounds 862 a tonne - its
highest point since June 1990. About 16,000 contracts had changed hands by
the close of the market, still way below the record of 46,458 lots set on
June 22.
'The market has realised cocoa prices have just been too low for too long
and maybe this is just the beginning of a big move,' said Mr Tony Chadwick
at Prudential Bache.
The cocoa market has recently been reacting to reports that this year's crop
from the Ivory Coast, which produces around a third of the world's cocoa,
will not be as good as expected.
A poor harvest - which begins on October 1 - will push world supplies lower
than demand for the third season in a row.
One reason for the shortfall is that prices have been so low in recent
years, they have not encouraged producers to invest in production, resulting
in the current poor crops.
Mr Tony Harrison from Mars who is chairman of the European cocoa industrial
users body, Caobisco, says there is a pressing need for producers meeting in
London today to discuss ways of matching world supply with demand.
'I'm not arguing for higher prices, but we want to see a sustained supply
and these prices have not been encouraging that,' he said. World demand has
been rising by between 3 and 5 per cent a year.
The 40 nations represented at the talks in London will also try to agree a
way to dispose of some 230,000 tonnes of buffer stocks held from the
market-stabilising International Cocoa Agreement, which expired this year.
They are expected to agree a way of releasing some 4,000 tonnes of cocoa to
the market each month over four and a half years at prices prevailing in the
market.
Mr Lawrence Eagles, commodities analyst at GNI, the London trade house,
believes that the way in which the buffer stock liquidation is decided could
have an effect on prices.
But traders have been anticipating the outcome for some weeks and most of
them believe it has already been discounted.
