FT  10 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Hills ordered dumping laws study -
Last-minute decision by former US trade representative
STRONG complaints by US exporters led Mrs Carla Hills, the former US trade
representative, to order a controversial two-year study of the US dumping
and subsidy laws just five days before leaving office, according to Mr
Julius Katz, Mrs Hills' former deputy.
The trade representative's staff had for many months discussed having the
bipartisan International Trade Commission take 'a good, hard look' at the
effects of the 'unfair' trade regime in a balanced, non-partisan way, Mr
Katz said. Because this would be unpopular in the Congress, it was felt that
Mrs Hills could more easily make the request than her successor, Mr Mickey
Kantor, just starting his term in office and anxious to maintain good
relations with Capitol Hill.
Mr Katz said, although protection against dumping and subsidies was
necessary, the rules adopted by both the US and the EC had become
increasingly 'arbitrary and restrictive'. The number of countries adopting
similar regimes had proliferated, so that American exporters now had to
worry that they would be denied market share under similar rules.
Controversy over the US anti-dumping and subsidies regime may stand in the
way of a Uruguay Round deal. The US is insisting on amending the final
negotiating text which would make it easier for exporting countries to
challenge the anti-dumping and subsidies findings.
'We had no political reason for calling for the study,' Mr Katz said. The
proposal - for an in-depth look at the effects of dumping and subsidies as
well as the impact of the subsequent duties on the US economy - came from
the office's career staff.
Mrs Hills apparently reckoned without the intervention of the Democratic
chairman of the International Trade Commission. Mr Don Newquist last week
sent the proposal for the study to Mr Kantor, giving him 90 days to shelve
it if he wishes. He has yet to comment on the matter.
A spokesman for Mr Newquist said the Trade Representative's Office had
failed to perform the detailed consultations with the ITC usual when studies
were requested. He suggested that the budget-cutting Clinton administration
might have different priorities, and the agency was already loaded with a
time-consuming study agenda.
Mr Katz said Mrs Hills had called the chairman about the study and had
spoken with his counsel, Mr Fred Beavers. After the call it was decided to
stretch the timing of the study from 1994 to 1995, to keep it separate from
election year politics. Mr Beavers said Mrs Hills had simply informed him of
the study without asking for Commission suggestions.
