FT  06 OCT 93 / France's job creation bill passes hurdle
FRANCE'S National Assembly last night approved a wide series of job creation
measures, including an effective cut in the minimum wage for young workers
and a progressive shift in welfare costs from company payrolls and onto the
state budget.
The draft five-year employment law now goes to the Senate for approval.
The overall thrust of the law is to introduce more flexibility into France's
labour market, from which 3.22m unemployed, or 11.7 per cent of the
potential workforce, now find themselves excluded.
But, despite Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's claim last week to be 'open
to experiment', the government has not proved itself very radical in any one
direction.
None the less, the centre-right government has quietly put a dent in the
country's so-called Smic minimum wage, which has risen twice as fast as real
wages over the past 20 years and thus been blamed for pricing less-skilled,
and often younger, workers out of the job market. Henceforth, employers
would be able to pay an 18-26 year-old only 90 per cent of the Smic -
currently around FFr5,500 (Pounds 641) a month, but amounting to more than
FFr8,000 with welfare charges included - provided they provided him or her
with a training instructor.
The draft law also provides for a more flexible formula for Sunday trading,
top-up payments to people who take a job paying less than their unemployment
entitlement, and reduced social welfare charges for companies which take on
new workers.
But over the longer term, the bill aims to take the cost of family
allowances for lower-paid workers (less than 1.5 times the Smic) off company
payrolls and onto the state budget by 1998. This would be an historic shift,
bringing France more into line with most other EC countries which finance
more of their welfare state out of general taxation.
Steering a middle course, the government has eschewed any frontal attack on
the Smic that would infuriate the unions as well as imposing by legislation
any reduction in the current 39-hour regular working week that would anger
its business lobby. But it is no longer the Socialist opposition and the
unions who are touting the notion of spreading available work around more
people by cutting working hours.
A Gaullist RPR amendment to reduce welfare costs for companies cutting their
work week to 32 hours was defeated. But as Ms Segolene Royal, a former
Socialist minister, said 'the taboo (about shorter working hours) is now
broken'. As it is, the draft bill encourages the two sides of industry to
negotiate a possible reduction in working hours, provided these are set in
more flexible annual, rather than weekly, limits.
