FT  07 OCT 93 / Dublin says peace moves have begun
MR Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, yesterday appealed for
'restraint and patience' regarding the nationalist peace initiative from
Northern Ireland, but affirmed his government is now involved in the efforts
to bring about an end to the military campaigns of the IRA and Loyalist
paramilitaries in the province.
Answering questions in the Dail (Irish parliament) yesterday he quoted from
the recent joint statement by Mr John Hume, the leader of the Social
Democratic and Labour party, and Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader. He
said: 'It is pretty clear that it is a peace process we are talking about .
. . we are engaged in trying to find a formula for peace.' On the talks
between Mr Hume and Mr Adams, Mr Reynolds said: 'I was fully aware of the
objectives of those talks but not of the detail.'
He and Mr Dick Spring, the foreign minister, are to be told those details in
a full briefing from Mr Hume later today, and will consider the proposals
that Mr Hume and Mr Adams have come up with.
Mr Reynolds said loyalist paramilitaries in the province have declared their
violence to be reactive to that of the IRA, and that if the IRA stops its
campaign then the loyalists would stop theirs.
Mr Hume and Mr Adams have been holding bilateral talks since last April,
which Mr Hume has stated are aimed at achieving a 'total cessation of all
violence'.
Mr Reynolds attempted to damp expectations that there would be a prompt
publication of the proposals. He said: 'I want to ask for restraint and
patience from this house and the public in general. There is no overnight
solution . . . I don't think that making every detail public would be
helpful to achieving a settlement.'
He has a meeting scheduled with Mr John Major, the British prime minister,
before the end of the year, and added: 'If a further meeting becomes
necessary before then, then I shall seek one.'
The Northern Ireland Office had not fully digested the detail of Mr
Reynolds' statements last night, but a spokesman said: 'The way forward as
we see it is to get the (round-table) talks going again, and if any document
is presented to us by the Irish government then we will consider it.'
Pressed by opposition leaders as to whether the Irish government is prepared
to amend its constitutional claim to Northern Ireland, which Unionists say
is the main impediment to any progress, Mr Reynolds insisted that there will
be no unilateral move by Dublin.
Editorial comment, Page 23
