FT  11 JUN 93 / The Property Market: Rights issues retain appeal - Why the
equity market shows no signs of indigestion
The property rights-issue bandwagon seems unstoppable. When Great Portland
Estates issued a Pounds 95m rights issue this week, it pushed the total
amount of property funds raised in the equity market to over Pounds 900m.
Analysts believe that a continuing stream of issues, which may increasingly
come from smaller companies, will take the total raised to well over Pounds
1bn.
So far, the equity market shows no sign of indigestion: share prices have
gone up when companies have asked investors for money.
At first sight, investors' enthusiasm appears remarkable. Why are they
prepared to hand over large sums of money, with few strings attached, to
managements which rarely have strong track records, with little prospect of
dividend increases for many years? Indeed, in the case of Great Portland the
rights issue was accompanied by a promise of a dividend cut for 1994.
The explanation is two-fold. First, the huge increase in property share
prices over the past nine months means that many property shares are no
longer trading at a discount to assets, which over the long term has
averaged more than 25 per cent.
The erosion of this discount means that companies can issue shares without
diluting their assets. 'Historically speaking, there have been very few
opportunities for companies to issue equity at around the asset value and
some may not wish to miss the current window of opportunity,' says James
Capel, a broker.
Second, many investors believe that asset values are set to rise. Rather
than force cash-strapped companies to sell properties to reduce their
borrowings, fund managers would prefer to give companies the cash to go
bargain-hunting.
By converting corporate sellers to buyers, the injection of new equity into
the corporate sector is having a large impact on the property market. It may
have another knock-on effect; by transforming companies' ability to issue
bonds.
Mr Hugh Corbett, of UBS, the broker, believes that the current spate of
rights issues is paying the way for a wave of bond issues. He expects Pounds
500m-Pounds 1bn of debentures and long-dated bonds to be issued in coming
months. 'It is like the equity market, the opportunity is there,' he says.
'They (the property companies) will grab it when they can.'
He argues that there is a strong market for property bonds. 'By historic
standards, there is a lot of demand for good quality, long-dated bonds from
institutions,' he says. The injections of new funds into the property
sector, which have repaired companies' balance sheets, together with the
brighter prospects for asset values, have removed the main constraint on
issuing bonds.
The main arguments cited by UBS in favour of issuing debentures now are:
The relationship between the yields available from property and long gilt
yields has never been closer. 'As a result, it is now theoretically possible
to raise long-dated debenture finance at a rate cheaper than the average
yield from property,' according to UBS.
Companies which delay may not be able to invest at such attractive yields or
borrow as cheaply. UBS expects property investment yields to fall by about
0.5 per cent a year for the next three years, while 25-year gilt yields rise
to 8.7 per cent by the end of 1993 and 9.3 per cent the year after.
Conversely, the factors discouraging companies from issuing debentures are:
The steep slope of the sterling yield curve means it is currently cheaper to
borrow short term rather than long term.
Concern about gearing levels and the possibility that asset values still
have further to fall.
There may be difficulties in issuing unsecured property debt. Downgrades
from the credit rating agencies have limited the pool of potential investors
in short-dated issues.
Looking ahead, there may be other obstacles facing the debenture market.
Investors in debentures are attracted by the security of property income,
which is underpinned by the 25 year property lease, with its upwards-only
rent reviews.
Investors are getting nervous about the erosion of the UK institutional
lease and forthcoming changes to privity of contract, the law which holds an
original tenant responsible for paying rent if a subsequent tenant defaults
in the course of the lease.
They are concerned that the government plans to change privity of contract
in a way that will reduce the tenant's obligations and reduce the security
of income associated with a property.
'Any change in this area will seriously prejudice such sources of finance,'
according to Barclays de Zoete Wedd Gilts. 'It would not be going too far to
state that the very existence of the long-term debenture market arises out
of the combination of long lease structures and the insurance and comfort
engendered by privity of contract.'
The uncertain future of the property debenture market gives limited
encouragement to banks concerned about the excessive level of debt
outstanding to the property industry.
Debentures and bonds were promoted as one of the options for refinancing the
property industry by Mr Pen Kent, an associate director of the Bank of
England, when he addressed the Association of Property Bankers last week.
Mr Kent's comments about 'the dearth of obvious solutions for future
financing' underlined the scale of the problem facing the property industry.
The Pounds 37bn debt of the property industry is more than three times, in
real terms, its level in 1974.
'Neither will recovery be boosted by a surge in inflation as it was in the
1970s; nor probably by large-scale investment by institutional investors,
whose enthusiasm for property has waned significantly,' he added.
The problem for many lenders to the property industry is that the recent
revival in interest from investors is focused on a relatively narrow band of
property, with financially-secure tenants on lengthly, secure leases.
But much of the debt overhanging the property industry relates to empty
buildings or those with unreliable tenants, which at present cannot find
investors in any shape or form. Ultimately, a broadly-based recovery in the
property market will depend on the recovery in the economy as a whole.
