FT  05 MAR 93 / UN plans to send 28,000 troops to lawless Somalia
TWENTY-EIGHT thousand United Nations troops, empowered to use force, would
replace American-led contingents in Somalia from May 1, under a plan
submitted yesterday to the Security Council.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, made the recommendation
in a written report following discussions with President Bill Clinton and US
officials. The UN Security Council is expected to approve the plan when it
is debated later this month.
The proposed size of the force, considerably larger than the number of UN
troops in either former Yugoslavia or Cambodia, surprised many diplomats,
including US officials.
However, Mr Boutros Ghali emphasised that there was no functioning
government in Somalia, no police force or disciplined army and that the
atmosphere of lawlessness and tension was far from eliminated as evident in
new outbreaks of violence, including against UN and US troops in Mogadishu.
Under his plan up to 5,000 US soldiers would remain as part of the UN
operation, which would be called Unosom II.
The first Unosom mission, a small ineffectual force, was superseded by
President George Bush's despatch of American troops to Somalia at the end of
last year to ensure deliveries of food and relief to the starving. About
15,000 US soldiers remain.
Turkish lieutenant general Cevik Bir has been named to command the new UN
force, with US major general Thomas Montgomery as his deputy.
Urging a smooth transfer to the UN of the current operation, in which troops
from some 20 countries are participating, Mr Boutros Ghali warned that any
hiatus would be exploited by warring gangs. But a transition would have to
be achieved area by area and he could not say when it might be completed.
He offered no cost estimate for the plan. The UN is reeling under the
financial impact of peacekeeping operations unprecedented in four
continents.
Mr Jan Eliasson, in charge of UN humanitarian operations, yesterday appealed
for international contributions totalling Dollars 166.5m for the 'first step
towards rebuilding the economic and social fabric of Somalia.' He said more
than 2m Somalis were threatened by starvation.
