FT  19 JAN 93 / Patten backs primary school streaming in reform package
RADICAL reforms to primary education in England, including streaming of
pupils by ability and an overhaul of teacher training, were announced
yesterday by Mr John Patten, education secretary.
They mark a further stage in the government's assault on 'progressive'
teaching methods and on the university-based 'education establishment' which
it believes fosters them.
Mr Patten is writing to all 19,000 primary schools in England urging them to
'achieve a better match of work to children's needs'.
His 'five-point plan' includes greater use of 'whole class' and
specific-subject teaching, the introduction of streaming by subject where
possible, and grouping of children by ability where not.
Mr Patten's announcement marks the first time that the government has sought
to make streaming at primary level a matter of national policy.
Reforms to teacher training would reduce the proportion of time spent by
students in training colleges. They might involve the transfer of funds from
colleges to schools, which would then contract with colleges for specific
courses.
'There is still much to be done to improve the education offered to pupils,'
Mr Patten said. 'I firmly believe that there must always be adequate room
for the teaching of the basics to a good standard.'
He is urging schools to teach children for the government's recommended
minimum number of hours - 21 for five to seven-year-olds and 23 1/2 for
eight to 11-year-olds - amid concern that a significant minority are
teaching for less.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education spokesman, condemned formal streaming in
primary schools as 'merely a preparation for selection to secondary school'.
She added: 'Constant chopping and changing in line with the latest fanatical
doctrine is creating chaos in our schools.'
The government's action follows reports yesterday from the National
Curriculum Council and the Office for Standards in Education (Ofsted).
Mr Patten has accepted the council's proposal for a five-year rolling review
of national curriculum subjects. He is instructing Ofsted to report on the
implementation of the reforms.
Yesterday's reports are a follow-up to an influential discussion paper,
known as the Three Wise Men Report, published in January 1992. It called on
teachers to 'abandon the dogma of recent decades' which had led to
'excessively complex classroom practices and devalued the place of subjects
in the curriculum'.
In similar vein, Mr David Pascall, National Curriculum Council chairman,
yesterday described the curriculum as 'too complex and over-prescriptive'.
He said: 'As a consequence, depth of learning is being sacrificed in pursuit
of breadth and the lack of rigour and challenge is not resulting in the
necessary improvements in standards.'
Professor Stewart Sutherland, chief inspector of schools, said there was
growing concern about an 'overloaded' national curriculum.
Mr Patten's proposals for primary teacher training follow changes to
secondary-level training last year. They limit to one third the proportion
of time students spend in college, obliging them to undergo school-based
training for the rest. The teachers' unions oppose the changes.
