FT  18 JUN 93 / Technology: Steps towards vaccines
While much of the research on Aids focuses on treatment and a possible cure,
two US biotechnology companies - Chiron, in a joint venture with
Switzerland's Ciba, and Genentech - have taken important steps towards
creating a preventive vaccine.
The companies' vaccines consist of genetically engineered proteins from the
surface of the virus - an empty shell resembling HIV. Both groups have
completed trials on small numbers of healthy volunteers, who subsequently
developed antibodies against the virus.
The federal National Institutes of Health plans to launch a large-scale
clinical trial of the vaccines on about 10,000 healthy volunteers by the
beginning of next year.
A preventive vaccine is a relatively new concept in Aids research, which
until recently has concentrated on therapeutic vaccines for patients already
suffering from the disease.
Scientists are now questioning whether use of vaccines as a cure for Aids is
feasible. 'We've never been able to cure any viral infections, so a cure for
Aids may not be a realistic possibility,' says Martin Hirsch, a professor at
the Harvard Medical School. As a result, the focus is turning to prevention.
The new vaccines are promising, but by no means perfect. The Chiron vaccine
has side-effects of redness, soreness and mild flu-like symptoms. More
important, neither vaccine has been shown to have any impact after a patient
has contracted the disease.
Even if successful, the vaccines would have severe limitations. For
instance, a vaccine for the North American strains of HIV would be unlikely
to have much of an effect on Asian or African strains. The vaccine would
probably have to be altered every year to address the constantly mutating
virus.
Chiron and Genentech say they do not foresee the widespread use of the
vaccines immediately, even if they prove successful in the next set of
clinical trials.
'But among high-risk individuals, like spouses of infected people,
health-care workers and intravenous drug users,' says Chiron, 'this could be
a very welcome aid.'
