FT  15 JAN 93 / Hospitals face worst cash crisis in 30 years, say doctors'
leaders
HOSPITALS face their worst funding crisis in 30 years, doctors' leaders
claimed yesterday, amid a bitter exchange of arguments with Mrs Virginia
Bottomley, the health secretary.
A British Medical Association council meeting adopted a resolution declaring
that current funding was 'inadequate to deliver fully comprehensive patient
care'. BMA leaders say hospitals will have to close wards and cancel
operations for the rest of the financial year because they have already
spent their budgets.
The BMA warned Mrs Bottomley at a meeting late last month of its concerns
over funding but Dr Jeremy Lee-Potter, chairman of the council, said he was
disappointed by her response. 'Our impression was that she is going to try
to ride out the storm until some new money becomes available in April,' he
said.
Mrs Bottomley reacted immediately to the BMA criticism, accusing the
association of a 'glib response' that disguised the need for doctors to
examine ways of using resources more efficiently. 'The BMA has never taken
any other line than that the NHS is underfunded,' she said.
Under the new system of NHS funding, hospitals are contracted by health
authorities to carry out specified amounts of work during a year. Some
hospitals are in difficulty now because they have already exhausted their
budgets.
Both Mr John Chawner and Dr Ian Bogle, chairmen respectively of the BMA's
consultants' and general practitioners' committees, said the financial
problems were the most serious they had experienced in 30 years - worse than
the 1987-88 financial crisis that prompted the NHS reforms.
The BMA says many hospitals will be forced either to stop non-emergency work
or to 'solicit business' from GP fundholders, who have alternative sources
of funds. It claims that this is leading to the development of two-tier
standards of service.
Mrs Bottomley says that record amounts are being spent on the health
service, and that hospital managers know contract-funding has to span a full
year's activity and should allocate resources accordingly. The BMA is
conducting a survey of hospitals, and may then consider making an approach
to Mr John Major, the prime minister.
In another move yesterday, the BMA warned that without sufficient funding
and careful management, the government's Tomlinson report recommendations to
rationalise hospital provision in London could lead to a 'disastrous
destabilisation of integrated patient care'. A similar warning was sounded
by a newly formed London Health Services Crisis Committee.
