FT  11 JAN 93 / Turkey takes Moslems under its wing: Ankara is arguing for
force against Serbs
THANKS to Turkey's lobbying and the loan of the Turkish president's private
jet, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnia's Moslem leader, should get a hearing at
today's special meeting of Islamic Conference countries in Senegal.
Turkey, a Moslem country with a devoutly secular constitution, is today in
the curious position of outdoing even the most radical Islamic states in
defence of Bosnia's Moslems.
For more than six months Turkey has been a lone voice within North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation calling for military intervention to prevent the
carve-up of the former Yugoslav republic.
Turkey was quick to offer troops but the UN has indicated its opposition to
involving such regional countries in peacekeeping.
'Turkey in some ways is in a no-lose situation,' says a western diplomat.
'It can offer a battalion, a division, the whole Turkish army in the safe
knowledge that the UN would never accept.'
The move has none the less done much to allay criticism of the government
amid growing public outrage at the failure of the international community to
curb Serbian aggression.
Primary school pupils are raising money for refugees from the conflict.
After the latest reports of Moslem rape victims, the government despatched a
team of abortionists. Turkish opposition politicians have sought electoral
mileage from high-profile visits to the region.
The reason for Turkish concern is partly historical. While officials are
quick to disclaim irredentist ambitions towards their country's former
Ottoman dependencies in the Balkans, Bosnia is often casually described as
part of the Turkish nation.
There are after all an estimated 2m Slav 'Bosnaks' in Istanbul and other
cities, who first settled in Turkey as the empire collapsed. Many are
prominent in Turkish business and society.
Having turned its back on its imperial past some 70 years ago, republican
Turkey today finds itself, however reluctantly, as the moral protector of
those communities whom the Ottomans converted to Islam. As Mumtaz Soysal, a
leading Turkish commentator, sees it: 'It's not unlike the way western
powers, particularly the French, sought to guarantee the rights of the
Christian minorities under the Ottoman Empire.'
As Turkey sees it, if Serbian aggression is not met by force in Bosnia, the
crisis could reawaken other ethnic conflicts, dragging in all the regional
powers, Turkey, Greece, Albania and Bulgaria, and perhaps even the Russians.
At a hastily convened Balkan foreign ministers meeting in Istanbul in
November, Turkey voiced concern over Kosovo, the previously autonomous
region on the Albanian border which Serbia in effect re-annexed three years
ago.
Turkey has close ties with Albania and could be dragged into a conflict if
Albania sought to defend Kosovo's 2.5m ethnic Albanians.
The Turks argue that inaction on the part of the west will also help fuel a
more radical Moslem reaction, which in the long run will damage the case for
Turkey's own position in the heart of Europe.
In the public mind, the Bosnian crisis has already been reduced to a simple
conflict of Christian against Moslem, which has not made it any easier for
the government to steer a moderate course.
The OIC set January 15 as an informal deadline for the international
community to take action. Turkish officials say the threat of unilateral
military intervention by the OIC is only 'an insinuation' and that any
military action will have to be under UN auspices.
In practice, given the naval blockade, it is hard to see what the OIC can
do. Mr Hikmet Cetin, foreign minister, last week suggested the Islamic
countries could impose an oil embargo on western countries to force action.
This may have been the foreign minister indulging in domestic politics. His
Social Democrat party, the junior partner in the coalition, is currently
challenged by Republican People's party leader Deniz Baykal, whose trip to
Sarajevo grabbed the Turkish headlines last week.
However, the suggestion is further evidence of Turkey's growing frustration
over the Bosnian crisis.
