FT  22 APR 93 / MEPs call for a greener Europe
MEMBERS of the European parliament yesterday accused the European Commission
of neglecting environment policy in favour of economic objectives.
Euro-MPs said they wanted principles of environmental protection integrated
into all EC policies.
But Mr Ioannis Paleokrassas, the EC environment commissioner, denied the
charges. 'It isn't true that the Commission is treating environment policy
as though it were some sort of hindrance (to other objectives),' he told
MEPs. 'On the contrary, we regard it as a fundamental part of policy.'
Socialist deputies - the largest group in the parliament - are pressing for
adoption of a strict timetable for a new European environmental action
programme, which they believe could replace the single European market as a
central Community objective.
Mr Ken Collins, the British Labour MEP who heads the parliament's
influential environment committee, said the commissioner's statement was
'unadventurous, cautious and, frankly, unconvincing'.
He said he wanted the exact costs of neglecting environment policy to be
laid out by the Commission, in the same way that Brussels estimated the
costs of resisting a single market six years ago.
Mr Paleokrassas replied that the Commission was already preparing a
timetable for further measures as part of the EC's fifth environmental
action programme.
Mr Niels Helveg Petersen, foreign minister of Denmark, which holds the EC
presidency, agreed with MEPs that it was 'scandalous' that EC members had
yet to decide on the site for a European environment agency, thus hindering
implementation of 'green' standards in the EC.
EC environment and energy ministers meet tomorrow in Luxembourg for a
so-called 'climate council', at which they will discuss proposals for a
Community carbon tax.
The European parliament yesterday voted to strengthen EC rules restricting
cosmetics tests on animals. MEPs agreed to amend a delicate compromise
between member states to outlaw such tests completely from the year 2000.
However, the European Commission has refused to support the amendment, which
means the original compromise between member states will almost certainly
survive intact. According to that agreement, cosmetics tests on animals will
be banned from January 1 1998, but only if alternative testing methods have
been discovered.
