FT  13 JUL 93 / UN to maintain Somali action despite bloodshed
THE United Nations last night rejected an Italian government request to
suspend military action in Somalia after UN helicopter gunships bombarded a
command centre of Somali warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed, killing more than a
dozen Somalis.
Two foreign journalists, a Briton and a German, were killed when an angry
mob took to the streets of Mogadishu seeking revenge for the UN strike.
They were named as Mr Dan Eldon of Reuters and Mr Hansi Krauss of Associated
Press. Both were photographers. Two other journalists were missing and
feared dead, and a further two were injured.
Supporters of Gen Aideed claimed that up to 73 Somalis were dead. The bodies
of 16 Somalis who had died in the air raid were paraded through the streets
and it was claimed more were lying in the ruins of the Aideed compound. A UN
official said 13 Somalis were killed and about 11 wounded.
In Rome, Mr Fabio Fabbri, Italy's defence minister, said he would ask the US
and the UN to suspend combat operations in Somalia in an attempt to reduce
tension in the former Italian colony. 'We suggest a cooling-off period to
reduce tension, the suspension of combat operations and a renewed effort to
restore dialogue,' he said. Italy has deployed 2,600 troops in Somalia.
Tension has escalated since Somali gunmen ambushed and killed 23 Pakistani
peacekeepers on June 5. Since then, a further 22 UN soldiers have been
killed. Many more Somalis have died during night-time air raids against Gen
Aideed's strongholds. But the UN military operation has failed to capture
the general, who went into hiding after an arrest warrant was issued against
him on June 17.
In New York, Mr Joe Sills, a UN official, emphasised that peacekeeping
operations were mandated by the UN Security Council and were not subject to
decision by individual members. He told reporters that Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, the UN secretary-general, felt 'very strongly' that in any UN
operation the force commander must be in total control, while working within
the council mandate.
Mr Sills refused to single out Italy for reproach and commented that 'a
number' of providers of UN contingents had sought a freer hand in Somalia.
'There have been problems in this regard,' he added.
General Bruno Loi, the Italian commander, is said often to have failed to
consult the UN force commander, General Civek Bir of Turkey.
For example, on July 2 when three soldiers were killed and 30 wounded in an
ambush of 800 Italian troops, the UN was not informed in advance of a
weapons search operation in which the Italians were engaged, and learnt
about it only when urgent American support was requested.
Speaking on behalf of Mr Boutros Ghali, Mr Sills said it was unacceptable to
the UN and the Security Council for any member state to instruct its
national contingent and unacceptable for a contingent to seek instructions
from its national capital. Gen Bir has American and Pakistani deputies, but
the Italians have accused the UN of running the show and have sought a
bigger role in decision making.
Mr Sills said they were not alone in seeking senior appointments to Gen
Bir's staff.
Italy seeks to calm row, Page 3
