FT  21 APR 93 / The Queen's Awards for Technological Achievement 1993:
Cutting and grinding - Holroyd
HOLROYD, a Rochdale-based company of 250 people, is so well entrenched in
world markets that the UK recession has left it happily unscathed. It makes
specialised equipment for the compressor industry and sells more than 90 per
cent of its products overseas.
The company, owned by Renold, won the Queen's award in the technological
section for its development of a new generation of CNC (computer numerically
controlled) automatic cutter grinding machines. These sharpen the cutting
tools which are fitted on to special milling machines - also made by Holroyd
 -to make compressor rotors.
Mr Ronnie Kershaw, the company's managing director, says that it took five
years to develop the new range, which can control the accuracy of cutter
profiles to less than 5 microns (a micron is one millionth of a metre). The
previous accuracy level was 20 microns. Not only are the components and the
compressors made more efficient, but cutting times are reduced by
three-quarters and tool life increased fourfold.
This is not the first time that Holroyd has won a Queen's award. In 1967, it
gained one for its high precision rotor milling machine, the first of its
kind. This sustained level of technological skill has left Holroyd as one of
the few surviving machine tool companies left in Britain, which once was a
world leader in this sector.
Holroyd's market includes some of the big names of international industry.
Among Its domestic customers are Compair, Howden, and the UK operation of
Ingersoll Rand, a company to which it also exports in the US. Atlas Copco of
Sweden (which has a compressor division in Belgium), Kobe Steel of Japan,
and GHH of Germany are among its foreign buyers. It recently won a Pounds 3m
order from China, one of its largest ever, and also exports to Scandinavia,
South Korea, and South America. It has also won large orders in Russia.
The equipment manufactured by the air compressor companies on Holroyd
machines has a variety of uses. They include mining, construction, food
refrigeration in large cold stores and on fishing vessels, and ice freezing
for skating rinks.
Holroyd's competition is in west Germany, where it is up against several
manufacturers. The company's new CNC machine, for which it also designed the
electronics, allows new designs of compressors to be produced which perform
far better than their predecessors. It also enables very high accuracy
profile forms to be ground on a wide range of cutter materials ranging from
the traditional high speed steel and carbides to newer advanced tool
materials which are now available.
