FT  24 JUL 93 / Selling the family silver: Lean times for Lloyd's Names
As the Glorious Twelfth, approaches, fewer sportsmen than usual are
preparing for the start of the grouse-shooting season - not just because of
an expected shortage of birds.
Record losses at Lloyd's of London, the insurance market, are forcing many
Names - the individuals whose personal wealth supports the market  - to
cancel their traditional sporting holidays and to cut spending on field
sports such as salmon fishing and hunting.
So far relatively few Names have had to sell their homes, but Lloyd's losses
 -which now amount to more than Pounds 5.5bn over the past five years - are
beginning to have an impact on other businesses which serve the lifestyles
of the wealthy.
This year many Names have begun to raise cash through selling family
valuables, ranging from antiques to fine wines and furniture, pictures and
feudal titles, thus helping boost turnover at the country's biggest auction
houses.
'Many Names don't know how much they owe and are planning on a month to
month basis. They are disposing of all the things that aren't central to
their lives,' says Mr Patrick Ramsay, country house specialist with estate
agency, Knight Frank &amp; Rutley.
'For the majority of people, the first option is to cash in shares, then it
might be frivolities like shooting holidays and then their collections of
antiques and furniture,' says Mr Philip Hoffman, deputy managing director at
Christie's, the auctioneers.
Mr Jamie Illingworth, of Strutt and Parker, the estate agency which leases
sporting lodges for between Pounds 400 and Pounds 7,000 a week, has noticed
a change. 'Members of Lloyd's who got their profits cheque used to put it to
a Scottish holiday, It has definitely taken some people out of the market.
Some people have cried off,' he says.
Mr David Olive, who runs a shooting school near Andover in Hampshire, also
points to a a fall in demand from Names. During the late 1980s many Names
were regular participants in his out-of-season training and refresher
courses, but demand has tailed off by 50 per cent over the past two years.
Lloyd's problems have also contributed to the difficulties of the hunts,
some of which have reported a decline in support this year. Captain
Frederick Barker, joint master of the prestigious Quorn Hunt in
Lincolnshire, told Horse and Hound magazine recently that there 'is no doubt
that the recession and Lloyd's of London have affected us badly. That final
bit of disposable income is no longer there and subscriptions are
considerably down.'
In the fine arts and antiques market, the effect of losses on Names has been
positive. Both Christie's and Sotheby's report a surge in inquiries and
business this year. Mr Hoffman estimates that sales by Names through
Christie's could amount to between Pounds 10m and Pounds 20m this year, more
than 5 per cent of the house's total turnover.
'The majority of the clients we talk to have managed to sort out their
problems up until now,' says Mr Hoffman at Christies, whose Fine English
Furniture catalogue is full of items ranging from Regency mahogany tables,
to more exotic pieces such as a George III brass-bound mahogany bucket and
William IV library globes, offered for sale as the 'property of a gentleman'
or the 'property of a lady'.
Typically, Names are selling pieces of antique furniture or pictures worth
between Pounds 10,000 and Pounds 100,000. British 18th and 19th century
pictures, old Italian and Dutch masters and furniture are the kind of items
most frequently offered. Mr Hoffman reports that large numbers of English
'sporting' pictures by arists such as Stubbs have come onto the market.
He says that the impact on prices is mixed. Names who bought their artworks
in the late 1980s can expect to lose money on the sales.
The prices of English sporting pictures by artists such as Stubbs have
fallen by between 25 and 30 per cent since 1989, for example, says Mr
Hoffman. But many other quality pieces, such as Old Master paintings, some
have not been seen on the market for some time, and demand - and prices -
are buoyant.
Christie's also reports strong demand for a scheme which allows Names to
obtain 'bank guarantees' for which antiques or artwork are used as
collateral. Launched last month with the backing of Coutts &amp; Co, the bank,
the scheme allows Names to obtain bank guarantees worth 40 per cent of the
worth of the pledged artwork, which they can use to continue trading at
Lloyd's. The heirlooms are sold only if the guarantee is drawn on to cover
losses.
Sotheby's, too, says it is facing a huge number of inquiries from Names.
'Most Names will start off just looking to sell one or two big pieces,' says
Mr Mr James Miller, who runs an advisory service for Names at Sotheby's.
Sotheby's offers a special service advising Names on possible sales. Mr
Miller says it is not simply artworks which are being sold, but books, cars,
wine, silver and jewellery. Sotheby's also offers a bank guarantee service
similar to that of Christie's.
Wine, he says, has been a particularly popular choice. 'A lot of people
think that it's an indulgence they can't really keep if things are going
badly,' says Mr Miller. 'It's something that you consume - you can't hand it
on to another generation. After all, its got to be sold or drunk at some
point anyway.'
The extent of the sales activity could be even wider, since many Names are
likely to sell privately too. Roger Stiles of Fine Art Investments, a small
art dealer and consultant, says: 'A lot of Names are very reluctant to
consign their works to an auction. Obviously people are very sensitive
because an auction is a very public way of selling your work, and the prices
can be very volatile,' he says. 'If a piece that is coming onto the market
for the first time doesn't sell then it can lose its premium very quickly.'
Mr Stiles says some Names are selling valuable works, but not through the
auction houses. He has more than 200 pieces on his list now, which he thinks
are 'mostly' Lloyd's-related. 'In the past few months I have noticed a real
increase,' he says. The top value of individual works could be about Pounds
10m, although most are about the Pounds 1m mark. They include Rembrandts,
Picassos, and Cezannes. Most of them will, he says, be bought by financial
institutions, including Swiss banks, although there are also some private
buyers.
Another auctioneer reporting brisk business from Names is Mr Robert Smith,
who buys and sells feudal titles. No rights to land still attaches to titles
such as the Lordship of Walkes Colne and the Seignory of the fief of
Craqueville St Helier, although they sometimes give mineral rights. Even so
buyers are prepared to pay thousands of pounds for the social cachet
conferred on barons, earls, viscounts and marquesses. More than 100 Lloyd's
Names have sold titles this year alone, raising between Pounds 4,500 and
Pounds 100,000 each. 'It's a very painless way of raising a bit of cash,'
says Mr Smith. 'They are trying to stave off the evil day.'
The Earl of Carlisle, who has lost money with Lloyd's, raised Pounds 55,000
by selling his barony of Gilsland in Cumbria to an American. The earl, who
sold a collection of antique books, is philosophical about the latest
transaction. 'I expect we've had the title since the 1500s but it was no
more of a blow than selling any other asset.'
Additional reporting by James Buxton in Edinburgh
