FT  24 NOV 93 / Survey of the Basque Country (1): Cross-roads opportunity -
The Basque Country is at a cross-roads politically, socially and
economically. It faces the challenge of recognising its own pluralism and of
diversifying its economy - and it has the opportunity to establish an
efficient dialogue with Madrid
The Basque Country has some of the worst slums and some of the most
unspoilt, richly forested valleys in western Europe. It embraces wholly
obsolete industrial plants and greenfield sites devoted to technological
innovation. It has been hit harder by recession than anywhere else in Spain
and yet it is the home of an energetic business community and the
headquarters of top national corporations.
Politically, the Basque Country suggests just as many contrasts and
contradictions as it does socially and economically. It is governed by a
coalition formed by two rival parties who have agreed on a joint programme.
The partnership is, nevertheless, an uneasy one and the political climate
swings from confrontation to consensus with extraordinary ease.
Broadly speaking, the Basques are wholly integrated because they are
legendary 'joiners'; they group together in a myriad institutions, from
sporting clubs to dining societies and associations of mushroom pickers. But
terrorist violence has cast a long shadow over Basque society and deeply
divides it.
Out of a population of just over 2m, some 500 members of the Basque
separatist organisation Eta are presently in prison. Probably twice as many
associates of the terrorist organisation live abroad, and the number of
Basques who over the years have been detained or jailed in connection with
terrorism must run into five figures.
Everybody in the Basque Country has first-hand knowledge of Eta; many live
in threat of its racketeering. While there is a fearful, silent majority,
increasing numbers are speaking out against the terrorists.
Many Basques support Eta's violent struggle for independence, however. Herri
Batasuna, (People's Unity), the radical coalition which backs the gunmen,
gained 174,000 votes in June's general elections; some 50,000 more than in
the 1989 poll, although its share of the total vote slipped from 17 per cent
to 15 per cent. Political stability in the Basque Country ultimately depends
on a negotiated solution to the Eta problem.
Politically, socially and economically the Basque Country is at a
cross-roads. Obsessively rooted in its Basque identity, an exclusive, ethnic
identity in its more extreme manifestations, and excessively dependent on
its steel-manufacturing sector, it now faces the challenge of recognising
its own pluralism and of diversifying its economy.
The deep love and respect for the Basque Country's special nature; for its
language, its culture and its traditions, which so many in the area share,
should not become a tribal battle call to arms that sets off one section of
the community against the other.
Blessed with excellent communications, the best cuisine in Spain and, in San
Sebastian, arguably the finest seaside resort city in Europe, the Basque
Country has much to gain from opening itself out to others, not least to
foreign tourists.
With its industrial tradition and its highly-skilled labour force, the area
has even more to gain from outside investment - investment that at the turn
of the century formed the core of the Basque Country's industrial muscle.
But there will be no meaningful foreign takers for the local opportunities
while the often irascible and sometimes violent Basque nationalist climate
persists.
The Basque Country's arrival at a cross-roads is timely in as much as Spain
itself, on the political and economic level, faces a watershed of its own.
The general elections last June left Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the prime minister,
short of an overall majority and his minority government has been forced to
seek alliances with nationalist parties, notably with the Basques.
The economic recession has, meanwhile, prompted the government into
overhauling the labour market rigidities that have in no small way
contributed to the decreasing competitiveness of Basque industry
The twin issues of a new political arrangement, involving a form of
cohabitation with the nationalists, and of deregulation, involving a loss of
trade union power, can - if they are properly addressed - help the Basque
Country a great deal as it seeks a sure route towards recovery.
Initial negotiations between the Basque Nationalist Party, which leads the
Basque government, and Mr Gonzalez's socialists in the Madrid central
government have not been encouraging. The Basques played too strong a hand
as they hurriedly sought to extract home rule prerogatives in return for
supporting Mr Gonzalez, and they were turned down.
Despite the early misunderstandings and the ill-tempered exchanges that
accompanied them, the talks have not been broken off. Mr Gonzalez is still
seeking a stable pact - ideally with nationalists, both Basque and Catalans,
in his cabinet - that will ensure the survival of his government.
There are, therefore, grounds to expect that home-rule wrinkles will be
ironed out, and with them the aggrieved and irritable rhetoric which has
traditionally characterised the mainstream Basque nationalists.
A spell as junior partners in a Madrid coalition government will certainly
help the Basque Nationalist Party to shake off its narrow localism. It
should also aid Spaniards to lose the suspicions they harbour about the
Basques as a whole as a consequence of Eta terrorism.
The planned overhaul of labour market rigidities by the Madrid government
meanwhile appears tailor-made for the Basque Country's recession-hit
industry. With its numerous small plants, employing up to 25 workers, the
Basque Country urgently needs flexible labour practices that allow for
functional mobility and labour force adjustments.
Current legislation, which applies to the Basque Country as it does
everywhere else in Spain, is weighted towards fixed employment and makes
dismissals costly. This legislation has been arguably the most important
factor in deterring investment, in raising unit labour costs and, in the
final analysis, fuelling the rise of joblessness in Spain.
Unemployment levels in the Basque Country are higher than the national
average.
The Basque government should also be able to use the lead given by Madrid
with its decision to impose wage restraint and, in particular, to freeze
public sector salaries next year in order to reduce the spiralling public
deficit.
In one of the least satisfactory aspects of autonomous governments in
action, civil servants in the Basque government, including teachers and
members of the Basque security forces, earn far higher salaries than do
their Madrid central administration counter-parts.
ELA-STV, the Basque trade union which wields strong power in the white
collar sector, is sticking out for exactly what the Basque economy does not
need: 6 per cent wage rises, more public sector jobs and shorter working
hours.
At present the Basque Country cannot afford the luxury of inflationary union
deals any more than it can waste time on the finer points of home rule
prerogatives.
It must take the route which establishes an efficient dialogue with Madrid.
That will help restore competitiveness to its economy and in so doing solve
the tension-ridden contradictions of its community.
