FT  09 FEB 93 / Consumers increase borrowings: 'Wise men' disagree about
taxes and interest rates; Statistics point to a slight improvement in the
economic outlook
BORROWING BY individuals for consumer purchases rose for the second
consecutive month in December, pointing to a slight improvement in
willingness to take on new debts.
Official figures out yesterday showed that consumers borrowed a net Pounds
56m in December, compared with net borrowings of Pounds 13m in November and
a net repayment of Pounds 138m in December 1991.
The better-than-expected figures were released as the latest consensus
forecast for UK growth this year crept upwards. Average GDP forecasts among
34 economists, provided by Consensus Economics, a consultancy company, was
for growth of 1 per cent this year and 2.4 per cent next year. This year's
forecast has been revised upwards from last month's mean of 0.9 per cent.
Forecasts for France, Germany and Italy have been revised downwards.
The Central Statistical Office said the total rise in net credit in the
three months to the end of December was Pounds 136m compared with a net
repayment of Pounds 11m in the previous quarter. This suggests that lower
interest rates encouraged consumers to borrow more but did not stimulate a
rapid recovery in consumer spending.
The Treasury said the figures were encouraging: 'The figures suggest a rise
in borrowing by consumers in December accompanied by prudent reductions in
indebtedness.'
The seasonally adjusted figures - which do not include mortgages and account
for only about 15 per cent of total private sector debt - also showed a
small increase in the amount of new credit advanced to consumers by finance
houses, building societies and on credit cards that are part of the Visa or
Mastercard system. In December new credit advanced was Pounds 4.67bn,
slightly higher than November's Pounds 4.06bn.
Although the latest figures are slightly more optimistic, the level of
consumer borrowing remains depressed. A broader measure of credit growth,
which includes bank loans on personal accounts and lending by non-bank
credit cards, painted a more sombre picture. This showed a slowing in net
consumer credit growth in the latest quarter compared with the third quarter
last year. In the three months to the end of December, consumer lending
according to this measure expanded by Pounds 153m compared with Pounds 392m
in the previous three-month period.
The figures underlined expectations for a slow economic recovery as
consumers continue to make debt repayment a priority.
