FT  26 AUG 93 / Better GCSE grades seen to reflect strength of candidates
HIGHER GRADES in GCSE exams reflect rising quality of candidates rather than
lower standards, a government study argues today.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, who last year ordered a special
check on the exams' standards, attempted to heal his breach with the
teachers' unions by congratulating them.
In the exam results published today, the proportion of candidates passing at
grades A-C - equivalent to a pass at the old GCE O-level - rose from 51.3
per cent to 52.4 per cent. Those achieving the top grade A rose from 12.5
per cent to 12.7 per cent.
The check on GCSEs by the Schools Examination and Assessment Council showed
that standards had not been lowered. A mandatory code of practice for
examining boards has been introduced, and government inspectors appointed in
individual subjects to check that standards are uniform.
Last year, Mr Patten began a series of acrimonious exchanges with the
teachers' unions by suggesting that grades had only improved because
standards had slipped.
Yesterday, in his first public appearance since returning to work after a
six-week stomach illness, he said: 'I congratulate pupils and their teachers
on these GCSE results. They can take particular pride in the fact that this
year's papers have been marked against the much more stringent standards
laid down in the code of practice for the examining boards which I announced
last January.'
However, the proportion failing to reach grade G, the lowest pass, also rose
slightly, from 1.4 to 1.8 per cent. The total number of separate exam
entries was 4.96m, a decline of 4.2 per cent since last year, while the
number of 15-year-olds has only fallen by 3.2 per cent, according to the
Department for Education.
Teachers' unions said the results vindicated the GCSE system, which replaced
O-levels and CSEs in 1988. The new system includes teacher assessment and
written examinations.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers, said that GCSE standards were 'holding firm', while Mr David
Hart, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said
the introduction of the code of practice should demonstrate 'even to the
most jaundiced critic' that education standards were 'on the up and up'.
Mrs Ann Taylor, Labour's education spokesman, said that Mr Patten's comments
last year had been a 'tactless blunder' which set the scene for 'a series of
bad judgments throughout the whole of the past year'. She said: 'Pupils,
parents and teachers will remember him belittling the achievement of last
year's successful candidates by alleging that standards had fallen. He still
owes them an apology.'
Educationalists suggested that the debate about standards had been
arbitrary. Mr Dylan Wiliam, lecturer in education at King's College, London,
pointed out that passes at A to C in mathematics stood at 46.6 per cent, but
for English were 57.3 per cent. 'All this means is that we've historically
set an easier threshold for English than for mathematics,' he said.
Decline in science, Page 6
