FT  15 JUN 93 / UPS rethinks its deliveries of red ink from Europe: Nikki
Tait analyses a shake-up at the world's biggest package delivery group
UNITED Parcel Service, the world's biggest package delivery company, is
rethinking its European strategy.
'We're going through the kind of appraisal we've never had time to do,'
admits 'Oz' Nelson, UPS's chairman.
The motive is simple. UPS, a privately owned company handling almost 3bn
packages a year and clocking up annual revenues of Dollars 16.5bn (Pounds
10.7bn), has spent the past eight years buying up local delivery firms
across Europe. The 16th and final transaction, the purchase of Carryfast in
the UK, was announced in June last year.
Although most of the deals were modest, UPS's total European investment,
including revamping the acquired facilities, is thought have topped Dollars
1bn.
Its reward, however, has been a steady flood of red ink. In 1992, 'foreign'
operations lost Dollars 276.2m before tax. This stretches the cumulative
deficit for the last three years to Dollars 795.8m.
UPS does not split out its international businesses, but it does confirm
that the bulk of these losses are in Europe.
Ominously, the company has abandoned its long-held aim of achieving
profitability in the region by 1994.
'Maybe we'll get there in 1996,' says Mr Nelson.
UPS is not alone in losing money hand-over-fist on a European delivery
business. Federal Express, UPS's Memphis-based rival, was obliged to abandon
its attempt to establish an intra-European delivery network last year, after
operating losses mounted to more than Dollars 100m a quarter.
The retrenchment cost 6,600 jobs and produced a one-off charge of Dollars
254m.
Most analysts attributed these problems to a serious mismatch between supply
and demand. The two US giants were drawn to Europe because they believed
that a unified European Community would accelerate the development of
pan-European businesses and create a related demand for speedy, reliable
cross-border delivery services.
To an extent, this has happened. UPS, for example, signed a contact earlier
this year with General Motors' European distribution network for the
overnight delivery of repair parts for Opel and Vauxhall cars.
But in general the pick-up in cross-border volume has been slow to emerge.
The overnight intra-European market has been put at fewer than 200,000
packages per day, for example, against 2m-3m sent around the US.
Federal's retrenchment removed one competitor from the market but other big
firms - notably Brussels-based DHL, Australia's TNT and UPS - continue to
battle for these thin pickings. In short, there is overcapacity.
But now, in what appears to be a shift of approach, Mr Nelson suggests that
UPS no longer sees its salvation in an increase in cross-border demand.
'There's just not a lot of business,' he admits. 'But if we can make the
domestic operations (in Europe) profitable, all the rest will eventually be
gravy.'
This is where the rethink is concentrated. There is little UPS can do about
Europe's recession, but it may be able to work on localised management
problems.
These stem partly from UPS's corporate culture in the US. It is one of
America's biggest private companies, owned principally by its managers and
supervisors. It has, for years, prided itself on running an immensely
efficient delivery operation, sending its ubiquitous brown vans to every
corner of the US.
But, until recently, UPS concentrated on delivery rather than selling the
service, which in turn led to strict work-rules and a rather conformist
culture. The company employed efficiency experts, for example, to determine
how fast drivers should walk, how they should carry the packages, handle van
keys, and so on.
By contrast, UPS's marketing department consisted of half a dozen people.
The company also clung to listed delivery rates long after competitors, such
as Federal and Airborne Express, wooed corporate customers with discount
offers.
Attempts to impose the same corporate approach in Europe have not always
gone smoothly.
In Spain, for example, where UPS purchased a package delivery company called
Cuallado in 1990, there was a costly one-month strike by drivers last year.
The drivers' grievances centred on US-style working conditions: they were
unhappy about UPS's no-smoking rules and its uniform requirements.
In France, meanwhile, UPS lost some top management when executives retired
shortly after the Prost Transport acquisition. In Italy, it simply misjudged
the competition: delivery by the Italian post office is very cheap.
'Anyone who can wait two or three days is not going to pay our rates,'
admits Mr Nelson.
UPS says that it learnt two decades ago, when it first tried to build a
German network from scratch, that foreign operations have to be run locally.
Although top management has now changed at the Spanish, Italian, and to an
extent at the French operations, Mr Nelson says the company still employs
relatively few US nationals in Europe.
But he is equally emphatic that these local managers, with the Atlanta head
office, need to make a thorough assessment of prospects.
How radical the conclusions may be is a moot point, but it seems some
serious reshaping may be on the cards. For example, in Italy, Mr Nelson is
mulling over the possibility of turning the business into a courier service
'when we grow up there'.
He is also insistent that much of the solution in Europe needs to be
marketing-driven, giving the operations more support through the regional
headquarters in London. This mirrors the changes which he has just pushed
through in the US.
At the end of the day, UPS's weaknesses may be its strengths. The company
has long pockets, a solid balance sheet, a large profitable US business, and
 -because of its private status - no pressure from Wall Street investors. It
also invites European managers into the ownership structure, giving them a
vested interest in success.
Asked to confirm that UPS will not repeat Federal Express's retrenchment, Mr
Nelson says: 'We don't walk away. We may tackle it differently.'
