FT  06 FEB 93 / A-Z of chess begins with K: 10 things you probably did not
know about Short's sport
IT SEEMS that the British are finally to be educated about chess.
On Monday The Sun newspaper, in its own inimitable style, published 'Ten
things you didn't know about Nigel Short'. This sort of accolade The Sun
normally reserves for pop stars and soap actors, but Short is about to
become as much a household name as any in those categories. Following his
victory a week ago in the final eliminator of the three-year-long world
chess championship, Nigel will in September become the first Briton to
contest a match for the title, and only the third non-Russian since 1927.
Short is set to do for chess what John Curry and Robin Cousins did for
ice-skating: turn it into a British craze, particularly among the young. The
Sun is right, therefore: the time has come to explain the game of kings in a
way which is comprehensible to all.
To win at top-flight modern grandmaster chess it is normally required to
have a surname beginning with K. Kasparov is the world champion. He
succeeded Karpov, who himself fought off two challenges from Korchnoi. The
two strongest teenage players in the world, who will be fighting out the
world chess championship well into the next century, are called Kamsky and
Kramnik. Vladimir Kramnik is 17 and already has a higher chess world ranking
than Short who, at 27, is sometimes called 'the grand old man of British
chess.'
When, last week, I told Short that his name began with the wrong letter, he
replied that he had looked into this, and that three of the 13 official
world champions since 1886 began with S - Wilhelm Steinitz, Vassily Smyslov
and Boris Spassky - and that this made the letter S the most successful and
desirable chess initial. But Nigel admitted he is hedging his alphabetical
bets: his guru and coach is grandmaster Kavalek.
Those who followed Short's recent victory will note that his opponent, Jan
Timman, was from the Netherlands. The only European to have won the world
championship in the past 60 years was another Dutchman, the late Max Euwe.
Theories have been advanced that the flat terrain of the Netherlands is
responsible for the national success at chess. Pieces never slide off the
board, which aids concentration and analysis.
The British chess master and industrial psychologist William Hartston has
attempted to apply similar arguments to chess ability. Players with
close-set eyes are likely to miss moves at the outer areas of the board,
while players with wide apart eyes are vulnerable to thrusts in the middle
of the board, players with long arms like to make extended, sweeping moves,
and so on. There is no proof of any of this, but it might also all be true.
I am often asked: 'Is there hooliganism in chess?'. The answer, I am afraid,
is yes. The Romanian grandmaster Florin Gheorgiou is in the habit of hurling
the pieces at the board with such ferocity that they have been known to
bounce up and strike opponents on the head.
Even the world champion, Gary Kasparov, is prone to sneering openly at his
opponents' bad moves. Once he did this to the US champion Yasser Seirawan,
and Seirawan snarled over the board: 'Do that again, buster, and I'll tear
your lungs out.' This is known as the Seirawan counter-gambit. It is
important, when essaying the Seirawan counter-gambit, that you are bigger
than your opponent.
Another question often asked by non-initiates is whether grandmasters can
take their moves back? Technically, the answer is no. It is possible to
adjust a piece's position within the square if it is off-centre, but
etiquette demands that this is preceeded by the utterance 'J'adoube'. Milan
Matulovic, a Yugoslav grandmaster, was notoriously prone to playing a
blunder, and then retracting the move, while muttering 'J'adoube' in a thick
Serb accent. He was known, naturally, as grandmaster Jadoubavitch.
The main problem for the British media, now that chess is about to become
big news, is that players' names tend to be difficult to spell, and even
more difficult to pronounce. Having heard news-readers' tongues stumble over
such simplicities as Korchnoi, Karpov and Kasparov, I fear for the worst
when Kasparov plays against Short: the name of Kasparov's chief aide is
Zurab Azmaiparashvili. It is a disaster waiting to happen. Dominic Lawson is
editor of The Spectator.
