FT  13 AUG 93 / Money Markets: Speculation on UK
Expectations of a cut in UK base rates remained fairly strong yesterday
after a small increase in unemployment in July and a slight drop in
manufacturing output in June, writes James Blitz.
Yesterday's unemployment figures showed the first net monthly rise for six
months. At the same time, a 2.1 per cent drop in manufacturing output in
June more than offset the 1.5 per cent rise the month before.
One sterling money market dealer said that the figures had triggered a new
round of speculation that UK base rates would be cut, with a few market
operators even wondering whether monetary policy might even be eased today.
However, another dealer dismissed this idea: 'You have to ask yourself
whether there is any political rationale behind such a cut, and right now,
there isn't,' he said.
The September and December short sterling contracts remained strongly
bullish for a cut, although they did not alter much during the day. The
September contract was up 2 basis points at 94.29 at the close, while the
December contract fell 2 basis points on the day to close at 94.73.
Sterling cash markets were more-or-less unchanged. Three month money dipped
slightly from 5.78 per cent to 5.75 per cent on the bid side. There was a
shortage of Pounds 1.1bn in the discount market, and only Pounds 30m of late
assistance.
European markets were very quiet, although another poor set of reserves
figures from the Bank of France led some dealers to think that interest
rates would only come slowly there.
The September French franc contract was up 4 basis points on the day at
93.42, quite a modest performance in the wake of the previous day's heavy
buying.
In the cash market, 3 month French francs closed about 20 basis points
higher on the day at 7.95 per cent as the franc came under heavy pressure in
the wake of the reserves figures. German call money eased yesterday after
the Bundesbank had surprised the market on Wednesday by adding a net
DM10.3bn to the banking system.
Call money hovered around 6.75 per cent after 6.80 per cent the previous
day. Some dealers said the high levels of liquidity had left the market in a
good position to meet a season of tax payments which should start next week.
