FT  22 MAY 93 / Gardening (A Taste of Chelsea): The agony aunts of gardening
lore
AS EVERY regular visitor to the Chelsea Flower Show knows, it is the people
who matter quite as much as the plants they exhibit.
There stand the men and women who know the answers - whether daffodil-leaves
should be tied in a knot, why your auriculas never germinated, why last
summer's tomatoes had black blotches. At other flower-shows, exhibitors are
too busy selling stuff to answer questions. At Chelsea, you fix the poor
devils with a gimlet eye and they have no place to hide.
Exhibitors have ways of evading interrogation. They spend a lot of time
fussing around the stand, squirting the roses and replenishing catalogues.
Language, too, can be a problem. Last year, my most urgent question was
about tulip fire. Does it persist in the soil? But the tulip-exhibitors were
dour Dutchmen and as soon as I waylaid them, each became resolutely
monoglot.
This year, I would find an answer. A section of the Great Marquee is
virtually a clinic for gardeners' problems. The Educational and Science
section is not glamorous; many exhibits are merely display panels and a few
plants. Nonetheless, knowing gardeners queue up for advice, often with bags
and matchboxes of unsavoury items.
For sick lawns, there is the Institute of Groundsmanship (0903-312511);
environmentally friendly ways with greenfly, the Henry Doubleday Research
Association (0203-303517); tree-problems, the Arboricultural Association;
(0794-68717). A sign of the times, the Metropolitan Police will be advising
on chaining down your statues and yuccas.
Among the agony aunts will be Dr Roland Fox of the School of Plant Sciences
at Reading University, known worldwide for its horticultural expertise. This
year's melancholy display, 'Diseases in the Garden', is also advertising
Reading's new BSc degree in crop protection as well as short courses on the
diagnosis of plant disease (0734-318708).
The exhibit itself is not about curing diseases but the symptoms which
reveal that 'the invisible worm' is in the bed. Ghastly photographs
illustrate scabs, lesions, cankers, blights, and moulds, all symptoms of
what the experts call necrosis and we call a dead plant. A close up of
carrot with black bodies, Sclerotimia sclerotorum, is as nasty as it sounds.
The vocabulary of the plant pathologist is strangely poetic. Fungi and
bacteria reveal themselves by streaks, stripes, fire, scald, scorch,
die-back, blotches, mummification, exuding, and bleeding. You want to know
what happens when your pears get scab? 'Conidia of the fungus form under the
cuticles then burst through to sporulate.' If the leaves of a plant grow
downwards, it has epinasty due to ethylene caused by wilts or canker.
Scabby potatoes and crooked cactuses will make this Chelsea's first exhibit
of (knowingly) diseased plants. However, some of these plants are valued for
their viruses. If it were not for arabis mosaic virus which dwarfs its
hosts, all kitchen-garden rhubarb would loom 6 ft tall.
The netted gold leaves on the honeysuckle, Lonicera japonica var
aureoreticulata, are due to a virus. It is not readily transmissible, which
is why the variegated form is tricky to propagate.
Virus has caused the variegations on clover, geraniums, abutilon, and a fine
golden-veined canna peculiar to Reading's collection. A silver variegated
pot of that awful pest, Mind Your Own Business, may have virus but could be
genetic.
If this sounds a trifle academic, the Reading team will be there to answer
questions. Why does my almond have Peach Leaf Curl despite being sprayed?
Answer, because England is cold, and Bordeaux Mixture is not half as
effective as lime sulphur which is listed in my old gardening books, but can
be the devil to find.
Dr Fox is used to gardeners weeping as they describe sudden death of trees
and shrubs. Often, honey fungus is often the cause. Disease, it is well
known, is a matter of social class and as Fox puts it, 'honey fungus is the
major disease of RHS members.' Look for white rot, like very old
matchsticks, and for black 'bootlaces'.
However, the good news is that the Reading team have found a 'very
effective' preventative for honey fungus which it is developing for the
market with Zeneca. Fox will not be drawn on the date of release, but it
should be with us in the next few years.
