FT  22 JUN 93 / Legal history made in Melton Medes pension case
MEMBERS OF the pension fund run by Melton Medes, the Nottingham-based
trading company, yesterday made legal history when a High Court judge
indicated he would award legal costs in their favour before their action
returns to the court.
The members are suing the pension fund's trustees - Mr Nathu Ram Puri, the
Melton Medes chairman, and Mr James Philpott, its chief executive - for more
than Pounds 7m, saying that they improperly handled funds regarding a loan
from the pension fund to Melton Medes' subsidiaries.
Although backed by the GPMU print union, the members halted the action after
legal costs escalated.
Mr Justice Vinelott, although not giving a final judgment, said yesterday he
was minded to award a pre-emptive costs order in their favour and against
the pension fund. This would enable the members to carry on their High Court
action until the trustees' evidence is disclosed.
It is the first time such a pre-emptive costs order has been made by the
courts. Mr Sean Hand, of solicitors Dibb Lupton Broomhead, acting for the
Melton Medes members, said it was an important safeguarding of the rights of
the members of pension funds that are controlled by their employers.
If, following the Goode committee's report on pension law, the government
did not support independent pension fund trustees, this ruling would
increase the opportunities for pension fund members to pursue grievances, he
said.
Mr Justice Vinelott also indicated he would support the members' request for
independent judicial trustees to be appointed to the pension fund board to
review their claims once the trustees' evidence had been disclosed. Mr Neil
Cooper and Mr Ipe Jacob, partners with accountants Robson Rhodes, have been
suggested by the pension fund members as independent trustees.
The members are supported by the Securities and Investments Board in a
parallel action seeking more than Pounds 4m damages from Melton Medes and
its pension fund trustees. SIB alleges Mr Puri and Mr Philpotts repeatedly
breached the rules of the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation in
handling pension fund assets.
