FT  17 FEB 93 / Management: Keeping in Czech - Fund manager Viktor Kozeny
aims to exert control over his portfolio
The dispersion of shares among thousands of very small investors has been
highlighted by critics of eastern Europe's mass privatisation programme
(MPP). They say this approach militates against the emergence of powerful
new owners with enough clout to impose their will on management.
Viktor Kozeny, an American-educated Czech financial whiz-kid whose Harvard
Capital and Consulting company (HC and C) is widely credited with breathing
unexpected life into the Czechoslovak MPP last year, is out to prove them
wrong.
After five rounds of competitive bidding spread over almost a year, nearly
50 per cent of the coupons representing shares in around 1,500 newly
privatised Czech and Slovak companies are held by a small group of nine
investment funds. They intend to use their concentrated power to exert
effective control over the companies in their portfolios.
The unexpected concentration of shares in only nine out of the 400 funds
which blossomed last year follows Kozeny's success in persuading millions of
sceptical and inexperienced Czechs and Slovaks to take up the government's
voucher offer. He did this by promising to buy the Kcs 1,000 (Pounds 24)
privatisation vouchers for Kcs 10,000 12 months after the government
converts them into shares in the newly privatised companies. This is now
expected to happen early in 1994.
The offer turned what many potential investors had originally perceived as a
dubious bargain into an apparent sure-fire money spinner. Interest in the
coupons soared, and eventually 8.5m Czechs and Slovaks took advantage of the
government offer and subscribed the equivalent of an average week's wages
for their coupon books. Only 28 per cent of the vouchers were retained by
individuals. The bulk were entrusted for management to the 400 or so funds,
with Kozeny's and eight others run by banks and insurance companies taking
the lion's share.
The majority of coupon holders had only the vaguest notions about the
potential value, or even the identity, of the state-owned enterprises whose
shares they were invited to bid their coupons for during the first wave of
the MPP. Kozeny's HC and C, the first fund which offered to manage the
coupons on behalf of their new owners, is one of the biggest.
Unlike most of his imitators among the new funds, who scattered their
delegated coupons among the enterprises on offer, Kozeny limited his
purchases to 50 companies which his research identified as the 'vertebral
column' of the Czech and Slovak economies.
With the political divorce in view, MC and C created two Slovak funds,
denominated in Slovak crowns, and six Czech funds which hold 85 per cent of
the assets under management. Most Slovaks opted to invest the bulk of their
coupons in Czech enterprises, but they will not be able to participate in
the second wave of Czech coupon privatisation.
The laser-beam approach to portfolio-building has left the funds managed by
HC and C with stakes in key Czech and Slovak enterprises which are
sufficiently large to give the fund managers, Kozeny in particular,
effective proprietorial rights in strategic sectors of the economy.
The list includes two of the leading banks, Komercni Bank where the fund's
17.5 per cent holding translates into 40 per cent control over an
institution with assets of around Dollars 10bn (Pounds 7bn), and 13 per cent
of voting shares, again equivalent to 40 per cent control, in Ceska
Spositana, the savings bank.
Other key holdings built up by Kozeny's funds include strategic stakes in
CEZ, the main Czech hydro-electric company, Slovnaft, the Bratislava
refinery, and minority stakes in companies such as Tabak, now controlled by
Philip Morris, and Cokoladny, controlled by Nestle.
The latter offers both income growth and a sop to national feeling by
ensuring Czech investors retain a stake in what many see as 'family silver'
companies. More to the point, given Kozeny's pledge to redeem the coupons
entrusted to the fund at 10 times their nominal value, shares in companies
with large foreign shareholders are perceived as more liquid and more easily
marketable than the bulk of new shares whose market value will only be
definable once they are exchanged for coupons and become tradeable.
With an eye on the most successful Czech export sectors, Kozeny's funds have
also acquired significant stakes in breweries, paper and pulp companies, a
dozen brick and cement companies and four out of the five biggest
construction companies. 'One of the brick companies in southern Bohemia is
selling bricks costing 80 pfennigs for DM5.80 (Pounds 2.52) apiece in
Munich,' he says, underlining the profit potential for low-cost Czech
companies able to benefit from the Bonn-financed reconstruction of former
east Germany and the high-wage west German economy.
By contrast, Kozeny adds: 'We have not invested a single coupon in the iron
and steel industry or engineering.' These sectors, he adds, are saddled with
over-capacity, low productivity and high environmental liabilities.
Kozeny's selective approach has given HC and C funds 15-20 per cent stakes
and one or two board seats in 37 companies, and 7-8 per cent stakes in 13
others. This gives the funds run by Kozeny, who founded HC and C with
Dollars 3,000 and retains 100 per cent ownership, a management voice in
assets with a book value of around Dollars 1bn or an estimated Dollars 1.5bn
at current prices.
Making these newly acquired assets profitable, though, will require some
drastic surgery. If Kozeny has his way 'up to 60,000 or 70,000 people in the
enterprises we now help manage, roughly 25 per cent of the present work
force will have to go'. That includes the banks which are in the midst of a
heavy investment programme in new computers and equipment.
The ability of Young Turks such as Kozeny to influence enterprise management
depends on the willingness of millions of inexperienced small investors to
resist the temptation to liquidate their shares at the earliest opportunity.
If investors take the long view, the new funds, or at least the handful
which have built up strategic stakes, should retain the concentration of
ownership required to exercise ownership rights. If not, some of the funds
could be swept away by liquidity pressures. These are nervous times for
those involved in the boldest mass privatisation programme to date in the
former communist bloc.
