FT  27 APR 93 / Arts: The history of sculpture, and Moore - William Packer
reviews diverse examples of the stone-carver's art / Exhibitions
The conversion, by the Jeremy Dixon/Edward Jones partnership, of a group of
Victorian offices and warehouses alongside the Leeds City Art Gallery, was
discussed in an architectural context by my FT colleague, Colin Amery, last
week. In more general terms, what it does is to give the newly constituted
Henry Moore Institute its headquarters, and the public a fine new gallery
dedicated to the display of sculpture.
The Henry Moore Centre for the Study of Sculpture was set up by the Henry
Moore Foundation in 1982 and housed within the Leeds City Art Gallery. The
Henry Moore Sculpture Trust came next, in 1988, to make work of all kinds
better available to the public. And since 1989, the Trust's active
collaboration with working sculptors has been centred upon the Henry Moore
Sculpture Studio, at Dean Clough in Halifax. For all this apparently
confusing - though hardly confused - activity the Institute will provide an
administrative heart and public focus.
However, the inaugural show is no celebration of the modern or contemporary.
Rather, in going back to some of the earliest surviving examples of English
medieval sculpture, it lays proper emphasis on a continuing and universal
tradition. It is nicely appropriate, too, to Henry Moore himself, whose
first conscious encounter with sculpture as such was with the medieval
monuments and decorative carvings in the parish church at Methley, a village
between Castleford and Leeds, to which he was taken by his schoolmaster as a
boy.
Rather more ironically apropos is the story Moore often cited of the carving
rolled down the hill and reduced to its truer self as all the unnecessary
bits were knocked away. At Leeds, with the more-or-less life-size figures
from the West Front of York Minster which dominate the exhibition, are
sculptures not so much with the unnecessary bits knocked off as with
virtually all the bits knocked off, mere ghosts and dim echoes of
sculptures, so grievously are they eroded.
They remain extraordinary objects, the physical nature of their substance
wonderfully revealed in the weathering and pitting that reduces the
limestone to honeycomb. But to claim such residue as art is wishful
thinking. What it might have been is another matter. Certain of these
figures - and the rather better-preserved fragments and reliefs from York
itself, Gisborough, Lincoln and elsewhere - do more than enough to tell us
what has been lost. They do this by their own vigour, formal invention and
refined simplicity. Devils devour a sinner's soul: a mason carves at a block
of stone. Such images touch the heart across the centuries.
The importance of the art-historical research into these works is undoubted,
and already it has been established that the York figures long pre-date the
14th century West Front, with which they had always been assumed
contemporary. But scholarship, however worthy, does not always make for
successful exhibitions. Here the Romanesque would have been a subject
entirely appropriate to the occasion of this brave new departure, but sadly,
in the event, this exhibition is a misjudgment and a disappointment.
Over at Kirkstall Abbey, an incongruously complete and magnificent ruin in a
Leeds suburb, the German sculptor, Ulrich Ruckreim has installed a series of
works in the north arcade, which appears made for the spot. Ruckreim is a
minimalist, but a romantic minimalist, splitting open his blocks of stone in
a way that both celebrates the material itself, in its mass and physical
texture, and the manner of his working it - the drilling and cutting and
splitting.
Here he also responds directly to the setting, putting the component pieces
of these works through as many permutations, but making each single work
conform to a consistent buttress-like image that both echoes and opposes the
ambient gothic architecture. And if, in the event, his work here serves to
celebrate the great spaces of the Abbey rather than itself, it is as clear
that Ruckreim is as moved by them as we are, turning with us to consider the
high vaults, the great void of the West Window, and the sky above.
Jorgen Sorensen is a Danish sculptor of international reputation, yet one
who is barely known in Britain. Indeed, this exhibition at the Yorkshire
Sculpture Park is his first substantial showing in Britain in a 30-year
career. Set in the Park's upper spaces, high above Bretton Hall near
Wakefield and the valley beyond, his work could hardly be seen to better
advantage. In particular, never before has he had the opportunity to throw
his work up so high against the sky.
He too is now principally a carver and a consummate carver at that, working
the surface of the stone with the utmost subtlety and variety of tone and
texture, yet never sacrificing an essential and monumental simplicity that
lately has grown ever simpler.
Here he shows only his non-figurative work, resting mass upon mass to be
held by sheer weight alone and, like Ruckreim, leaving the marks of drill
and wedge to declare themselves.
And yet, for all their massiveness, these things retain a curious humanity,
if not of scale then at least of feeling. The great granite piece that
stands alone in the centre of the sloping Bothy Garden, abstract as it is,
recalls nothing so much as one of the late two- or three-piece reclining
figures of Henry Moore - an indirect and unconscious homage perhaps, but in
these circumstances wonderfully appropriate.
Romanesque  - Stone Sculpture from Medieval England: The Henry Moore
Institute, Leeds, until July 19  - funded by the Henry Moore Foundation
Ulrich Ruckreim: Kirkstall Abbey, Leeds, until June 20  - presented by the
Henry Moore Sculpture Trust
Jorgen Sorensen  - Retrospective: The Yorkshire Sculpture Park, Bretton
Hall, near Wakefield, until July 4  - supported by the Arts Council's
International Fund, the Danish Ministry of Culture, the Royal Danish
Embassy, Celcon Blocks Ltd and the Henry Moore Foundation
