FT  30 JUN 93 / Clock keeps ticking: Prospects for a deal on Hong Kong
As Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor, sits down for a meeting of the
British cabinet's Hong Kong committee tomorrow he could be forgiven for
feeling that his firm stand with China in negotiations on the colony's
political future has been vindicated.
Beijing said it would never again talk to the British about Hong Kong's
development if Mr Patten did not withdraw his blueprint for a fairer, more
open way of electing members of Hong Kong's Legislative Council (LegCo), the
colony's lawmaking body. It also said it would never talk if Mr Patten
published his legislation.
Mr Patten has not withdrawn his proposals - they remain the British
negotiating position - and he did publish his legislation. But Beijing has
returned to the negotiating table.
Tomorrow's meeting of the British cabinet's Hong Kong committee will give
ministers an opportunity to take stock of progress made in the talks in
Beijing. It will allow them to fine-tune Britain's negotiating position and
to consider in what circumstances Britain would be prepared to terminate the
talks.
More important, it will provide an opportunity for ministers to consider how
far each side is likely to compromise to secure agreement on Hong Kong's
political future.
Only six months ago China was actively undermining business confidence in
the colony by trying to unseat the governor. Now Beijing is taking a more
positive approach than when the talks began in Beijing in late April.
China has allowed several high-profile public works contracts to proceed,
and it has indicated it wants Hong Kong's HKDollars 165bn airport to go
ahead.
It has also proceeded with plans for nine state companies to seek listings
on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
Progress on such projects reflects, in part, Beijing's wish to sustain Hong
Kong's economic and business success after sovereignty reverts to China in
1997. It is also the result of increasing co-operation between China and
much of Hong Kong's business community, eager to secure good relations with
Beijing before the handover.
But if there is evidence that China is moderating its position on economic
matters, there is no sign of progress on the political issues. China appears
to be as implacably opposed to the governor's plans to extend democracy to
Hong Kong as it has been since the proposals were unveiled last October.
The talks on Hong Kong's political development were a barren exercise until
the sixth round which ended last weekend. There was no breakthrough, but the
Chinese government set down for the first time its specific objections to
the Patten package.
Mr Jiang Enzhu, China's chief negotiator, presented Beijing's view on the
two most controversial aspects of the package. These are the governor's
proposal for an electoral college which will elect 10 members to the LegCo
in 1995, and his proposal to broaden the franchise of 30 'functional'
constituencies, which represent special interest groups, such as business,
industry and the professions.
In the words of a senior Hong Kong government official, 'horns have been
locked'.
Britain has sought to improve Mr Patten's tactical position in the talks by
asking the Chinese to agree to full democratic elections in Hong Kong by
2007.
It has also asked for Hong Kong government representation in a Chinese
committee which will be formed in 1996 to prepare for the transfer of
sovereignty.
Mr Patten is prepared to give ground, specifically on his proposal for the
creation of nine new functional constituencies, to be added to the existing
21.
Originally he envisaged carving up Hong Kong's 2.8m workforce into nine
electorates. China saw this for what it was - an attempt to get more
broadly-based representatives elected to the LegCo.
More important, the proposal has failed to win support among LegCo members.
Mr Patten knows it would probably be defeated in LegCo if it were deciding
the matter.
The governor continues to claim there are points on which he will not
compromise. These are: the need to broaden the electoral base of the
functional constituencies; full democratic election of all members of the
electoral college; and a commitment by the Chinese to define the criteria of
a 'loyalty test' LegCo members will have to pass if they want to serve after
China resumes sovereignty in 1997. The governor will want the cabinet to
endorse his stance on these issues.
He will also want to remind ministers that time for negotiation is not
infinite. Mr Patten does not tire of reminding Hong Kong and China that
measures have to be in place to ensure adequate preparation for elections in
1994 and 1995. As Mr Patten put it yesterday, just before he flew to London,
'tick tock goes the clock'.
The governor has indicated that he wants an agreement, or at least a sign
that agreement is not far off, by September. He has not called this a
deadline, for fear that China might treat it as a deadline that must be
broken.
An autumn target is important for Mr Patten since he will want something
positive to present to the LegCo at the opening of its 1993-94 session on
October 6. The governor's credibility and that of his administration would
suffer if he were able to say only that the talks were continuing.
Mr Patten's popularity remains high in Hong Kong as does support for his
proposals for political liberalisation. And nobody is yet arguing that it is
time to pull out of the talks. Yet Mr Patten will have to be seen to have
done all in his power to secure an agreement if he is to win broad public
support.
The governor is an optimist; he believes China and Britain can do a deal. In
believing this he is betting that China's interest in achieving a
trouble-free transition from British to Chinese rule in 1997 will make
Beijing more prepared to compromise than it has so far been prepared to do.
