FT  17 DEC 93 / Sinn Fein reaction keeps hopes of Ulster peace alive
Hopes of peace in Northern Ireland were kept alive yesterday when Sinn Fein
said it would take time to consider in detail its response to this week's
peace initiative by Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds.
As the British government sought to reassure Unionists at Westminster by
giving the go-ahead for a Northern Ireland parliamentary select committee,
Mr Gerry Adams, president of the IRA's political wing, said he was still
'personally and politically' committed to helping secure peace in Northern
Ireland. But he warned there were 'no quick fixes' to the province's
problems.
His statement reflected the difficulties the Republican movement is having
in co-ordinating a response to the prime minister's main demand that the IRA
should lay down its arms.
It is understood that an early meeting between senior Sinn Fein officials
and members of the IRA on Wednesday failed to produce an agreed response to
the joint declaration. The final decision is in the hands of the IRA's Army
Council which is understood not to have met in full session on the issue.
Mr Adams said the Downing Street declaration was the product of 'frenzied
activity' by the two governments after his talks with Mr John Hume, leader
of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party, had
'focused them on this issue'. He would be seeking clarification from Dublin
on some aspects of Wednesday's statement by the UK and Irish prime
ministers.
At Westminster, Mr Major came under pressure from his own back benches over
whether the declaration diluted the government's commitment to the Union. In
an acid exchange, he clashed with Mr Norman Lamont over the former
chancellor's assertion that the declaration stood 'a little oddly' with his
speech to the Conservative party conference in October.
In contrast to the cross-party plaudits for the government on Wednesday,
there were further backbench rumblings in the wake of a signal from Sir
Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, that the government might begin
talks with Sinn Fein without waiting for the IRA to hand in its weapons. One
Tory MP accused the government of giving in to terrorists.
Downing Street said the select committee decision - announced yesterday by
Mr Tony Newton, the Commons leader - was not related to the Anglo-Irish
declaration on Northern Ireland, which was 'on a separate track'. Officials
said the decision - which was not communicated in advance to Mr Reynolds or
Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist party leader - was taken by Mr
Newton after consultation with Mr Major and Sir Patrick.
The IRA last night claimed responsibility for two bombs discovered earlier
by the track near Brookwood railway station, Surrey. Army teams blew up the
packages at the station.
London hints at early start to talks, Page 9
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
