FT  02 FEB 93 / UK Company News: Medicine can come in many forms - Jane
Fuller considers whether the doubts concerning company doctors are justified
WITH 80,000 companies going bust last year and another 80,000 forecast to do
so this year, it is a bad time for doubt to be creeping in about the
efficacy of company doctors.
These professionals are brought in short-term to carry out the financially
essential - but difficult and unpleasant - tasks that the previous
management either shrank from or were ill suited to doing.
They close factories, axe staff, sell businesses and assets. They keep open
bank credit lines with one hand and tease new money out of institutional
investors with the other. If they succeed, they hand over the stabilised
company to new long-term managers.
But the view has gained currency that this recession is proving a bad one
for an elite group of high profile and highly paid company doctors.
Sir Lewis Robertson recently lost Lilley, the Glasgow-based contracting and
construction group, to receivership. In a long career, it was the first of
his seven rescues to fail and can be contrasted with cases from the last
recession, such as Triplex Lloyd, which are now healthy.
Mr Roy Barber saw Astra Holdings, the defence company under investigation by
the DTI, go into receivership. Shareholders in Davies &amp; Newman, under Mr
David James's care for two years, were left with nothing when it was wound
up after Dan-Air, its airline subsidiary was sold last year for Pounds 1 to
British Airways.
It is easy to see why the longest recession since the Second World War has
provided a hostile environment for corporate rescues. 'It is a difficult
time to sell property and non-core subsidiaries, and more difficult to turn
round what remains,' Mr Barber says.
Mr Trevor Swete, managing director of Postern, a corporate rescue firm,
says: 'By definition company doctors are on a tight wire. All their charges
have severe financial difficulties and one or two of those wires will
break.'
The focus on well publicised failures runs the risk of devaluing the role
outsiders can play in saving companies. This is the message of two recent
studies by firms of accountants.
In one, the insolvency arm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, formerly known as Cork
Gully, called for the reform of the 1986 Insolvency Act to foster a 'rescue
culture'.
In the other, Grant Thornton warned that many businesses risked insolvency
because they were not ready to cope with the end of recession, in particular
the need to seek extra finance. One of Grant Thornton's criticisms was that
companies showed a reluctance to seek the help of professional advisers.
The implication of both studies is that there is a clear need for company
doctoring in all its forms.
Leaving aside the up-market end of the profession - Mr James's latest fees,
for instance, are Pounds 35,000 a month (partly for office overheads) - a
great deal of remedial work is already being carried out by people who would
not describe themselves as company doctors.
One of the big lending banks says that only four or five of the 130-plus
'live work-outs' in its intensive care unit are in the hands of company
doctors.
The preferred route is to get the changes implemented by the existing
management, albeit with the banks wielding the big stick. 'They often come
to accept that if they don't do what we want, they won't have a future,
because we won't put more money in,' says the banker.
If a revamping of management is necessary, the newcomer(s) will not
generally be a short-term company doctor but long-term executives, typically
a new chief executive and/or finance director.
There are several examples of fresh management being recruited from
companies in the same sector - Mr Archie Norman (ex-Kingfisher) at Asda, the
supermarkets group, for instance.
Another option is to bring on to the board a director with a reputation for
pushing through changes such as Mr Michael Beckett, whose charges have
included Tace and Ultramar. He describes himself as a 'very independent'
non-executive director who is called upon 'to clean up the boards. In 1991 I
got rid of 27 directors'.
Even insolvency practitioners do more work related to company rescues than
receiverships, according to Mr Steve Hill, an insolvency partner at Coopers
&amp; Lybrand.
But whatever hopes are raised by the new people or the new approaches,
serious limitations remain.
Some patients will be lost. Mr Swete points out that most company doctoring
does not start until a banking covenant has been breached, putting the banks
in the driving seat.
'Generally the banks bring in a company doctor and in this situation the
shareholders have lost an effective voice,' says Mr Paul Myners, chairman of
Gartmore Investment Management.
Perhaps the lesson is that shareholders should act earlier. One
institutional investor says the best safeguard against a business becoming
company-doctor material lies in a properly constituted board. But he adds
that this is a 'counsel of perfection'.
More commonly, shareholders appear slow to act - other than by selling out
quietly. They shy away from getting together to call for change until
'disaster is at hand'. Even if the patient survives the initial financial
trauma, a company has to have orders, sales and cash flow to service its
debt and pay other creditors. In other words, many of the walking wounded
are awaiting economic recovery.
Mr Eugene Anderson, who was brought in to restructure Ferranti
International, the electronics and defence group, in 1990 after a huge fraud
was discovered, said recently it needed orders to generate cash. 'We have
bids out for about Pounds 400m of business. If we win only Pounds 100m, that
would totally transform us. We're at a very critical stage.'
Finally, it is worth pointing to the successes as well as the failures of
company doctors, although it can take years to tell whether the medicine has
really worked. Last week Stakis, with Sir Lewis Robertson as chairman and an
industry man, Mr David Michels (ex-Hilton International) as chief executive,
announced a Pounds 28m rights issue and the Pounds 50m sale of its nursing
homes division.
On a less public level, survival tips are being offered daily to
debt-strapped businesses by a raft of advisers. Mr Swete gives the example
of a company which had found a buyer for an asset, but was advised to spread
out the payments to avoid the risk of the bank taking the money and pulling
the plug.
In contrast to the priorities of a bank-appointed receiver, a company
doctor's 'primary duty is to the company; the secondary one, to whom ever
brought him in,' Mr Swete adds.
The real world dictates, however, that if the interest of the company
diverges too much from that of the bank, it will not succeed.
Banks claim that they are not trigger happy when it comes to calling in
receivers. The head of one intensive care unit says that over the past two
years only a third of the companies in that unit have gone bust.
The motives are not altruistic. 'It is a simple economic truth that
businesses are worth more intact, without taint of insolvency,' says Mr
Hill.
To avoid that taint, the more company doctoring that goes on, and the
earlier advice is sought, the smaller the final bankruptcy toll of this
recession will be.
