FT  13 FEB 93 / As They Say in Europe: Language of diplomacy
AS USUAL last Saturday, French radio stations carried extensive accounts of
the day's rugby internationals. There was also the regular phone-in and,
once again, I was impressed with the expertise and sense of le fair-play
exhibited by commentators, fans and rugbymen. Then, on France-Inter, there
was another phone-in. It was about the Ecu, monetary union, and speculation
against the franc,
In all such programmes, there are three groups of callers: buffoons,
paranoiacs, and those occasional rational, fair-minded people who agree with
me. This occasion was dominated by those who believed the US and its satrap,
Japan, were plotting against the European Community.
The Americans were leading a speculative attack on the franc to destroy the
EC. They were jealous of the dollar's global role and would stop at nothing
to prevent the Ecu's eventual take-over. They were helped by the English,
because the City of London had built its prosperity on speculation and could
not afford to let a whole lot of speculative opportunities - ie, numerous
European currencies - disappear. So, they were picking on them one by one to
break up the European monetary system and destroy all prospects of monetary
union.
Listeners were invited to phone in and record their vote, for or against
monetary union. About 1,500 did so and they split 81-19 per cent in favour.
What was extraordinary about that hour as I sat, captivated, by French radio
stations was that a rugby match should be treated with total objectivity,
credit being given where credit was due, while intricate questions of
international monetary policy should generate deep passion, xenophobia and,
of course, paranoia.
The immediate inspiration for this outbreak was the view enunciated by a
right-wing politician and former prime minister, Raymond Barre, who had
described the assaults on the franc as speculation contre l'Europe. A
foreign exchange dealer on the studio panel pointed out that there had been
only 'speculation for Europe' before the Danes voted No last June.
There is one sure way of knowing when a French politician is talking through
his hat - translate what he says into English. 'Speculation against Britain'
is the kind of phrase that nobody in the UK could get away with - British
politicians have to use other techniques to obfuscate and conceal lack of
thought.
Anybody who doubts this principle should stand outside the Lycee francais in
South Kensington and check which language the bilingual pupils use when they
emerge. If they wish to communicate vital information rapidly, they speak
English. ('Cor] Did you see Jean-Claude Pineau de Charente smash Claude-Remy
Martin de St Emilion's teef in] You should of. It were ace').
If they wish to indulge in sophistry and deceive, French will be the natural
choice. ('Tu sais, mon vieux, sans Eric Cantona l'equipe de Manchester
United aurait etait massacree meme par Stockport County'). This explains why
British politicians sound better in, say, Le Monde than in The Sun.
But I digress. It is apparent that the outburst of French Euro-fanaticism is
associated with greater hostility towards the neighbour across the Channel:
differences grow more acute. Is it not, for instance, strange that as the
franc strengthens and grows more reliable as a store of value, the more the
French wish to do away with it, while British loyalty to the rotten pound
grows as the currency declines?
Presumably, this is because of the new orthodoxy which holds that the main
foundation for a strong economy is a weak currency. The attempt to put this
policy into effect is seen as sabotage in France and has aggravated what one
might call the Hoover syndrome.
I had intended not to get involved in this matter, but 'social dumping'
might well turn out to be one of those phrases that will echo down the
weeks, like 'the end of history.' The move of Hoover's plant from Dijon to
Glasgow has become a symbol of almost everything. Le Figaro saw it as a
reflection of the 'third-worldisation' of parts of Britain and evidence of
the miserable plight of Scottish wage-earners. When the Lion chocolate bar
factory moved in precisely the reverse direction, that was merely a normal
commercial decision.
It was still strange that the prime minister, John Major, decided to see the
Hoover move as a vindication of his rejection of the social chapter of the
Maastricht treaty. This has played into the hands of his French critics, who
have to find what has been impossible up to now: a translation for 'level
playing field.' Hang around the lycee in South Ken and something will turn
up.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
