FT  30 DEC 93 / Chretien's deft footwork keeps Liberals' stock high: The
Canadian PM's down-to-earth style
Mr Jean Chretien has enjoyed a remarkable honeymoon in the seven weeks since
becoming Canada's 20th prime minister. This is not because he has shirked
any difficult decisions; on the contrary, he has tackled a long list of
politically risky initiatives.
Despite earlier promises to renegotiate the North American Free Trade
Agreement, his new Liberal government will implement the pact as scheduled
on January 1. Mr Chretien has also scrapped the previous Conservative
government's plan to privatise the country's biggest airport, and cancelled
a contentious CDollars 5bn (Pounds 2.5bn) helicopter order.
The Liberals have also flown in the face of advice from business leaders and
foreign investors by replacing Mr John Crow, the inflation-fighting governor
of the Bank of Canada. And the prime minister has sent unambiguous signals
since taking office of plans for a thorough overhaul of social security
programmes such as unemployment insurance and welfare. The 10 provinces have
been told to expect little, if any, increase in the federal transfers which
help fund their health, education and welfare budgets.
The initiatives have so far been greeted with little dissent. The latest
Gallup poll shows the Liberals riding high, with the support of 56 per cent
of decided voters. This is their highest approval rating since 1970, and far
above the 41 per cent of the vote which brought them to power in October.
Fears that Mr Crow's departure would send the Canadian dollar into free fall
have turned out to be groundless. The Liberals are now being applauded for
replacing him with his more personable deputy, Mr Gordon Thiessen, and for
promising to hold the inflation rate below 3 per cent until at least 1998.
The dollar has risen by more than one US cent in the past week to 75.50 US
cents.
Mr Chretien, who will take a break from domestic politics next week for a
trip to London, Paris and the Nato summit in Brussels, is given much of the
credit for the Liberals' adroit footwork.
The new prime minister often describes himself as just 'a little guy from
Shawinigan' (his home town in rural Quebec). He has neither the intellect of
his mentor, Mr Pierre Trudeau, nor the brokering skills of his Conservative
predecessor, Mr Brian Mulroney. But, as one observer puts it, Mr Chretien's
political instincts are as firm as the footing of a mountain goat.
His experience is unrivalled among Canadian politicians; he celebrated his
30th anniversary as a member of parliament this year, having held almost
every key portfolio during the Liberals' last period in office in the 1970s
and early 1980s.
The previous Conservative government, hobbled by the public's mistrust of
former prime minister Brian Mulroney, was wary of potentially unpopular
initiatives in its last few years in office. But Mr Chretien's down-to-earth
style contrasts sharply with Mr Mulroney's inflated rhetoric and imperious
demeanour.
The tough times of the past few years - unemployment still tops 11 per cent
and public-sector deficits are at record levels - have helped make Canadians
more receptive to the message of change.
Another factor in the new government's favour is its warm relations with the
civil service.
The Conservatives alienated senior bureaucrats by attaching large political
staffs to each cabinet minister's office. These appointees shielded
ministers from ideas generated in the civil service, while exposing them to
the influence of special interest groups.
Mr Chretien has sent strong signals to his mandarins that their advice will
be valued. Members of his cabinet have been told to keep their political
staffs to a minimum. More than one political observer has remarked that the
longest faces in Ottawa this winter belong to the lobbyists whose businesses
flourished in the Mulroney years.
The Liberals next big test starts on January 17, when the House of Commons
reconvenes for the first time since the election. A new opposition,
dominated by the separatist Bloc Quebecois and the right-of-centre Reform
party, will then begin peppering the government with questions and
criticisms.
Two issues are bound to keep the new government's hands full; Quebec
separatism and economic revival.
Mr Chretien would prefer to avoid a repetition of the interminable
constitutional wrangles which dogged Canadian politics in the late 1980s
over Quebec separatism. But a provincial election must be held in Quebec by
next autumn. The Bloc Quebecois and its provincial counterpart, the Parti
Quebecois, will seize every opportunity to promote the separatists' cause.
On the economic front, the Liberals face the delicate task of fulfilling
their campaign promise to create jobs and revive the economy, without
increasing the budget deficit.
They are pressing ahead with a modest CDollars 6bn public works programme,
to be funded by federal, provincial and municipal governments. But Mr Paul
Martin, finance minister, has damped expectations by revising the projected
federal deficit for the year to March 1994 to CDollars 44bn-CDollars 46bn,
far above the CDollars 32.6bn forecast by the Conservatives just eight
months ago.
Mr Martin has put out word that the Liberals' first budget, to be presented
in February or March, will be largely a holding operation.
The main event is now scheduled for early 1995, by when Mr Chretien and his
colleagues hope to have fleshed out their plans for new social security
programmes, tax reform and defence cuts.
