FT  15 JUN 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Small firms warned
Small and medium-sized firms in Europe have enjoyed dynamic growth but now
face tougher competition from larger companies following the creation of the
single European market.
This is one of the findings of the first in a planned series of annual
reviews of the smaller firms sector in Europe. The European Observatory for
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises* is compiled by academic researchers in
the 12 member countries.
In the short term the single market is expected to reduce delays and red
tape following the removal of customs checks at borders and the
harmonisation of technical standards. But some formalities have simply been
shifted on to businesses and there is a strong risk that smaller firms will
not fully reap the benefits in practice, the review warns.
In the medium term the creation of larger markets and more trade will
increase competition from new entrants, often larger firms, in many
traditional markets. In manufacturing sectors where small firms have been
unable to exploit economies of scale they may lose market share.
The number of small firms in manufacturing and distribution will probably
decline. By contrast, the creation of a larger market place will create
opportunities for further specialisation and new business initiatives. This
will prompt the creation of new companies offering innovative products and
services but will also lead to higher failure rates.
Almost 99.9 per cent of the 15.7m businesses in the EC are small or medium
sized and they employ 70 per cent of the total workforce. There are 14.5m
micro enterprises (employing up to nine people), 1m small firms (between 10
and 99 people) and 70,000 medium-sized businesses (from 100 to 499 people).
There are only 12,000 companies larger in size.
*Free summary from Warwick Business School Centre for SMEs. Tel. 0203
523741. Full text - 437 pages, Ecu 60 (Pounds 47) plus VAT - from EIM Dutch
Research Institute for SMEs Tel. +31 79 41 36 34.
