FT  20 SEP 93 / Management: If you don't strike oil fast, stop boring - Tips
from the Top / Sipko Huismans of Courtaulds gives advice on how to make an
after-dinner speech
Giving an after-dinner speech usually seems a better idea at the time you
accept the invitation than it does when you are just finishing the main
course on the night.
This is one of those rare moments in life when a certain amount of humility
can be very helpful. The most useful thing I can suggest is to imagine the
thoughts going through the mind of one of the dinner guests as the speaker's
moment arrives. Who is the speaker? Why is he speaking? What does he have to
say that is worthwhile? Will it be boring? How long will it be?
If you're such a celebrity that your mere presence is an attraction in
itself, these remarks do not apply, but my presumption is that few of us
businessmen are in the Bill Clinton or Madonna 'glamour' class. Even then,
be sure that your speech lives up to the glamour image - you can only go
downhill from the moment you stand up. Much better to come from behind - 'a
boring grey businessman'. At least then if you are boring, there are no
surprises and if you did manage to stimulate and entertain, you're ahead of
the game.
I have seen countless articulate and persuasive communicators (and they have
to be, to some extent, to have become senior managers in the first place)
read out speeches written by newly recruited MBAs in the corporate
communications department that are utterly unconvincing.
Whatever you do - do it yourself. If you are dull and without anything
original to say, nothing is lost - your true self is revealed. The danger is
that you put across an image much worse than reality.
Pick a subject you believe in. Something you can put a bit of passion and
emotion into. If the subject you're asked to speak on is dull, do the
politicians' trick: answer the question you were not asked - or if all else
fails, refuse to do it. Don't get trapped into a speech on 'the merits of M1
as a means of measuring the money supply' if you're not a passionate
monetarist. And if you are, make it entertaining - over-simplify - use quite
inappropriate role models to explain - anything to wake them up and keep
their interest. After all, you're there for a purpose: either to persuade
them of your point of view, to entertain, or because you're being paid (I've
heard of this, but it has never happened to me).
You have to establish a rapport with the audience - the best way is to make
them laugh. I've never found the story of the 'dog and the two old ladies'
funny when delivered by someone who is profoundly unfunny - resist the
manufactured joke. The best and safest funnies are told against yourself:
you can risk a joke against the haggis (when you're in Scotland) or the
cricket team (when you're in England) but don't go too far.
When you get into your subject, find someone in the audience who agrees with
you. You will recognise that person when he or she nods at your most
profound points. Identify a sympathiser and look for the occasional bit of
confirmation of your views.
By all means have a shortlist of topics that you need to touch on, but at
all costs resist a written-out speech. You're not the chancellor of the
exchequer, whose every word is weighed and re-interpreted. The risk of
forgetting something or saying something slightly indiscreet is far
outweighed by the risk of being deadly dull and boring.
Look at your audience - you'll know when you've lost them - and it won't be
because of what you say but how you say it. And when they're getting bored
or you've gone on too long, wind it up fast and sit down. If that happens
within minutes of starting, you're on to a dead loser and you had best keep
it short.
From then on it is classic stuff - tell them what you're going to say - say
it - and tell them what you've just said. Use anecdotes to illustrate the
points. Above all, never forget - you're the entertainment.
Thank the host for asking you, thank the audience for listening, and thank
heaven it's over and you can get to the port and cigars.
Next Monday: Sir Alistair Grant of the Argyll Group on how to stay close to
your customers.
