FT  27 MAR 93 / Pressure of people to test the west: Migration has focused
attention on soaring world population
Industrialised countries will be confronted with an unprecedented influx of
would-be immigrants in the next few decades, putting their economies under
enormous pressure. That is the message delivered by Mrs Nafis Sadik,
director of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), to the UN conference
on European population this week in Geneva.
More than 2m immigrants are believed to have entered both Europe and North
America over the past two years alone. While Poland, Hungary and
Czechoslovakia have so far taken the brunt of Russians, gypsies and
Romanians from the east, political chaos in Russia could intensify westward
migration. This is quite apart from the pressures from the south, Mrs Sadik
warned.
Migration, many UN officials and economists in Geneva argued, would be the
factor spurring industrialised countries to pay more attention to the
world's soaring population. Prince Charles pointed out that at last June's
Earth Summit in Rio, the link between numbers of people and destruction of
the natural environment was conspicuous by its absence from the agenda.
The Vatican's resistance to including population in the talks was
unsurprising, but the Philippines and some Middle Eastern countries with
high birth rates also proved obstructive. Environmental pressure groups,
wary of telling developing countries how to manage their affairs, were also
quiet.
Such reticence is difficult to understand in the light of UN population
projections - one puts the world's population at 11bn in 2050, double its
present 5.5bn, before it stabilises. Mr Miroslav Macura, demographer with
the UN Economic Commission for Europe, reminded the conference that the
total 'could be anywhere from 5bn to 20bn' if fertility rates turned out to
differ even marginally from the model's assumptions.
Nearly 95 per cent of the projected rise will come from developing
countries, despite the considerable success of many Asian and Latin American
countries in bringing down the rate of population growth in the past two
decades.
India now has a fertility rate of about 4 - the average number of children
per woman implied by the current birth rate - a fall of about a third in the
last two decades. China, after its ferocious policy of curbing family size,
has a rate of about 2.4, though that is still above the two children per
woman which maintains a static population.
But across much of sub-Saharan Africa, fertility rates have been running at
more than 6. Recent studies, although based on less than perfect data,
suggest the Aids epidemic is cutting only 1 percentage point off population
growth. Ethiopia, despite recurrent famine, still has a fertility rate of
about 3.
According to Mr Fred Sai, president of the International Planned Parenthood
Federation and chairman of Ghana's population council, African countries now
recognise that family planning is a tool for health improvement. But the
answers to restraining a high growth rate of population are not clear-cut.
Recent evidence shows that the traditional assumption that family size falls
with economic progress does not always hold true. Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Bulgaria and Kerala in India have all shown sharp falls in family size
despite relatively low prosperity, while the Gulf states have maintained
fertility rates of more than 3 during a period of sharply rising wealth.
'For every level of prosperity, you can find an enormous range of fertility
rates,' said Mr David Coleman from Oxford University. 'The things that
really bring down family size are more complex, to do with culture and
education'.
Contraceptive programmes do help though, the UNFPA, maintains: it called
last week for the present total of Dollars 4.5bn spent worldwide on family
planning programmes to double by 2000.
But even if such measures are successful, the population of developing
countries will continue to surge ahead that of industralised countries.
Fertility rates in western Europe now average only about 1.7 children per
woman - the UK rate is 1.8. Italy and Spain have rates of only 1.2, below
West German levels of 1.4, according to Ms Charlotte Hohn director of the
Federal Population Institute of Germany.
The result is that pensioners will soon outnumber children in Europe and
North America for the first time, the UNFPA said. Under-15s currently
outnumber the elderly by a third in Europe and North America. But the number
of people older than 60 has risen from 90m in 1950 to 185m today, and could
reach 310m in 2025.
The idea that any resulting labour gap could be filled by immigration is
disputed. Mr Coleman argued that 'only about 60 per cent of the potential
workforce in western Europe is actually working, and there is plenty of
slack.'
Past immigration can adversely affect the host country, he added. The
availability of cheap labour may be one factor behind Europe's relative lack
of investment in high-technology industries, he said.
It is clear from west European delegates that the increasing pressures of
migration are likely to prompt a tightening of frontiers to try to preserve
standards of living for their own citizens. But if the arguments that Europe
does not need immigrants to maintain prosperity are right, its cultural urge
to shut the doors may not have adverse economic consequences.
 ------------------------------------------------
Immigration pressure on developed countries
from growth in developing countries' population
 ------------------------------------------------
                     Pop in   Increase
(million)              1991   by 2005
 ------------------------------------------------
Western Europe          379       4
Eastern Europe          124      11
Ex-Soviet Union         209      10
US                      253      81
Mediterranean*          186     158
Latin America           451     289
Tropical Africa         531     826
South Asia            1,206     920
 ------------------------------------------------
Source: D Coleman, Oxford University
*south-east Mediterranean
 ------------------------------------------------
