FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (11): Envy of the neighbours - John
Barham notes that energy is a fast-growing sector
ARGENTINA has impressive energy resources, but until very recently made
little effort to develop them. A virtual state monopoly over the energy
sector prevented Argentina from exploiting resources that are the envy of
its neighbours. Argentina has:
Sufficient oil production to meet domestic needs and produce an exportable
surplus. Reserves are estimated at about 240m cu m, equivalent to about 7-8
years' consumption.
Gas reserves of about 560bn cu m, equivalent to about 30 years' consumption
at current rates.
Hydroelectric power that can be harnessed from ten main river systems and
several Andean valleys ideally shaped for building dams.
The elimination of state monopolies, removal of the crushing burden of
over-regulation and liberalisation of foreign investment laws has made
energy one of Argentina's fastest-growing sectors.
Oil output last year rose 15 per cent to 31.8m cu m. Despite increased
consumption, Argentina still exported Dollars 924m in oil and oil products,
a 21 per cent increase over 1991.
The industry is becoming a magnet for investment and technology. Shell has
raised annual investments to Dollars 100m a year, up from an average Dollars
34m a year in the period 1986-90. Receipts from the privatisation of the
entire gas industry, plus substantial chunks of the oil and electricity
industries already exceed Dollars 6.7bn.
Norcen, a medium-sized Canadian independent oil company, has invested
Dollars 25m in Argentina, bringing with it technology that had not been
applied widely there before, such as three-dimensional seismic prospecting
or horizontal drilling techniques.
The private companies' new technology and better management have led to the
dramatic improvement in production. But there is still much to be done. The
Energy Department says Argentine companies recover only about 20-22 per cent
of reserves, against an international average of about 40 per cent.
The government is benefiting from the oil boom in several ways. First,
through privatisation receipts and second, from rising tax and royalty flows
from private companies. Furthermore, oil exports to Brazil are expected to
rise sharply, offsetting its heavy trade imbalance.
More productive investments will also improve the economy's overall
efficiency. Fiel, an industry-funded economic think tank, estimates that the
state wasted well over Dollars 35bn through inefficient investments, much of
them in energy, in the period 1970-1991. Fiel says the private sector should
be much more productive investors than the public sector.
As part of the privatisation contracts, private operators in the gas, oil
and electricity industries are required to make mandatory investments. The
gas industry alone, for example, must invest Dollars 612m in the period
1993-97. However the government believes companies will invest a further
Dollars 630m of their own accord.
In oil - where mandatory investments are lower - the forecast is for Dollars
7.7bn investments in exploration, production, refining and marketing.
Industrial consumers will also benefit from more reliable supplies and lower
prices. Until recently, large companies often built their own mini power
stations to guarantee electricity supplies for their factories, and sold
excess power to the national grid.
However, Mr Jorge Brea, president of Shell's Argentina subsidiary, warns
against complacency. He says sustaining growth in energy output 'will
require a very important, sustained effort. The bottom line is that you
cannot take it for granted. It requires hard work, investment and yet more
investment.'
Investment is also badly needed in energy-related infrastructure. The
state-owned gas and oil monopolies neglected maintenance of their trunk
pipeline networks, with the result that these systems are operating well
below capacity, so any large increase in gas and oil output will further
strain capacity.
However, the construction of a 15,000 cu m capacity pipeline to Chile which
will come on stream next year will relieve overload on the transport network
in the south of Argentina. The increased oil production will be exported to
Chile, while maintaining supplies to the big energy consumers in Buenos
Aires.
The impending privatisation of state-owned oil giant YPF should further
improveefficiency. Mr Jose Estenssoro, YPF's president, has devoted most of
his energies to restructuring the company to prepare it for privatisation,
but spent less time improving its efficiency. Financial market analysts say
that YPF's productivity and output should improve considerably when it is
transferred to the private sector.
The impact of improved management introduced by private utility operators is
impressive. When the government transferred last year Central Costanera, one
of Buenos Aires' big thermal plants, none of its generators were working but
now all seven are working perfectly. Private utility operators - all of them
foreign - have also cut down on wastage through leaks and energy theft.
This year will also see the privatisation of several hydro dams - including
the big Rio Limay complex in southern Argentina - and the Transener national
grid company.
The Yacyreta dam, built across the Parana river together with Paraguay,
should at last begin producing electricity this year. The 2,700 MW dam was
designed 20 years ago and has cost about Dollars 12bn. Originally budgeted
at Dollars 3.75bn, it has come in six years behind schedule. President
Carlos Menem declared he dam a monument to corruption.
As Yacyreta and the 1,400 MW Piedra del Aguila dam in the Andes both come on
stream, the danger of power blackouts - all too frequent during the past ten
years - should become a thing of the past.
The government is also playing with the idea of privatising the operation of
its two nuclear power stations. The proceeds would be used to complete
Atucha II, the country's third nuclear plant, which has been delayed for
over ten years by budget difficulties.
