FT  07 SEP 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar/D-Mark remains soft
THE DOLLAR continued to come under pressure against the D-Mark yesterday,
falling by more than a pfennig, as dealers took the view that the Bundesbank
would not reduce its short-term interest rates later this week, writes James
Blitz.
The US currency is in the midst of a downtrend which has been triggered by
the Bundesbank's intransigence in keeping monetary policy tight and by new
signs of weakness in the US economy.
The fall has been striking. On Wednesday August 26, the dollar was trading
at DM1.6680 against the D-Mark, shortly before the Bundesbank decided to
keep its discount rate unchanged at its last council meeting.
Yesterday it closed in London at DM1.6120, after dropping from a previous
close of DM1.6225. The fall came in spite of the absence of the US on the
Labor Day holiday.
The D-Mark was partly boosted by good figures for industrial output in
western Germany for July, which showed a rise of 3.1 per cent, compared to a
fall of 1.4 per cent in June.
The figure also underlined that the Bundesbank need not be too concerned
about depressing the German economy if it keeps policy unchanged on
Thursday.
Mr Brian Martin, an economist at Citibank in London, believes that the data
coming out in the US this week are likely to underline the weakness that was
seen in the non-farm payroll figures last Friday. He believes that the Tan
Book and the producer prices figures for August will show that the economy
is not recovering quickly.
Those who have always been pessimistic about the dollar/ D-Mark rate are
getting more so. Mr Marc Hendriks, head of interest rate research at Swiss
Banking Corporation in London, believes that the dollar could find itself in
a DM1.55 to DM1.58 trading range within the next four weeks - and perhaps
even by next Monday. But he thinks little will now happen to the US currency
until the Bund-esbank meeting on Thursday.
The dollar was weaker against the yen, closing at Y104.20 from a previous
Y105.00. But the mood among investors was more optimistic than the exchange
rate move would suggest.
There were signs yesterday that the US and Japan were planning a plenary
meeting in Washington on Thursday at which the framework for a new
partnership could be worked out. The yen has made considerable ground in the
past, as dealers have taken the view that the US sought a strong Japanese
currency to reduce Tokyo's trade surplus.
In Europe, the French franc appreciated marginally to a close of FFr3.523 to
the D-Mark from a previous FFr3.525. The Belgian franc recovered to finish
at BFr21.62 per D-Mark from a previous BFr21.77. Sterling came under sharp
pressure, falling to DM2.4625 from a previous DM2.4775.
