FT  24 MAR 93 / Survey of Czech Republic (11): Sweeping away the cobwebs -
Profile, Skoda Automobilova
'OUR CARS are much better than the name (implies),' Mr Milan Smutny,
deputy-director of public relations for Skoda Automobilova, says somewhat
defensively to explain the legacy of 45 years of safe but uninspired
communist management.
Today the company is sweeping away the cobwebs of state planning and
controlled markets as it strives to rejoin the European family of car makers
that it had helped to found earlier this century. Skoda Auto - not to be
confused with Skoda Plzen, the heavy engineering group of which it was once
a part - has pinned its hopes for revival on Germany's Volkswagen group
which has taken a 31 per cent stake in the Czech company.
The relationship is described as a joint venture, though by 1996 Volkswagen
will raise its stake to 70 per cent turning the Czech company into a
fully-fledged subsidiary.
Volkswagen will invest DM9bn over 10 years to transform and modernise
Skoda's large plant in Mlada Boleslav, about 60km north east of Prague, and
two nearby subsidiaries in Vrchlabi and Kvasiny. Production, now at around
200,000 cars annually, will be raised to 450,000. New models will be
developed with more powerful engines than the 1,300cc engine.
Skoda Auto plans to raise DM1.4bn soon on the international money markets to
finance investments. Mr Volkhard Kohler, deputy-chairman responsible for
finance, says the loan will be neither guaranteed by the Czech government
nor by Volkswagen, but this should not present any problems.
So, while the international downturn in the car market is forcing leading
manufacturers, including Volkswagen, to make drastic cuts in their workforce
and investments, the Skoda project remains firmly on track, he says. The
underlying assumption is that there will be demand for around 3m cars in
central and eastern Europe - not including the former Soviet Union - in the
second half of the 1990s. The Czech Republic's central location, Skoda's low
labour costs representing about 7 per cent of total costs compared with 25
per cent in Germany, and a well-established industrial tradition, provide a
strong basis for growth, Mr Kohler says.
The aim is to sell one third of production jointly to the Czech Republic and
Slovakia, one third to other central European countries, and one third to
western Europe. 'Skoda cars are one of the few Czech products that can be
exported to the west,' Mr Kohler says.
It is a tough challenge made more difficult by recession in all target
markets. In 1991, Skoda's sales fell by 8 per cent from 187,000 cars in 1990
to 172,000 cars, though sales recovered last year, rising by 16 per cent to
200,000 cars. This was achieved despite declines in Czechoslovak industrial
production of 30 per cent and 10 per cent in 1991 and 1992 respectively.
In 1990, two thirds of Skoda's production was sold on the home market, but
domestic sales fell sharply in 1991 as the government opened the market to
foreign imports. A flood of second-hand imports and the illegal export of
Skodas initially distributed to agents for the local market cut domestic
sales to around 27,000 cars. Mr Kohler says a high volume of exports to
Yugoslavia and Poland compensated for declining domestic sales. 'That saved
us in 1991,' he says. But the war in Yugoslavia, and Poland's imposition of
35 per cent tariffs (now 41 per cent) on car imports, badly hit exports last
year.
There are other pressing problems. Productivity is about 50 per cent of that
achieved by Japanese plants in the UK, and raising productivity is a
principal objective. 'Suppliers are our Achilles heel. Few can produce to
western standards,' Mr Kohler says.
Slovakia supplies Skoda with 55,000 tonnes of steel annually, aluminium and
rear axles, but payments through the clearing system established between the
two countries is inefficient and costly.
On the plus side, Skoda's new owners inherited a relatively modern plant.
Turnover has risen rapidly from CzK14bn in 1991 when the company made a loss
of CzK900m, to CzK28bn last year when it made a small profit. The main plant
and its two subsidiaries employ 17,000 workers, and finding new workers is
not a problem with the average monthly pay of skilled workers at CzK6,000
(Dollars 210), about 20 per cent higher than in other local industries, Mr
Smutny says. Czech managers receive around CzK13,000.
