FT  27 SEP 93 / Satisfied UN ends Cambodia mission: Fears of currency
collapse and continuing Khmer Rouge influence
MR YASUSHI AKASHI, the Japanese diplomat in charge of the United Nations'
Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.2bn) peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, left Phnom
Penh yesterday expressing satisfaction at the broad success of his mission
but regret that Khmer Rouge guerrillas were still challenging the authority
of the new government.
Mr Akashi and his colleagues in the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia
have also urged foreign donors to support the country financially in the
aftermath of the two-year UN mission.
Mr Sam Rainsy, the Cambodian finance minister, left for Washington yesterday
to negotiate a Dollars 64m (Pounds 41.5m) loan agreement with the World Bank
and Dollars 9m more in short-term financing from the International Monetary
Fund.
Donors have pledged a total of Dollars 1bn to Cambodia, but little of the
money has been disbursed. UN officials fear the local currency may collapse
with the disappearance of the dollars previously spent by UN staff.
Speaking at the airport with tears in his eyes, Mr Akashi said: 'The memory
of the Cambodians and our valiant struggle together for peace will forever
be inscribed in my mind and in my heart.'
The UN, which deployed 22,000 soldiers and civilians in Cambodia at the time
of the UN-organised elections in May, is expected to grant a Cambodian
request for 30 UN military observers to remain in the country.
A UN office in Phnom Penh will also continue to help clear the millions of
land-mines littering the country after two decades of war, and will be
responsible for a human rights office in Cambodia - a new departure for the
UN.
Gen Charan Kullavanich, Thailand's national security council chief, was
meanwhile quoted in the Thai press as expressing regret that international
forces were departing from Cambodia without having brought peace and
'leaving behind an unsolved mess for Thailand to confront'.
UN officials regard this as an outrageous comment from a government which
has flagrantly violated the 1991 Cambodian peace accord (of which Thailand
was a signatory) by supporting the Khmer Rouge. The Khmer Rouge refused to
disarm its fighters and boycotted the election.
