FT  04 JUN 93 / World Stock Markets: Major and minor bands in NZ equities -
Performance contrasts good economic news with a cautious market
Caution is the overriding sentiment on the New Zealand stock market, five
months away from an unpredictable election outcome. Major shares are
determinedly stuck in a narrow trading band in spite of a solid flow of good
economic and positive business news.
The NZSE-40 capital index broke up briefly through the 1,650 mark last
Friday, set a 32-month high and promptly retreated. It recovered yesterday
to 1,649 but its all-time record of 3,850, set in 1987, remains a distant
memory.
This lacklustre performance is at odds with economic news. Yet it is backed
by the latest business surveys: the Lloyds Bank subsidiary, the National
Bank of New Zealand, said in its latest survey that business confidence had
fallen for the fourth month in a row, and was down 27 per cent from its
February high.
The bank's chief economist, Mr Girol Karacaoglu, said that it was difficult
to say why confidence was falling, although uncertainties about interest
rates, the general election and the electoral referendum on changing the
Westminster style, first-past-the-post voting system might be factors.
Mr Peter Shirtcliffe, chairman of New Zealand's biggest company, Telecom
Corporation, is leading a high-profile campaign to persuade people to stay
with the present voting system. Uncertainties over the emergence of a
powerful third party, which could hold the balance of power in November, is
unsettling the business community further.
Interest rates remain stubbornly high. The exchange rate, which has
appreciated steadily since the Reserve Bank intervened to support it in
January, worries exporters.
However, positives abound. New Zealand's finance minister, Ms Ruth
Richardson, announced on Tuesday night that the budget deficit would be
NZDollars 700m less than predicted last year.
Other figures show an improving New Zealand debt position, substantial
surpluses on external trade and the balance of payments and inflation at one
per cent - among the lowest in the world.
Labour costs are down sharply due to the government's tough anti-union
legislation. Gross domestic product figures are encouraging. Against this,
unemployment remains stubbornly high.
Overseas investors, notably from the US, have been making the bulk of the
running in equities this year. In recent weeks they have stepped up their
buying of Brierley Investments, buying 120m shares in a month. It is
estimated that 40 per cent of the stock is now held offshore. American
investors have also been buying shares aggressively in Fletcher Challenge,
following recommendations by US brokers, and in Carter Holt Harvey, the
forestry company.
Telecom Corporation, controlled by Bell Atlantic and Ameritech, has been
another favourite since it announced a further restructuring which will cost
5,500 jobs by 1995. All these shares have shown strong gains so far this
year, although they have been marking time in recent trading.
Any dip in Wall Street seems to be quickly reflected in trading volumes in
New Zealand, although prices so far this year have held. New Zealand's
economic performance has been publicised extensively this year in the US,
where the government has been described as 'the last bastion of
Reaganomics'.
Many second line stocks are showing the benefits of substantial
restructuring. A company such as the lingerie maker, Ceramco, which has
eliminated debt and is making highly successful inroads into the Australian
and Asian economies, is typical of a corporate strain which has coped well
with New Zealand's protracted recession, and moved aggressively into
exporting.
Gold shares have been a recent bright spot. New Zealand has two of
Australasia's biggest producers. Mineral Resources, which is profitably
reworking the century-old former British-owned Martha Hill mine at Waihi,
south of Auckland, and Macraes Mining, which has been producing large
quantities of gold from ore near the southern city of Dunedin, have both
seen their share prices double in the past five weeks.
Meanwhile, prospecting stocks, such as Summit Gold, Kiwi Gold, and Gold
Resources, have fared much better than the producers. Their share prices
have risen by up to five times in recent trading.
