FT  05 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Ladbroke doldrums
Negative press comment kept Ladbroke in the doldrums, the shares closing 5
down at 178p ex-dividend in busy turnover of 6.3m. The company last weekend
warned newspapers not to repeat allegations believed to be already the
subject of an injunction at another Sunday newspaper.
Yesterday, the leisure sector was abuzz with talk over the affair, with most
analysts agreeing that the whole episode had been blown up out of all
proportion. 'Ladbroke is always prone to this kind of rumour,' was the
almost universal view. Ladbroke shares weakened last week, mostly on the
back of poor figures from rival hotelier Forte, whose shares rose 8
yesterday to 226p ex-dividend.
Shares in BP bucked the market trend finishing a penny lighter at 328 1/2 p
on volume of 7.1m as market watchers came to the view that last week's
advance in the wake of OPEC agreements, had been overdone. However, Shell
Transport continued in favour and the shares put on 6 to 681 1/2 p. Also in
demand was Enterprise Oil, where last week's recommendation from Nomura
continued to boost trading. The shares put on another 6 to 476p.
Among banking stocks, Bank of Scotland were wanted ahead of tomorrow's
interim figures and the shares hardened 5 to 182p.
Investors in Standard Chartered continued to be cheered by Friday's news
that the bank had been paid Pounds 25.9m in settlement of its claim against
National Housing Bank of India and the shares gained another 16 to 984p.
Shares in financial services and banking group London Scottish Bank tumbled
10 to 89p, making it the day's biggest retreat in the market, after news
that the group had terminated talks that could have led to an offer.
Speculation that Lucas Industries would announce a new chairman when it
reports figures next Monday, once again did the rounds in the market. The
shares advanced 7 to 156p, in trade of 2.4m with the name of Mr George
Simpson, currently deputy Chairman at British Aerospace and head of its
Rover subsidiary, mentioned as the most likely candidate.
Weekend press reports that Johnson Matthey, the world's largest platinum
metals group, and Cookson Group were planning to merge their interests in
metals, encouraged demand for both stocks. The former gained 4 to 483p,
while the latter moved 6 ahead to 202p, as one analyst said that 'such a
move makes sense and it would result in synergy for both groups.'
Securities house BZW was reported to have recommended TI Group, where the
shares put on 4 to 350p. Fears of litigation in the US dampened enthusiasm
for T&amp;N and the shares finished 5 lower at 183 1/2 p. The strong market
trend helped Glynwed bounce from the recent doldrums and the shares hardened
7 to 316p.
A squeeze in UK airports operator BAA saw the shares advance 14 to 869p.
However, nervous trading ahead of today's publication of September traffic
data, depressed British Airways, leaving the shares 2 1/2 lighter at 359p.
Sentiment was also weakened by talk that the UK government was considering
charging VAT on domestic UK flights.
Shares in tobacco and financial services group BAT remained under a cloud
following last week's poorly received visit to its US operations by UK
analysts. They closed 2 down at 461p, after trade of 5.8m.
International conglomerate Hanson, recently the subject of a spate of
profits downgradings and sell advice, bounced 6 1/2 to to 260p in strong
business of 14m shares. Dealers suggested the UK selling had dried up
leaving US demand to underpin the day's advance.
Weekend reports of impending changes to the board of Lonrho, the
international trading group, boosted the company's shares and they firmed 3
to 124p.
NatWest Securities was reported to have recommended Royal Insurance and the
shares gained 6 to 326p.
News that building materials group Heywood Williams has increased sales
points from 90 to 140 upon completion of a Pounds 11m deal was followed by a
fall in the shares of a couple of pence to 343p. Post-tax profits of Pounds
0.6m for the 7 months to July 1993 were also welcomed.
Light trading ahead of forthcoming annual results edged construction group
Wolseley 17 to 675p; analysts expect profits of Pounds 120m.
ICI chairman Sir Denys Henderson's cautious comments in Rome concerning the
future of the European chemicals industry left ICI shares unchanged at 716p.
Hoare Govett suggested that the stock is overvalued since, 'the rating of
the shares more than discounts cyclical recovery'.
Avon Rubber shares fell 3 to 510p with views on short term prospects clouded
by reports of poor car sales in Europe. Inchcape was appointed by Jaguar to
set up 3 dealerships in China, the shares remaining unchanged at 519p.
Textiles group Coats Viyella continued to impress analysts favourably and
the shares rose 4 to 258p.
