FT  26 NOV 93 / Parkinson seeks rise in rented housing
Lord Parkinson, the former Conservative cabinet minister, is leading a
campaign to increase the supply of private rented accommodation by the
creation of a new class of investment trust.
He hopes that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, will include the necessary
legislative reforms in next Tuesday's Budget.
The proposal, which has support from Sir George Young, the housing minister,
would allow Authorised Housing Investment Trusts to pay corporation tax of
25 per cent and be exempt from capital gains tax.
This would allow the trusts to generate a rate of return high enough to
persuade institutional investors to buy shares in them. The absence of
institutional investment is one of the main reasons for the shortage of
private rental accommodation.
Lord Parkinson said chief executives of leading investment institutions had
appeared very supportive of the proposals.
Treasury concerns that the new trusts would provide tax shelters to property
developers could be allayed, he said. The Department of Environment would
review each trust every year to ensure that it was fully invested in private
rented accommodation and would withdraw authorisation from any company that
traded too actively in properties or owned commercial properties.
The trusts would not provide social housing. They would provide
accommodation for people setting up home for the first time or those in
occupations requiring mobility.
New capital has been attracted to the sector over the past few years by the
Business Expansion Schemes, but these will be abolished at the end of the
year.
It is believed much of the property owned by the BES schemes will be sold
with vacant possession in the next couple of years. This could be avoided if
the new trusts areallowed to exchange their shares for those held by BES
investors. The chancellor should extend value added tax to zero-rated or
exempt items as part of his Budget strategy for cutting the fiscal deficit,
the Society of Business Economists said yesterday.
The chancellor was urged to reduce mortgage interest tax relief as part of a
fiscal tightening of at least Pounds 2bn.
