FT  11 DEC 93 / Arts: Scouse in the house
Few cities have needed Scouse wit to lighten its darkness quite as much as
Liverpool has - blighted by the death of shipbuilding, the tragedy of
Toxteth, the horrors of Hillsborough and the Jamie Bulger case. Yet few
provincial centres have been as artistically vital as Liverpool, from the
Mersey bands of the 1960s, through the playwrights of the 1970s, the
Liverpool Everyman, the Philharmonic, the Tate.
In the 1960s, it was music that kept the kids off the street. And alongside
all those jangling guitars and sweaty, twisting bodies in the Cavern and
lesser clubs, came the poets, especially the three that seemed to sum up the
spirit of the place: Roger McGough, Brian Patten and Adrian Henri.
In 1967, Penguin published an anthology of the three of them in their
Penguin Modern Poets series. The Mersey Sound is still in print and has now
sold almost half a million copies, making it the best-selling poetry
anthology of all time. And this week the three of them had a reunion reading
at the South Bank. The Liverpool Poets were back.
But back to what?
And who were they writing for? Of the three, only Henri is not a born and
bred Scouser, though he is only one that still lives there. 'Our audience
was the same as the more discerning Cavern-goers,' he says,
'non-intellectual, non-university, a few art students, sixth-formers, a
young crowd who would try and appreciate anything as long as they weren't
bored: above all whatever was presented should entertain.'
The Livepool Poets in performance are part a cabaret threesome and part
earnest individualists. The opening sketch was a telling reminder of how the
Liverpool Poets have been treated by the critics - as 'a short-lived
furore'. Being popular, and easily understood at first reading, they must be
superficial. How true is this?
Henri is the slightest of the trio. Greatly influenced by the Beats, his
poems too often sound like random gobbets of autobiographical reportage. The
best of them depend for their success upon the single, forceful image. His
best work, in fact, has been done as an artist - from pop art in the 1960s
to multi-media events with live music, including the 'Liverpool Scene,' a
poetry/rock group that played with Led Zeppelin and recorded for RCA. What
he can do well is write a good song lyric.
Patten reads heart on sleeve, and some of his love poems are very good
indeed. Unfortunately, he seems too easily pleased by his own material. Too
much of his poetry is like an adolescent's first love affair with words.
McGough's is the most enduring talent, and he is also the most effective
solo entertainer of the three. He reads fast, making his well-crafted work
sound like good patter. Most of the poems he read were from his new book,
Defying Gravity (Viking, Pounds 9.99), a collection which The Times Literary
Supplement declined to review.
These days McGough's work is mainly about his relations - the large Catholic
family amongst which he was brought up; the young children of his second
marriage. This is all very different from the mildly subversive stuff of the
1960s, the tics picked up from e e cummings; the defiant spurning of syntax
and punctuation; the not so daring hymns to free love. What he seems to
exude now is a mood of incorrigible optimism and the belief that poetry and
what it memorialises is for sharing.
No wonder the young girl said to her friend as she walked into the foyer:
'We will write a poem tonight, I assure you, and it will rhyme]' No one ever
said that after a reading by Walcott or Brodsky. 'Oh my God]' was what they
said then. 'Such unscaleable heights . . .'
