FT  29 NOV 93 / DTI faces grilling over exports at Scott inquiry
The Department of Trade and Industry is bracing itself for some
unprecedented public scrutiny of its export control regime when the Scott
arms-for-Iraq inquiry hearings resume today after a two-week adjournment.
Lord Justice Scott and his counsel Miss Presiley Baxendale QC plan to
question senior DTI officials about statements they made to Customs and
Excise which led to the prosecution last year of three executives of the
machine tool manufacturer Matrix Churchill for breaching export regulations.
The focus on the DTI is being greeted privately with some relief by the
Foreign Office, which considers itself to have unfairly borne the brunt of
public examination by the inquiry so far. One Foreign Office official said:
'Scott has tried to suggest that we should have acted as the guardian of
Whitehall's virginity, when it was the DTI and the MoD that were
responsible.'
Appearing today will be Mr Eric Beston, the head of the DTI's overseas
branch responsible for export controls and licensing from 1985-1990. He will
be followed over the next two weeks by Mr Michael Petter, former head of the
DTI's Middle East exports branch and at present an assessor for the Queen's
Awards to Industry, and two other senior DTI officials, Mr Anthony Steadman
and Mr Michael Coolican.
The DTI will come under pressure to explain why it gave witness statements
to Customs and Excise claiming that officials had no idea that machine tools
being exported by the UK were used by the Iraqis for munitions manufacture.
Documents which the government tried to withhold from the Matrix Churchill
trial but which have been considered by the Scott inquiry as important
evidence show that officials and ministers were aware the machine tools were
being put to military use. A senior Ministry of Defence official told the
Scott inquiry earlier this month that DTI officials tried to block the
prosecution of the Matrix Churchill businessmen to protect intelligence and
ministers.
According to evidence submitted by the Foreign Office, former trade
ministers were involved in an apparent attempt to persuade the government to
breach its own export rules.
Since then the Scott inquiry has been taking further evidence in a private
hearing from the intelligence services in an attempt to unravel the reasons
why certain defence-related exports were licensed by Whitehall officials
with the apparent blessing of their ministers.
In correspondence with the Confederation of British Industry, trade unions,
and government departments, Lord Justice Scott has made clear that he will
make recommendations for a reform of Britain's export and licensing
procedures when he publishes his report next summer.
