FT  18 FEB 93 / Survey of World Taxation (4): Revenue showdown - Deficit
challenge to Clinton and Congress
US POLITICIANS and economists have for years been wringing their hands over
the ever-growing federal budget deficit. But with the outlook now worse than
ever, the time may be approaching when the administration and Congress unite
to tackle it.
During his election campaign, Mr Bill Clinton shied away from the
catastrophist approach of Mr Ross Perot, the self-financed candidate who
argued that the deficit was a 'mad aunt in the basement' which must be dealt
with before anything else.
Just before Mr Clinton took office last month, however, his predecessor, Mr
George Bush, presented a farewell pro forma budget projecting that the
deficit would, on current policies, grow from Dollars 290bn in 1992 to
Dollars 320bn in 1998 - substantially gloomier than the Office of Management
and Budget's earlier predictions, and its most honest forecast for years.
Mr Clinton seized this opportunity to explain that things were much worse
than he had been told, and that he would therefore be unable to fulfil his
campaign plan to halve the deficit in four years.
Preparation for the presentation of an economic plan, due yesterday, has,
therefore, included much fervent discussion of what combination of spending
cuts and tax increases will best provide the short term stimulus that Mr
Clinton seeks to ensure that the economic recovery does not, once again, bog
down, while at the same time offering a prospect of deficit reduction over
the longer term.
The economic plan laid out by Mr Clinton during his campaign included a
curious mix of the broad brush (unspecified administrative savings) and the
bizarrely detailed (an end to the Dollars 18.6m a year subsidy to honey
producers) but contains two main revenue raisers:
the top income tax rate would climb for the richest 2 per cent of taxpayers
from 31 per cent to 36 per cent. This, coupled with a surtax on
millionaires, would bring in an extra Dollars 17.8bn in 1993, rising to
Dollars 23.0bn in 1996.
the prevention of tax avoidance by foreign companies is estimated to yield
an extra Dollars 9.0bn this year, rising to Dollars 13.5bn in 1996.
Mr Clinton now intends to raise corporate income tax rates, probably to 36
per cent, in order to stop the wealthy from shifting their income into
corporate shelters to escape the higher personal income tax rates. He has
also promised limits on the deductibility of excessive salaries.
The money from foreign companies may, however, be hard to find. Although
foreign companies on average report lower profits as a percentage of assets,
capital or sales than their domestic counterparts, it is far from clear that
all of this gap is accounted for by any effort to avoid US taxes.
Clinton campaign officials remained reluctant to the last to disclose the
basis of their estimate. But it is widely assumed that they split the
difference between an estimate by the Internal Revenue Service that the tax
shortfall could amount to as much as Dollars 3bn, (if the gap between
foreign and domestic profitability were entirely accounted for by abuses),
and an estimate of Dollars 30bn a year, popular in Congress but based on the
somewhat academic assumption of Professor James Wheeler, of Michigan
University, that foreign companies must be earning as great a return on
assets as they would get on a Treasury bond, or they would not trouble to do
business.
Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation, probably the most authoritative
source for revenue estimates, calculates that if foreign companies were
taxed in proportion to their assets, rather than their reported profits,
they would pay only Dollars 166m more a year, or Dollars 680m more if taxed
in proportion to their receipts.
Politically, however, the target is so appealing that tax lawyers and
congressional staffers are convinced that some effort will be made to wring
more tax out of foreign companies. This could involve an attempt to rewrite
the Section 482 rules on transfer pricing put out by the Bush administration
in its final days, but many observers feel that Congress is so eager to get
its finger into the pie that new legislation is likely.
Foreign governments, as well as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, fear that the Congress may try to ignore international tax
codes and bilateral tax treaties.
Fiscal realities, however, are driving the new administration in search of
other sources of revenue beyond the tax increases Mr Clinton outlined in his
campaign. This is taking him into hostile territory.
Many of Mr Clinton's advisers, backed by an unlikely coalition of
environmentalists and carmakers, have argued in favour of a substantial
increase in taxes on petrol, an option favoured by Mr Perot during his
campaign. The federal petrol tax stands at a relatively modest 14.1 cents
per gallon, although all states and some cities also tax petrol.
But although many economists believe an increase in the petrol tax would
have the desirable effect of reducing US fuel consumption, and hence
pollution, politicians view it as suicidal, because it is perceived as
unfairly burdening the middle class, as well as the car-dependent states.
A broader energy tax, possibly levied per British thermal unit, is now
favoured, although some senators from oil-producing states are clamouring
for an oil import fee.
It is a token of the greater seriousness with which the budget deficit is
now treated in Washington that discussion of tax increases has not stopped
there: even Social Security, the US state pension system, is under scrutiny.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the unpredictable New Yorker who took over
the chairmanship of the Senate finance committee when Mr Lloyd Bentsen
became Treasury Secretary, has made it clear that he will fight to the last
any attempt to freeze inflation adjustments in Social Security payments.
But Mr Dan Rostenkowski, who as chairman of the Ways and Means committee is
his counterpart in the House of Representatives, has warned that there can
be no sacred cows, and several leading senators have indicated that they
would be prepared at least to consider making a greater portion of these
Social Security payments liable to income tax.
Mr Nicholas Brady, President Bush's Treasury Secretary, argued in a
valedictory speech that the US tax system needed root and branch reform,
including radical measures such as lifting the income tax threshold
dramatically and replacing the lost revenue with a form of VAT.
But Mr Brady never undertook such an initiative while he was in office, and
even though Moynihan believes a VAT will come to the US one day, it seems
unlikely that the Clinton administration will be any bolder.
