FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Computer Industry - Systems, Software &amp; Services
(1): Heads roll in year of havoc - The past year has been eventful, even by
the computer industry's restless standards. Senior figures have quit as
newer, more agile competitors make the running. The scene has been set for a
major shift in the balance of power
THE computer industry is notoriously volatile, but the past 12 months have
been eventful even by its restless standards. Some of the most important
heads in the business have rolled as companies have been forced to jettison
entrenched attitudes and yesterday's ways of doing business.
'This kind of impact, this kind of change in industrial structure is very
exciting but it is very difficult for the companies involved,' Mr Bill
Gates, chairman of Microsoft, told a London audience last month with some
understatement.
The resignation of Mr John Akers, chairman of International Business
Machines, set the seal on a year which saw the traditional industry in
disarray as newer, more agile competitors made the running. On one memorable
day in early 1993 as IBM's share price slipped towards towards Dollars 45,
its market capitalisation was briefly equal to that of Microsoft, the
leading personal computer software supplier, and Intel, the biggest
microprocessor supplier.
Since then, Mr Akers has been replaced by Mr Louis Gerstner, formerly with
RJR Nabisco. Mr Gerstner has yet to make known his plans for returning the
company to profitability, although the indications are that he has set his
face against breaking up IBM, which lost some Dollars 5bn last year, into
independent businesses. He is, however, beginning to make his own
appointments at senior level, placing outsiders like himself, with
formidable reputations for cost cutting, in key positions. For example, Mr
Jerome York, formerly with the Chrysler motor company, has been appointed
finance chief.
The transformation in progress at IBM reflects what is happening to many
established computer companies today. Closely cherished business principles
are having to be abandoned. IBM, for example, no longer rules out forced
involuntary redundancy as a way of cutting staff numbers. It no longer
insists that its future is tied to mainframe computers - cuts in research
and development funds will fall more heavily on the mainframe side than on
faster-growing areas such as network computing.
In similar fashion, Digital Equipment, once the global leader in scientific
and technical computing, has had to accept that it missed the boat in high
performance workstations and open, or industry standard, systems.
Mr Kenneth Olsen, its founder and chairman, has stepped down and under new
management headed by Mr Robert Palmer, it is restructuring, focusing on a
market-driven approach and attempting to establish Alpha, its innovative
64-bit microprocessor chip that is said to be the world's fastest, as the
industry standard.
Compaq, the leader in high performance personal computers, has had to
abandon its emphasis on selling high-priced machines through the dealer
channel. Masterminded by new management under Mr Eckhard Pfeiffer, after Mr
Rod Canion, its founder, was ousted, Compaq's resurgence in the marketplace
has been a consequence of developing a new range of low cost machines
distributed through a variety of channels.
The personal computer market has now divided into high end machines, broadly
defined by IBM's PS/2 range, and lower priced 'value-for-money' machines.
'No-name' makers - personal computer manufacturers without much of a track
record - had been making heavy inroads at the lower end of the market. Now
that established makers, led by Compaq and IBM, are making their presence
felt in the second tier, branding has become, again, an important selling
point. One indication is the decision of Virgin, Mr Richard Branson's music
to airlines group, to enter the market.
The machine, to be launched later this year, will use the same
microprocessors and operating system as other PC makers; but it will bear
the Virgin name, which could prove a powerful selling point.
Changes in the way computers are used within organisations are gathering
pace. The emergence and growth of network, or client server computing, is
one of the keys to the hiatus in the industry today. It has been accelerated
by the availability of powerful desktop machines coupled through high
capacity networks.
It is becoming important for many companies because it is a better match for
the way business is conducted today than traditional systems.
Don Tapscott and Art Caston writing in 'Paradigm Shift'* argue: 'As long as
businesses and governments could function and survive as large hierarchical
bureaucracies, then large, centralised, monolithic host computers were
well-matched. However, isolated host systems can no longer match the
fast-paced, streamlined and integrated operations of today's well-planned
organisation. The client-server approach to work organisation treats
business units as networked clients and servers with well-defined roles,
each making a measurable contribution to the business and having equally
well-defined relationships with other clients and server units.'
Mr Fred Gibbons, chief executive of the Software Publishing Corporation,
told delegates to the Asian Technology Roundtable conference earlier this
year: 'Investment is moving from traditional applications towards
client-server systems. It will not happen overnight, but in the next five
years more applications will be developed on client-server systems than on
mainframes.'
So the scene has been set for a major shift in the balance of power. Who
will be the market leaders in the new computer industry that will develop
over the next decade? According to Charles Morris and Charles Ferguson,
writing in the Harvard Business Review earlier this year, the secret lies in
domination of an architecture, a design which becomes an industry standard.
The two youthful challengers to IBM's market domination, Intel and
Microsoft, fit this pattern. IBM in effect threw away control of the
personal computer market when it chose Intel microprocessors and
commissioned Microsoft to develop MS/DOS for its first personal computer.
Intel has since grown to become the world's largest semiconductor company.
Mr Andrew Grove, Intel chairman, says: 'It took us 22 years to get to
Dollars 1bn a quarter in revenues and, thanks to the explosion in demand for
our 486 chip, less than three years to get to Dollars 2bn a quarter.'
The company hopes to continue its advance with the release of Pentium, the
successor to the 486 chip. Selling at almost Dollars 1,000 in its fastest
version, it will be used in high performance personal computers and network
servers. A slew of personal computer makers including IBM, Compaq and
Hewlett Packard have already announced products based on Pentium.
Microsoft is the world's largest personal computer company driven by sales
of a broad range of products but especially MS/DOS and Windows, the most
broadly used operating system in the PC world. It is taking a step into the
unknown this year with the launch of Windows/NT, an operating system
designed for client-server systems, making it possible for users to work on
several programs simultaneously and for several users to share the same
computer.
Intel and Microsoft will inevitably face heavy competition from other
companies - notably IBM and Apple - as technology changes, and there is no
guarantee they will be able to maintain their domination. There are other
areas where standards can be set, where control of an architecture can give
a company market leadership.
PC networking is one such area: the US company Novell is well on the way to
setting the standard. Groupware is another. This is software that enables a
group of computer users to work together over a network. The market leader
is Lotus Development Corporation with a product called 'Notes'.
Mr John Landry, chief technology officer of Lotus, is fond of saying that in
communication: 'First there were talking drums, then there was the
telephone, now there is Notes.'
Notes is a step on the way to comprehensive 'multimedia', the combination of
text, sound, graphics and moving video in a workstation. Mr Gates of
Microsoft describes it as the communication of today's information: 'It is
simply allowing everyone in the company to collaborate, allowing you to
track everything you have done on a new product design, everything you have
done with customers.'
The companies which control the design of multimedia systems will be the
IBMs of tomorrow's data processing industry.
* Paradigm Shift by Don Tapscott and Art Caston, McGraw Hill, 1993.
