FT  07 APR 93 / Truly, widely, deeply: A more federal Europe could lead to
greater individual freedom
Formal negotiations on Norway's application for membership of the European
Community began in Luxembourg on Monday.
Actually that is not quite right. Norway, along with the other three
applicants from the European Free Trade Association (Austria, Finland,
Sweden), was told that it must accept the Maastricht treaty. That means that
they are negotiating to join, not just the EC, but the future European Union
(EU).
That assumes, of course, that Denmark and the UK will actually ratify
Maastricht. If either of them fails to, the treaty is null and void and the
EU non-existent. There would then be a period of confusion, from which would
emerge - probably quite quickly - two parallel efforts to replace Maastricht
with something else.
One would be made by an inner group or 'hard core' of countries determined
to salvage the essential features of Maastricht and apply them among
themselves even if some EC members do not participate - following the model
of the Schengen treaty on removal of internal borders, to which all EC
members except Britain, Ireland and Denmark are now signatories.
The other would be a more modest attempt by all Community members to salvage
a mini-Maastricht, consisting of only those elements which could be
generally accepted as both valuable in themselves and non-threatening to
state sovereignty.
Negotiations with the applicant countries would in any case proceed, since
they would still want EC membership. Obviously Maastricht could no longer be
presented to them as part of the acquis that they are required to accept as
a precondition. Nor could membership of the 'hard core'. In theory, it would
be possible for the 12 to negotiate the mini-Maastricht among themselves and
then introduce it as an acquis into the negotiations with the applicants.
But it would make a lot more sense to include the applicants in the
discussion from the start.
Similar considerations apply if Maastricht is ratified and the EU does come
into existence, presumably by the end of this year. If negotiations with the
applicants go smoothly their accession to the EU should be ratified next
year, in which case they would be full members in time to join the
Maastricht revision conference scheduled for 1996. But even if that
timetable slips, it would be stupid for the existing members to negotiate
revisions to the treaty in the absence of the new members, to whom those
revisions would have to apply - especially as one of the main reasons for
revising the treaty will be the need to adapt it to an EU of 16 members.
British ministers and officials view the revision process with considerable
apprehension. They dread being asked to administer new doses of 'federalism'
to a British body politic which is clearly allergic to them, especially if
(as is likely) the conference coincides with the next general election
campaign. I have argued, and still believe, that one way to avoid a
repetition of the Maastricht nightmare is to entrust the revision to an
elected constituent assembly, instead of another intergovernmental
conference.
It is equally important to think more clearly about what sort of
constitution Europe actually needs. British officials warn that 'Maastricht
is the maximum that is conceptually possible', and that 'widening must not
be made the excuse for further deepening'.
But the word 'deepening' can mean two very different things. If it means
giving the EC, or the EU, new areas of competence, then indeed it should be
resisted. If anything a union with more members should confine itself to
fewer areas of competence - those in which a genuine common interest can be
discerned and in which one member state by itself may not be able to take
effective action.
But if 'deepening' means giving more power to the union's central organs so
that it can act decisively and effectively in areas where joint action is
agreed to be necessary, then indeed a wider union does need also to be a
deeper one. Otherwise it will be paralysed by the endless search for
consensus among 16 governments.
Similarly the word 'federalism' needs to be demystified. Many people in
Britain seem to assume that a federal European authority would diminish
their freedom, acting in an arbitrary and undemocratic way. But actually
that is much truer of intergovernmental procedures, when national ministers
meet to take decisions behind closed doors, with the accountability of each
to his national parliament being diluted both by secrecy and by the need to
agree with (or be outvoted by) his colleagues from other countries.
By contrast, federalism makes the central executive accountable to a federal
parliament; and by distributing power among different levels of government
it makes its arbitrary use much more difficult.
By appealing to a federal constitution, states can resist central
encroachment on their powers; but individuals or local authorities can also
appeal at the federal level against arbitrary action by the states; and a
federal supreme court is there to decide who has the constitution on their
side in each case.
All this also makes for greater transparency, as each level of government
has to publish and defend its decisions, instead of everything being sorted
out within a hierarchy of officials answerable only to those above them.
It is high time someone explained to the British people that a 'deeper',
more federal Europe could actually meddle in fewer aspects of their everyday
lives than the present model, and yet secure a net increase in their
individual freedom.
