FT  08 NOV 93 / Jews vow to avenge death of settler
JEWISH settlers vowed yesterday to step up their efforts to disrupt
Palestinian daily life in the Israeli-occupied territories after Palestinian
gunmen killed one settler and injured a former right-wing member of
parliament in an attack near the West Bank town of Hebron.
Hundreds of settlers immediately took to the streets of the West Bank in
protest, blocking main roads, burning Arab cars and wrecking a number of
Palestinian shops, and members of the parliamentary opposition called for
the suspension of peace talks with the Palestinian Liberation Organisation.
These calls were ignored by the government, which said last night that the
negotiations would resume today in Cairo. The talks, held at the Egyptian
beach resort of Taba, were suspended last Tuesday by the PLO negotiators,
who claimed that Israel was offering only a redeployment of forces in Gaza
and Jericho rather than full withdrawal.
Quoting the outline treaty which frames the negotiations, Mr Nabil Shaath,
who will head the Palestinian delegation at today's talks, said in Cairo
yesterday that the treaty 'says that redeployment takes place in addition to
the withdrawal in Gaza and Jericho. That's very clear.' The talks would
focus on differences of interpretation surrounding Israeli undertakings.
This week's meeting, however, appears to represent talks about talks rather
than a full resumption of the Taba negotiations.
Yesterday's attack, for which the Hamas Islamic fundamentalist movement
claimed responsibility, killed Mr Haim Ayubi, a 30-year-old father of four.
He was the eleventh Israeli to be killed by Palestinians since the PLO
autonomy accord two months ago.
He died early yesterday morning, when the car he was driving was riddled
with bullets fired from a passing vehicle. His passenger, Rabbi Haim
Druckman, a former National Religious Party member of parliament and a
leading settler idealogue, was hit in the arm and shoulder.
The settlers were last night laying plans to block all main roads in the
occupied territories this morning. Castigating the government for failing to
protect them, a settlers' spokesman vowed that the occupied territories
'would roar and tremble' until the attacks ceased.
Israeli newspapers yesterday carried reports of progress in the country's
talks with Jordan, with claims that Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign
minister, held nine hours of talks last week in Amman with King Hussein,
that the two men initialled various 'understandings', but that Jordan would
not sign a full peace treaty with Israel until the Syrians were also ready
to sign.
