FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of Northern Ireland (2): Political stalemate remains
a constraint - Why recession was less severe than on the mainland
Among Ulster's business community there is general agreement with a view
expressed in a recent NI Economic Research Centre report that the province
has had a 'good' recession.
Ulster's GDP scarcely blipped; in mainland Great Britain it fell by 3.9 per
cent between 1990 and 1992. The number in work in Northern Ireland fell by
very little and has remained close to its historically high peak of 1990.
Such rise in unemployment as there was can generally be attributed to the
arrival of newcomers on the job market.
Such are the demographic realities that Northern Ireland has to run fast in
its job creation even to stand still in terms of its unemployment rate.
From Belfast, observers have been able to take a fairly relaxed view of the
tribulations of the British economy since 1989. Although measured from a
lower datum line, Ulster's dive was less steep. The big rise in unemployment
nationally, particularly in southern England, was no more than what Northern
Ireland had gone through in the early 1980s with the disappearance of much
of its manufacturing base.
Two factors in particular explain the gentleness of Ulster's dive.
One is its heavy dependence for employment on the relatively recession-proof
public sector. It accounts for some 40 per cent of employment, according to
Doctor Vani Barooah, professor of applied economics at the University of
Ulster. 'The spending of that 40 per cent means that about 70 per cent of
jobs are ultimately dependent upon the public sector.'
Equally important is the absence of the speculative property boom which
occurred in Great Britain during the late 1980s. It simply did not happen in
Northern Ireland. House prices rose steadily, but there was none of the
dramatic surge which led so many people into high mortgages and, with market
slump, into the negative equity trap. There have been no significant
repossessions: if you have a job at all in Northern Ireland you are unlikely
to be crippled by a mortgage you can no longer afford.
Disposable incomes have not, therefore, been under such heavy pressure; the
Northern Ireland public has continued to spend to an extent which causes
many first-time visitors to express surprise at apparent prosperity where
the image had been one of deprivation.
But confidence has been bruised by the national gloom. It is rated
low-to-medium rather than medium-to-high by Paddy Murphy, chief executive of
the Bank of Ireland in Northern Ireland: 'We are seeing a very slow pick-up
 -slower than we would have expected.'
While the Bank of Ireland reports a 60 per cent increase in mortgage
business this year over last, some of this is accounted for by considerable
growth in its market share. But credit demand among companies is also
markedly up.
Mr Murphy says: 'There have been a lot of approvals recently, but borrowers
are slow to draw the money. They're getting ready for expansion, but the
trigger to make them go is still not there.'
That cannot be said for Ulster's largest family firm, Desmond and Sons,
garment manufacturer, which recently announced a Pounds 24m expansion which
will add 600 jobs and a new plant to the 2,700 workers in 11 locations
already. The announcement gave particular satisfaction to economic planners
in Belfast because this investment is in the province's poorest region, west
of the river Bann. Moreover, it is being made by an indigenous,
locally-owned company rather than some remote multi-national with no deep
commitment to the province.
'A number of people we're working with are looking at projects, at
acquisitions. They haven't all acquired them, but six months ago they
weren't even looking. There is a re-awakened interest in new activity,' says
Mr Tony Hopkins, managing partner in Northern Ireland of Touche Ross,
accountants.
Mr Hopkins brings a particular perspective to a region where, he says, the
close intermeshing of public and private sector decision makers is unique in
the UK. For 10 years until June last year, he was on the staff of the
Northern Ireland Industrial Development Board - the last four years as its
chief executive. He pays tribute to the way in which successive governments
have shaped policies, for 20 years, to the local need rather than the
national dogma of the day.
Mr Hopkins claims that Northern Ireland managers are now considerably more
professional and competent than a decade or so ago: 'The message of
competitiveness is now well embedded. They have got out into the export
markets and overcome the diffidence factor. The business basics are now
right, and there is a great bank of talent coming out of the schools and
universities. The province is well poised - and the last year has been good
for inward investments.'
No local observer would argue with Professor Barooah's contention that
closing the big employment gap between Northern Ireland and mainland Britain
will require radical restructuring and regeneration of the province's
manufacturing base. 'As an engine for employment generation, the public
sector has run out of steam. The only sector which isn't reliant on public
largesse has to be manufacturing and that is the sector which has run down
most in the past 40 years.'
The years are long gone when Belfast alone was a world centre in several
industries now much diminished: shipbuilding; linen; ropes; textile
machinery and tobacco.
There must be closer links between finance and industry and a pro-active
policy to back winners - on the lines of East Asian 'tigers' (Japan, Korea
and Taiwan) - says Professor Barooah.
He and others look enviously at the Irish Republic's success in attracting
the so-called 'sunrise' industries despite an industrial infrastructure much
less advanced than that in Ulster. It is a reminder of what might have been
achieved were it not for the effects of more than 20 years of political
instability and terrorism.
Business interests are themselves trying to produce some easing in the
political stalemate on which terrorism thrives. The Northern Ireland Chamber
of Commerce and Industry has for some months been holding unpublicised
working breakfasts with the various party leaders; sell-out occasions at
which the politicians have been implored by the assembled membership to work
together for the province's economic good.
'First results have been encouraging but we have a long way to go. There is
an amazing amount of agreement between them on economic issues and how to
achieve our aims,' says Paddy Murphy, in his other role as the chamber's
vice-president.
'So far we've only hosted them apart. The next step will be to get them
together.'
