FT  14 JUN 93 / Survey of Tunisia (14): Tourism's unattractive side - There
are fears that Tunisia could be about to lose its charm
TUNISIA'S tourist sector has grown quickly in recent years. Capacity has
doubled to 140,000 beds since 1980 and new hotels under construction and
building permits suggest that figure could rise to 200,000 by 1998.
Investment in new hotels nearly doubled to Dinars 200m between 1990 and
1992, with more than 3m visitors traveling to the shores of North Africa's
smallest country every year, earning it between Dinars 830m and 930m.
Tourist receipts cover between 50 and 100 per cent of the trade deficit,
amounting to about one fifth of exports of goods and services. The sector
accounts for 5 per cent of GDP and 5 per cent of all investment. The jobs
its creates - 40,000 directly and 150,000 indirectly - are welcome in a
country with few natural resources.
This success story does, however, have its less attractive side. An ever
growing number of Tunisians are wondering what will be left of their
coastline as they watch the inexorable advance of concrete in places like
the island of Jerba. They also wonder what will be left of Hammamet, already
the busiest tourist area in the country, when another 13,000 beds are added
by the massive Hammamet Sud development.
Tunisians with long experience in this sector worry about what they see as
the 'cheapening' of the Mediterranean's cheapest destination for package
tour travellers. They say the strategy encouraging growing numbers of beds
to be built in hotels with low occupancy rates except in summer is
fundamentally flawed. Such a strategy gives international tour operators,
who already dominate the Tunisian market, an ever stronger hand.
Critics say that some figures are misleading. The tourists who really matter
are Europeans, but the figures here have not changed much since the late
1980s - 1.6m to 1.8m annually. The balance is made up of Libyans and
Algerians whose presence is either fluctuating or at times unwelcome.
Critics say the policy of subsidising interest rates on bank loans for new
hotels should be curtailed. They also say that - despite official
encouragement to young entrepreneurs - the cost of money means that only
wealthy Tunisians can afford to build new hotels. The sector has attracted
many new rich Tunisians whose love of bricks and mortar is far above any
professional capacity they might have to manage a hotel.
The critic's fears are borne out by what is happening in Tabarka, a small
port lying close to the Algerian frontier. A massive new development of ten
thousand beds is under way, three thousand of which have been built. The
style of new hotels, such as the Mehari Beach, look like a pale imitation of
California. The size of the new buildings sit uncomfortably with the small
houses in the town, which is surrounded with coark oaks at the foot of the
Kroumir mountains.
Activities are more varied here than in any other Tunisian resort. Golfers
enjoy a spectacular new course virtually all year round, sailors and divers
are attracted by the summer months. There is boar hunting in autumn and
winter. Is it wise, critics ask, for the state to spend TD250m in
infrastructure, including the cost of a new airport? Would it not have been
more judicious to build a fast road to Tunis and cut the time of travelling
to the capital from three-and-a-half to one-and-a-half hours? This would
have encouraged a flow of visitors throughout the year, quite a part from
the benefits it would have brought local farmers.
The consequences of careless development is increasingly visible in the
south, where small oasis such as Douz are being ruined by hotels whose
architecture destroys the very character of what is a uniquely fragile
desert environment. In nearby Tozeur, new hotels ignore local architectural
style. Yet, due north of Tozeur, in the mountain oasis of Tamerza, an
architect, Mr Foued Elleuch, and a hotel manager who knows the region well,
Mr Mouldi Hached, have produced the perfect Shanghri La. The architecture of
the Tamerza Palace blends perfectly with the crumbling desert mountains
against which it is set. It sits dramatically above the abandoned village
and oasis of Tamerza.
The interior is a masterpiece of simple design, well suited to the
barrenness of the desert, which sprawls beyond its walls. The service is
excellent and the food delicious. The hotel is attracting discerning
travellers. Its success raises key questions about the direction Tunisian
tourism will take.
Either the authorities want to encourage the building of smaller hotels
tailored to a specific clientele, who have money to spend, or they will
continue to encourage the ever growing spread of uninspired architecture;
hotels for mass tourism whose foreign earning power is increasingly in doubt
and whose presence is destroying many areas of the country.
In the book 'Medinas' recently published by Dar Ashraf Azouz, the French
architect, Claude Santelli, raises a cry of alarm about the number of old,
colonial buildings being pulled down. Roman ruins are also being desecrated,
such as the pier at Thapsus.
