FT  17 APR 93 / Finance and the Family: Protect yourself against school fee
inflation - John Authers with timely advice on how to pay for your child's
education
PARENTS with children of school age must feel trapped between the devil and
the deep blue sea.
The strife over national curriculum tests in the state sector is
well-publicised. Meanwhile, the independent sector makes life harder for
parents by continuing to increase its fees far faster than inflation.
According to a provisional estimate by the Independent Schools Information
Service, fees have risen by 8 per cent in the last year - way ahead of
earnings or price inflation. ISIS's figures show that in 1992 at the senior
level girls day schools cost from Pounds 1,000 to Pounds 2,100 per term
while boarders paid from Pounds 2,100 to Pounds 3,500. Boys' schools tended
to be more expensive, with fees ranging up to Pounds 2,600 per term for day
boys, and Pounds 3,700 for boarders.
If school fees inflation resumes at its average rate for the last few years
of ten per cent, projections of the total bill sound alarming. According to
Sun Life, educating a child born in 1992 at independent schools from the
ages of seven to 18 would cost Pounds 310,000.
Perhaps it is not surprising that parents are resorting to desperation
tactics.
Group Captain David Goucher, bursar of Bryanston, elaborated on some
techniques in the latest edition of the Headmasters' Conference magazine:
'The common ploys, familiar to all bursars, for delaying the day of
reckoning include the accidental misdating of cheques, an irate telephone
call ten days into a new term complaining that the bill has not arrived and
delivering dire threats if the next account includes a surcharge for late
payment, computer breakdowns in the international bank credit transfer
system, fees not yet released by trust funds, insurance companies and
building societies, and, not least, the pathetically disabled duck excuse
that the cheque must have been lost in the post.'
None of these techniques is recommended. It makes more sense to save in
advance, which will lessen the burden of fees once you have to pay them, and
to take out insurance against sudden falls in income.
It is also worth analysing what the school is intended to achieve. If you
just want good exam results, then the best 'value for money', assuming your
child is able to beat the competition, should come from big city single-sex
day schools. They are cheaper than boarding schools.
Once you have decided on a school, you should find out from the bursar how
much it will cost.
Parents who think that meeting fees will be difficult should ask the
following questions:
How much help can the state provide?
The government-backed assisted places scheme will pay fees for children from
low-income households. The amount of government help will depend on your
family's 'relevant income', which includes the total pre-tax income of both
parents, and any unearned income from dependent children. It does not
include social security benefits, and an allowance of Pounds 1,105 is
deducted for each child in the family who is not applying for an assisted
place.
On this basis, families with income up to Pounds 9,056 are eligible to have
their fees paid in full. Assistance for families on higher incomes is
available on a declining scale. The maximum income you can have is Pounds
25,000. Parents interested in the scheme should contact the Department for
Education Assisted Places team, Mowden Hall, Darlington, Durham DL3 9BG
(tel. 0325 392163), which provides details of the scheme and the schools
involved.
Can the school help out?
Several schools offer pre-payment plans, which can work out as offering
better value than paying as you go along. The volume of fee income which
arrives late leaves them feeling grateful for the improved cash flow. Some
also have scholarship funds.
School schemes can be inflexible. Some, such as Harrow's, will allow you to
transfer money to another school. Others will not.
Are the fees protected for the future?
This is most important if you have not saved in advance, and need to fund
fees out of your regular income. Life term insurance for the main bread
winner of the family, to last until the end of your youngest child's
projected school career, makes sense and should not be expensive.
Permanent health insurance, to protect your income in the event of ill
health, could be vital. ISIS has launched three schemes, administered by the
broker Mason &amp; Mason, to help when economic life gets tougher.
Future Term allows you to cover against death, disability, and redundancy
(or bankruptcy for the self-employed) for the period of your child's
education. The rates are expressed as a percentage of fees covered, and will
increase at the end of June. They are - 1.5 per cent for death, 1.75 per
cent for disability, and a maximum of 3 per cent for redundancy. The entire
package would therefore cost 6.25 per cent of fees, and the scheme will not
pay out if you are made redundant within 90 days of joining.
That is an individual scheme. Rates are lower if your child goes to a school
covered by Feesure. This covers the fees against disability, redundancy or
bankruptcy, again with a 90-day period at the beginning of the policy. It
will pay out for a maximum of 12 months.
A scheme launched this week will be administered by schools. Educare will
cover all fees against redundancy or disability for a flat premium of 1.5
per cent. The risk for the insurers is sufficiently reduced by covering so
many parents that they can afford not to bother with the 90-day exclusion at
the beginning of the scheme.
Contact ISIS on 071-630-8793, or Mason &amp; Mason on 0625-529 536, for further
details.
It is best, while you have time, and a high income, on your side to save
capital to be protected against these problems. If that is no longer
possible, there is no reason to allow independent education to become even
less accessible by failing to take out protection.
