FT  01 OCT 93 / Arts: Unique sound of the Czechs - Concert
The Czech Philharmonic Orchestra is on a three-concert visit to London - two
in the Barbican's 'Great Orchestras of the World' series, one in the South
Bank's Czech Festival. Wednesday's at the Barbican offered two of Dvorak's
war-horses, the Cello Concerto and the 'New World' Symphony. A neat pairing
of late works from the composer's American period, the programme picked up
two historical threads - 1993 marks the centenary of the symphony, which was
also conducted by Dvorak himself as part of the Czech Philharmonic's opening
concert in 1896.
For their authenticity alone, the orchestra's Dvorak interpretations demand
attention. But there is no resting on historical laurels: the players are
equally rich in tradition and imagination. They produce a distinctive,
indeed unique, central European sound - warm strings, vibrant winds, raspy
brass (the horns especially characterful) - that sets the band apart from
the homogenised super-orchestras of the West.
The Czech Philharmonic's conductors have been distinguished. Wednesday's
concert was to have been led by one of the notables in the line, Vaclav
Neumann, but his indisposition brought a replacement in Vladimr Valek,
principal conductor of the Czech Radio Symphony Orchestra. He was efficient,
but the concert belonged to the orchestra and, in the concerto, to the
commanding soloist.
He was Lynn Harrell, who proved himself alert to the work's rhapsodic detail
and formal structure; the performance was enriched by the obvious mutual
admiration of cellist and orchestra. Harrell dug affirmatively into the
opening statement, and thereafter provided playing by turns fervent and
lyrical. Flighty in the passage-work, he was warm of tone in the moments of
tenderness.
Valek's account of the symphony was less comfortable. He conducted
confidently, from memory, with superficial results. The scherzo sounded
restless, even improvisatory, the outer movements fiery but pushed; the
finale, especially, was brash where it should have been broad. Valek
responded best to passages of folk-like jollification - where the Dvorak of
the Slavonic Dances is evoked (we heard two of them as encores - and to the
Largo, a slow, poetic performance allowing one to revel in the orchestra's
matchless sound. There is a chance to sample more of it in the concerts
conducted by Libor Pesek (at the Barbican) and Jir Belohlavek (at the
Festival Hall) this weekend.
