FT  27 JUL 93 / Survey of Ghana (9): Hopes may be too high - Edward Balls
examines some harsh realities for the future
GHANA is perhaps the only African country to have accepted the spirit, as
well as the letter, of the World Bank's list of market-based reforms over
the past decade. But after 10 years of structural adjustment, the country
has yet to receive the promised rewards.
At current growth rates (5 per cent for GDP, 3 per cent for population) it
would take Ghana 20 years to join the ranks of lower middle-income
countries. Only then would the average poor Ghanaian reach the poverty
threshold - defined as two-thirds of today's average consumption per head.
To succeed, the World Bank's African role model must make the leap into
accelerated growth and wean itself off foreign aid by attracting much more
of the private and foreign direct investment that Africa so desperately
needs. Failure to do so would mean, rightly or wrongly, a damaging blow to
the Bank's reputation in the continent.
Little wonder that understandably nervous World Bank officials hurry to damp
down expectations about Ghana's future prospects while stressing the
progress that has already been made. Yes, they acknowledge, Ghana remains a
very poor country (average incomes averaged around Dollars 400 per head) and
relies heavily on foreign assistance. But Ghana's economic performance has
still been impressive over the past decade relative both to the previous 10
years and the rest of the continent.
Real incomes per head have grown by an average 2 per cent a year since 1983;
they fell by 0.4 per cent a year in the decade before the structural
adjustment programme began. GDP growth has averaged 5 per cent a year since
1983; in sub-Saharan Africa the average is 2.1 per cent.
These growth rates occurred while Ghana's terms of trade have fallen
relentlessly. While gross aid flows have averaged 8 per cent of GDP a year,
adjusted for Ghana's large terms of trade losses the net resource transfer
was less than 5 per cent of GDP at its peak, compared to a sub-Saharan
African average of 8 per cent.
In short, World Bank and International Monetary Fund officials argue, Ghana
confirms that structural adjustment is a necessary condition for successful
development. Low inflation, a realistically valued exchange rate, reduced
tariff barriers and the removal of numerous restrictions on investment, have
together delivered much faster growth.
Ghana's experience, they argue, also undermines some common myths about
adjustment. Does structural adjustment require a smaller public sector?
Fewer civil servants, perhaps, but the share tax revenue in GDP has tripled
since 1983. Does adjustment hit the poor harder? The sketchy evidence,
according to Mr Ravi Kanbur, World Bank mission chief in Accra, suggests
that, on average, adjustment has reduced the incidence of poverty by
shifting resources from the richer urban areas to the poorer, rural regions.
But Ghana also demonstrates that successful structural adjustment is
insufficient for an acceleration of economic growth and a rapid fall in
poverty. The obstacles to an acceleration in economic growth to the levels
achieved by the east Asian developing economies over the past two decades
will not be rectified by low inflation and liberalisation alone.
Ghana lags far behind its east Asian competition in all areas of social and
physical infrastructure, as the charts show. 80 per cent primary school
enrolment is high by African standards but low compared to east Asia. And
the capacity of Ghana's civil service to implement reforms remains
disappointing, as Kwesi Botchwey, the finance minister, readily admits.
Most worrying are the low level of private sector investment and the small
share of manufacturing investment in GDP. Last year's balance of payments
does, in fact, suggest that flight capital may be beginning to return. But
inflows of foreign direct investment remain low.
Senior government minsters call for a new 'agenda of activism' to address
these deficiencies. Mr Botchwey stresses the need to attract foreign
investment to supplement Ghana's small pool of domestic private savings and
trumpets the new investment code. He talks of packages of tax cuts and
tariff concessions to attract particular foreign investors.
Meanwhile the Bank of Ghana is using all its powers of moral suasion to
encourage the banking sector to bias its foreign exchange operations towards
export-orientated business and offer cheaper term loans for new investments.
The Bank has made it clear, says one banker in Accra, that 'importing
second-hand cars is not consistent with sustainable development.'
But the government appears undecided about whether to bow to pressure for
infant industry protection, from members of the private sector advisory
group, although the World Bank and IMF counsel strongly against it. 'Free
trade means efficiency but it can also destroy domestic industry,' says one
senior minister.'
Mr Ishmael Yamson, chairman of Unilever Ghana, does not believe in
protectionism. 'It breeds corruption and inefficiency,' he says. 'Most
companies in Ghana asking for protection grew up in a shortage economy and
have never had to justify their investment.'
The missing ingredient is confidence. Senior ministers privately voice
frustration at President Rawlings's occasional outbursts against particular
private companies.
Ghana's experience suggests some lessons for the rest of sub-Saharan Africa.
Bank, Fund and government officials list some possible reasons for Ghana's
success:
Ownership: the Economic Recovery Programme was identified with the
government, not the donors, and ministers took responsibility for mistakes
as well as successes - at each stage, they worked hard to persuade interest
groups that reforms were in their interests;
Sequencing: reforms were carefully staggered - the devaluation occurred well
before imports were liberalised - and not pushed through faster than the
government's capacity limitations allowed;
Aid: donor support was substantial and became available from the outset of
the programme before the government had established a track record.
But the missing element is politics. The military has consistently tried to
align its interests with those of the rural poor rather than the richer
urban elite who probably stand to lose more from adjustment in the early
stages. And the government was able to build an impressive track record,
over a 10 year period, before putting its popularity to the test through
last autumn's elections. An election in 1985 or 1986 may well have delivered
a very different result.
But the Rawlings government won the right to continue for a further term of
four years, in an election which most western observers judged to be free
and fair. That is perhaps the most encouraging sign yet that structural
adjustment might work in Africa.
