FT  17 MAY 93 / US weighs action against Chilean over arms for Iraq
THE US Department of Justice is facing a politically delicate decision on
whether to indict a top Chilean arms dealer who used US technology in
large-scale weapons sales to Iraq.
Mr Carlos Cardoen, who made a fortune in the 1980s as one of the biggest
suppliers of cluster bombs and other weapons to Baghdad, has been under
investigation since 1991 by US law enforcement agencies and federal
prosecutors in Miami.
The Clinton administration's decision on the Cardoen case - expected in the
next fortnight - could also have repercussions on other politically
sensitive US prosecutions related to the arming of Iraq.
A year ago US prosecutors filed a civil suit against Mr Cardoen, accusing
him of money laundering and of illegally exporting 100 tonnes of zirconium
from the US to Chile in the 1980s; zirconium is a material that can be used
in cluster bombs or other armaments.
US government officials have told the Financial Times that a criminal
indictment of Mr Cardoen for the zirconium deal was due to be unveiled
earlier this year, but was put on hold after new information was provided to
prosecutors by the CIA.
The CIA information indicated US government awareness as far back as 1984 of
Mr Cardoen's likely military use of the zirconium shipments. At the weekend
Mr Cardoen was quoted in the US as saying American officials were aware of
his work in arming Iraq and of the planned use of the US shipments of
zirconium.
He has also stated he communicated with the CIA about his Iraqi dealings,
contradicting past denials by the Bush administration that the US
intelligence agency had ever had any relationship with Mr Cardoen.
Mr Cardoen's claim that the Reagan and Bush administrations knew precisely
what he was doing mirrors the defence in London last year of former
executives of Matrix-Churchill, the UK machine tools company that was a
Cardoen business partner and also supplied Iraq.
Other pending Iraq-related US cases could be affected by the Clinton
administration's decision on Mr Cardoen, including the planned September
trial of Mr Christopher Drogoul, former manager of the Atlanta branch of
Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL). Mr Drogoul was accused by the Bush
administration of single-handedly organising Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.2bn) of
clandestine Iraqi loans that helped to finance Baghdad's war machine.
BNL Atlanta provided letters of credit that indirectly financed equipment
shipped to Mr Cardoen by Matrix-Churchill, the company at the heart of the
present arms-to-Iraq inquiry being conducted in London by Lord Justice
Scott.
The Matrix-Churchill case collapsed last autumn after it was revealed that
key executives were working with British intelligence services and receiving
the UK government's blessing for their sales of militarily useful equipment
to Iraq.
Mr Drogoul has claimed his activities were known about and approved by the
Reagan and Bush administrations, and by BNL headquarters in Rome. The bank's
head office has denied any knowledge of the BNL Atlanta loans.
