FT  16 AUG 93 / Moscow's monetary reform traumatises republics: Russia's
withdrawal of pre-1993 banknotes earlier this year has not had the intended
result among its neighbours
FORMER Soviet republics have been scrambling to agree terms with Moscow to
obtain more roubles, suggesting that the Russian central bank's crude
monetary reform may not have achieved its goal of a monetary divorce.
Although the main damage caused in Russia by the withdrawal of pre-1993
banknotes was psychological, the operation was a blow for neighbouring
republics. They had, in recent months, been conducting much of their trade
with Russia with pre-1993 banknotes ahead of western-style credit agreements
to finance energy imports from Russia.
Most important, the operation does not appear to have prompted the republics
either to cement their independence with their own currencies, or to keep
the rouble using budgetary, monetary, and customs policies dictated by
Russia.
When the central bank dropped its rouble bombshell at the end of July, only
the three Baltic republics and Kyrgyzstan had introduced their own
fully-fledged currencies. Ukraine and Georgia, and to a lesser extent
Belarus, had introduced their own surrogate currencies which were everything
but convertible.
Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan, which have their own energy supplies, promptly
declared they intended to part with the rouble, but the signs are the others
will continue to delay a decision.
To enable salaries to be paid and goods to be purchased domestically,
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Armenia and Tajikistan have said the old roubles
will remain legal tender at home. But to avoid a breakdown in trade and to
obtain some new 'real money', they have been conducting feverish
negotiations with Russia to secure new banknotes, before finalising
conditions for using the rouble as their own currency.
Cynics say there is nothing to stop republics such as Uzbekistan, which has
already received Rbs50bn in new banknotes, from taking the new notes as a
free gift from Russia and then introducing their own currency.
Meanwhile, explanations of what the policy was meant to achieve, and what is
being negotiated with the republics, remain confused.
Mr Alexander Khandruyev, deputy chairman of the central bank, said on Friday
Russia wanted to create a monetary and economic union whereby other
republics would have their own currencies but conduct trade with the Russian
rouble. In the meantime, he said, Russia had to 'help' republics like
Kazakhstan, which were not yet ready to introduce their own currency.
Such help could involve printing their own currency for them, and might
involve giving them shipments of new rouble banknotes.
Given the problems generated for the republics by Russia's sudden change of
policy in July, they should be keen to introduce their own currencies. But,
while a national currency is a true sign of independence and gives a
republic the tools to pursue an independent economic reform policy, it is
fraught with risks.
The arguments against a national currency include painful macro-economic
policies needed to support a sound currency, which Estonia has achieved, but
Ukraine, for instance, has not. Another powerful incentive for sticking with
the rouble could be that those republics introducing their own currency will
have to pay world prices for energy supplies from Russia.
The confusion in Belarus, where the central bank has been considering its
own currency while the government has been looking at monetary union with
Russia, reflects the difficult choices facing a republic heavily dependent
on Russian energy to run its industry.
Delegations from Armenia and Belarus were in Moscow last week for talks. Mr
Vladimir Manoyan, a government spokesman for Armenia, pleaded an absence of
reserves (the country is spending most of its money on supporting the war
with Azerbaijan) and an economic blockade as special reasons for sticking
with the rouble for now.
But while accepting that Armenia, Tajikistan and Moldova - all small states
involved in political and military strife - were special cases which could
keep the rouble, Mr Khandruyev said the aim of talks with Belarus was
different.
Because Belarus had already introduced its own currency when it started
printing coupons to make up for a shortage of rouble banknotes last year, he
said details now needed to be worked out on how, for instance, it would pay
for Russian energy supplies.
On the domestic front, Mr Khandruyev said the objective of forcing
individuals to place more than Rbs100,000 in bank accounts, at interest
rates far lower than inflation, was to make entrepreneurs declare untaxed
revenues. But implementing the policy is proving fraught with difficulties.
Perhaps the only positive outcome of the rouble move is that it has tested
the tender shoots of a growing civil society, with the Russian Association
of Banks asking the constitutional court to examine whether the move
violated property rights.
