FT  14 DEC 93 / Survey of Charities Investment and Finance (8): Independent
advice needed - Investment management strategy
'Trustees with substantial sums to invest should consider appointing an
independent investment manager to them in drawing up their investment
policy.'
This statement, taken from a Charity Commission pamphlet*, shows that the
Commission is now actively encouraging charities to seek investment advice.
Hymans Robertson, the consulting actuaries, estimates that at the end of
December 1992, Pounds 13.047bn was under the management of the 25 leading
investment firms offering charitable fund investments. Of that, Pounds
10.874bn is divided into 1,144 segregated accounts.
These sums are still small compared to the total funds managed in the
pensions industry. But charities are making increasing use of the number and
range of managed funds available. Two things show why:
First, the Official Custodian estimates that divestment back to the
charities' trustees will take about five years (starting in January 1993).
Trustees are now responsible - and liable - for the performance of their
investments on behalf of the charity.
But many trustees and charity managers have neither the time (nor the
knowledge) actively to manage their investment portfolios day-to-day: 'All
we want is an investment expert who we can trust so we don't have to worry
every day whether a particular stock has gone up or down,' says Ian
Theodoreson, finance director of the Save the Children Fund.
Second, the need for a better investment return. Charities depend very much
on contributions and fundraising (the top five by total voluntary income
alone pooled more than Pounds 292m in 1992). But they are also big spenders
(those same five charities spent Pounds 385.7m in the same year).
The shortfall has to be made up by sales of goods and services, government
grants, rent and investment. But with the government trying to reduce its
expenditure and income from goods and services and struggling in the
recession, charities have become increasingly dependent on their investment
returns.
Most of the big fund managing firms offer two main investment alternatives
Segregated managed funds. These can start at any funding level, with minimum
sizes of zero to Pounds 15m. Management fees, however, tend to be weighted
against the smaller fund levels. For example, Fleming Investment Management
fees start at 0.8 per cent for the first Pounds 5m, 0.4 per cent for the
next Pounds 6m, 0.3 per cent for the next Pounds 25m and 0.2 per cent
thereafter. Mr Paul Drake, head of the charity team at Baring Global Fund
Managers, says it manages segregated funds for charities with funds in
excess of Pounds 10m. 'It is ludicrous for small and medium sized charities
with less than Pounds 10m in segregated funds, to pay these fee levels.'
Fee levels - not always comparable in terms of services offered - range
widely. According to Hymans Robertson's survey, annual charges for managing
a Pounds 5m fund ranged between Pounds 35,000 (top quartile) down to Pounds
20,000 (bottom quartile. For charities with Pounds 25m to invest,
comparative figures ranged between Pounds 100,000 and Pounds 50,000.
Common Investment Funds (CIF). CIFs are small in terms of the total amount
invested relative to segregated funds, but they have grown in number and
range since the divestment from the Official Custodian. The Charity
Commission allows two investment alternatives - equities or fixed interest
securities. From this, most fund managers are now offering three CIF
investment products: UK equity, fixed income and overseas investments.
However, the Commission (stating its objectives for investing charitable
funds) presents fund managers with the dilemma of how to protect the fund's
capital while at the same time 'obtaining the best income from those
funds.'*
As a rule, most fund managers tend to view equity-based portfolios as
offering the best investment. 'We have an important educational role to play
in steering charities away from concentration of investment in monetary
assets towards an equity biased strategy,' says Mr Drake at Baring.
Mr Jonathan Maylin-Smith, fund manager at the Church, Charity and Local
Authority Fund Managers (CCLA) says: 'Charities should stick with an
equity-based investment policy.'
Overseas CIFs are becoming increasingly popular, but fund managers are not
unanimous about their benefits. Flemings hopes to launch its overseas fund
by the end of January 1994. Baring already has Pounds 7m-Pounds 8m in an
overseas equity fund. Murray Johnstone Asset Management offers funds that
have exposure to UK, US, Japan and South East Asian equities, fixed interest
and smaller companies. Global equity and overseas equity vehicles are also
available.
Some fund managers are not convinced that so many products are warranted:
'Charities need income and overseas investment tend to offer lower income.
And for most UK charities, distributing in the UK, it is difficult to
contemplate an investment abroad,' says one.
However, the spread of CIFs is unlikely to diminish. Baring, for instance,
is now looking into the viability of a small UK companies fund, on the basis
that the sector has the best prospects to benefit from an upturn in the UK
economy. Ethical-based CIFs have also been mooted, but fund managers
question if their returns will be adequate: 'The legal position is quite
clear. The trustee's primary responsibility is to maximise the return to the
fund,' says Mr Maylin-Smith.
But the range of UK equity-based investment alternatives has not been helped
by changes in domestic tax law. In the last UK March Budget, the chancellor
announced that advanced corporation tax (ACT) is to be reduced from 25 per
cent to 20 per cent on dividends in two stages by April 5, 1994. As
charities receive a tax credit on top of their net dividend income which
they use to reclaim the ACT paid on their behalf, any reduction in the rate
of ACT will result in a fall in their gross dividend return. Charities
therefore stand to lose 5 per cent in dividend over the period.
But of those fund managers questioned, most were not too concerned:
'Charities should not change their investment policy because of the changes
in ACT. Equities have performed so well as the interest-rate cycle has
turned down,' says the CCLA's Mr Maylin-Smith (significantly raised
dividends and enhanced scrip alternatives have also helped).
But at time when the Government is turning to charities to take up the slack
from the welfare state, and when charity income is at a premium, says Mr
Drake, 'we have to acknowledge it is a negative.'
* Investment of Charitable Funds: Basic Principles CC14 - Charity
Commissioners for England and Wales.
 ---------------------------------------------
HOW GIVING CHANGED IN 1992
 ---------------------------------------------
Charity Shops                   +16%
Convenants/gift aid             +11%
Legacies                         +4%
Donations                        +4%
Fund raising events             -14%
 ---------------------------------------------
Source: Charities Aid Foundation
 ---------------------------------------------
