FT  23 MAR 93 / Wave of immigration at new peak: Western Europe and North
America each take over 1m a year in 1991 and 1992
WESTERN Europe and North America each received more than 1m immigrants in
1991 and 1992, a United Nations Conference on European population, which
opens today in Geneva, is to be told.
The total, mainly relatives joining earlier immigrants and a new wave of
asylum seekers, is higher than the previous peak in the early 1960s,
according to Mr David Coleman, a demographer at Oxford University.
Immigrants are not generally economically beneficial to their host
countries, he argues, although they may solve short-term labour problems.
'Only around 60 per cent of the potential workforce in western Europe is
actually working and there is plenty of slack to cope with future labour
demand,' he says. The past availability of cheap labour may be one factor
behind Europe's relative lack of investment in high technology industries,
he adds.
The immigration numbers include 250,000 leaving Yugoslavia last year.
Germany last year took 438,000 asylum seekers, two thirds of the European
total.
But so far 'it is Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia which are taking the
brunt of Russians, gipsies and Romanians from the east,' Mr Coleman says.
An outbreak of fighting in Russia could intensify the pressure for westward
migration, and pressure will come too from the projected rise of nearly 2bn
in the populations of the south Mediterranean, tropical Africa and south
Asia in the next 12 years.
The conference, one of five regional debates before next year's UN World
Population Conference in Cairo, is expected to call for more money to be
spent on family planning to curb high rates of population growth in
developing countries.
The UN Population Fund wants the total amount of money spent each year to
double from the present level of Dollars 4.5bn by the year 2000. Developed
countries contribute only Dollars 800m of the total, and the Population Fund
the main UN family planning agency, has seen its budget frozen at Dollars
238m.
The conference will also hear warnings that current projections of the
world's population could need considerable revision.
By the year 2050, the world's stable population could be anywhere between
5bn and 20bn, according to Mr Miroslav Macura, of the UN Economic Commission
for Europe. Present estimates of a doubling in population from the present
5.5bn by that date could be altered by small changes in fertility rates, he
said.
Scientists are also arguing that traditional assumptions between economic
development and falling birth rates - captured in the phrase 'Development is
the best contraception' - no longer appear true. Gulf states have seen
fertility rates - the average family size if the current birth rate were
maintained - of around three, compared to a European average of around 1.7,
despite a huge increase in wealth. Mr Macura also points out that Thailand,
Sri Lanka, and Bulgaria have seen sharp falls in birth rate despite low
prosperity levels.
Social changes in Europe are causing sharp fluctuations in birth rate. East
German fertility rates, which were 1.6 before German unification compared to
West Germany's 1.4, have now fallen to 0.8 because of uncertainty. However
the increasing prosperity of Italy and Spain is thought to be responsible
for the fall in fertility rates to about 1.2, below West German levels.
