FT  18 MAR 93 / Cut-price route angers community groups
HACKNEY COUNCIL in east London was quick to state its opposition yesterday,
after it became clear that the high-speed Channel rail link is likely to run
overground through the borough.
Councillors, officials and community groups collected about 11,000
signatures on a petition which will be delivered to the House of Commons
today. Traders from a 200-year-old market are threatening to deliver a load
of bananas with the petition.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said in the Budget the government favoured
St Pancras station as the terminus for the link, implying a surface route
alongside the North London railway line. A detailed announcement on the
route of the link has been delayed until next week.
Traders at the Ridley Road fruit and vegetable market fear that widening the
North London line - which runs directly beneath the market - to accommodate
Continental trains would probably require the market's demolition.
Mr John Julian, whose great grandfather helped start the market and who has
dozens of cousins working there, said: 'It's terrible. If they take out this
market it will knock out this area.'
Mr John McCafferty, leader of the Labour-controlled Hackney council, said an
overground line 'would be a disaster for the population of Hackney. We will
certainly be taking every single step we can to block it'.
The council says widening the existing railway would affect a dozen schools
and hundreds of houses and shops. British Rail has told the council only 15
houses would be destroyed. The council says the figure is nearer 700.
The council also says that up to 500 extra vehicles an hour could be brought
on to Hackney's congested roads if Stratford in east London became, an
interchange for the new link.
The pressure groups affected by the St Pancras option say they would prefer
the Channel rail link to run underground to King's Cross - as originally
planned - or to end south of the river at Waterloo.
Islington council says the King's Cross project has already blighted the
area. Mr Gordon Arnot, planning worker at an Islington residents
association, said: 'The residents here have lived for five years with the
threat of the King's Cross low-level station. We feel we should get some
compensation for the economic blight.'
Mr Andrew Bosi, chairman of Islington's transport committee said: 'It is a
pity that the government's transport policy still changes from one month to
the next.'
BR said it could make no comment on the figures at issue until the decision
on the route was announced.
