FT  28 SEP 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (12): Sound advice on
stability / Economics
CRISIS, STABILISATION AND ECONOMIC REFORM by Michael Bruno Clarendon Press,
Oxford, Pounds 25 300 pages
THIS HAS been a dreadful year for the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development. The events of the summer, culminating in the departure of Mr
Jacques Attali, the bank's founding president, dealt a serious blow to the
bank's reputation. But there was another loss which may, in the end, prove
more serious.
The EBRD has, understandably, found it difficult to lend to commercially
viable projects in eastern Europe. But there is one commodity it should be
distributing in abundance: sound advice. Last March, the bank announced that
it had found a new chief economist, whose international reputation and
experience should have enabled the bank to lift its profile on the
prescriptive policy circuit.
Professor Michael Bruno, then Melchior Professor of International Economic
Policy at the Hebrew University at Jerusalem, is one of those few academics
who speak with real authority about the real world, and can draw on
practical experience when giving policy advice. His new book, Crisis,
Stabilisation and Economic Reform, demonstrates why his appointment last
March was such a coup for the EBRD, particularly as, given Mr Attali's
desire to increase the bank's activities in Russia, his appointment occurred
just when the Russian government finally appeared willing to embrace reform
and stabilisation.
Drawing heavily on his first-hand experience as governor of the Bank of
Israel between 1986 and 1991, but not skimping on the economic analysis, Mr
Bruno provides a powerful and comprehensive analysis of why some countries
get into hyperinflationary difficulties. At the heart of all the
hyperinflations he examines, both in Israel and Latin America, is the
political and distributional difficulties that weak governments face in
sharing out the costs of negative economic shocks and the temptation to
resort to monetary deficit financing instead. The book charts the essential
elements of workable stabilisation plans in these regions and countries and
then extends its analysis to eastern Europe.
Based particularly on the Israeli experience, Mr Bruno lists six ingredients
for an economically and politically sustainable stabilisation effort in
eastern Europe:
Stabilisation should come in the wake of past failed attempts to control
inflation;
The central leadership should be strong and united, and be able to offer the
prospect of external aid in return for successful reform;
The programme of stabilisation measures and structural reform must stand or
fall as one package;
There must be a consensus among economists in the country that the proposed
programme is the right one;
It must have transparent ingredients which offer potential welfare
improvements for the whole society;
The programme must be perceived as enhancing the chances of survival of the
political leadership.
Where the book fails is in making the case that the analogy works, in spite
of the huge differences between the political problems of stabilisation in
essentially market-based and liberal societies such as Israel and those in
the former Soviet Union. At first sight Russia appears to meet all the
ingredients above for successful reform, but the Russian government, in
spite of the availability of substantial western aid and advice, has not
been willing to try. Presumably this can be explained, in part, because the
huge dislocation caused by trying to stabilise a non-market economy means
that it is not worth taking the risk. In any case, Russia does not have the
essential components of a civil society which enable the government to sell
and sustain the case for economic reform.
While Mr Bruno's book does not help us fully to understand the Russian
dilemma, he is presumably currently on the case. But not at the EBRD. For,
as the Attali crisis developed, Mr Bruno withdrew his candidacy and has
subsequently been appointed the World Bank's new chief economist. But the
Russian government will still be hearing from him - unless, that is, the
difficulties of building a viable Palestinian economy prove too powerful a
distraction.
