FT  21 JAN 93 / International Company News: Notebook PC unveiled in Japan
PRICE competition in the previously-sheltered Japanese personal computer
market intensified yesterday with the unveiling by IBM Japan and Canon, the
office equipment maker, of a jointly- developed, notebook-style computer
with built-in printer.
Earlier this week, NEC, the Japanese electronics company which has about 53
per cent of the PC market, announced a cheaper model range that was seen as
a response to a fast-increasing flow of lower-priced imports from Compaq and
Dell Computer, the US makers.
At the same time, PC demand is falling in Japan, with sales down an
estimated 15 per cent last year, putting extra pressure on makers to
discount products.
Industrial companies are cutting their capital spending budgets, while
domestic users appear reluctant to trade-in existing models, particularly as
there are expectations of further price cuts later this year.
The IBM-Canon machine, which will have a list price of Y298,000 (Dollars
2,374), has a 32-bit central processing unit and built-in bubble-jet printer
capable of holding 10 sheets of paper.
The companies are hoping for annual sales of about 50,000 units, arguing
that its price compares favourably with that of existing Japanese notebook
PCs.
Japan's computer market was given a shake by Compaq late last year when it
announced the arrival of a Y128,000 model, which was about half the price of
comparable Japanese machines. IBM Japan has since marketed lower-priced
machines, and NEC this week released a desk-top model for Y218,000.
NEC claims its machines are more powerful, offering users value for the
extra money, while the company has its own software.
Japanese retailers, which have traditionally had large margins on NEC
machines, also have room to make further discounts if sales are sluggish.
The Japanese company offers notebook-style computers starting at Y288,000,
which will be under extreme pressure from the foreign competition.
NEC insists it will not be caught in a 'low price, low quality' spiral, but
it is facing a challenge from high-quality imported machines, which come
with suitable Japanese language software.
