FT  21 AUG 93 / Arts: 'Job' and 'The Labryinth'
ONE OF THE Dartington Festival's visitors this year has been the Czech
composer Petr Eben, whom some see as one of the important successors to
Messiaen. This week he gave the first of two Dartington organ recitals
focusing on his own music.
Eben's works are often conceived on a large scale. The Labyrinth of the
World and the Paradise of the Heart, and Job, the two works heard at St
Mary's, Totnes, and at the restored former Cistercian Buckfast Abbey, occupy
almost an hour apiece. Each consists of eight or more sections of music. By
interspersing a speaker, Eben echoes a genre favoured by Stravinsky (to
texts by Gide and Cocteau), Honegger and Gerhard (after Camus), with the
audience cast as spectateurs to a kind of humanist medieval morality.
There is a conscious didactic purpose. The prophet's tribulations and
fortitude supply the lesson of Job; in the new work, which uses extracts
from the ill-fated Czech philosopher-theologian Jan Amos Komensky
(Comenius), central Europe's equivalent to Bunyan or Langland, we witness a
trail of bourgeois hypocrisy and jumped-up officialdom, satirised with the
pungent wit of the brothers Capek or Hasek's Schweik.
Buckfast's cipher-prone four-manual organ produced a curiously under-defined
performance of Job from David Titterington, who has recorded the work
admirably. By contrast, The Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise of the
Heart is a 'work in progress', still evolving through a process of
improvisation. The joins inevitably showed, and there is the added danger
that the organ interludes seem to mimic, as much as illuminate, what has
just been read.
The contrasts and build-ups were well measured, with lively registration.
Eben's sinuous, diabolic writing, is has been said, can be more effective
than its opposite. But it is in understatement that he most excels, as where
the plainsong unexpectedly transmits into the tenor using an 8-or-4- foot
reed on the pedal.
The key to this performance was a first-class speaker, the baritone Thomas
Helmsey, who gave Comenius' text the Rabelaisian vent it deserves. Yet even
this vigour and Eben's own intensity could not prevent the final volte-face,
an unadorned statement of Comenius' hymn from the Leiden MS, seeming at best
naive, at worst sentimental.
