FT  28 MAY 93 / Companies may be charged over Iraq arms sales
THE CLINTON administration is considering two new indictments of US
companies involved in illegal exports of militarily useful equipment to Iraq
during the 1980s, both of which were funded by the Atlanta branch of Italy's
Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
According to US law enforcement officials, the investigations of both
companies, which are located in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, are at an
advanced stage.
On Wednesday night the US Justice Department filed arms export charges
against Mr Carlos Cardoen, a Chilean arms maker, and Teledyne, a California
defence contractor. The 21-part indictment concerns the allegedly illegal
export from the US to Chile between 1982 and 1989 of zirconium, a metal made
by Teledyne. The metal was allegedly used by Mr Cardoen to make about 24,000
cluster bombs that were then sold to Iraq.
The Cardoen affair could have repercussions in the forthcoming trial of Mr
Christopher Drogoul, former BNL manager in Atlanta, and also in London,
where the Lord Justice Scott inquiry is investigating Matrix-Churchill, the
Coventry machine tools company that was Iraqi-owned, funded by BNL Atlanta
and worked closely with Mr Cardoen.
Both Mr Drogoul and Mr Paul Henderson, the former Matrix-Churchill managing
director, have said they acted with their governments' approval and briefed
government intelligence services.
Both Teledyne and Mr Cardoen yesterday reacted with anger to the
indictments, saying they held government documents that proved Washington's
knowledge and approval of the exports as part of a tilt toward Iraq in the
1980s.
Teledyne said it would plead not guilty to the charges and would use US
documents to show its exports were known about in Washington.
Mr Roger Zuckerman, a US lawyer for Mr Cardoen, said: 'The very government
that now charges Mr Cardoen as a criminal was supplying weaponry to Iraq.
(It) knew of, approved of, and even solicited the conduct it now deems
illegal.'
