FT  08 DEC 93 / (CORRECTED) International Company News: Postbank welcomed
into the German banking fold - But the change will hurt
Correction (published 10th Decemeber 1993) appended to this article.
The Association of German Banks yesterday dropped a two-year legal suit
against Postbank, the state-owned postal bank, which was accused of keeping
interest rates low with the help of state subsidies.
The move symbolically welcomes Postbank, often nicknamed 'the bank without
bankers' into the broader family of German commercial banks following the
government's success last month in pushing its privatisation through
parliament.
Postbank will sell up to 75 per cent of its equity starting in 1995. The
German postal services and the state will each retain a 12.5 per cent equity
stake until 1999.
Mr Gunter Schneider, chief executive, said Postbank would immediately be
seeking equity partners, with a preference for building societies and other
savings and loans institutions.
The first equity exchange is likely to be made with the Vereinigte Post
Versicherung, the insurance company which, after selling life insurances to
the postal employees, has widened its client base. Mr Schneider says he
plans to step up the bank's restructuring before floating shares publicly on
the German stock market.
The bank also intends to strike co-operation alliances with foreign
partners, mostly through Deutsche Postbank International, its recently
formed subsidiary in Luxembourg. Its first cross-national venture was
announced this week. Three weeks ago, Postbank opened three investment funds
co-managed by the Swiss Bank Corporation. The funds will invest in European
fixed-interest rates deposit certificates.
Postbank's operating results for 1992 totalled DM216m (Dollars 127m), but
the bank made a loss of DM173m in 1992 after transfers to the state budget
and special expenses.
Until last year, losses by the state-owned bank were covered by Deutsche
Telekom - a measure which will stop in 1995 with privatisation. In return,
Postbank will no longer pay a substantial portion of its earnings to the
state. 'We expect to be in the black in 1995,' says Mr Schneider.
Becoming a fully-fledged independent bank will not be painless. Up to 40 per
cent of the bank's staff is expected to be axed bringing the workforce down
from 20,000 to 12,000 by 1996. The bank has accumulated DM1.1bn for pensions
in the last two years.
The bank's divorce from the postal services will hurt those working in
German post offices. With privatisation, Postbank will stop covering the
wages of some 30,000 employees offering financial services behind postal
counters. The measure will save the bank about DM800m a year.
Analysts estimate that the bank will only need 1,500 counters, from which it
currently derives nearly 80 per cent of its business, rather than be
represented in Germany's 20,000 post offices.
'We will start operating like a normal commercial bank,' says Mr Schneider.
'We will stay in the savings deposits business but we will offer more
services. We do not want to develop new products. We want to offer known
products at better prices,' he says.
Postbank has started its drive to attract new customers. A new savings book,
called Sparbuch 3,000 plus, has attracted 200,000 customers since it was
launched at the end of 1992.
After losing customers last year, when deposits fell to DM42.5bn from
DM44.8bn, the new product is expected to lift deposits to DM48bn by the end
of 1993.
Other new businesses include a licence with Visa, which will allow Postbank
to issue credit cards later this year.
'We will become a real player now. But we want to remain faithful to our
traditional image of security,' says Mr Schneider.
CORRECTION
Postbank, the German bank, has recently opened three investment funds
co-managed by Union Bank of Switzerland. The co-manager was incorrectly
reported in the Financial Times on Wednesday as Swiss Bank Corporation.
