FT  19 NOV 93 / The Queen's Speech: Mum's army of teachers on the advance -
Education
THE Department for Education is courting further direct conflict with the
education establishment by pressing on with plans to reform university
student unions and teacher training in schools.
Both plans were announced earlier this year and the government has consulted
on them.
The reform of teacher training would allow a heavy shift away from
universities and colleges and towards purely school-based training. It would
involve creating a new quango, to be called the Teacher Training Agency,
which would replace the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education,
and also take some powers from the Education Department, and the Higher
Education Funding Council, the university quango.
The new agency would decide grant allocations to institutions for teachers'
initial training, research into education, and teacher education.
An announcement is expected in the next few weeks on the government's most
controversial proposal, to create a 'mum's army' by allowing non-graduates
to qualify as teachers of infants. It does not require primary legislation
and so was not included in yesterday's speech.
Teachers' unions have already stated a strong opposition to the proposals,
and the normally moderate Association of Teachers and Lecturers says that it
will not co-operate with any of the measures.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the ATL, described the proposal to
allow schools to employ 'unskilled' teachers as 'insulting to parents'. He
said all children deserved teachers who were 'fully trained and properly
competent'.
The proposals on students' unions would restrict them to a narrow list of
activities. Public funding would not be available for anything else.
The proposal is aimed at student unions which use public money for political
campaigning, but university vice-chancellors expressed sorrow that the
government had continued with the measure. The Committee of Vice-chancellors
and Principals said the government should have provided a list of proscribed
activities, rather than attempting to define what student unions could do.
