FT  13 OCT 93 / Waldegrave admits error over exports to Iraq
CABINET MINISTER Mr William Waldegrave yesterday accepted that he had erred
in approving exports to Iraq that were used to boost the country's military
capability.
But he blamed Whitehall officials for not passing on key intelligence to
ministers that might have shed light on the Iraqi build-up and the
involvement of British companies.
It was the most serious public admission by a serving minister since the
Scott inquiry began last May and may refuel the furore over the
arms-for-Iraq affair.
Mr Waldegrave said that in 1989 as foreign office minister he had decided on
'the balance of probability' that British machine tools would be used for
civilian purposes by the Iraqis.
'I took the view maybe wrongly - clearly wrongly in hindsight - that the
priority in Iraq had changed and these were going for civil use,' he said.
'Clearly, with hindsight, that was the wrong judgment.'
The government faced a further embarrassment when Mr Waldegrave agreed to
retract an earlier statement to the inquiry that 'no dual use exports (to
Iraq) were allowed if it was believed they were to be used to produce
weapons'.
Mr Waldegrave, now public services minister, was being questioned over his
role as foreign office minister between July 1988 and November 1990.
He was referred by the inquiry to a series of intelligence reports showing
that when he agreed to the British exports there was firm evidence that the
Iraqis were using the machine tools for military purposes.
He said he had not been made aware of the reports which were circulated
among his own officials. Had the reports been made available to him, he
said, it would have been easier for him to argue against other government
departments and to block the export of machine tools.
'I have a very high regard for the capacity of the intelligence services in
this country but I don't think we used them properly in this story,' he
said.
Documents made available to the Scott inquiry and referred to yesterday
appear to confirm a contradiction at the heart of the government's handling
of its defence policy towards Iraq.
Ministers agreed in 1989 to approve the export of machine tools made by
Midlands company Matrix Churchill in spite of intelligence linking the
company to a munitions contract. The information was used later to prosecute
directors of the company.
The defence in the Matrix Churchill trial argued that the directors acted in
the full knowledge of government. The trial collapsed after a judge refused
the government's attempt to withhold documents.
Mr Waldegrave was asked by Lord Justice Scott why, given the intelligence on
Matrix Churchill, there had not been an earlier prosecution or whether such
a prosecution at all was fair. The minister said: 'I find it very difficult
to judge this. Perhaps that is what all the inquiry is about.'
