FT  23 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Concert party fires speculation - Andrew
Taylor on possible new ownership at Watts Blake Bearne
A 280-YEAR-old Devon business, a world leader in its field, looks set to
lose its independence, and there appears little that the directors or
majority of shareholders will be able to do to influence the outcome or
price at which it is sold.
Watts Blake Bearne has been digging ball clay out of the Bovey Basin near
Newton Abbot since 1710. The heavy sticky clay, which once produced tobacco
pipes, is used worldwide to manufacture ceramics such as sanitary ware, wall
and floor tiles and table ware.
The ownership of the company has been thrown into question by the decision
of three shareholders to sell their combined stake of 45.2 per cent.
The companies, which are acting as a concert party, say that, under takeover
rules, the sale 'is likely to lead to an offer for the entire issued share
capital of the company.'
The three are Ceramics Holdings, controlled by the Lebanese Gargour family,
Sibelco, a privately-owned Belgian-based producer of silica sand for the
glass industry, and Quarzwerke, a private German producer of silica sand.
Mr John Pike, Watts Blake Bearne managing director, said: 'The three
companies are acting within their rights. They announced a concert party
agreement to pursue common interests in 1991 which allows them to sell their
combined holdings in this way.'
'It is tough, however, for other shareholders, many of which have said they
wish us to remain independent. It will be very difficult to mount a defence
if, as seems likely, the sale of such a large block of shares triggers a bid
at an unsatisfactory price.'
The company can only hope that the minimum price, which has not been
disclosed, is not met; an acceptable white knight can be found to buy the
stake; or that the shareholding can be placed with a number of investors
rather than sold to a single purchaser.
A placing, however, would be unlikely to raise as much cash as a sale to a
single buyer which might be prepared to pay a premium to provide a
spring-board for a take-over.
Sibelco and Quarzwerke could themselves bid for the company. They have a
pre-emption right, should a recommended purchaser offer less than 433p a
share, to buy Ceramics' shares at the same price.
At 433p the business would be valued at just Pounds 90m compared with
shareholders funds currently of about Pounds 50m or 240p a share. Watts
Blake Bearne's share price closed last night at 443p.
Mr Ian Hilliker, analyst at NatWest Securities, said a bidder could afford
to pay up to 530p a share or Pounds 110m without earnings dilution based on
forecast pre-tax profits of Pounds 7.2m this year.
'This is a high quality company which absolutely dominates its niche
market', he said.
Watts Blake Bearne, which generates 85 per cent of its sales outside the UK,
estimates that it provides clay for 40 per cent of the European sanitary
ware market, a third of the US market and half of the Far East market. It
also claims to supply a quarter of the European and US floor tile market.
It owns extensive clay reserves in Germany and in the US where in 1989 it
bought United Clays the country's second biggest ball clay prod-ucer.
Profits, which had grown steadily since the family-owned business was
floated in 1964, have faltered recently due to the recession in the
construction industry. The group estimates that two-thirds of sales are
triggered by new building, repair, maintenance or improvement work.
The loss of an important customer in the US (since replaced), compounded
problems and pre-tax profits slipped to Pounds 5.67m in 1991 compared with a
peak of Pounds 8.47m in 1989.
NatWest expects profits to have bounced back to Pounds 6.8m last year helped
by recent acquisitions and a recovery in the US business.
The company should benefit from a recovery in the US and UK construction
industries, particularly housebuilding, although the continental European
ceramics market is likely to fall further. It seems probable, however, that
new owners will reap the benefits from any revival.
