FT  18 FEB 93 / International Company News: Flanders offers Fl 55m to Daf
BELGIUM'S Flemish regional government is prepared to provide Fl 55m (Dollars
29.5m) in capital for a new, slimmed-down Daf, the UK-Dutch truckmaker which
went into receivership two weeks ago.
Mr Luc van den Brande, head of the Flanders government, disclosed this
yesterday after meeting on Tuesday with Daf's receivers and Mr Koos
Andriessen, the Dutch economic affairs minister, in The Hague.
Meanwhile, Daf NV's banks, led by ABN Amro, were expected to have more
meetings with its receivers today to hear details of a proposed
restructuring plan and consider whether to co-operate in any further
refinancing. Current short-term financing of Daf runs out on February 26.
The government of Flanders said the majority of its Fl 55m capital injection
would involve a direct equity stake in both the Dutch and Belgian arms of
the proposed new Daf company. A smaller portion would take probably take the
form of a subordinated loan.
It said the Fl 55m figure would represent 12 per cent of a total of Fl 450m
in shareholders' equity needed to revive Daf. Its equity stake would give it
input into policy at Daf in the Netherlands, while its stake in the Flemish
arm would give it a blocking minority in Flanders.
The Dutch government indicated earlier it would be willing to put up around
Fl 200m to relaunch Daf.
The Belgian financing is conditional on guarantees that the new-style Daf
would employ around 753 people in Flanders, compared with the more than
1,400 people who currently work at the company's cab and axle factory in
Westerlo. It also wants job guarantees for 410 Belgians working at Daf's
headquarters in Eindhoven.
Production of Leyland DAF vans resumed in Birmingham yesterday after
components suppliers, including GKN, resumed deliveries. But lines at the
truck plant in Leyland, Lancashire, were quiet, with suppliers reluctant to
restore delivery. At Birmingham's Washwood Heath plant ''about a dozen''
suppliers are in negotiation with the receivers.
