FT  29 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Zeneca faces struggle to beat hostile
environment
ZENECA, ICI's recently floated bioscience business, could not have been born
at a more inauspicious time. Its pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and
specialities businesses are all struggling in an extremely hostile
environment.
Healthcare reform in Germany and Italy have stunned the European drugs
market, which is now static compared with an 8 per cent increase last year.
Reforms in France and the UK, as well as additional measures in Germany, are
expected over the next 12 months.
In the US, reforms are also being prepared by the Clinton administration,
although the expanding power of bulk buyers of healthcare will probably have
more impact than any reforms.
Meanwhile, Zeneca's pharmaceuticals division is struggling with the US
patent expiry of its best-selling drug, the heart treatment Tenormin. Once
the world's fifth top-selling drug, with sales of Pounds 652m, its US sales
have halved in less than 12 months.
As for the agrochemical sector, in which Zeneca is the second largest after
Ciba of Switzerland, it is struggling with higher development costs - a
direct result of greater regulation - and a stagnant market.
The reforms of the Common Agriculture Policy have knocked the European
market, the world's largest, backwards.
Speciality operations are also suffering from the general recession. Mr John
Mayo, Zeneca's finance director and architect of its split from ICI, admits
the division's results are unacceptable.
Zeneca's most important operation is the pharmaceuticals division, with
sales last year of Pounds 1.6bn. The best way of dealing with the new
price-conscious drugs environment would be to compensate with innovative
compounds that can drive growth through volume.
Zeneca has four products with fast expanding sales. Three: Zoladex, Nolvadex
and Diprivan, are hospital products and protected from the worst of the
healthcare reforms in Germany and the US. The fourth is Zestril, a heart
drug, which must struggle against a large number of competitive products in
the same class. The group will have its work cut out to differentiate the
product, particularly in the US.
These four products will start to stagnate in about 1996 or 1997, according
to Kleinwort Benson analysts. After that, growth will depend upon new
products such as the antibiotic Merrem, and Casodex, a treatment for
prostatic cancer. Beyond that is Accolate, an asthma treatment, and
Seroquel, a therapy for schizophrenia.
Zeneca has thoroughly reorganised its research and development activities in
recent years. Its management maintains that all being equal its drugs should
not fail during the development process, like some of its earlier compounds
such as Statil and Corwin.
In the meantime, Zeneca's management must show its teeth in adapting to the
new environment. Other pharmaceuticals groups have been busy adjusting their
cost-bases to adapt to the new circumstances in Italy, Germany and the US.
Zeneca has laid off about 100 pharmaceuticals sales representatives in the
US.
Additional cuts may be necessary in the pharmaceuticals division, and will
certainly be obligatory in the specialities businesses, which last year
generated operating profits of only Pounds 26m on sales of Pounds 936m.
Zeneca's agrochemicals business generated sales last year of Pounds 1.2bn.
Its future is secure, but profitability is a problem and competition is
becoming tougher.
A series of mergers and acquisitions are creating significant opposition.
Shell's business has been acquired by American Cyanamid; Rhone-Poulenc of
France has linked up with Sumitomo of Japan; and Schering, the Berlin-based
group, is forming a joint-venture with Hoechst of Germany, which in turn is
taking on the agrochemicals business of its majority-owned subsidiary
Roussel-Uclaf of France.
In the immediate future, Zeneca's agrochemicals business may surprise,
following useful agrochemicals results reported last week by Monsanto of the
US. But in the longer term, the operations will find the going ever-tougher.
Zeneca's management insists the company is sufficiently large to cope with
the new harsh environment. That may be so. But Zeneca will have to be
nimble. Freed from the deadening hand of ICI's Millbank headquarters'
bureaucracy, the company must now show it can adapt quickly enough to
survive.
