FT  09 SEP 93 / End of S Africa sanctions era in sight
THE breakthrough made this week by South Africa's constitutional negotiators
towards establishing a multiracial government promises significant relief to
an economy that is short of good news, writes Philip Gawith.
Agreement on a Transitional Executive Council (TEC), after many false dawns,
has at last brought the end of the sanctions era in view.
Mr Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, has said the ANC
will probably call for the lifting of remaining financial sanctions - most
notably the embargo on International Monetary Fund/World Bank financing - by
the end of the month.
It is likely also to mark the start of an era of considerably increased
international development assistance. As Chief Emeka Anyaoku,
secretary-general of the Commonwealth, made clear during a recent visit:
'The international community wants to help and to help substantially once
the next step has been taken towards representative government.' The US and
European Community have expressed similar intentions.
Although white South Africans have for years with bravado dismissed
sanctions as ineffective there will be no disguising the joy when they
finally go. While a minority found succour in the romance of the besieged
volk in its laager, most longed to be rid of the burden of being an
international pariah.
It could not come at a better time. Economists believe South Africa's net
reserves have fallen as low as one month's import cover, while capital
outflows and the lower gold price have driven the rand to a record low
against the dollar.
Top of the list will be re-establishment of links with the IMF. Since
declaring a moratorium on the repayment of part of its external debt in 1985
South Africa has been forced to run a current account surplus to finance
more than Dollars 1bn a year in debt repayments. This has seriously hampered
growth. Renewed access to the IMF will allow South Africa to run a deficit
and growth prospects will be improved. Banks will also be much happier to do
business in South Africa when it enjoys the financial backing of the IMF.
The IMF has made no secret in recent months of its willingness to lend to
South Africa again, most recently in July when President FW de Klerk held
talks in Washington with Mr Michael Camdessus, its managing director. The
World Bank has also made clear it is ready to lend large sums, most for
infrastructure and human resource development.
Mr Chris Stals, governor of the Reserve Bank, the central bank, believes
that the TEC agreement will be seen by the IMF and World Bank as the signal
that the time is ripe to re-engage formally with South Africa.
He said yesterday that in terms of the IMF's compensatory and contingency
financing facility (CFF), South Africa is eligible for about Dollars 800m in
assistance arising from balance of payments shortfalls related to the severe
drought in 1992. The technical groundwork for the loan has already been
done, but he stressed that an application would have to come from the
finance sub-committee of the TEC.
Mr Dave Mohr, chief economist at the Old Mutual, the Cape-based life office,
argues that when the world economy starts growing again, South Africa's
current account will benefit more directly than in the past when its trade
was hampered by such factors as having to accept a political discount on
goods and incur the cost of routing trade through a third party.
Although nobody is expecting big capital inflows to the country, the
normalisation of South Africa's international economic relations should help
stop the haemorrhage on the capital account. In the year to June, the total
net outflow of capital not related to reserves amounted to R9.8bn (Pounds
1.4bn). Mr Stals argues that this 'is not a sign of economic weakness, but
of the difficult political situation in which we find ourselves'.
He believes that the removal of sanctions will allow investors to assess
South Africa more in terms of conventional risk criteria, without
'extraneous' political distractions. There remain of course, as he is quick
to recognise, ample reasons for believing that investors are likely to hold
back until well after an election. At the very least, uncertainty about
political stability, the shape of future economic policies, and the
economy's seeming inability to emerge from a prolonged slump give
considerable cause for caution.
From the point of view of the US investor there are other obstacles too. At
the last count, 26 states, 90 local authorities and 24 counties still had
sanctions in place. The effect of these has been to prevent US bank lending
to South Africa and US pension fund investment in companies with South
African ties.
The fact that some sanctions still remain in place against Namibia, which
received its independence in March 1990, is a reminder of the obstacles that
lie ahead.
