FT  14 OCT 93 / Kent chambers form alliance
SMALL CHAMBERS of commerce in Kent are joining together to promote the
county's attractions as a business centre in competition with Continental
markets.
The formal establishment of the single European market and the opening of
the Channel tunnel next year highlight the need for more effective business
support in the county.
Mr Martin Graham, chief executive of the new Kent chamber, said: 'We are the
exposed flank of Britain.'
The creation of the Kent Chamber of Commerce and Industry is intended to
boost local industry's exports, improve the quality of business information
and strengthen training.
Kent's fragmented chamber network, just across the Channel from powerful,
publicly funded chambers in France and Belgium, has long been seen as an
example of the weakness of the British system.
Mr Graham commented: 'A Spanish businessman visited one of our chambers up a
dingy flight of stairs and said: 'Are you serious?''
Six of Kent's smaller chambers, including Maidstone and Dover, with a
combined membership of 1,500 businesses, have combined to form the new
chamber and talks are continuing to bring in a further five, including
Dartford, Ashford and Canterbury.
If agreement can be reached between all 11 chambers, the Kent chamber would
have a membership of 3,000 businesses and rank third among UK chambers after
Birmingham and Thames Valley, Mr Graham said. It would qualify as one of a
nationwide network of 50 'core chambers' which is being established by the
Association of British Chambers of Commerce.
Negotiations over the creation of the Kent chamber have taken three years.
It has obtained Pounds 300,000 of funding for its first year of operation
from Kent Training and Enterprise Council, Kent County Council and the
Department of Trade and Industry with declining amounts of finance for a
further four years.
Mr Graham said Kent had failed to create a single chamber in the past
because of the lack of a large natural commercial centre in the county.
