FT  02 OCT 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Good knight out at the castle -
Suzanne Askham meets a baronet who pays the bills with corporate
entertainment
EVERY DAY, Sir Thomas Ingilby has to find Pounds 300 to fund the running of
his family home, Ripley Castle in North Yorkshire. To do this, the baronet
has turned self-employed businessman.
His main asset is that same expensive castle, to which corporate clients
come for dinners and conferences. A typical group consists of 15 to 35
delegates. Other enterprises complement these VIP Events, as Sir Thomas
calls them. But the core of the business developed more or less
accidentally.
Sir Thomas inherited Ripley in 1974, aged 18. 'My chief regret is that I was
so young,' he says. 'As it was, I learned my mistakes at my own expense.'
His first move was to open the castle daily to the public. Other revenue
came in from tenant farmers (he owns 1,800 acres) and residential
leaseholders. But the real business began in 1981.
'It was the year that Harrogate Conference Centre opened,' he says. 'Several
people who knew of the castle asked if they could hold dinners and other
events here.
'For the first two years my wife and I did everything ourselves. She cooked,
on our own domestic four-ring stove. I laid the table and waited on it, with
the help of four cleaning staff. We used chairs, crockery and glasses from
all over the castle.'
Because the outlay was minimal, Sir Thomas was able to set attractive rates
that drew in, among others, a Channel Four launch dinner.
Initially, Sir Thomas added a small profit margin of 10 per cent over costs.
Turnover in 1982 was Pounds 15,000, and went on to double every year.
During the 1980s, Sir Thomas made the operation systematically more
professional. The first, essential move was to build up an in-house catering
staff. Ripley's total staff has risen from 17 in the early days to 76.
He also reassessed his price structure. Today, in line with industry
practice, he adds a profit margin of 60 per cent over the cost of food,
adding overheads and extras at cost. A typical rate for a party of 20
holding a one-day conference with light lunch and refreshments would be
Pounds 560 including VAT.
His second essential move was to market the castle, mainly on the trade show
circuit. 'I budget Pounds 35,000 a year for this. It's a hit and miss affair
 -you try to talk to everyone who visits your stand, but it's often the
quiet ones who pick up a brochure then run away who later make bookings.'
Sir Thomas tried, and rejected, advertising in the business press. 'I found
it impossible to tell which ads got a result.' By 1989, turnover had reached
Pounds 500,000. The Ingilbys decided the growth justified a major expansion:
opening a hotel. There was a suitable building on the estate, but it
required substantial funds to get it into shape.
'We took detailed projections to six different funding sources, and received
four offers. Our own bank, Barclays, with whom my family has banked for 200
years - longer than they've been Barclays - rejected our proposal.' The
Ingilbys switched their account to NatWest. 'We liked them because they went
into it in depth. We feel they will keep us on our toes.'
The loan is for Pounds 1.2m over 20 years, with endowment policies to cover
the repayment. 'God, we were nervous; we'd never done anything that big
before. But it's working out.' Paradoxically, the biggest business mistake
he has made seemed absolutely safe at the time. 'In 1990 we brought in
management consultants who advised us to appoint middle managers. It was a
disaster.'
The problem was that the Ingilbys became distanced from their clients.
'Suddenly, it was like going into a large anonymous hotel.
'It's taken us three years to undo the mess. One mistake was being too loyal
to managers. But today, out of a middle management of six, we've now got
three: head chef, admin and accounts.
'We lost hotel admin, marketing and personnel managers. These are the
activities my wife and I do - we feel they're the heart of the business.
Broadly, she runs the hotel, while I do the marketing and corporate side.'
In the past year, they have raised turnover by 10 per cent, to a total of
Pounds 450,000 in 1992 - less than the heyday, before the recession and the
management consultants did their work, but better than Sir Thomas expected.
At the same time, by trimming overheads, their profits have risen by 15 per
cent.
'We're concentrating on building up our customer base in America and Norway
 -both are expanding markets,' says Sir Thomas, who is spending an
additional Pounds 25,000 annually on marketing the hotel. 'My priority now
is to reduce the overdraft, and consolidate. In the meantime, we're always
thinking of new schemes to make our package more attractive.'
VIP Events, The Ripley Castle Estate Office, Ripley, Harrogate, North Yorks
HG3 3AY, tel 0423-770152.
