FT  31 AUG 93 / International Bonds: Brightening prospects for Nordic
borrowers
JUDGING by the recent flurry of international bond issues from Finland and
Sweden, a significant thaw is under way in investor sentiment which a few
months ago was as frozen as the Baltic Sea in winter.
'If I count the number of foreign investment banks that call me and send me
proposals compared to 10 months ago, then, yes, it is clear that attitudes
have changed,' a senior Stockholm banker remarked last week.
Late last year, when the extent of the losses run up by Nordic banks became
clear and the region was wracked by a deep economic and currency crisis,
foreign investors turned their backs on what had previously been among the
world's best credit risks.
But pledges by the governments of Sweden, Norway and Finland to support
their respective banking systems, as well as mounting evidence that the
banks are coming off the critical list, has enabled investors to adopt a
more balanced view on Nordic borrowers
'I think it is a crucial factor for foreign investors that they see the
level of government support behind the banks,' says an official at Finland's
Okobank, whose Dollars 150m issue of floating-rate notes (FRNs) in July
marked a turning-point for Nordic credits.
The most obvious indicator of the extent of the rehabilitation of Swedish
and Finnish borrowers has been the sharp cut in the margin or 'spread' they
have to pay over the yield on underlying government paper. Last week,
Finland achieved its best pricing in three years when it raised Dollars 250m
through an offering of three-year Eurobonds priced to yield 28 basis points
over underlying US Treasuries. During the financial crisis last year,
spreads on Finnish sovereign paper widened to around 90 basis points.
Sweden is now able to raise funds at 10 basis points below the London
interbank offered rate (Libor) compared with around 25 basis points over
Libor late last year when, like Finland, it had to raise large amounts
quickly.
Now that the sovereign borrowers have accomplished a large part of their
international funding programmes, there is room in the market again for the
banks and the spreads they have to pay have come back down.
Last week Spintab, the Swedish domestic mortgage association owned by
Swedbank, raised Dollars 250m through an issue of five-year FRNs at an
all-in cost of 33 basis points over Libor, less than half the spread on a
similar offering launched in February.
Kansallis-Osake-Pankke (KOP), the leading Finnish bank, also tapped the
market last week with a Dollars 150m issue of perpetual subordinated notes.
This would have been virtually impossible several months ago when investors
were reluctant to buy even senior Nordic debt.
Mr Jean-Francois Tapprest, who deals with international funding at KOP,
says: 'The access to funds has opened totally and the spread which KOP has
to pay over Libor for three to five-year maturities has halved.'
The rehabilitation of Nordic borrowers is being helped by a hunger among
investors for high-yielding assets. Despite the improvement in pricing,
Nordic issues still offer a substantial pick-up over the yields on other
bonds. In addition, investors are now eager to buy Nordic bank debt in
anticipation of an upgrading of their credit ratings.
Their hopes have been fanned by the recent crop of good news from the
banking sector. Earlier this month Scandinaviska Enskilda Banken, Sweden's
leading bank, said it had returned to profit in the second quarter and had
withdrawn its request for state support.
Norway's two biggest banks, Den norske Bank and Christiania Bank, reported a
return to profit in the first half. In Finland, KOP and Unitas, the
second-largest bank, say they will cut their losses this year.
So far, the two biggest Swedish players, SE Banken and Svenska
Handelsbanken, have not moved back into the bond market, concentrating
instead on rights issues in order to rebuild their capital.
The only Swedish corporate borrower this year has been Vattenfall, the
national power group, which raised Dollars 500m through an issue of
five-year Eurobonds in May.
Syndicate managers and borrowers alike believe spreads will continue to
tighten, but there are two factors which could interrupt this trend. One
worry is the huge borrowing requirements of the Swedish and Finnish
governments stemming from their budget deficits.
They are spreading their borrowing among different instruments, but there is
some concern that non-sovereign borrowers could be crowded out once again,
in which case spreads would go back up.
The second is the depth of demand for Nordic issues, despite the improvement
in investor sentiment. 'Certainly there is a window of opportunity now,'
says an official at a senior Swedish bank. 'But if a lot more banks come out
with issues rapidly, the market could become saturated.'
