FT  06 MAR 93 / Spotlight turns on blind cleric
ISLAMIC extremism in the US has been most emphatically represented for the
past three years by Sheikh Omar Abdul-Rahman, a 54-year-old Egyptian
preacher.
Since the sheikh arrived in the US in 1990, apparently on a tourist visa,
Cairo has repeatedly asked its ally to curb the activities of a man widely
regarded in Egypt as the spiritual inspiration for violent Islamic groups in
the country which have recently spearheaded a series of lethal attacks on
foreign visitors.
The US immigration service said last month it was still considering a move
to deport the cleric, on the grounds that he was a polygamist - he has three
wives - and had once falsified a cheque in Egypt, both grounds for
deportation.
Attention has focused on the sheikh because Mr Mohammed Salameh, the
26-year-old Arab charged on Thursday with the bomb attack on the World Trade
Centre, prayed at the New Jersey mosque at which the Egyptian cleric
occasionally preaches.
In a statement yesterday published through an Arab-American leader, Sheikh
Abdul-Rahman 'unequivocally denounced the bombing'. Dr MT Mehdi,
secretary-general of the National Council on Islamic Affairs, said the
sheikh told him: 'The holy Koran commands the faithful not to commit
aggression. . . the bombing of the World Trade Centre could not have been
done by a true Moslem.'
Sheikh Abdul-Rahman's cause within Egypt has been clear-cut for more than a
decade: the establishment of an Islamic state. In 1982 the blind preacher,
who is said to have memorised a braille copy of the Koran at the age of 11,
was acquitted in the trial of Islamists accused of assassinating President
Anwar Sadat. The sheikh was accused of issuing the fatwa, or edict, calling
for Sadat's killing.
Today, in a call smuggled into Egypt on tens of thousands of tape cassettes,
the sheikh brands the present government of President Hosni Mubarak
'corrupt' and a 'dictatorship', accusing the government of oppressing,
jailing and torturing Islamic activists.
In a recent BBC interview from his New Jersey home, Sheikh Abdul-Rahman said
that the 'oppressor' government of Egypt had to be overthrown.
Such statements have led Sheikh Abdul-Rahman to be seen in Egypt as the
spiritual elder for the Gama'a el-Islamiyya, the shadowy militant Islamic
group which has claimed responsibility for most of the recent attacks on
tourists in Egypt.
Although Sheikh Abdul-Rahman claims not to be part of the group, he does
nothing to distance himself from their cause.
