FT  29 APR 93 / Survey of Baden-Wuerttemberg (2): Coalition against racists
 -Democrats rally to reassure immigrants
A BRUISING election campaign in Baden-Wurttemberg last April had two
unforeseen consequences.
First, the far right captured 11 per cent of the vote, enough to send 15
representatives to the state parliament in Stuttgart.
Second, for the first time in 20 years, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
 -the party of federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl - lost its absolute majority
in the state .
As a result the CDU and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) had to bury their
differences and form a coalition government across the ideological divide.
'This is the only way we could have formed a stable government,' says Mr
Erwin Teufel, the earnest career politician who took over as
Baden-Wurttemberg premier in January last year after his CDU colleague Mr
Lothar Spath was obliged to quit office on suspicion of corrupt dealings
with a local businessman.
'It was not what you might call a marriage of love,' concedes Mr Dieter
Spori, the state's SPD minister of economics and deputy prime-minster. 'But
we had to bury our differences and get on with with the tasks in hand. We
have managed to get a lot done.'
Teufel agrees: he says the coalition has worked 'almost without any
problems'.
The evidence of this is a thick document spelling out a 50 point plan
designed to secure Baden-Wurttemberg's attractions as an investment location
as Germany faces what Mr Spori calls 'the biggest challenge since the
Wiederaufbau (economic reconstruction after the second world war).'
The plan, says Spori, has encouraged companies, unions and government to
cooperate with one another. This unusual willingness to talk will help the
process of reconstruction necessary if Baden-Wurttemberg's economy is to
emerge stronger after the current recession has run its course, Mr Spori
believes.
As the chairman of the committee of economics ministers from all German
Lander, Spori played an important role in the negotiations which led to the
'solidarity pact' to finance German reunification, in mid-March.
The experience of co-operation between rival parties amid an economic
downturn makes Baden-Wurttemberg an 'impulse-giver' for developments in
national politics, says Mr Spori.
'If we manage to work something out here then they know in Bonn that it must
be sensible,' he argues, pointing not only to the solidarity pact but also
to the compromise agreement on a change to the law on asylum-seekers reached
in Bonn earlier this year. He adds: '95 per cent of the compromise (on
asylum) can be traced to back to what we were forced to develop here in
Baden-Wurttemberg.'
It was the inflow of asylum seekers - which rose from 256,000 in 1991 to
438,000 last year for the whole of Germany - which was the central issue in
last April's elections in Baden-Wurttemberg and in the northern state of
Schleswig-Holstein, as in the elections in the state of Hesse this March.
In all three regional elections, the establishment parties suffered at the
expense of the Republicans and other right wing extremists, an expression of
what Germans call 'politische Verdrossenheit ' - disillusion with mainstream
politics. This could have ugly consequences for the crop of federal,
regional and European elections which take place in Germany next year.
Mr Teufel says that the swing to the right in the state of Baden-Wurttemberg
reflected this disillusion with politicians, rather than any more sinister
upsurge in racist sentiment.
'I have no doubt that the outcome was a protest vote,' he says. 'People in
Baden-Wurttemberg are willing to welcome genuine war refugees and victims of
political repression. But many of the 61,000 who came into Baden-Wurttemberg
last year are economic refugees. We sympathise with their plight but the
others must take priority.'
Local authorities are obliged to house the asylum seekers while their
applications to stay in the country are dealt with - a process which can
take years.
At a time of acute housing shortage for native Germans, the influx of
undeserving asylum-seeker unleashes 'extraordinary protest' from voters, Mr
Teufel says.
He is confident that the new law on asylum seekers, which seeks to stop
those refugees, who merely want better living standards, from crossing the
German border, will reduce the number coming to Germany to a third or a
quarter of the current figure.
Had the law been in place a year earlier, Mr Teufel says, the voters would
not have voted as they did last April: 'The undercurrent of support for far
right parties is only 2 to 3 per cent in Baden-Wurttemberg. If the asylum
problem is solved, the Republicans will disappear out of the state
parliament altogether.'
Mr Manfred Rommel, longstanding mayor of Stuttgart and son of Field Marshal
Erwin Rommel, of second world war fame, believes that the Republicans are an
ineffectual force in regional politics. But he says that the compromise on
asylum law has not addressed the fundamental problem of citizenship rights
for non-Germans living in Germany.
Stuttgart is an example of an international 'melting pot' where 23 per cent
of the 584,000 people living there are non-German, many drawn to the city
decades ago by the prospect of jobs in the nearby car plants and their
suppliers. The percentage of younger people who are technically foreign is
higher - but 70 per cent of non-Germans under the age of 17 were born in
Germany. They are prevented from acquiring German citizenship by archaic
laws which date back to before the first world war.
This anomaly, which serves to preserve racial demarcation lines, is not
being tackled by the compromise on asylum law.
