FT  27 MAY 93 / Shareholders condemn Steinkuhler
THE FULL might of the German financial establishment yesterday united to
condemn Mr Franz Steinkuhler for the share dealing that led him to resign as
leader of Germany's most powerful union, IG Metall.
At the annual meeting of Daimler-Benz, where Mr Steinkuhler is a supervisory
board member, Germany's biggest bank described his share trading as 'totally
unacceptable' and 'massively lacking in sensitivity with regard to the
problems of insider trading'.
Mr Wolfram Freudenberg of Deutsche Bank, the biggest shareholder in
Daimler-Benz, said the union leader did not have inside information when he
bought nearly DM1m (Pounds 300,000) of shares in Mercedes Holding (MAH), a
Daimler holding company, in the weeks leading up to Daimler's supervisory
board meeting on April 2. The information about the proposed dissolution of
MAH - which led to a sharp rise in the share price from which Mr Steinkuhler
benefited - was only known by a few, and not by the union leader.
However, Mr Freudenberg said that Mr Steinkuhler had received confidential
information about Daimler on March 25. 'It is totally unacceptable that a
member of the supervisory board should have dealt in MAH shares under such
circumstances,' he said. 'In the interest of both the company and Germany as
a financial centre, we simply cannot put up with this sort of thing.'
The criticism was echoed by Mr Hans-Joachim Fonk, one of the two directors
of MAH, which owns a 25 per cent stake in Daimler. MAH and Deutsche Bank
said they would not vote to approve the reappointment of Mr Steinkuhler to
the Daimler supervisory board. Although he was a trade union official, Mr
Steinkuhler's position on the board was held in a personal capacity. He has
not yet offered to resign, but is unlikely to stay.
The circumstances surrounding the MAH announcement are being investigated by
the Insider Commission of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. Mr Edzard Reuter,
Daimler's chief executive said the information had been released to the
market in a proper way.
IG Metall yesterday confirmed that Mr Steinkuhler had owned shares in AEG,
the electrical group now owned by Daimler, in 1985. The union leader had
denied any such ownership when he was accused last week of having bought
them just before Daimler confirmed its takeover.
