FT  17 JUN 93 / Kohl ready to relax laws on nationality
CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl yesterday agreed to draw up plans for further
relaxation of Germany's strict laws on citizenship and nationality, and
including possible extension of dual nationality in exceptional cases.
Both the chancellor and Mr Rudolf Seiters, his interior minister, rejected
calls for a general acceptance of the principle of dual nationality, which
has been urged by leaders of the Turkish community in the wake of recent
racial attacks.
They promised, however, that the 80-year-old nationality law would be
redrafted before the end of the current parliament next year.
In a formal statement of government policy in the wake of a series of arson
attacks on the homes of foreigners, especially Germany's 1.8m strong Turkish
community, Mr Kohl sought to counter criticism that he had failed to show
enough sympathy for the victims.
He listed measures taken by the authorities to clamp down on right-wing and
neo-Nazi groups, including the banning of three organisations, legal action
to strip two leading neo-Nazis of their constitutional rights and
surveillance by the security services of the extreme right-wing Republicans,
who have won a number of seats in local council elections.
At the same time he issued a stern warning against extremists within the
Turkish community, suggesting that there were now as many as 18,000
supporters of Islamic fundamentalism, 7,000 members of extreme Turkish and
Kurdish nationalist groups, and 4,000 supporters of 'revolutionary-Marxist
groups'.
Mr Kohl's statement is unlikely to meet many of the demands of both
immigrant and opposition groups for firmer government action, and dual
nationality, but he did throw open the debate on German nationality.
'We must change our law on nationality in such a way that the existing
opportunities to become a German citizen are better used,' he told the
parliament. 'I am thinking above all of young Turkish citizens, who regard
Germany as their home, and are also ready to fulfil the duties of a citizen
in our democratic state.
'I think it is right to avoid the application of multiple nationality in
principle,' he added. But in the course of drafting the promised reform of
the 1913 Nationality Law, a joint commission of the federal government and
16 states would investigate 'whether multiple nationality can be possible in
exceptional cases, beyond those which already exist.'
An idea put forward by members of Mr Kohl's Christian Democratic Union is
that anyone opting for German nationality would be given an extra five years
to decide whether to renounce his or her original nationality.
Some would doubt, however, that the whole debate over extending German
nationality will help solve the rise of racism in the country.
