FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (2): On earth as in the
atmosphere - Energy squandering is targetted in Clinton's aggressive
clean-up plan
As the US tries to shake off its image as a profligate energy user, the
issue of energy efficiency has come increasingly to the fore. It was,
therefore, no great surprise last month when President Clinton's Climate
Action Plan to control global warming included about 50 initiatives to
improve energy efficiency.
The plan, which Mr Clinton described as 'a very aggressive and very specific
first step,' includes proposals to regulate more stringent efficiency
standards for household appliances such as air conditioners, cookers and
television sets; it is estimated that the US uses about 30 per cent more
energy per unit of activity in home appliances than other countries. Mr
Clinton is also looking at ways of getting private investments to improve
energy efficiency at federal dams.
In addition, Mr Clinton hopes to change the tax law to encourage increased
use of public transportation. The proposal would make employers who provide
employee parking also offer an equivalent cash subsidy to employees who use
other means of transportation.
The Clean Air Act Amendment of 1990 already requires companies employing
more than 100 workers to reduce the number of cars driven to work or face
substantial monthly fines.
Other aspects of the plan include shoring up government programmes that help
companies evaluate their use of energy for lighting and computer systems.
Projects such as the Environmental Protection Agency's Green Lights
programme, which came to life under the Bush administration, are geared at
persuading companies and local governments that they will save significant
sums by using less energy. The Green Lights scheme helps companies and local
governments evaluate the efficiency of their existing lighting systems and
replace them with more energy efficient alternatives.
The EPA was so encouraged by the success of its Green Lights project that it
later launched Energy Star, a programme designed to encourage computer
companies to make energy efficient personal computers which automatically
switch to low energy consumption when not in use. Participation in both
schemes is strictly voluntary.
Businesses will also be encouraged to examine their heating, ventilation and
air conditioning systems and improve them for energy efficiency within seven
years.
But Mr Clinton, like his predecessor George Bush, has backed away from
proposing mandatory efficiency standards for business and industry, relying
instead on voluntary cooperation to cut both energy use and greenhouse gas
emissions not covered by the clean air legislation of 1990.
Mr Clinton has also steered clear of the politically contentious issue of
mandating higher car fuel efficiency standards. Instead, in a move which may
placate some critics, the administration and the big three US auto makers
plan to join forces in a research project to produce a new generation of
cars. The aim of the study is to cut auto emissions of carbon dioxide,
largely by designing cars which consumer fuel more efficiently.
The new cars, due to be designed in the next 10 years, should be three times
more efficient than the 28 miles per gallon used by today's average car. In
order for the plan to succeed, the new cars will also need to be as
comfortable, safe and affordable as current models.
To do this, the administration is giving the car makers access to defence
industry technology such as stronger, lighter-weight materials which were
developed for weapon systems and electronics initially designed for
anti-missile defence.
Meanwhile, existing car technology is being re-examined as the nation moves
towards compliance with the new standards legislated by the Clean Air Act
Amendment of 1990. And manufacturers are discovering that reduced emissions
and improved energy efficiency often go hand-in-hand.
The new standards apply to air pollution sources with a potential to emit
100 tons a year of any regulated pollutant, including nitrogen oxides,
sulphur dioxide and volatile carbon compounds. Although carbon monoxide is
excluded from the federal regulations, it is included in many state
implementation plans.
In the area of car engines, manufacturers are paying closer attention to
precombustion chambers on clean-and lean-burn engines. These systems not
only help reduce emissions significantly, they also improve fuel economy
compared with their uncontrolled rich- or lean-burn counterparts.
Car tyres are also being evaluated. Research by Michelin North America has
shown that CO emissions can be reduced significantly and energy efficiency
improved substantially by redesigning car and truck tyres. The company has
proposed introducing low-rolling resistance radials as a means of complying
with stricter air quality codes without redesigning vehicles. According to a
study by Michelin North America, which was presented this summer to the
Department of the Environment, annual emissions from passenger cars could be
slashed by 16.1m tons while heavy truck emissions could be cut by 4m tons
just by using new tyres.
Although low-rolling resistance passenger tyres cost significantly more than
standard tyres, the added expense could be largely offset by fuel savings.
Michelin estimates truck drivers would save Dollars 1,108 in fuel costs by
using these tyres, even after including the higher cost of the tyres. Bus
drivers would save about Dollars 170.80 using the tyres. Personal car
drivers, however, would pay more for the tyres than they would recoup in
fuel savings.
Other alternatives include the use of compressed natural gas vehicles. Vons,
a California-based grocery store chain, has been testing compressed natural
gas vehicles to help it comply with the Clean Air Act's stricter air
pollution standards for interstate transporters which go into effect next
year. Vons found that the long-haul truck tractors could cut emissions by up
to 75 per cent.
The Clinton administration may be loath to legislate wide-sweeping measures
to improve energy efficiency, but it has indicated that it will not balk at
fining companies which fail to comply with existing environmental standards.
When US Attorney General Janet Reno recently said that environmental
enforcement would be one of her top priorities, she added that stiff
penalties are necessary 'to make sure our business community knows that
companies that 'play by the rules' are not at a competitive disadvantage to
those willing to risk violating the law'.
