FT  29 OCT 93 / Major to support fresh N Ireland peace initiative: London
and Dublin hope to sideline Hume-Adams talks
MR JOHN MAJOR and Mr Albert Reynolds will back a new political initiative
today to bring peace in Northern Ireland based on secret talks between the
London and Dublin governments.
The two leaders will consider joint proposals for a new constitutional
settlement which includes fundamental changes to the Irish constitution and
the creation of a number of powerful executive boards to increase
cross-border co-operation.
They are determined to regain the initiative at the end of a week of
escalating violence, which started last Saturday with an IRA bomb which
killed 10 people in the mainly Protestant Shankill Road.
The bloodshed continued last night with the shooting dead of two Catholic
brothers, aged 18 and 20, in the living room of their home at Bleary, near
Warringstown, Co Down. Loyalists were blamed for the murders.
The proposals, drafted in outline over recent weeks by a working party of
civil servants from London and Dublin, would provide an 'umbrella' for the
restart of negotiations between political parties in the province.
The move is also designed to sideline the parallel talks between Mr John
Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, and Mr Gerry Adams,
president of Sinn Fein, and persuade the parties to talk again. Dublin,
however, wants some of the Hume-Adams proposals included in a broader
settlement.
The outcome of today's meeting, at the margins of the European summit in
Brussels, may not be spelled out in detail given the political sensitivity
of the peace process. But they will form the basis for more talks next week
between Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, and Sir Patrick Mayhew,
the Northern Ireland secretary.
The 'guiding principles' for any agreement, set out this week in the Dublin
parliament by Mr Spring, received a strong positive response from London
yesterday.
Officials stress that the provisions of this fresh joint Irish-UK initiative
would only come into effect as part of an overall settlement. That in turn
would depend on agreement between the SDLP and the Unionist parties on the
shape of internal political arrangements in the province to replace
government from Westminster. Both sides acknowledge that considerable
obstacles remain. But at the heart of any intergovernmental settlement would
be a commitment by the republic to replace its constitutional claim to
jurisdiction over Northern Ireland with an aspiration to achieve a united
Ireland.
It return Britain would formally acknowledge the legitimacy of that
aspiration and would agree to the establishment of a number of cross-border
executive boards in such areas as transport, dealings with the European
Community's social funds and tourism.
Mr Spring's clear declaration that the consent of the people of Northern
Ireland was essential for any change in the status of the province was
warmly welcomed in Downing Street. Mr Major told MPs he looked forward to
discussing the 'positive' proposals with Mr Reynolds.
There was acknowledgment in Whitehall that the peace process drawn up by Mr
Hume and Mr Adams still presents political hazards for any intergovernmental
settlement.
Mr Reynolds, who is expected to outline the Hume-Adams plan in today's
meeting, believes some elements could be incorporated into an agreement
between the two governments. Dublin also believes it must take seriously the
prospect of an IRA ceasefire.
