FT  06 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Ring of anxiety
DISRUPTION TO business caused by the security cordon in the City of London
was described as negligible yesterday. The first working day of
anti-terrorist traffic restrictions in a small area of the capital's
financial district failed to produce the threatened jams. Vital though it is
to defeat terrorism, these measures do not look like part of a
well-considered and coherent strategy for fighting the Irish Republican
Army.
The plan has been instituted at the request of the City Corporation, the
local authority for the district. On two recent occasions, the IRA has
planted large bombs, causing death, injury and hundreds of millions of
pounds of damage. Two other attempts, involving large quantities of
explosives, were thwarted outside the City's boundaries. The Corporation
felt that action was needed to protect the City's position as an
international financial centre. Further successful attacks would harm
London's prospects in competing for financial businesses which might be
tempted to relocate to other European cities
The Corporation's security cordon has, however, given the terrorists a
propaganda coup by so publicly interfering with commercial activities in the
capital. In its mainland bombing campaign, the IRA's avowed aim is to
prevent the British living life normally, so long as Northern Ireland
remains part of the UK. By setting up roadblocks and police checkpoints in
the City, the Corporation has provided compelling evidence of the success of
the campaign.
The strategy is also unlikely to deter bomb attacks in London, only a tiny
part of which is covered by the cordon. A similar security ring in Belfast
has had some success in protecting a small part of the city centre. But the
bombers have simply shifted their attacks to targets elsewhere in Belfast
and to other provincial towns. There is a grave danger that the City of
London's security cordon will displace the terrorist attacks to other parts
of the capital.
Perhaps the most compelling argument against the security cordon is that
once made permanent, it would be difficult to dismantle. Except in the
unlikely event of the IRA publicly abandoning its mainland bombing campaign,
the removal of the cordon would be seen as either an admission of failure or
an invitation to the bombers to return.
The City traffic restrictions have been imposed as part of a six-month pilot
study, since legislation would be required to make them permanent. The
Corporation should think hard before proceeding to this stage. It would be
wise to spend the next six months thinking of less disruptive and
potentially more effective ways of deploying the very substantial resources
involved in manning the new security system. Draconian car-parking
restrictions and more intense surveillance, of the kind used around
Whitehall since the mortar attack on Downing Street, are options worth
considering.
