FT  22 JUN 93 / International Company News: Deal that leaves all sides
satisfied - Paul Abrahams assesses Rhone-Poulenc's sale of its stake in
Roussel
THE SALE of Rhone-Poulenc's 35 per stake in Roussel Uclaf, the French
bioscience group, appears to make good sense for all the companies concerned
 -Rhone-Poulenc, Hoechst, the German company that owns 54.5 per cent of the
bioscience group, and Roussel itself. Whether the Roussel shares are good
value for investors at their present price is another matter.
For Rhone-Poulenc, the deal is a relief. Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, chairman, has
never made it a secret that he did not want the minority stake that was
foisted on his company by the French state in July 1990.
Mr Fourtou is selling the stake at the earliest possible moment under the
terms of the protocols agreed between Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst in July
1990. He is also taking advantage of Roussel Uclaf's all-time high share
price, up 30 per cent since the beginning of the year on expectation of high
sales of the group's controversial abortion pill RU-486.
Most importantly, the share sale could, at yesterday's share price of
FFr575, raise FFr4.5bn (Dollars 797m) and help reduce Rhone-Poulenc's debt
mountain.
The group's debt is too high, fluctuating at between FFr33bn and FFr35bn,
admits Mr Jean-Pierre Tirouflet, finance director. He aims to cut debt by up
to FFr7bn by the end of the year through the sale of some prefered stock in
the US, the sale of assets other than Roussel, and through positive
cash-flow.
The deal also allows Rhone-Poulenc to dispose of a minority holding which
offered it little operational control and which generated only limited
synergies.
Hoechst directors could scarcely hide their elation about the deal's
structure, which clears a substantial minority shareholder from Roussel's
board and frees the group from direct political intervention from the French
government.
Although the company holds a majority stake, it felt constrained by
political considerations. Rhone-Poulenc is 43.4 per cent owned by the French
state. Erap, the government holding company, also controls 5.5 per cent.
Alternatives to the sale announced yesterday were considered, said Hoechst.
However, the company said it had not been interested in a proposed deal with
Rhone-Poulenc, swapping some of the German group's chemical interests for
the 35 per cent stake.
An outright purchase would have taken Hoechst's gearing from about 41 per
cent to 52 per cent, unacceptably high given chemical companies' present
poor cash-flow, said analysts.
Hoechst directors said the sale could open the way for Roussel to tap the
international equity markets at a later date.
Members of Hoechst's board stressed the potential synergies. Hoechst is the
sixth-largest drugs group in the world with sales last year of about DM11bn
(Dollars 6.55bn). That compares with Roussel's pharmaceuticals sales of
FFr14.8bn. There is little overlap in the companies' drugs portfolios.
Hoechst estimates it will eventually be able to reduce costs at Roussel by
DM250m a year. There remained considerable opportunity for rationalisation
in both production and administration in the long-term, said the German
company. There would also be some sharing of clinical trials, said Hoechst
directors.
The future of Roussel's agrochemicals business remains in doubt. Hoechst
said the operation, which has a turnover of about FFr3.5bn a year, was too
small to survive on its own. A decision whether to merge the business with
Hoechst's agrochemicals operations had not been made.
Whether the deal is good for prospective investors in Roussel remains
unclear. Hoechst has tried to sweeten the pill by changing Roussel's
structure.
The German company intends to sell Roussel its French business, Laboratoires
Hoechst, which has a turnover of about FFr1.2bn. It is also selling the
French group a 50 per cent stake in Albert Roussel Pharma, a marketing
operation in Germany with a turnover last year of about FFr834m.
The businesses are being sold to Roussel for FFr1.2bn, according to BZW, the
global co-ordinator for the internation private placement. The French
company will issue about 2.2m shares at the same time as the share sale,
taking the number of shares issued up to about 29m.
Mr Tirouflet said the sale of Hoechst's businesses was a guarantee of
Roussel's integrity and autonomy, and made the French government view the
deal as more acceptable.
Sales growth in the first quarter this year was only 4.2 per cent,
uninspired even by recent pharmaceutical industry standards. The company is
promising a 7 per cent increase in sales this year and a 15 per cent rise in
net profits before exceptionals to FFr850m.
Roussel is heavily involved in antibiotics, a therapeutic area hit
particularly heavily by price competition in the US. Admittedly, net profits
last year increased by 72 per cent to FFr1.03bn, after a round of
cost-cutting. But much depends on the future success of the abortion pill
RU-486.
As Roussel's international road-show starts tomorrow, its executives will
have some hard selling to do if they are to counter the market's current
dislike of healthcare stocks.
