FT  26 JUL 93 / Seeking security in S E Asia: Victor Mallet examines Asean's
plans to bring great powers closer to its members' political concerns in a
post-Cold War world
SOUTH-EAST Asian countries have formally announced plans to bring together
the US, China and Russia in an 18-member forum, to discuss political and
security issues in Asia and the Pacific. This would be the first group of
its kind in the region.
Foreign ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (Asean)
said in Singapore, at the end of their annual meeting, that the first
gathering of the new Asean Regional Forum would be held alongside Asean's
talks in Bangkok next year.
One reason for the new forum is the uncertainty after the Cold War and the
withdrawal of US forces from the Philippines. Several Asian countries have
embarked on weapon-buying programmes, often taking advantage of bargain
prices in the former Soviet Union.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, was lukewarm towards the idea
of formal multilateral security talks when he arrived in Singapore on
Saturday for discussions with his Asian counterparts.
'These dialogues will build upon, but will not supplant, our alliances and
our forward military presence,' he told reporters. 'We are not reducing our
forces in the region. We are in fact making them more effective.'
Those expected to participate in the first formal round of security talks,
in Bangkok next year, are the Asean states (Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand), Asean's regular 'dialogue partners'
(the US, the EC, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South Korea), as
well as China, Russia, Vietnam, Laos and Papua New Guinea.
Western and Asian diplomats say the participants will probably find common
ground on such issues as piracy and maritime surveillance, but be more
reluctant to agree to a regional arms register, to exchange information
about their defence plans, or to adopt Asean proposals for a zone free of
nuclear weapons.
The confrontation of China against Vietnam and Asean, over the disputed
Spratly islands in the South China Sea, is one issue to be tackled in the
security talks.
Mr Qian Qichen, Chinese foreign minister, dismissed the 'China threat' in a
speech to foreign correspondents in Singapore at the weekend: 'China does
not, and will not, impose hegemony and power politics on others and will not
threaten or bully anyone.'
He described reports of a Chinese military build-up as 'rather fabricated'
and said an airport built on the Paracel islands north of the Spratlys in
1988 was 'to improve transport' and had nothing to do with military
preparations.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, echoed the US administration's
talk of a 'new Pacific community' when he said his government saw Asia and
the Pacific 'developing into a sort of regional security community capable
of efficient peace-keeping in accordance with the UN charter.'
Aware that south-east Asian leaders are concerned at the possibility of
China basing Russian bombers in the South China Sea, Mr Kozyrev gave
assurances that Russia would not sell to Asian countries 'purely offensive'
weapons such as long-range bombers. 'From now on, the main symbols of our
presence here will be freighters instead of missile cruisers and joint
ventures instead of nuclear submarines.'
Mr Christopher had his first encounter as Secretary of State with Mr Qian
yesterday. He spent much of the 80-minute meeting on M-11 missile parts
which, US officials say, China has sent to Pakistan. 'We intend to continue
to pursue this question very seriously,' a senior US official said.
The two men also discussed US proposals for a comprehensive ban on testing
nuclear weapons, and the problem of Chinese citizens being smuggled into the
US by ship as illegal immigrants.
Prompted by the mainly Moslem governments of Malaysia and Indonesia, Asean
said that Bosnia-Hercegovina should be exempted from the UN weapons embargo
on the former Yugoslavia.
