FT  13 MAR 93 / Markets: Don't be rushed by the taxman - Serious Money
IT IS easy to get hurried into making investment mistakes at the end of the
tax year. The pressure of the April 5 deadline, the advertisements in the
papers and the brochures in the mail, the feeling of guilt at having
neglected their finances for the rest of the year: all conspire to persuade
investors to unleash their chequebooks.
Two products are receiving most of the attention; the business expansion
scheme and the personal equity plan. John Authers gives details of the
latest BES offers on page IV. Some are exploiting the quirks of the system
to offer high - and reasonably safe - returns over six months; such deals
often sell out within days.
But it is far from true to say that all BES offers are good deals. The
dangers of rushing into these investments are illustrated by Johnson Fry's
difficulties over its University College, London, scheme which was part of
two hastily-assembled offers at the end of the last tax year.
With personal equity plans, we cannot stress too often the danger that, in
some cases, the charges may outweigh the tax benefits.
The short-term tax gain is, in fact, fairly small; even if a Pep yields 5
per cent after charges, then a basic rate taxpayer who invests Pounds 6,000
is saving just Pounds 75 a year in tax. In some cases, it may be better to
buy the equities direct.
It is, of course, a good thing that investors are diversifying away from
their dependence on the building societies. Investors should have a balanced
portfolio of gilts, shares and cash. Furthermore, the evidence suggests
that, over the long term, equities are the best investment.
But the key words in that sentence are long term. If you take out a Pep now,
you are taking out a Pep with the UK stock market at an all-time high. You
must be prepared for the possibility that your investment might fall in
value in the short term.
Often, it is only when shares have been hitting new highs that investors
start to feel they might be missing out and pile into the market. Persuading
investors to buy at the bottom is far more difficult.
Back in November 1991, when the yield on the market was above 5 per cent, I
wrote a column urging investors to put money into the UK stock market.
Figures from M &amp; G then showed that there had been 30 years between 1919 and
1989 when the yield on the All-Share was more than 5 per cent at year end.
In every single case, investors in shares earned a positive real (after
inflation) return over the following five years; the average real return was
14 per cent per annum.
On the day the column appeared, the All-Share stood at 1182.51; it is now
1437.25, a rise of 21.5 per cent. And investors will have enjoyed income of
5 per cent or so on top.
Of course, for every journalist's prediction which is correct, there is
another that is wildly wrong. But the figures do show the benefits of buying
near the bottom of the market.
By contrast, the same M &amp; G analysis shows that there were 12 years when the
market ended the year yielding under 4 per cent. Following 10 of those 12
years, investors suffered a negative real return on equities over the
following five year period. The All-Share is yielding just over 4 per cent
at the moment.
This is not to say that investors should avoid equities, or Peps,
altogether. There is a good case for arguing that the budget deficit will
eventually force the government to raise taxes; and that will make the tax
concessions involved in a Pep more attractive. But it could mean that a
savings scheme approach, which smooths out the peaks and troughs of the
market, might be far more sensible.
The end of tax year rush tends to make investors forget about savings
schemes because they want to get the full Pounds 6,000 allowance into the
market. There is, however, a nice compromise: the phased approach (offered
by Fidelity, Henderson and Mercury, for example). This involves giving the
management group Pounds 6,000 up-front before April 5; it then drip-feeds
the sum into the market over the following year.
Alternatively, you could just wait for the stock market to retreat from its
euphoria. The old saying is 'Sell in May and go away'; shares often decline
in the summer months and you could well find the market looks more
attractive in, say, August. If you miss this year's Pep deadline, it is not
the end of the world.
Furthermore, those who are buying Peps for income should concentrate on
whether the dividend payments will be maintained or increased. Provided they
can be, and the present yield is better than building society interest, they
can try to ignore the capital element.
Of course, investors should be wary of plans which turn capital into income
(see the article on income shares on page III). But if investors are getting
a high income, they should be prepared for very little growth in their
capital.
Above all else, investors must be patient. Some of those who bought Peps
early in 1987 are breaking even only after 5 1/2 years. Others may already
have sold out in disgust. Come 1995, you might wonder why you bought that
Pep early in 1993; but by the year 2000, the reason should be crystal clear.
