FT  15 MAR 93 / International Bonds: Dresdner Bank goes to the top of the
D-Mark table
WITH the first quarter coming to a close, the volume of new D-Mark Eurobond
issues so far this year puts Dresdner Bank ahead of Deutsche Bank in the
D-Mark underwriting league table.
Excluding in-house deals, Dresdner has launched DM11.55bn worth of D-Mark
issues since the start of 1993, compared with DM10.90bn for Deutsche,
according to the new international bond issues tables published daily by the
Financial Times.
The figures also show that the two banks have consolidated their dominant
position in the D-Mark sector - Commerzbank comes a poor third with DM1.7bn,
excluding an in-house deal - and that the profile of foreign banks remains
low.
Observers believe that Dresdner's emergence at the top of the table, as well
as its recent success in winning mandates such as the DM2.9bn Eurobond issue
for the European Community, reflects a sweeping re-organisation of the
bank's new issues department.
The man wielding the broom is Mr Hansgeorg Hofmann, who joined Dresdner at
the end of 1989 from Shearson Lehman. Insiders say that Mr Hofmann has
galvanised his team into embracing a more international approach to the
syndication and trading of new issues.
For example, it was Dresdner which introduced the fixed price re-offer
concept to the D-Mark sector when it arranged a DM2.5bn issue for Sweden
last October.
This mechanism, which had been adopted several years earlier in the other
sectors of the international bond market, makes the pricing of issues more
transparent for the investor. It has also made the new issues business more
profitable for the banks involved in underwriting the deals.
Before the introduction of the fixed price re-offer, the D-Mark sector was
still geared to Europe's army of retail investors. But since then, the
market has opened up more to international and institutional investors.
Dresdner's fresh approach to the new issues business has coincided with a
marked increase in demand for D-Marks over the last year. The collapse of
the Ecu market, following Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht Treaty,
heightened the currency's 'safe haven' attraction for investors.
At the same time, the D-Mark sector was one of only a few areas of the
Eurobond market which offered sufficient liquidity to sovereign borrowers
seeking to replenish their currency reserves after the turmoil in the
exchange rate mechanism.
Not surprisingly, sovereign and supranational borrowers have dominated the
D-Mark sector so far this year. Most of the deals slated to appear in the
first quarter have been launched, though one further issue of up to DM2bn
could emerge by the end of the month.
Borrowers are being discouraged by the widening of yield spreads on D-Mark
sovereign paper over German government bonds, following the downgradings of
the foreign-currency debt of Italy and Finland.
For example, the yield spread on Italy's 7 1/4 per cent Eurobonds due 1998
has widened to 65 basis points over bunds compared with a spread of 47 basis
points at the launch in January. The spread on Finland's 7 1/2 per cent
seven-year Eurobonds has increased to 80 basis points from 53 basis points.
