FT  13 JAN 93 / Parliament and Politics: PM pledges pressure for Bosnia
settlement
THE government last night agreed to reinforce its 2,400-strong military
force in Bosnia in the event that the peace talks designed to end the
conflict in the former Yugoslav province again break down.
Mr John Major and senior ministers last night agreed in principle that the
ground troops - sent to support the United Nations humanitarian aid effort -
should be supported by further forces operating heavy artillery.
Officials refused to comment on their conclusions, which will be reported to
the full cabinet tomorrow. Downing Street suggested earlier that the
reinforcement would also include the despatch to the Adriatic of the
aircraft carrier Ark Royal.
A senior official from the prime minister's office said the aim was to
ensure that British troops remain secure once the United Nations agrees to
sanction military action to enforce the no-fly zone over Bosnia. Other
Whitehall officials said that ministers were also reviewing contingency
plans to evacuate the troops in the event of serious ground battles with
Serbian forces.
Earlier Mr Major warned publicly that further pressure would be applied by
the international community if the Bosnian Serbs rejected the peace formula
devised by Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.
Speaking in the Commons before the dramatic reversal by the Bosnian Serb
leader of his earlier rejection of a constitutional plan for Bosnia, the
prime minister said that sooner or later there would have to be a negotiated
settlement.
'The only question is whether that comes now or following further
repression, further suffering and further difficulties,' he insisted.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, underlined the concern caused by
a deliberate artillery attack, 'from what appears to have been Serbian
positions' on British troops fulfilling their humanitarian mission in the
area around Sarajevo.
He said: 'We are giving urgent consideration as to what should be the proper
response to ensure the fullest protection for our forces.'
Anxiety was expressed from the Tory backbenches about the escalating dangers
facing British troops, and Mr Peter Viggers (C Gosport) underlined the risk
that UN forces might end up being 'the fourth side in a civil war'.
He urged that the option of withdrawing British troops if they continued to
come under fire should be kept open.
