FT  12 JUN 93 / The Lex Column: Banking on rights
Another Pounds 350m worth of rights issues this week suggests the flow may
be getting out of hand. It is understandable that companies should be
anxious to secure their money before BT monopolises the market, less so that
they should be so concerned with raising equity at this stage in the cycle.
If they really are gearing up for recovery, it would be more appropriate to
go for debt. That is most clearly arguable in the case of Wimpey, but true
of some of this week's other offerings as well. Yet while the equity market
is awash with business, the well of bank credit is almost dry.
Part of the trouble is that corporate balance sheets are still showing the
ravages of recession. Some bank debt is also being replaced by the heavy
flow of corporate bond issues. But there remains a worry that the banks are
not yet willing to finance the recovery. Unless they change their minds, it
could eventually falter. The capital market cannot stand the strain
indefinitely, especially given the remorseless tide of gilts.
That is not the only preoccupation, however. Yesterday brought the first
figures on trade with Europe since January, while in the background the
political uncertainty grows. The trade figures show exporters are using the
devaluation to increase their margins rather than gain market share, which
is good for profits in the short run but may be bad for growth in the longer
term. Mr Norman Lamont's attack on the prime minister may have been dramatic
but its implication for the market is hard to gauge.
Mr Major's classic response to trouble is to cut interest rates - and the
strictures from Mr Eddie George this week suggest the Bank of England may
fear just such a development. Mr Kenneth Clarke professes concern about
growth and employment, but this could be just a front behind which to engage
in some radical pruning of the PSBR. There is plenty of room for internal
debate on strategy. The markets can only hope to know more after next week's
Mansion House speech.
