FT  22 MAY 93 / Sport: Man who keeps an eye on net profits - Tennis, the
Business / Keith Wheatley meets administrator Brian Tobin
BRIAN Tobin shakes his head over Wimbledon. As president of the
International Tennis Federation this Australian-born former banker heads an
organisation that oversees the most efficient dollar-generating sport in the
world. Sponsorship, massive TV revenues and player endorsements have turned
tennis into a huge global business.
And then there is Wimbledon, still the private ivy-clad members' club in the
leafy suburbs of south-west London. Playing on grass for heaven's sake,
instructing the world's superstar players to substitute their 'billboard'
kit for the traditional predominantly white and still unsponsored - not
counting the discreet little Rolex clock on each court.
'Every year I used to bring John Elliot for a day at Wimbledon, when he was
head of Carlton Breweries and he'd always say: We're going to sponsor this,'
recalled Tobin. 'I've still got a Pounds 10 bet with him that it will never
be the Fosters championship but I don't suppose I'll collect it now.'
When Tobin shakes his head over Wimbledon, it is with respectful awe. The
two-week All England championship makes a total profit of around Pounds 14m.
The ITF boss is at heart a traditionalist but as befits a person who started
work as a 16-year-old cashier, he also likes to see a strong bottom line.
When the two combine it makes him even happier.
Tobin is not unsympathetic to those critics who say that the highly-paid
week-in, week-out treadmill of professional tournament tennis is deadened by
an excess of cash over personality. 'The top players are probably making
Dollars 250,000 a week, win or lose,' he said in his office high above the
manicured lawns of London's other tennis shrine, Queen's Club.
'Their style of tennis play is becoming stereotyped by coaches urging them
to always go for percentages. The players are becoming robots, not only in
their style of play but in their personalities,' says Tobin. 'The money and
the entourage combines to create a player that must win 80 per cent of the
time. It doesn't develop flair.'
Like many administrators of his generation, Tobin can hardly believe he is
looking back to John McEnroe with nostalgia and affection. 'When John cuts
up badly you find that 20 per cent of the public complain and 80 per cent
came back to see his next match,' explained Tobin. 'You need a mean streak
to be a champion but there must also be control.
'Those strong personalities make the game attractive but you also need
regard for your fellow human being, which some of the new generation don't
have. John Newcombe, Arthur Ashe and Fred Perry had it.' Tobin was a player
of that generation, if not that ilk. He reached the No 8 singles ranking in
Australia and won the hard court doubles title with Lionel Brodie. In the
final they beat Lew Hoad and Ken Rosewall.
Yet is it not hypocrisy to criticise the amount of money in the game when
the ITF created the biggest purse of all - more than Dollars 2m for the
winner - with the annual Grand Slam Cup? Tobin is clearly unhappy on this
particular spot, saying only that the GSC was created to defend the four
Grand slam tournaments at the time of the ATP tour emerging.
'The Grand Slams are over the hump and don't really need the Cup to
survive,' said Tobin. 'It's a five year deal with an option to renew, so
whether it continues past 1994 remains to be seen.'
The ITF has grown with its sport. It now has nearly 50 employees and an
annual budget of Dollars 25m. The Davis Cup is the ITF's biggest asset,
creating well over half the its annual income through TV rights and
sponsorship. It is the biggest annual team sports competition in the world,
'dwarfing soccer's World Cup,' Tobin adds like a proud parent.
In 1993 a total of 101 countries will compete in Davis Cup and 76 in the
womens' equivalent, the Federation Cup, although among individual players
there can be considerable problems of motivation and commitment.
'Sanctions don't work against tennis players these days,' says Tobin. 'It's
like kids. You've got to give them incentives all the time. The top players
from some countries simply can't be bothered unless you dangle enormous sums
in front of them.'
The biggest recent boost to tennis was its return to the Olympics in 1984 as
a demonstration sport, with full status at Seoul in 1988. A lot of smaller
and developing countries, says Tobin, have a policy of only giving
government aid to Olympic sports. The ITF had 101 member countries in 1984,
now the total is 176.
'Last year we had two 15-year-old girls from Madagascar doing well in
Barcelona,' says Tobin.
Tobin is puzzled and worried about the increasing dominance of speed and
power in professional tennis. 'You get all sorts of suggestions. One chap
came up with superficially attractive idea of raising the net six inches -
until we asked him to consider how many million posts around the world would
have to be replaced.'
The ITF is amending ball specifications. 'We have a harder ball at one end
of the scale and a softer one at the other, so on a fast surface you could
slow it down with the softer ball,' he reasons. 'but I think the main area
of problem is the racquets but I doubt we can do much about those on the
market now.
'The ITF could restrict the materials that could be used from now on but who
knows, in 10 years there might be a commercially available material that
will build you a racquet hitting the ball 300kph. Sports that try to hold
the line against new technologies often end up in trouble.'
