FT  06 APR 93 / Business and the Law: Court annuls Commission's pulp fines -
European Law
The European Court of Justice has annulled the principal findings of a 1984
European Commission decision to fine 40 US, Canadian and Scandinavian
woodpulp producers and three trade groups up to Ecu500,000 for operating a
price fixing cartel on sales of woodpulp in the EC between 1975 and 1981.
The main evidence relied on by the Commission was parallels between both
'announced' and 'transaction' prices of woodpulp, though there was some
evidence of direct contacts between some producers. US, Canadian and Finnish
producers sought annulment of the decision on the grounds that there had
been no concerted behaviour.
In 1988 the Court appointed experts to report on the Commission's findings
of parallel pricing, and the evidence on which they were based.
Last week the Court annulled the Commission's finding of collusion on
transaction prices on the grounds that it infringed the producers' rights of
defence. The case against the producers on transaction prices had not been
set out sufficiently clearly in the Commission's statement of objections.
In respect of announced prices the court said that a system of quarterly
price announcements to customers did not in itself infringe EC competition
rules. As the Commission had no direct evidence of concerted behaviour it
was necessary to ascertain whether there could be another explanation for
the observed parallels in prices.
The Court-appointed experts reported that the practice of quarterly
announcements reflected purchasers' needs and market conditions. The near
simultaneous price announcements could also be explained by market
information passing speedily via buyers, common agents and a dynamic trade
press.
Finally, the identical prices reflected an oligopolistic market. The
Commission's finding of collusion was therefore not based on 'a firm,
precise and consistent body of evidence', and should be annulled.
A separate finding that US producers colluded on transaction prices in 1975
and 1976 was also annulled. However, the Court upheld findings that Finnish,
Swedish and other European producers had colluded on hardwood pulp prices
between 1973 and 1977.
Fines were annulled or reduced to Ecu20,000 and companies were released from
price undertakings.
Joined Cases 89,104,114,116,117, and 125-129/85: A Ahlstrom OY v Commission,
ECJ 5CH, 31 March 1993.
Plasterboard Decision Upheld
THE Commission's 1989 decision fining British Gypsum for infringements of EC
competition rules has been upheld by the Court of First Instance.
The Commission had fined British Gypsum and its parent, BPB Industries,
Ecu3m and Ecu150,000 respectively for abuse of their dominant position in
the plasterboard market.
The companies asked the court to annul the decision or reduce the fines.
They argued that the Commission had infringed their rights of defence by
failing to disclose all the documents in its possession. They stressed that
they had not been given access to documents supplied to the Commission by
third parties.
The Commission argued that the contested decision was based exclusively on
documents to which the companies had access; in any event, it argued that
the rights of defence in competition matters did not entitle parties to
proceedings to have access to all documents in the Commission's possession.
The Court found there had been no infringement of the companies' rights of
access to the Commission's file. It said the Commission was entitled to
restrict access to third party documents because of their confidential
nature. Such documents should not be revealed to dominant companies which
were capable of retaliatory action against companies which had helped the
Commission in its investigation.
T-65/89: BPB Industries and British Gypsum v Commission CFI 2CH, 1 April
1993.
