FT  06 MAR 93 / More arrests likely after NY blast
MORE ARRESTS were expected soon in connection with the bombing of New York's
World Trade Centre, which killed five people and injured more than 1,000.
Yesterday FBI agents carried out fresh raids for suspects and clues linked
to the bombing, but reports that three men arrested at a mosque yesterday on
charges of transporting a stolen car across state lines were linked to the
case could not be confirmed.
A second suspect was charged yesterday with assaulting an investigator and
obstructing justice. Mr Ibrahim Elgabrowny was ordered held without bail.
The second arrest in the case followed Thursday evening's charging of Mr
Mohammed Salameh, a Moslem fundamentalist who was detained as he tried to
retrieve Dollars 400 for a rented van alleged to have contained the bomb.
The rental agreement named him and gave his address.
Mr Salameh was charged with aiding and abetting the bombing and subsequent
fire and with transporting explosives across state lines. He was refused
bail. If convicted, he could receive a life sentence.
Details of the charge against Mr Salameh pointed to him as the builder of
the massive bomb that blasted a 100ft-wide-hole in an underground parking
garage at the centre. The complaint said tools and parts were found at an
apartment Mr Salameh used and that a police expert said they were evidence
of a 'bomb-maker'.
US District Judge Richard Owen ordered Mr Salameh to be held without bail.
Investigators are still looking for other suspects, and the FBI warned that
the investigation would probably continue for many months.
New York Governor Mario Cuomo yesterday asked Presi dent Bill Clinton to
declare New York a major disaster area, which would allow the city to get
federal funding to help clean up the rubble, install new security measures
at the centre's twin towers and counsel displaced workers.
The federal Small Business Administration has already declared the area an
economic disaster zone, thereby making business owners eligible for
low-interest loans.
In a letter to the president, Mr Cuomo estimated the costs of the bombing at
more than Dollars 700m. Officials at the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey, which owns and operates the complex, believe the figures will be
even higher.
Towers of strength at time of disaster, Page 9
