FT  23 AUG 93 / Management: Language lessons - Despite a need for
multi-lingual staff, training budgets have become tight
Three years ago many British managers were concerned about their inability
to speak foreign languages. As 1992 loomed, they looked anxiously across the
channel at their multi-lingual counterparts and a hasty flurry of training
began.
The single market is barely a year old, but companies already seem to be
wondering whether it is necessary to pay for costly language lessons after
all.
At the Languages Lead Body, an organisation for the promotion of language
training, the number of enquiries from British companies has tailed off from
the peak levels of two years ago.
According to spokesman Louis Greenstock, companies are being cheapskate in
their approach to training: some have even abandoned in-house lessons,
instead sending people on local authority evening courses. Others have
invested in a few self-study packs and told staff to get on with it.
Linguarama, a large private-sector language training business is feeling the
chill: earlier this month it reported a loss of Pounds 40,000 for the first
half of this year, against a profit of Pounds 620,000 for the first half of
1992.
It seems recession-hit clients in the UK and on the continent are reluctant
to spend any more than strictly necessary on training.
The same message emerges from a recent survey by employment agency Gordon
Yates. This shows that companies are having second thoughts about whether
their secretaries need a foreign language.
More than a third of the 500 London employers surveyed say languages play no
role whatsoever in their choice of staff - a year earlier only a fifth were
adamant that languages did not matter.
'From the survey we sensed that people were getting fed up with Europe,'
says Richard Grace, managing director at Gordon Yates. 'Companies have had a
desperate time in the last year, and all forward thinking like language
training has gone out of the window,' he says.
The dwindling interest is alarming, given that the necessity for speaking
languages seems to be increasing.
A survey of the language needs of British business by the Institute of
Manpower Studies in 1991 revealed a serious shortage of language skills,
which it forecast would get worse.
All the companies in the survey identified some unmet language needs, and
most said that they expected foreign languages to become more important to
them in the future. Less than a quarter, however, intended to increase their
training in the next five years.
Companies appear to be becoming more selective when it comes to staff
language training. A few years ago, many big organisations offered language
training to any willing member of staff as a self-development perk.
Geoff Monaghan, general manager of Linguarama UK says: 'During the boom
years people got very excited and started a lot of language training
initiatives.' Companies were also over-expectant about what could be
achieved, thinking staff could be fluent after six months of weekly classes.
Companies are now more realistic about the difficulties and expense involved
in learning a language.
Recognising that achieving fluency can cost up to Pounds 10,000 and require
great effort they are spending more carefully, training only those staff who
need languages for their work, and exploiting employees' existing skills.
British Gas has been doing just this at its Global Gas division, which buys
into overseas gas markets. The company has started to log its staff
abilities including their language skills. The process is enabling the
company to fill posts from existing staff numbers in European gas markets
where few locals speak English.
For its German operation, British Gas needed 12 fluent German speakers.
After trawling its staff, it could find only three suitable candidates.
Others have been sent on intensive tailor-made training. Now, says Chris Le
Fevre, a regional controller of Global Gas, at least one of the people
speaks 'better German than the Germans - it does impress'.
Each person in the 60-strong department in London is engaged in intensive
study of a language, having lessons in office time and studying at home.
Their progress is being minutely examined and is going towards an overall
performance appraisal.
The notion of language being important is coming as something of a shock in
this mature British utility.
'Lots of people were interested in Global Gas, but when we said they had to
learn a language, they were shocked. They hadn't thought of that dimension,'
says Le Fevre.
In adopting a more selective approach to languages, companies are
recognising the need to be more precise about employees' existing skills.
Linguarama has been retained by several large companies to run detailed
programmes.
'Sometimes you get people who have done a degree in French or Spanish, but
ask them to hold a telephone call to arrange a meeting and they are lost,'
says Monaghan.
The first lesson is not to take someone's CV details too seriously: even if
they claim to speak business French they may not be able to advance much
further than 'Bonjour, comment allez-vous'?
Manpower, the employment agency, is capitalising on companies' need for
precision.
It is spending more than Pounds 1m on an appraisal and training project that
starts this month. Its temps who speak languages will be rigorously tested
on vocabulary, grammar and comprehension, to ensure they can meet company
requirements.
The Manpower project is bold as it assumes that British companies' apathy
towards languages will be short-lived, in spite of its own market research
suggesting little demand for the new service.
'People didn't see a need for multi-lingual skills,' says Lilian Bennett,
the company's chairman.
Evidently she thinks she knows what companies want better than they do
themselves. The need to speak languages is not 'a fashion thing. The single
market is going to bring up these needs,' she says.
It is only alarming that companies at the moment are too short-sighted to
agree with her.
