FT  21 SEP 93 / International Bonds: Portugal finds firm demand for Dollars
1bn global offer
THE Republic of Portugal launched its widely-expected Dollars 1bn offering
of 10-year global bonds to strong demand yesterday, kicking off what is
likely to be an active week in the international bond market.
The market expects the Japanese Development Bank to raise between Pounds
150m and Pounds 200m today through an issue of seven-year Eurobonds. J. P.
Morgan and S. G. Warburg are thought to be arranging the much-rumoured deal,
which represents JDB's first foray in the Eurosterling sector since 1988.
JDB's issue is expected to be priced to yield 18-20 basis points above the
yield on the underlying UK government bonds. The borrower is believed to
want to swap the proceeds into fixed-rate yen.
The Republic of Argentina is expected to tap the D-Mark sector later this
week to raise between DM750m and DM1bn through an issue of five-year
Eurobonds.
Meanwhile, Corporacion Andina De Fomento, the Latin American supranational
agency which finances trade and infrastructure, has had a positive response
from investors for its planned Dollars 100m five-year Eurobond offering. The
issue should launched by the end of the week.
Portugal's perception among investors as a rapidly-improving credit enabled
it to achieve a yield spread for its global bonds of 45 basis points over
the 5 3/4 per cent US Treasury due August 2003.
Joint lead manager Merrill Lynch said this represented the lowest coupon a
sovereign borrower has ever paid for 10-year dollar-denominated paper.
At launch, Portugal's bonds yielded around 18 basis points less than Italy's
recent issue of dollar global bonds, and some syndicate managers believed
that the yield spread between the two issues could narrow in Italy's favour
over time.
However, Merrill Lynch pointed out that Portugal's bonds were also yielding
less than comparable bonds issued by Sweden and Ireland. This indicated that
investors were also willing to pay a premium for Portugal's rarity value.
When the bonds were freed to trade, the spread was unchanged. One-third of
the bonds were placed in North America, 10 per cent in Japan, 20 per cent in
the rest of the Far East and the remaining 40 per cent in Europe.
Yesterday's global bond issue is the third and final leg of Portugal's drive
to re-establish a presence in the international bond market after a
five-year absence. Earlier this year, Portugal tapped the D-Mark and yen
sectors of the Euromarket.
Commenting on the bond issue, Mr Jose Braz, Portugal's secretary of state
for the treasury said, 'This loan affirms our return to the market after
several years and helps to publicise the new reality of Portugal where
growth is higher than in the rest of the European Community and where we are
not troubled by problems of unemployment.'
Mr Braz added it was the first time Portugal had made a fixed-rate, re-offer
bond placement, which he saw as giving the loan the greatest transparency.
Mr Manuel Pinho, director-general of the treasury, said that Portugal would
continue to tap the Euromarket in the future, but with smaller amounts.
