FT  14 JUL 93 / Popular touch urged for BBC
THE BBC needs to broadcast more relaxing popular entertainment programmes
because large sections of the audience are not being well served.
This tentative conclusion has emerged during a review of programme strategy
by Ms Liz Forgan, managing director of BBC Radio, and Mr Alan Yentob,
controller of BBC1.
Ms Forgan said yesterday: 'The BBC is brilliant at serving upmarket and
minority audiences.' It was much less good, she added, at serving the C and
D social groups.
She said that in the past few years the BBC had focused a lot of attention
and resources on news and current affairs. It was now time to put greater
emphasis on entertainment.
The conclusions, which came from detailed audience research, also suggested
that the BBC seemed remote and old-fashioned to sections of its audience.
But as the BBC was hinting at new programme strategies the ITV network was
suggesting it was planning to move up market.
Launching a Pounds 173m programme schedule for the autumn, Mr Marcus
Plantin, the ITV network director, said the schedule was aimed to attract
younger, more upmarket audiences. Mr Mark Tully, the BBC's veteran India
correspondent, yesterday delivered his promised attack on the way Mr John
Birt, the BBC director-general, is running the corporation.
Mr Tully told the Radio Academy Festival in Birmingham that he did not think
Mr Birt understood 'what the BBC was, or indeed what it should become'.
There was a very real sense of fear among the staff which prevented people
speaking their minds, he added.
Mr Tully warned that there was a threat to the BBC's talent base from the
practice of putting more staff on short-term contracts.
No one could do their best work if they were always worrying about their
next contract, he said.
BBC chiefs yesterday rejected Mr Tully's criticisms. Mr Tony Hall, managing
director of news and current affairs, said: 'It is not surprising that staff
are unsettled by the changes that are happening.
'But criticism is not being stifled - indeed we are stressing the need for
debate about our purpose.'
