FT  24 JUL 93 / Books: Cultural clashes
A DIFFERENT SEA by Claudio Magris Harvill Pounds 12.99, 104 pages
BENGAL NIGHTS by Mircea Eliade Carcanet Pounds 14.95, 176 pages
COMMISSION by Finn Carling Peter Owen Pounds 14.95, 120 pages
FICCIONES Jorge Luis Borges Everyman's Library Pounds 6.99, 188 pages
CLAUDIO MAGRIS' last book to be translated into English, the widely
acclaimed Danube (now available as a Harvill paperback at Pounds 7.99), was
part fictional speculation, part anecdote, and part an intellectual and
literary history of the Danubian lands and therefore of the idea of
mitteleuropa as a whole. Spasmodic, arresting and oddly illuminating in its
details, it managed to be both minute and vast at the same time.
His new work, a novel - though its level of scholarly detail seems to
suggest that it is striving to be intellectual history too - is as small as
the other was large. This time it is a tiny corner of the Danubian empire
that Magris explores through his narrator, Enrico, a disenchanted resident
of the Austro-Hungarian city of Gorizia.
Enrico, philologist and desiccated intellectual, flees to Patagonia in 1910,
and is pursued in his life of wandering by memories of his schoolboy friend,
the philosophical Carlo, who represents a kind of ideal to the rootless
Enrico. By the time he returns to Europe in 1922, a new world order is in
place and Carlo has committed suicide. Thereafter Enrico, who never quite
succeeds in conquering desire by the application of intellect alone, finds
himself at the mercy of historical forces that he would choose to rise above
 -fascism, nationalism and Titoism.
It is a novel of great intellectual ambition, exercised within a small
compass, but fails because Magris has not succeeded, for all his scholarly
credentials, in breathing life into the central character.
At the turn of the 1930s, Mircea Eliade, the Romanian philosopher of
religion and sometime fascist, was living in India, and his early novel of
these years is a lively and sympathetic, though often intense and febrile,
narrative of a bumptious young man's voyage of self discovery.
A young European arrives in India possessed of a pioneering spirit; he
believes himself the bearer of civilised values. Unfortunately, he soon
becomes hopelessly entangled in a mesalliance with an under-age Bengali girl
from a Brahmin background. The consequences for both are catastrophic.
Eliade shows an acute sensitivity to cultural differences; how excessive
displays of human feeling can be so unwelcome in a culture that exalts
dispassion above all things; and how the two young people, separated by
violence when their feelings for each other can no longer be hidden, become
tinged with elements of Untouchable mythology. An excellent tragi-comedy of
cultural manners.
In Commission, by the Norwegian novelist Finn Carling, a nameless man living
alone on the island of Corsica receives an unexpected commission: to write
the biography of a young man who has either committed suicide or been
murdered in Singapore. Who is this man? And why has he, of all people, been
given such a task?
The novel takes the form of a detective story. The nameless writer, at first
repelled by the intrusions into his own desolate, self-absorbed life of the
relatives and lovers of the dead man, gradually acquires a passion to learn
the truth. And, little by little, the fragments of his own begin to assume a
more meaningful shape. A compelling, though characteristically spare and
laconic, piece of Nordic fiction.
This month Everyman's Library has added to its excellent list of 20th
century classics two collections of short stories by the Argentinian writer
Jorge Luis Borges, The Garden of Forking Paths (1941) and Artifices (1944)
under the collective title of Ficciones. Like other titles in the revamped
library, the book represents excellent value for money, and not only
includes a full and fair account of Borges's life and intellectual history
but also provides a separately chronology which lists, in a series of
tables, the principal events of 20th century world and South American
history, the major works of 20th century fiction, and the publications of
Borges himself. (We see at a glance, for example, that in 1949, the year in
which Borges published his second major collection of stories, The Aleph;
Simone de Bouvoir published The Second Sex; George Orwell Animal Farm, and
the Berlin blockade was lifted).
Borges, that master of the shortest and most playful of narratives, a
supreme juggler with ideas, is at his best in some of these stories: in the
lamentable tale of Ireneo Funes, for example, who, as a result of a terrible
accident, has a memory capable of total recall. His life is overwhelmed by
useless and inexhaustible detail.
A writer, any writer, Borges seems to be saying (though he would never have
admitted to it), needs the skill to know how to deal with facts in fiction -
too much reality can all too easily overwhelm the unreality of art. Claudio
Magris might reflect on this story.
