FT  19 FEB 93 / The Clinton Economic Plan: Energy industry warns of heavy
cost - Levy on fuel
THE US energy industry yesterday responded to the economic package with a
blast of harsh rhetoric, warning that the proposed levy on petrol, heating
oil, gas and coal could damage the economic recovery and cause a loss of
jobs.
President Clinton's newly announced energy tax, based on the heat content of
fuels, is aimed at avoiding a politically controversial tax on petrol and
spreading the higher energy costs between industry and family homes.
Instead, the tax would be levied on the thermal content of fuels and,
according to US Treasury officials, is expected to raise net revenues
estimated at Dollars 22bn a year once it is fully in force.
The tax would be imposed at a rate of 25.7 cents per million British thermal
units on coal, nuclear energy and gas, and at a much steeper rate of 59.9
cents per million BTUs on oil. The administration plans to phase in the tax
in three stages, charging one third of the full rate from July 1, 1994, two
thirds a year later, and the full rate from July 1, 1996.
When fully phased in, the tax is expected to add 7.5 cents to the price of a
gallon of petrol, 26.25 cents to a thousand cubic feet of natural gas, and
Dollars 2.25 to the monthly electricity bill of an average household.
Mr Charles DiBona, president of the American Petroleum Institute (API),
claimed, however, that it 'really amounts to a thinly disguised gasoline
(petrol) tax, one that would seriously harm economic recovery and be a
job-killer on a mammoth scale'.
Mr Di Bona, in effect the energy sector's top Washington lobbyist, argued
that the tax could reduce gross domestic product by Dollars 170bn over five
years and cost 600,000 jobs.
The API said it did not accept administration estimates of the cost of the
new tax 'because we do not believe the additional costs can uniformly be
passed through on all petroleum products'.
The tax was also attacked as burdensome to middle class families. Jobs that
might be endangered were in the Midwest, South, Southwest and Rocky Mountain
states because of the energy-intensive industrial and agricultural
operations there.
In Oklahoma, part of the energy sector's heartland, Mr Larry Nichols,
chairman of independent oil and gas producer Devon Energy, reflected the
API's views. He thought the proposal was biased against companies like his
because a number of the costs could not necessarily be passed on to
consumers.
The US coal industry reacted cooly. But Mr Steve Anderson of Westmorland
Coal said 'a carbon tax would have been much worse for us', a view echoed by
Mr John Grasser of the National Coal Association, who said: 'Coal prices
will rise by about 25 per cent at the mine. Under a carbon tax it might have
doubled.'
He was also sceptical that coal use would fall as a result of the tax.
'Eighty per cent of our coal goes to the electrical utilities, and the only
competitor is gas which will be hit with exactly the same tax.'
