FT  21 APR 93 / Arts: Period drama by the yard - Television
Doesn't your heart sink as yet another pristine steam locomotive fills the
screen, and yet another cast of superbly professional British actors in yet
another wardrobe load of period costumes begins to push yet another
expensive collection of oh-so-accurately dated luggage around the platform?
So does mine. Aren't your nerves at twanging point waiting for the first
showroom-condition drophead coupe? Mine too. Can you take even one more
cigarette case being loaded from a scrupulously contemporary Players' packet
without screaming? One more Fair Isle pullover? One more spotless milk float
which manages to appear in every street shot throughout 55 minutes of drama
even though the action switches from London to Bristol? Nor me.
The appearance on BBC2 of The Second Heimat (reviewed last week) serves to
show how depressingly uninspired, restricted and uninspiring most British
television drama has become. The overwhelming proportion is either old
fashioned, cosy, whimsical or nostalgic, and much of it is all four. Even
those of us scarcely into middle age would seem to have reason for wondering
whether the golden age of British television drama is now over. Remembering,
as we do, a time when the BBC drama department alone was using a great crowd
of creative people including David Mercer, William Trevor, James MacTaggart,
Jack Gold, Michael Frayn and Dennis Potter (while he was still writing about
the present day) we do wonder whether yet another 1940s' detective series,
or yet another '50s series laced with early rock-and-roll, is a fair
substitute - however authentic the enamel advertisement hoardings or the
paper petticoats.
Of course The Second Heimat is itself a period piece, even though the period
happens to be the 1960s, but no one could accuse author Edgar Reitz of being
old fashioned, cosy, whimsical or nostalgic. More important, it was not
ordered up by the yard, or the hour, by a crowd of shoulder-padded
executives whose marketing men had used their lap-tops to decide that what
was really needed for the ratings was another period detective series.
Heimat is the inspiration of one man who has a passion to tell us the story
of his time and his life and the way he feels about it. In dispiriting
contrast, Britain's home-produced series look as though they are being
produced in a factory using a formula from a text book, with quantities of
ingredients calculated down to the last gram.
Take Westbeach, BBC1's new Saturday evening saga about family competition in
the seaside leisure industry. Can you imagine anyone saying 'What I really
want to write is a series just like Howard's Way and Trainer but set in
Eastbourne, I want it to feel like an anaemic sort of Dallas-on-Sea' ? There
is the obligatory teenage greenie college dropout whose concern for the
planet is going to teach the grown ups a thing or two. There is high-class
Hannah who cannot wait to drop her Janet Regers for the golf pro (or
anything else in trousers). There is - but you could write the thing
yourself. This is hamburger drama where you can be sure that every serving
will be exactly like the last: just as limp, just as ersatz, yet always done
up in fashionable packaging.
Then take BBC1's new Sunday night sleuth series The Inspector Alleyn
Mysteries. Can there really be anybody in a drama department who, after
Poirot, Dalgleish, Maigret, Marple and Morse says 'I know what we need - a
period detective series, but with some terrific twists: he doesn't drive a
Citroen, he rides around in a Wolseley] He doesn't wear spats, he wears a
homburg] He's not keen on opera, but on art]' In Episode 1 an awful cad at a
weekend house party was killed with a jewelled dagger shortly after the
lights went out while the clock was striking eight. Bad show, what? The
programme started at 7.30. The first steam train appeared at 7.36, the first
drophead coupe at 7.40, the first phoney German accent at 7.49, the first
oak panelled study at 7.52 . . .
Some might argue that ITV's Thursday night series Body And Soul is
different, being about a beautiful young nun who comes out of her enclosed
order to help straighten out her family's affairs after her brother commits
suicide. Indeed, it is different: it is not every day that you see a nun
driving an Aston Martin (luckily she learned to drive a tractor at the
nunnery). But, as with Mr Wroe's Virgins earlier in the season, any idea
that drama might be used to explore the relevance of religion to society has
gone by the board. Yes, there are a few 'wry' observations about the
materialism and overt sexuality of the modern world impinging on the
emergent virgin, tapped into the script with a sledge hammer. But generally
speaking this is more drama-by-the-yard.
Doctor Finlay has been different, of course: as they clamber from the steam
trains to manoeuvre the period luggage into the vintage cars they speak in
Scottish accents. And House Of Eliott was different because, whether dodging
some blasted milk float on foot or travelling in the back of a vintage
motor, one of the young stars spoke something awfully like the 'Estuary
English' of Ken Livingstone and Norman Tebbit. This seemed a teeny bit odd
in a nice gel working in haute couture in the 1920s. Head Over Heels was
different because it was set in the 1950s, but otherwise it was just more
formula drama: the only thing it had to say to its audience was 'Please
watch this, we need the ratings'.
True we have had ITV's sad little early evening serial September Song with
Michael Williams and Russ Abbot as a pair of ill-assorted, ageing drop-outs
and BBC2's Goggle Eyes which gave a clear and often funny account of how it
feels to a 13-year-old girl to have a new man coming into her mother's life.
But however good they may have been (and you would no more compare them to
The Second Heimat than compare Nevil Shute to Joseph Conrad) they were
little more than miniatures.
Above all we have, running now on BBC1 on Friday nights, The Riff Raff
Element by Debbie Horsfield. In its favour, this is not a period piece,
there are no steam trains, it is not old fashioned, cosy or nostalgic. The
Belchers, a family of thieves and layabouts, have moved into the servants'
wing of Tundish Hall. Roger Tundish, a third rate diplomat, has lost his job
but none of his social pretensions: he still orders everyone about and tows
behind him a besotted American aide named Phoenix who hangs on his every
word and calls him 'Excellency'. The characters tend to be stronger than the
stories, which are almost non-existent, and there is, yet again, some
wonderful acting from a cast which includes Ronald Pickup as Tundish and the
ever watchable Celia Imrie as his daughter in law.
It is full of amusing moments and some of the characters are pleasingly
unpredictable (the grungiest of the Belchers, with ring in nose, turns out
to be a marvellous cook). Yet even here there is more a feeling of
contrivance, of material being produced to fill slots, than any sense of an
author fulfilling an urge to communicate. Maybe Debbie Horsfield really does
have a chip on her shoulder about the English class system - her work on
Making Out suggested she does - but, if so, she has little to say about it
that is new.
Perhaps those who warned that there would never be enough talent to fill
more than a couple of television channels are being proved right. Perhaps
there are very few people in the world like Edgar Reitz. Perhaps the public
prefers the consistent extrusion of predictable serials to the peculiar work
of individualistic craftsmen. Perhaps we were lucky in Britain to have 40
years of weird and wonderful television drama before being overtaken by the
age of market enterprise and spreadsheets. The fact remains that my spirits
droop every time another steam loco puffs monotonously into sight indicating
that we are in for another hour or two of 'production values' in place of
dramatic inspiration.
