FT  07 MAY 93 / Survey of Turkey (6): OECD report is gloomy - John Murray
Brown examines the economy
It is hard to argue the case for fiscal and monetary discipline when the
economy is growing at close to 6 per cent, and foreign exchange reserves are
at the highest levels ever recorded during the republic's 70-year history.
No one is predicting a crisis just yet. But the Paris-based Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), in an unusually gloomy report
on Turkey's economy, warns that 'no slippage should be tolerated' in
restoring control over public finances.
The external side looks robust, at least for the moment. But, as ever, the
resilience of the Turkish private sector is undermined by the miserable
state of public finances.
Turkey has little problem servicing its Dollars 54.7bn foreign debt. Exports
continue to grow, having reached Dollars 14.7bn in 1992, while foreign
reserves at close to Dollars 17bn in April will cover eight months of
imports. What with tourism revenues, set to reach Dollars 4bn, and
continuing remittances from its overseas workers, Turkey should have little
trouble financing its balance of payments.
However, the OECD says the picture is not 'as benign as it appears'.
Turkey's economy, in recession in 1991, rebounded in 1992. But given such a
strong recovery, the government made only limited progress in reducing the
public sector borrowing requirement. The PSBR was cut from 14.4 per cent, to
around 13 per cent of GNP, in 1992. This is using a figure for the cash
deficit on the budget of TL56,000bn, not the TL43,000bn as claimed by the
government  - the amount appropriated by parliament rather than that
actually spent during the year. Again, in the words of the OECD, 'it is
difficult to call this an achievement'.
More worrying is that some of the key external indicators are showing signs
of weathering. The debt service ratio  - which measures interest and
principal repayments as a proportion of Turkey's exports of goods and
services  - is close to 30 per cent.
Turkey's debt stock increased by an estimated Dollars 4bn in 1992. Much of
the increase was from the bond markets. In the wake of receiving a BBB
rating from the Standard &amp; Poor's credit agency, Turkey has gone to Japanese
and US bond markets for the first time. However, even here there are
questions whether this is the best way to fund development.
With an increasing volume of Turkey's debt carrying variable interest rates,
the treasury is looking for ways to protect itself against adverse currency
movements. It is estimated that cross rates added close to Dollars 2bn to
Turkey's debt in 1992.
The rate of growth of domestic debt is even more pronounced. According to
economists, domestic debt stock has increased at an annual average rate of
17.8 per cent over the period 1987-92. Over the same period, Turkey's gross
national product has improved by only 4 per cent a year.
As ever, it is not the absolute size of the public deficit which is at
stake. In many respects, Turkey needs to spend more on health and education,
to bring it in line with its European competitors. There is still no social
safety net, which will be needed if the government is ever to address the
need to close some of the 235 state enterprises which continue to be a
burden on the public purse.
While the treasury remains wary of resorting to increased foreign borrowing,
it has come to depend increasingly on the domestic capital markets to
finance its deficit, crowding out the private sector's need for investment
funds and driving up interest rates. What the treasury cannot finance
through the capital markets is made up by short-term advances from the
central bank, in effect printing money and fuelling inflation.
The result is a vicious circle. Inflation fuels higher public-sector wage
settlements, increases the government's debt servicing, and undermines the
efforts at tax consolidation.
The impact on the private sector is equally dramatic. Inflation chokes off
private investment, pushes up wage costs and acts as a drag on the equity
markets, where new issues have all but dried up. The government's appetite
for funds has deprived the Istanbul stock exchange of badly needed
liquidity, which analysts believe is one of the major constraints on the
market's growth.
Clearly, new investment is vital if Turkey is to be able to upgrade its
industrial base and retain domestic market share against the competition
from imports. The issue will become all the more acute as Turkey lowers its
tariffs further in the countdown to customs union with the European
Community in 1995.
The issue is equally pressing on the export side, where Turkey is
over-dependent on a textile industry which is badly in need of some
retooling. According to EC officials in Ankara, Turkey relies on the EC for
75 per cent of its textile exports. Textiles remain Turkey's single largest
export item, making up 54 per cent of total export receipts.
Inflation fuels wage demands, too. Wages are now the largest cost to Turkish
industry. Unionised labour has restored the ground lost during the
mid-1980s, when a coincidence of low wages and a depreciating currency
helped to launch Turkey's export drive. The share of wages and salaries in
GNP grew from 7.5 per cent in 1987 to 13 per cent last year, according to
economist Ali Tigrel, of Marmara bank. As a result, many businesses are now
relying on contract labour.
Despite some improvement in 1992, the OECD says underlying inflation is
still on the rise. The problem is compounded by policy drift and a serious
breakdown in co-ordination between the economic ministries and the central
bank and key arms of the bureaucracy.
Relations between Mrs Tansu Ciller, the chief economics minister, and
central bank governor Rusdu Saracoglu have reached a new low. At one point
Mr Saracoglu seemed close to resigning, when he hurriedly returned from a
skiing holiday in France to stop Mrs Ciller from introducing changes in bank
reserve requirements, the amount of a bank's deposits which must be lodged
with the central bank.
To the outsider, the issue may seem a little abstruse. But given the lack of
other monetary instruments, control over bank credit is about the only tool
left for the governor.
After missing the targets by such a wide margin last year, the central bank
decided against issuing monetary projections for 1993. Instead, the Bank is
concentrating its efforts on interest rates to dampen exchange rate
volatility, the final defence against rampant domestic inflation. To do
this, the Bank has had to resort to increased interventions to uphold the
lira's value in the market, one reason for the high official reserve policy.
Mrs Ciller still believes the lira is too high. 'We are not going to make
any huge devaluation, no one should expect that. But we need to keep up with
inflation. . . If you try to withdraw money from the market because you feel
there's a pressure on foreign exchange, that puts an artificial pressure on
interests rates,' she says, in an oblique criticism of the governor's
exchange-rate policy.
In the long run, without some form of external anchor, it is difficult to
see how the government can hope to curb inflation, now running at around 60
per cent. The short-term answer has been to resort to measures like the tax
amnesty and the consolidation of the debts of the public-sector enterprises.
Some progress has also been made with privatisation, with asset sales
realising some Dollars 570m in 1992, compared with Dollars 1.3bn in the
period 1986-1991, under the old Motherland party government. Mrs Ciller
talks about selling off the PTT, the state telephone monopoly. Closing down
loss-making concerns would have an immediate impact. But as prime minister
Suleyman Demirel concedes, 'our public is not ready for that yet'.
