FT  26 MAY 93 / Business and the Environment: Body Shop treads thin green
line - The UK-based retailer has set a fresh standard
Body Shop irritates the cynics, but its latest environmental report may
soothe many of its greener observers.
The second edition of the UK-based retailer's 'green book', published this
week, is an uncommon attempt to push corporate accountability into less
conventional areas.
It treads a fine line: part propaganda; part political tract; and part
relatively objective, if incomplete, profile of the company's activities and
effects.
About 5,000 copies of the colourful 30-page guide have been produced for
distribution to shareholders and other interested groups. They list the
company's future targets and current performance on topics such as energy,
waste and 'product stewardship'.
'We want people to see environmental reporting as fun and accessible, as
well as not being difficult for companies to do,' says David Wheeler,
general manager for environment, health and safety. 'We want this to be a
normal part of our annual reporting process, and we hope that others in the
retail sector who make green claims will follow. They have nothing to lose.'
While companies are increasingly producing environmental reports, few do so
to rigorous criteria, are comprehensive, or allow meaningful comparisons
between sites and the past. Fewer still are independently verified. Body
Shop goes some way to meeting these points.
A statement from the board at the start says it plans to review the
company's investment and pension arrangements during the coming year on
environmental and social grounds. It also plans to make new investments in
on-site waste-water treatment and plans to change its in-store refill
service during 1993-94.
There are some interesting disclosures, not least that Body Shop expects
soon to proceed with the construction of a wind farm in Wales in conjunction
with National Wind Power, which would eventually match the company's energy
requirements throughout the UK.
There is a clear set of targets at the start of the report for the end of
this year and up to next February. These include eliminating the use of PVC,
reducing the impact of packaging and conducting environmental reviews in all
subsidiaries and overseas franchises.
But several of these targets are not quantified. That will make comparisons
difficult. The issue crops up throughout the report. Electricity and gas
energy consumption on a range of measures are only shown for last year, not
the year before, for instance.
Body Shop's first green book had a verification statement from Arthur D
Little, an environmental consultancy, which agreed to offer the service at
cost price. This year it employed Environmental Resources Limited (ERL), for
a fixed fee of Pounds 4,000; again hardly enough to be profitable. Richard
Cane, one of the ERL consultants involved, says there were six people-days
spent on site interviewing more than 30 Body Shop employees, inspecting
documents, and making random visits. A further four days will be spent on a
detailed report for management.
The verifiers are pioneers groping around in the dark with few guidelines to
help them form a view. They drew up a six-page checklist based on elements
mentioned in the EC's ecological management and auditing scheme, launched
earlier this year.
The one-page verification statement included in the report veers away from
the objective into the idiosyncratic and even the self promoting: 'In our
professional judgment the Body Shop can consider itself an industry leader
for its initiatives,' it concludes.
It is at least informative and individual, in stark contrast to the standard
wording of the auditor's report in companies' financial statements. It is
also partly critical, highlighting issues requiring further attention, such
as greater documentation of procedures, responsibilities and training needs.
There are still weaknesses in the green book. But Body Shop has pushed the
boundaries of reporting beyond those adopted by most of its rivals.
