FT  03 JUN 93 / France prepares bill to tighten foreign entry rules: FT
writers assess the immigration crisis in W Europe as EC ministers in
Copenhagen agree tougher guidelines
FRANCE'S new conservative government yesterday approved a draft bill to
tighten curbs on immigration, which Mr Charles Pasqua, its hard-line
interior minister, wants to bring close to zero, David Buchan reports from
Paris.
The bill, whose passage through parliament is ensured by the conservatives'
large majority, would set tougher rules on the entry and stay of foreigners
in France. The country has been taking about 100,000 immigrants a year,
about a third of them admitted in order to join members of their families
already in France.
The new bill would require foreigners to be legally resident in France for
two years before their families could join them. This would not, however,
affect citizens of other EC countries, nor is it expected to apply to
expatriate employees of foreign companies in France.
Polygamists or students would be barred from having their families join them
in France. To crack down on marriages of convenience, foreigners would only
get French citizenship a year after their marriage to a French spouse and on
proof of cohabitation.
The tougher rules on family reunification, which also enshrine the right to
political asylum in French law for the first time, follow recent legislative
moves to narrow eligibility for French citizenship and to widen police
powers to make spot identity checks. They also coincide with unemployment,
rising sharply to 3.1m or 10.9 per cent of the workforce in April, and
economic recession.
Mr Pasqua cited this when he told Le Monde newspaper this week that France
could no longer be considered a country of immigration.
In contrast, Chancellor Helmut Kohl said yesterday at the close of the
Franco-German summit in Burgundy that Germany 'must remain a country
hospitable and welcoming' to foreigners.
The German leader was admittedly reacting to the tragedy at Solingen last
Saturday in which five Turks died in an arson attack blamed on right-wing
extremists.
