FT  30 MAR 93 / Russian Congress fails to end constitutional power struggle
RUSSIA was braced last night for a prolonged constitutional crisis as the
ninth Congress of People's Deputies ended with no resolution of the power
struggle between president and parliament.
The parliament's last act was to pass a resolution calling for a referendum
on April 25 - the date originally set by President Boris Yeltsin but on
terms he is unlikely to accept.
Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, his press secretary, said Mr Yeltsin would be likely
to conduct his own poll of voters, separate from the referendum proposed by
the Congress.
Mr Kostikov's comments, together with his earlier attack on parliament as a
lawless body and other statements by presidential aides in the last three
days, point to a resolve by Mr Yeltsin's team to ignore parliament's
decisions. One adviser said last night the president had no choice 'but to
carry out his own ballot with his own questions'.
The Congress resolution would put four questions on the voting paper: the
issue of trust in the president; the acceptability of the economic reforms
Mr Yeltsin has introduced; whether early presidential elections should be
held; and whether early elections should be held for parliament.
The sting lay in the high participation qualification introduced by the
Congress. Instead of the normal condition that at least 50 per cent of the
electorate take part in a referendum, the deputies laid down that at least
50 per cent of the electorate must vote one way or the other before any
decision was accepted.
This would be an all-but-impossible level to achieve, especially given the
political apathy in the country.
The main effect of the Congress has been to obscure further the
decision-making process.
Earlier yesterday the deputies passed a resolution calling for Mr Yeltsin's
decree allowing him to rule without challenge from parliament to be referred
to the Constitutional Court. They also called for his aides and
representatives in the regions to be sacked. This followed a resolution on
Sunday putting television and radio stations under parliament's control.
Mr Vyacheslav Bragin, chairman of the main Ostankino TV station, said this
would be challenged in the Constitutional Court. Mr Yeltsin has also said he
will refer to court the attempt by Congress to impeach him.
In remarks intended to show Congress's determination to act as the bulwark
of democracy, Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker, closed the session by
saying that 'if the plan of the president's team had succeeded, we would
have gone back to the worst of times of totalitarianism, the splitting of
society and maybe civil war. For the first time in Russia we have managed to
prevent unconstitutional actions, but their thrust has not yet been
completely stopped.'
Meanwhile, the west continued yesterday to wrestle with the consequences of
Russia's collapsing economy and political turmoil.
Mr Jacques Attali, chairman of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, warned in Moscow that the West should not allow Russia to
unravel as Germany did in the 1920s and 1930s by insisting on heavy debt
repayment.
He added: 'This country cannot be managed for long on the basis of mutual
disdain - there needs to be a clear decision-making process including an
effective executive and a clear role for the legislature.'
Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, urged Mr Yeltsin to resist the
temptation to put political reforms on the back-burner while concentrating
on economic problems.
Economic and political liberalisation went hand-in-hand, he said.
In a speech in Bonn Mr Hurd backed Mr Yeltsin's 'courageous economic and
democratic programme' and said the West must not give up on Russia.
Yeltsin twists and turns risk support, Page 3
