FT  06 SEP 93 / Paris seeks pact on flexible working hours: Labour minister
proposes measures to combat France's record unemployment rate
THE government of Mr Edouard Balladur is to invite France's employers and
trade unions to strike an historic bargain on the flexible working of
shorter hours, in an attempt to reduce the country's record 11.7 per cent
unemployment rate.
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Michel Giraud, France's labour
minister, confirmed he would make the proposal when he and Mr Balladur meet
employers and union leaders today to get their final views on the
government's planned five-year labour pact. The bill is shortly to go before
parliament.
The conservative government has responded to employers' demands for more
flexible labour patterns by setting an annual, rather than weekly, cap on
working hours. But in a shift from last spring's election campaign, in which
it mocked Socialist calls for shorter hours, the government is now inviting
employers to join unions in negotiating a reduction in the 39-hour maximum
work week.
'I know that many unions are much more positive about the 'annualisation' of
working hours if there is the prospect of reducing these hours overall,'
said Mr Giraud. 'If companies which want the flexibility of annualised work
limits are ready to make an effort in reducing the length of work, why not?'
This suggested trade-off is part of Mr Giraud's attempt to reverse France's
structural tendency to shed jobs faster and to create employment more slowly
than most other leading industrial countries. By July, there were 3.21m
unemployed, with the loss of jobs in the second half of the year still
officially forecast to outstrip the disappearance of 175,000 jobs in the
first half.
The labour minister described the priority the government was giving to
unemployment as 'obsessional', reflecting society's widespread fears about
the problem. He cited a recent survey showing that eight in every 10 French
schoolchildren feared they would end up in the dole queue.
But in contrast to the piecemeal approach of the Socialist government which
produced six labour laws in five years, Mr Giraud claims his catch-all
programme for the next five years will tackle France's fundamental problems
of high labour costs, inadequate training, and rigid practices, many dating
back to the Socialist-led Popular Front of the 1930s and before.
Measures include a progressive shift of family allowance charges from the
salaries of lower-paid workers to the central state budget, a five-year
freeze on new welfare charges on payrolls, and tax breaks for job-creating
companies, as well as deregulation.
At the rhetorical level, France's new centre-right government insists on the
need for the European Community, even the Gatt world trade organisation, to
have social policies. But Mr Giraud says: 'I am a liberal, and we don't want
to put social policy handcuffs on ourselves, or others.'
In domestic political terms, Mr Giraud, a member of the RPR Gaullist party,
insists he is in no way attacking France's 'essential social achievements'.
Indeed, he says he would like stronger unions in France, and in the priority
which he and Mr Balladur have given to 'social dialogue', the unions 'have a
chance to reinforce themselves'. He does not, for instance, like to alarm
the unions by using the word 'flexibility' too much.
But he clearly approves of the concept. In May he proposed the government
should step in to help compensate workers who took pay cuts to avoid
redundancies. He had to withdraw the idea when some companies were believed
to be making false threats of job cuts to get the state to pay part of their
pay cheques. However, his five-year plan contains a clever modification of
something even more sensitive - France's minimum wage, the Smic, which many
experts feel has helped price low-skilled workers out of the job market.
'We are not touching the structure of the Smic,' says Mr Giraud. 'To do that
would needlessly stir up a confrontation.' But the new law would let
companies pay young workers below the Smic rate, if they devote most of the
saving to training the lower-paid young. Another move would be to start
schoolchildren on 'pre-apprenticeships' at 14, instead of delaying all
vocational/manual training until they leave school at 16.
France still has no fewer than 72 labour laws dating from 1936-37, and many
of these need updating, says Mr Giraud. One of these is a 1937 law which,
for bank employees, still decrees two consecutive days of rest.
Another anomaly, common to all European countries, which Mr Giraud hopes he
can settle is Sunday trading. The Virgin Megastore on the Champs Elysees has
brought this issue to a head by defying the 1906 law against Sunday opening.
Essentially, Mr Giraud is passing this buck to local prefectures, but with
the clear indication that they should let shops in tourist spots open on
Sundays.
'Against clandestine employment, I am totally inflexible,' says Mr Giraud,
complaining that companies which fail to give their workers proper pay and
social protection 'distort competition' against law-abiding companies.
A subtle way of discouraging travail noir is the draft law's new experiment
of 'ticket-service'. The idea is to encourage people into the provision of
part-time services, such as running errands for the elderly, and being paid
for these services in tickets bought at post offices. 'There's nothing wrong
with services,' insists Mr Giraud, seeking to reverse his countrymen's
tendency to think that only production counts.
A big demonstration was planned in Jeumont, near the Belgian border, today
in protest at 476 sackings at Jeumont Industrie, Julia Pascal writes. The
company was an electrical components subsidiary of Schneider before being
taken over this year by nuclear parts group Framatome.
