FT  27 MAY 93 / International Company News: Court rejects GM case against
former staff
GENERAL Motors, the world's leading volume carmaker, yesterday suffered its
first important loss in the legal battle against Germany's Volkswagen.
An initial bid to prevent seven former employees of GM and Adam Opel, the US
group's German subsidiary, from working for Volkswagen for 12 months was
thrown out by a Frankfurt court.
Meanwhile, a public prosecutor examining GM's complaints of industrial
espionage against a top VW executive, said preliminary investigations could
last at least six months.
This followed a statement that enough information had already been gathered
to justify an initial probe.
The US concern had been asked to provide further documents to back its most
serious claim against VW: that its former global buying chief, Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, and others had taken secret documents and
industrial information with him when he defected to VW in March.
Opel said later the case against the seven more junior VW employees would
continue. Yesterday's rejection at an oral hearing of Opel's application for
an urgent temporary injunction would be followed by a full hearing, he
added.
Timing would depend on the court's timetable.
'We had expected this verdict,' Dr Lopez said. 'We came to Volkswagen of our
own free will. Every person has the right to choose where he works.'
The decision was the first significant setback for Opel, which recently won
an injunction barring VW from continuing 'systematically' to poach its
personnel. According to Opel, Mr Lopez and his colleagues had approached
around 40 senior buying and production staff.
According to a VW official, the company had chosen not to challenge this
injunction to 'avoid further legal conflict and because the charge was not
valid either in the past or now'.
The seven involved in yesterday's case, which did not involve Mr Lopez,
include former top members of Mr Lopez's buying team at GM, who left the US
shortly after their boss. Most notable is Mr Jose Gutierrez, GM's former
machinery and equipment procurement chief, and now head of purchasing for
the VW brand division.
The delays caused by the long investigation into the charges against Mr
Lopez, and the rejection of the call for the injunction, will bring
widespread relief to VW.
They will allow its new employees to press ahead with the urgent overhaul of
the purchasing and manufacturing processes.
