FT  07 AUG 93 / Lopez asked for 'clear statement' by VW board
VOLKSWAGEN'S production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, was
last night asked to make a 'clear statement' on allegations that he stole
industrial secrets from his former employer, General Motors of the US.
The call came from Mr Gerhard Schroder, prime minister of the state of Lower
Saxony, which owns 19.7 per cent of the troubled automotive group.
Mr Lopez, with Mr Ferdinand Piech, the VW chairman, was called to speak at a
crisis meeting of the company's non-executive supervisory board last night.
Mr Schroder's press spokesman said the prime minister still assumed that
affidavits from Mr Lopez, denying theft of GM secrets, were valid. If there
was anything more to be said to the charges, however, it had to be said at
the meeting.
At the same time, Mr Piech, who was accused of damaging Germany's reputation
in his attacks on General Motors, was called on by the board's four-member
presidium to tell the board when he expected the company to return to
profit. Doubts have grown about the validity of Mr Piech's claims that the
group will break even this year. Industry analysts suggest VW will be making
losses of between DM500m (Pounds 194.5m) and DM1bn.
While VW continued to say Mr Lopez's job was not at risk, Mr Schroder's
demands suggested the director had still not fully convinced all 20
supervisory board members. Less than two weeks ago, Mr Schroder declared
full confidence in both executives as 'men of honour'.
Workers' representatives from both groups yesterday warned that the 'war'
between VW and Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, and focused on Mr Lopez,
endangered jobs and profits.
Mr Klaus Volkert, a member of the VW supervisory board, and his counterpart
from Opel, Mr Rudolf Muller, yesterday called on both groups to do
everything to prevent further escalation.
Mr Muller asked Mr Piech to suspend Mr Lopez until the espionage case had
been concluded. Mr Volkert, however, has said he should continue to work
'like the rest of us' to earn his pay.
GM cost-cutting, Page 10
