FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (1): Adventure in statehood -
Slovaks were wary when their 74 year-old 'marriage' with the Czechs ended
peacefully at the start of 1993. Now caution has been replaced by a quiet
determination to succeed. Anthony Robinson describes the new Republic's
problems and prospects
ON New Year's day, 1993, Slovaks sloughed off a thousand year subservience
to Hungary and seven decades as the junior partner in Czechoslovakia and
celebrated the birth of a sovereign, independent, internationally recognised
republic.
But only six months earlier most Slovaks went into the crucial general
elections of June 1992 intending to negotiate a new and looser union with
their richer and more numerous Czech cousins, but not to be divorced from
them.
Opinion polls showed that divorce was only sought by a small minority in
both the Czech lands and Slovakia. Many Slovaks were in favour of seeking
greater political and cultural autonomy, but fewer than 10 per cent voted
for the openly separatist Slovak National Party (SNS). The 600,000 ethnic
Hungarian minority was virtually unanimous in opposition to breaking ties
with Prague as were the less politically organised Gypsy, Ukrainian,
Ruthenian and other minorities living mainly in the east and south of the
country.
But the election results put political power into the hands of politicians
with incompatible ideas about acceptable terms for cohabitation in a common
state. The Czech leader, Mr Vaclav Klaus, made clear from the outset that a
clean divorce was preferable to a messy, protracted squabble over the terms
of cohabitation. As the Czechs were the richest and the most populous
members of the 74 year-old Czechoslovak state Mr Klaus was able to determine
the subsequent course of events.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, the pugnacious Slovak leader who turned his Movement for
a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) into the dominant force in Slovak politics by
his attacks on Czech arrogance and insensitivity to Slovakia's needs, found
himself with no alternative but to negotiate the best terms for divorce.
In contrast with Yugoslavia, where the number of states, nationalities and
cultural and ethnic groups involved was much greater, and where past violent
conflicts over borders and between groups had left indelible scars, the
Czech and Slovak divorce negotiations were tough but amicable.
But a mere 10 months of separate existence have already brought about
palpable changes in perspective. On both sides of what is now an
international border between the two states apprehension about the possible
unforeseen consequences of separation has been largely replaced by a
determination to make independence work. Both states insist on their
European vocation and their desire for the fastest possible integration into
a suitably extended European Community and revamped Nato.
A young Slovak diplomat from the east of the country, the part which was
most opposed to the idea of rule from Bratislava and gave the lowest votes
to Mr Meciar, summed up the reaction of many of her generation. 'We did not
want to be cut off from Prague and the Czech part of our country. We felt
nervous about being alone in this part of the world. But now I am amazed to
find how little we have in common with the Czechs and how tied up we are in
trying to solve our own problems here in Slovakia.'
For Prague, the divorce meant the end of an implicit economic subsidy to
Slovakia, at the cost of a 30 per cent loss of trade between the two new
states. It also freed the Czechs from entanglements inherited from the
inter-war republic whose borders were drawn to include a large Hungarian
minority at the end of the first world war.
For Bratislava, independence promised the psychological and spiritual
satisfaction of permitting the majority ethnic Slovaks the opportunity to
develop and assert their own national personality at home and abroad after a
millennium as a largely ignored or subservient people.
But it has required an enormous effort to build up the institutions and
trappings of a sovereign state. For more than 70 years many of the most able
Slovaks moved to senior jobs in Prague, and few were prepared to return to
Bratislava to create a new state, especially under the political conditions
created by the HZDS victory in the elections.
In spite of the difficulties, however, Slovakia now has an independent
central bank, a national currency (hastily introduced in six weeks instead
of the expected six months after the divorce), a national army and security
forces and diplomatic representation abroad. It has obtained international
recognition and membership of a wide range of international institutions,
including the IMF, the World Bank and the EBRD. It has also signed a
separate association agreement with the EC and gained membership of the
Council of Europe, after the last minute withdrawal by Hungary of objections
linked to the rights of ethnic Hungarians. Both economically and
strategically, however, the new Slovakia inherited substantial real and
potential problems. Already hard hit by the collapse of Comecon markets and
the end of the Cold War, the disintegration of the highly integrated
Czechoslovak economy has led to a sharp drop in trade with the Czech
republic at a time when recession in western markets has reduced the already
limited ability to shift to OECD markets. Unemployment is high and foreign
investment remains low while the pre-divorce wave of Czechoslovak
privatisation has not been followed by a similarly determined all-Slovak
version. Without rapid privatisation and higher foreign investment
Slovakia's ability to build a less energy and raw material intensive economy
more attuned to international trade will remain in doubt.
The potential certainly exists for a successful transformation of the
economy, given the high level of technical skills and current low wage
rates. In the service sector tourism also has good prospects, once the
unfriendly, rigid state hotel structure is replaced by small scale private
and local tourist initiatives. This year Slovakia is expected to earn only
Dollars 200m from tourism, a fraction of what could be earned by creative
exploitation of a rich natural endowment which includes the high and low
Tatra mountains, much untouched countryside and a plethora of castles,
churches and cultural treasures.
A lot depends on Slovakia's ability to project itself properly as a
peaceful, stable, democratic country, at ease with its neighbours and not
only open to foreign investment but able to create the banking, legal and
institutional framework that potential investors can feel familiar with.
This is not always the case and some small investors have found difficulty
seeking redress for alleged irregularities.
But the main question hangs over Slovakia's ability to forge a mutually
satisfactory relationship with Hungary. This is highlighted by the dispute
over Slovakia's unilateral decision to go ahead with completing the
Gabcikovo dam on the River Danube, and irritating resistance to the ethnic
Hungarian minority's desire for dual Hungarian-Slovak place names in areas
of Hungarian settlement and the right not to use the Slovak suffix added to
female Hungarian surnames.
The dam issue, which aroused greater passions in Hungary than merited by the
controversial ecological issues alone, is currently under adjudication by
the International Court at the Hague. The Slovak side points out that it was
Budapest which first acted unilaterally by pulling out of the joint scheme.
Mr Jozef Moravcik, the foreign minister, also compares the high degree of
cultural and linguistic autonomy enjoyed by Slovakia's Hungarian minority
with the assimilation pressures to which ethnic Slovaks have been subjected
in Hungary.
Wise heads in Bratislava have tried to defuse potential tensions by quiet
diplomacy, fearing that the intemperate words sometimes used by Mr Meciar
when referring to both the Hungarian and Gypsy minorities could inflame
passions and contribute to the re-ignition of latent ethnic tensions
throughout the wider Carpathian region. The rise of nationalist parties in
Hungary and Romania underlines the risks involved in playing the ethnic
card.
Opinion polls indicate that Mr Meciar still retains a core following in his
home territory of central Slovakia, in the scenically attractive villages of
the Vah valley and the Tatra mountains. These are the areas economically
hardest hit by the collapse of the arms industry and the loss of Comecon
markets on which Slovakia was so heavily dependent before the death of the
Soviet system.
It is far harder to find supporters in Bratislava, the capital which is
tucked away at the extreme south west of the country, only 65kms from
Vienna, or in Kosice, the regional capital of eastern Slovakia, even though
unemployment and the attendant social pains are lower in these two big
cities.
Mr Meciar may not be the ideal politician to lead Slovakia into
independence, but his latest deal with the Nationalist Party (SNS) should
give him the parliamentary majority needed to get next year's tough budget
approved and fight off left wing opposition demands for early elections. The
international financial institutions are helping to fund investment
projects, pending the hoped for awakening of foreign private investment.
The next years will not be easy. But independence seldom comes cheap.
