FT  02 JUL 93 / Technology: Hologram on wheels - A way of making car
production more efficient by spotting design flaws earlier
Even from 15 feet away, Clive Buckberry's song was deeply moving to the
five-litre can of oil he was serenading. Every surface quivered violently in
response.
Buckberry is a research engineer at Rover Group's Gaydon test centre in
Warwickshire. He was demonstrating, via what has come to be known around the
Gaydon lab as the 'karaoke can', some of the capabilities of a television
holography system developed by Rover's applied optics laboratory.
The screen's depiction of materials, showing a vastly greater response to
even the slightest pressure than many an engineer might suspect, is a
spectacular side-effect of the equipment's underlying purpose.
Rover is using it to design, develop and produce its cars more quickly and
efficiently. For example, the system can determine the exact points on car
bodies where drumming and vibrations originate in response to inputs such as
road surface irregularities, wind pressure and engine and gearbox shaft
rotation.
The normal industry practice is to apply large areas of sound-deadening
panel to damp overall noise levels. The holography system, say Gaydon
scientists, allows the identification of 'culprit' areas, which may be
little more than an inch square, and promises significant weight savings in
present and future models.
The system's potential applications cover almost every aspect of a car's
engineering. One of the most telling illustrations of the system's
capabilities is provided by the action of bolting a cylinder head to the
engine block. A video camera, when aimed up the cylinder bore towards the
combustion chamber, relays to the screen pictures showing spectacular
distortion of the combustion chamber and its environs as the bolts are
tightened.
The real physical distortion is magnified on the screen many times. But it
shows that, in this particular engine, normal tightening is causing
sufficient distortion for valves to be unseated by up to four thousandths of
an inch - enough to prevent it ever sealing itself properly into the head.
The initial reference image and subsequent ones showing the distortion are
converted by the system's image processing software into a variety of
optical data, from colour-coded contour 'maps' to rotatable 'wireframe'
structures.
Data from such tests and observations have already begun to play a
substantial role in designing future engines as free as possible of such
vulnerability to assembly distortions. The system has already been used to:
Help design the most efficient water flow in engine cylinder heads for
optimum cooling without distortion;
Locate exactly where on the engine a combustion knock sensor should be
placed to pick up early warning of the potentially damaging combustion
problem;
Redesign turbocharger impellers to eliminate high-speed 'whistle' and
vibration;
Analyse fuel/air mixture dynamics for optimum combustion;
Track the vibration of light bulb filaments, with a view to increasing
durability and light emission.
Holography has been used, on a more limited basis, for this type of work for
some years. But until now, says Buckberry, it has involved taking a sequence
of still holographs, developing each one separately, and then comparing them
with a 'reference' hologram taken before forces were applied.
But the 'contour lines' of stress variation can be as little as two
thousandths of a millimetre apart, so keeping the subject stable enough to
register such minute variation was difficult.
Working with Loughborough University, Gaydon's technologists hit on the idea
of substituting the stills with a video camera capable of recording
distortions being caused in the subject material continuously, and in 'real
time'.
In the 'holovision' camera, designed at Gaydon, the normal optical
components of a video camera are replaced by a fibre-optic system coupled to
the laser needed to 'read' the subject material's surface holographically.
The camera is connected by another fibre-optic 'umbilical cord', carrying
all control and monitoring signals, to two state-of-the-art image data
processing boards.
One board monitors the operation of the camera, collects the data generated
and analyses it. The other controls the operation of the camera. The images
are stored by the image-processing system at a rate of 25 per second, as
well as being relayed through the colour monitor for the benefit of
observers.
In the 1980s Gaydon, which occupies nearly 1,000 acres of Warwickshire and
includes a high-speed test track, was changed from an entirely in-house
research and technology centre to a stand-alone profit centre charged with
seeking consultancy business from outside customers.
After the British Aerospace takeover Gaydon again became a mainly in-house
research and development arm.
However, Gaydon remains free to sell some technology outside when considered
appropriate and not prejudicial to Rover's own interests. The company has
already sold two of the Holovision systems - to Ford.
