FT  19 OCT 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Keeping the customer
happy - Companies that put the client first have much to gain
Dee Swift recalls the customer who towed his caravan into the company car
park and scratched two cars while parking. When asked about the incident,
the customer said that if a member of the company's staff had parked his
caravan for him then he would not have got into difficulties.
Some might have regarded this response as bare-faced cheek. Swift, marketing
manager of Harringtons Caravan &amp; Leisure World, took it as a compliment to
her company's policy of customer care.
Even if raising people's expectations can sometimes rebound, Swift believes
that going out of your way to treat your customers well pays off.
Harringtons, a family-owned business based in the Delamere Forest, Cheshire,
has expanded and remained profitable throughout the recession. It made sales
of Pounds 9.1m in 1992/93 and expects a further Pounds 1m increase in the
current year.
According to the business text books it should be no surprise that a small
firm takes good care of its customers. In theory the small business is
closer to its customer than the large company, is very service-conscious and
innovative, comments David Kirby, professor of entrepreneurship at Durham
University Business School.
'In reality, though, this is not always the case,' he told a London Chamber
of Commerce seminar last week. Small businesses can be just as remote from
their customers as large.
Among the attributes of the 'winning company' identified by the US
management guru Tom Peters are: a willingness to flatter its customers; a
consciousness of the importance of service and a high degree of
responsiveness to what the market wants.
Customer service can start with the obvious. Michael Pritchard, owner and
managing director of the Spar Foodliner, a supermarket in Treherbert, a
village in the Rhondda Valley in south Wales, puts a great deal of effort
into reducing the waiting time at his check-outs.
Pritchard claims an average waiting time of 2 1/2 to three minutes and a
maximum of five minutes, compared with much longer delays at his larger
rivals. Staff are switched from refilling shelves to the check-outs when
queues start to build up.
Pritchard says he puts an emphasis on customer service because his is a
small supermarket in competition with much larger stores owned by the big
chains. The Spar Foodliner has a turnover of Pounds 1.6m and employs 28
people.
But the innovative business owner can take customer care to considerable
lengths. Pritchard runs a bus service up the valley every Wednesday to bring
in customers without cars. This was an idea borrowed from the larger
supermarket chains but Pritchard's service for handicapped customers is
probably unique.
Not only is the store designed to allow wheelchair access, Pritchard's staff
will make up orders for disabled customers and accompany them round the
aisles if necessary. Some other local stores positively discourage the
handicapped, says Pritchard.
Harringtons Caravan puts a lot of effort into fostering long-term
relationships with its customers. It offers a free replacement caravan for
up to four weeks if a customer's caravan is damaged in an accident, an
instructional video with every caravan purchase and a 24-hour telephone
helpline. Caravan interest afternoons are held on the last Wednesday of each
month, attracting up to 100 people, while a newsletter goes out three times
a year to 20,000 people on its mailing list.
But the all-important first impression that a customer receives will depend
on how he or she is treated by the staff. Harringtons Caravan expects its
110 employees, from managing director to caravan cleaner, to greet customers
with a smile and a 'good morning' or 'good afternoon'.
John Maddison, owner of a garden centre in Chester-le-Street, County Durham,
until he sold it last November, says he insisted on an 'eyes up' policy.
Staff weeding beds or sweeping the floor were required to look up and greet
customers.
But ensuring your staff make customers feel welcome is only the outward
manifestation of an approach that must be grounded in a well thought out
policy on customer care. This should start with research, or at least
observation, of what customers want.
Harringtons Caravan set up its own subsidiary to carry out research into its
sector of the market in 1985. The company now holds regular lunchtime
meetings with small groups of customers to ask them their views of the
company and the caravan industry. But a weakness of this method is that
people are reluctant to be critical.
Maddison used a variety of approaches to stay close to his customers,
including surveys carried out by business school students. But he also
practised 'management by drinking cups of coffee'. Selected customers would
be offered a voucher guaranteeing a free cup of coffee in the garden
centre's coffee bar. Maddison would then chat to them while they relaxed.
Establishing an effective policy on customer care requires a professional
approach to training and motivating staff. Maddison says he always made sure
that his most junior employee - the boy or girl sweeping the floor and hence
the person most likely to be asked by customers - knew from day one where
the check-out, the coffee bar and the toilets were.
Harringtons Caravan trains its staff on the technical aspects of caravans
but also puts a lot of effort into career appraisals, seminars and an annual
'think tank' for each department to discuss ideas.
Training people to be welcoming and friendly is difficult and companies
depend more on recruiting the right sort of people at the outset.
Spar Foodliner has a low turnover of staff which means they can be 'brought
into the family way of doing business', says Pritchard.
The benefits of these efforts should come in loyal customers who, over the
years, will spend large sums with the company. Existing customers are far
easier and cheaper to reach than new ones while satisfied customers will
promote a company for free. Dissatisfied customers, in contrast, talk to far
more people.
But what does it cost? Many small companies appear vague about the cost of
their customer care programmes, although Pritchard accepts that his policies
mean his staff achieve a lower productivity than the larger supermarket
chains. Training is also expensive, but is essential in many businesses for
reasons other than customer care.
Building a reputation for customer care takes time and commitment. 'Customer
care is not just a gloss,' says Kirby. 'It goes right to the heart of the
business.' It can also provide an invaluable edge in increasingly
competitive markets.
