FT  03 AUG 93 / Tutu seeks foreign force to restore peace in S Africa
ARCHBISHOP Desmond Tutu yesterday called for foreign peacekeepers in South
Africa as the body count from one of the bloodiest weekends in the
transition from apartheid to democracy neared 100, Reuter reports from
Johannesburg.
A police spokeswoman said 89 people were killed between Friday night and
yesterday morning in factional fighting which raged through the Johannesburg
townships of Tembisa, Tokoza, Katlehong and Vosloorus.
Police in Natal province said six people were killed over the weekend,
bringing to almost 600 the death toll in the month since democracy
negotiators named April 27 as the date for the first non-racial election.
Archbishop Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, said the slaughter
'demonstrated beyond doubt' that South Africans were incapable of restoring
law and order themselves.
'We need to appeal to the international community to send in, as a matter of
urgency, a corps of police officers experienced in handling civil turmoil,'
he added.
Negotiators at democracy talks outside Johannesburg expressed horror at the
slaughter, which threatens to wreck progress to democracy.
Mr Nelson Mandela's African National Congress urged the conference to agree
to form a joint peacekeeping force, representing black and white South
African political groups.
'We should have a joint peacekeeping force, to be installed within a matter
of weeks,' said Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, ANC chief negotiator.
He said the ANC wanted to discuss Archbishop Tutu's plan with him. The more
radical Pan Africanist Congress said it had been advocating international
involvement for a long time.
Black parties distrust the white-led South African police, despite its
claims of impartiality in township wars that have claimed more than 9,000
lives in three years.
Rail authorities announced yesterday they were temporarily suspending trains
serving the volatile townships east of Johannesburg, to protect commuters
and property.
Political leaders expressed frustration and helplessness over the second
most bloody month of fighting since President F W de Klerk lifted apartheid
clamps in early 1990.
