FT  06 DEC 93 / Arts: Jacobeans revisited - Architecture
Jacobean, Tudor and Elizabethan are the styles that are back in favour. Not
with architects (at least not yet) but with architectural writers and
historians. They are periods that have been curiously neglected and this
year's crop of books does a lot to rectify the situation.
One book stands out: The Royal Palaces of Tudor England by Simon Thurley
(Yale University Press, 284 pages, Pounds 29.95) covers the period between
1450 and 1550 and is an informative and good-looking book. Thurley is
Curator of the Historic Royal Palaces Agency and has been responsible for
refurbishment of the Tudor kitchens at Hampton Court Palace and the repair
and restoration of the King's Apartments after the Hampton Court fire of
1986. At the Tower of London he has guided the 're-creation' of the Royal
Lodgings of King Edward I.
When King Henry VIII died in 1547 in his palace in Whitehall he was the
proud possessor of more than 60 houses. Thurley charts their history, giving
new insight into the social history of the court. Not all the houses were
palaces: they were a mixture of the royal desire for magnificence and a less
powerful one for privacy. In architectural terms the now lost palace of
Nonsuch remains the richest example of Henry VIII's sophisticated and
sumptuous European taste. Hampton Court naturally dominates the book with
its incessant heraldic decoration and complex plan. With Thurley's brilliant
choice of illustrations, from plans to paintings, it is possible to imagine
a world of cloth of gold, Turkey rugs and tapestries that was almost
Oriental in its imperial glorification of the monarch.
Elizabethan and Jacobean Style by Timothy Mowl (Phaidon Press, 240 pages,
Pounds 29.95) is a book that gives the reader the broader stylistic
background to the period from the accession of Queen Elizabeth I in 1558 to
the death of King James I in 1625. It is marvellous for two reasons. First,
Mowl is that rare thing, an architectural historian who can write. Second,
he is a man with a new thesis who challenges the orthodox view.
The victim of Mowl's views is Inigo Jones, no longer seen as the inspired
orderer of English classicism but as 'an insidious courtier' who imprisoned
the brilliant English imagination in a set of dull rules and petrified the
progress of the English Renaissance. The great Elizabethan and Jacobean
houses have an aesthetic richness and visual vigour that is unique, but Mowl
is right to point out that we have been conditioned to look away from their
apparent vulgarity and soothe ourselves in a cool bath of classicism. In
fact a house such as Bolsover is as good as any palace in Mantua or Urbino.
The truly Shakespearean richness of the architecture of this period has been
ignored for too long. The Victorians loved it and copied it and perhaps were
responsible for this century's extreme reaction against its complexity and
almost pagan splendour.
Mowl concentrates on the grander manifestations of the English Renaissance
style and passes quickly over the black and white half timbered architecture
 -still, I suspect too close to stockbroker Tudor to be studied closely. But
he does widen his field to look at silverware and tapestries and draws our
attention to one of the richest veins of European sculpture throughout
England during this period in the elaborate tombs and church monuments. The
sense of allegory and meaning is something we have lost from architecture,
our senses irreparably dimmed by modernism. This vigorous and profoundly
English book will inspire any reader to look again at this period with pure
joy. There is a gazetteer at the back of all the houses that are open to the
public.
When it comes to palaces, the City of London's own Mansion House is
curiously little known. One of the great town palaces of London, it has a
well documented history and has recently been completely restored and
refurbished by the City Corporation at no modest cost. This book is the
result of six years of research made for this refurbishment. The Mansion
House by Sally Jeffery (Phillimore Pounds 75, 352 pages) is a handsome,
expensive volume that will be the perfect banker's gift for his Japanese
clients.
It explains in well illustrated detail the history of the house's 250-year
life and has a section on the recent restoration. The Mansion House,
designed by George Dance the Elder and altered by George Dance the Younger,
still has some of the best mid-18th century interiors in the country. Like
all palaces, it was built for entertainment and the City maintains there an
elaborate tradition of hospitality.
This official book tells the tale of the building and furnishing of the
house with relentless thoroughness. But it does raise one question. Now that
the monarch opens her London Palace to the public, why is the Mansion House
not regularly opened when the Lord Mayor is away? For the time being this
book is the best informed tour of the house that is available, but it can
only be a substitute for the real thing.
