FT  24 SEP 93 / Design Council break-up decided by government: 'Business
Links' network to take on consultancy role
THE Design Council, which provides design advice to British industry and
promotes design education, is to be largely dismantled, the government
announced yesterday.
The council will be reduced to a small advisory body. Many of its functions
will be taken over by the government's planned national network of
integrated service centres for smaller businesses - to be known as Business
Links.
Both the Confederation of British Industry and the Chartered Society of
Designers welcomed the reorganisation but there was strong criticism of the
move from some business leaders.
The Design Council, which receives a Pounds 7.5m annual government grant,
employs more than 200 staff. By the end of next year, when the
reorganisation is likely to be complete, it could have fewer than 50 and a
grant of under Pounds 3m.
Mr Tim Sainsbury, trade and industry minister, told the council that more
had to be done 'to move design as a subject into the mainstream'. The
government had decided that a 'major redirection and refocusing of the
council's work' was called for.
The council has been criticised in recent years for becoming too preoccupied
with engineering aspects of design and not concerned enough with public
campaigning and aspects of industrial design such as styling.
Mr Bill Moggridge, co-founder of Ideo, a leading international design
consultancy, said the council had played a 'tremendously powerful part' in
British design, but had not had 'a very evident role' in recent years.
Sir William Barlow, former chairman of BICC, the cables and construction
group, who is president of the Royal Academy of Engineering and a former
Design Council chairman, said he had not seen details of the reorganisation
but 'it would be very disappointing if they were doing away with it. It
would be throwing away a national asset'.
Mr John Sacks, chairman of the Office Furniture and Filing Manufacturers'
Association, said the move was a 'very considerable disappointment'. The
council had helped in 'bringing together different influences that affect
our industry'.
The planned national network of about 200 'one-stop shops' for small and
medium-sized businesses will take over design advice and consultancy. The
business-led Training and Enterprise Councils are co-ordinating the setting
up of the centres.
Design Council on a crash diet, Page 14
People, Page 15
