FT  19 APR 93 / Revolutionary talk in Wisconsin
At a 1939 trade fair, a New York Times reporter dismissed the likely impact
of television, arguing that the average American family was too busy to sit
glued to a flickering screen. It was not an unusually poor judgment: myopia
is the occupational hazard of journalism which lives so completely in the
present that it is rarely able to comprehend the forces that are shaping the
future.
Trying to avoid this trap, I flew to chilly Wisconsin last week to attend a
conference on 21st-century infrastructure sponsored by the Diebold
Institute, a thinktank run by Mr John Diebold, a US management expert.
Appropriately enough it was held at Wingspread, a futuristic-looking house
built half a century ago by Frank Lloyd Wright, the American architect. The
building seemed to serve as a metaphor for the topic: the narrow, low-ceiled
wings representing particular aspects of information technology and the
soaring central dome the uplifting vision of 'information superhighways'
articulated by Mr Al Gore, the vice president.
Forty years ago, Mr Diebold coined the word 'automation'. He now believes a
new word, 'infostructure', is needed as a shorthand for the diverse bits of
hardware and software that will comprise tomorrow's information-based
infrastructure. Although keen on free enterprise, he is convinced that in
this sphere co-operation between the public and private sectors is
unavoidable; US and European experts were assembled at Wingspread to help
set an agenda for action.
Everybody came away with fresh insights. Americans discovered that the US is
lagging in some fields. The Netherlands, for example, is far ahead in
computerising medical records. Leading German companies, meanwhile, are on
the verge of introducing electronic traffic management systems, using
in-vehicle navigational aids linked to a central computer. US entrepreneurs,
by contrast, are lamely awaiting a lead from public agencies.
Europeans, on the other hand, were pleasantly surprised by what they saw as
a 'cultural shift' following President Clinton's election victory. None of
the US participants seemed remotely interested in the dogmatic free-market
ideology of the Reagan/Bush years. The issue was not whether government
should be involved in infostructure, but how and to what extent.
Special interest groups - such as computer companies - are doubtless talking
up information superhighways in the hope of winning big public subsidies.
Yet modern society probably is on the edge of an industrial upheaval
comparable with railways or electricity. In the next decade or so, the White
House expects every US business, government department, library, school and
home to be plugged into a high- speed, interactive communications network.
With high-capacity, fibre-optic cabling, a single terminal would serve as a
conduit for information of every description - words, music, colour images,
medical information, manufacturing blueprints and much more.
It is hard to exaggerate the impact of such a two-way universal network.
Much existing technology would be redundant, including separate televisions,
telephones, faxes and computers. Familiar services would probably vanish;
with everybody electronically connected, physical delivery of mail and
newspapers would become prohibitively expensive. Many of us would
'telecommute' from home rather than travel to a distant office, and do much
of our shopping and banking electronically.
Equally far-reaching change is likely in social services such as education
and medical care. With children (and adults) able to communicate
electronically with teachers and libraries from home terminals,
individualised home-based learning might eventually replace much
conventional schooling. People might also increasingly rely on
'tele-medicine': the first reaction to illness would be to seek advice from
an electronic medical databank; this could be followed, if necessary, with a
video-conference with a physician, to whom one could instantly transmit
one's medical record.
At Wingspread there was general agreement that government has to be heavily
involved in this industrial and social transformation. The presence of 'free
riders' (the fact that no single company or industry can capture all the
profits from information superhighways) justifies public subsidies for
research and development of the underlying hardware and for pilot projects
illustrating potential benefits in fields such as education, transport and
healthcare. The public sector should also provide a 'demand pull' by
subsidising the costs of connecting various bodies into a national
information grid. The scale of subsidies is debatable although nobody
blinked at the Dollars 1bn-plus (Pounds 600m) a year proposed by the Clinton
administration.
Subsidies are the easy part. The more difficult long-run challenge is to
establish a regulatory framework that encourages maximum competition between
potential providers of information services, while strengthening existing
privacy and freedom of information laws. At present the development of
markets worth a big chunk of US national income is hampered by anachronistic
laws, such as those that prevent local telephone companies challenging cable
TV monopolies. It is this regulatory tangle, as much as lack of capital,
that is cramping the development of Mr Gore's information superhighways and
the marvels that will flow from them.
