FT  23 JUN 93 / Survey of Spain, Banking and Finance (10): Foreign cushion
eases journey / Profile of Banco de Santander
SPAIN'S bank chairmen this year told their shareholders a fair amount of bad
news. One after another they warned about worrying loans portfolios and
sluggish credit demand. Banco de Santander's Mr Emilio Botin told his annual
general meeting about a growth strategy that had nothing to do with the
recessionary domestic climate.
Together with Banco Popular, a smaller bank that is just as tightly managed
and is even more profitable, Santander is a domestic banking success story.
Its ROA last year stood at 1.10 per cent and its bad debt coverage at 96.6
per cent. Popular, in comparison, had an ROA of 2.12 per cent and bad debt
coverage of 84.3 per cent while the figures for Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV)
were 0.86 per cent and 70.2 per cent.
Mr Botin was able to talk growth to his shareholders because Santander is
solidly based outside Spain. Popular, which is about 50 per cent owned by
foreign institutions and individuals, makes a lot of money because over the
years it has selectively drawn top domestic clients into its fold.
Santander, a bigger banking group with consequently larger ambitions, has
looked abroad for business.
International business contributed Dollars 205m to the bank's consolidated
1992 net profits of Dollars 577.1m. 'The time will come when half our assets
and profits will be abroad. That is our objective and that is where we are
going,' Mr Botin said.
Santander's business outside Spain has three principal legs. In Europe,
where it is a significant shareholder of the Royal Bank of Scotland and of
Portugal's BCI, it has pioneered the Interbanking On Line System, IBOS,
which hooks together its British and Portuguese partners as well as Credit
Comercial de France and in North America it is the main shareholder of the
fast-growing New Jersey bank, First Fidelity Bancorporation.
The third leg is Santander's growing involvement in the emerging markets of
Latin America where it has built up a strong corporate finance business. One
of the group's latest successes has been co-lead with Colombia's Corfivalle
investment bank, of a Dollars 130m Eurobond issued by the Republic of
Venezuela.
Santander's foreign cushion has allowed it to ride out the hard bumps of the
domestic ride. In the second half of May the bank announced a Dollars 195m
preferential share issue in the US. This was the fourth such issue in 18
months and it completed a programme which has raised a total of Dollars 750m
for the group.
The foreign-earned income that flows into the bank, as well as the
expectation of more to come, has a very clear function; it has allowed
Santander to take singular initiatives that have the dual purpose of raising
the bank's profile and of undermining the domestic competition.
At a time when rival banks in Spain are battling to rein in their
non-performing loans, Santander is using its liquidity to further squeeze
margins in the domestic market. In advance of last month's preferential
share issue, it rocked its rivals with a bid to capture a slice of the
mortgage market by offering sharp rate cuts to home buyers.
The 'lending war' provoked by the cuts was vintage Santander aggression. The
banking group had already showed its mettle when it unleashed a 'deposit
war' at the end of the 1980s by launching high interest-bearing current
accounts.
The current account assault on the domestic banking system forced rival, and
less liquid, banks to produce similar expensive products. And as margins
narrowed across the board, Santander comfortably increased its client base.
Santander's quota of the domestic mortgage market quota stands at less than
4 per cent and loans to homebuyers represent only 8 per cent of its total
lending. The bank aims to raise its mortgage activity to represent between
25 and 30 per cent of its lending, a level considered normal among European
banks.
Unlike the 'deposit war' initiative which took Santander's rivals so much by
surprise that it was months before they were able to offer similar high
interest current account products, the bid for the home-buying public has
met with a fast response. With the notable exception of Banesto, banking
institutions have also significantly brought down their rates.
The difference between Santander and its rivals in what looks like becoming
an increasingly competitive domestic battle is that Mr Botin's bank has its
well-focused foreign dimension. With growing assets and profits abroad,
Santander has a built in advantage on the home front.
