FT  03 NOV 93 / Bavaria's PM exposes split on European union
SERIOUS differences have emerged in Germany's governing coalition over
European integration within a day of the Maastricht treaty on European union
coming into force.
Leading foreign policy spokesmen in the coalition yesterday denounced the
views of Mr Edmund Stoiber, Bavaria's prime minister, who said the idea of
Europe as a federal state was finished.
Mr Stoiber is the most powerful political figure in the Bavaria-based
Christian Social Union (CSU), sister party of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) in the coalition. His outburst is likely to
seriously embarrass his party leader, Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister and a
co-signatory of the Maastricht treaty.
In a hard-hitting interview with the Suddeutsche Zeitung, Munich's main
newspaper, Mr Stoiber called for the integration process to be slowed. He
implied that Mr Kohl's passionate commitment to European union was out of
date.
'We are no longer striving for a European federal state,' he said.
'Europe is more than the European Community. I want a simple confederation.
That means that the nation states maintain their dominant role, at least as
far as internal matters are concerned.'
The danger of Mr Stoiber's views for the coalition is that they undoubtedly
reflect growing doubts in the German population. Those doubts are likely to
see defections at next year's European elections to the far-right parties
such as the Republicans, who openly exploit anti-European sentiment.
Among rank-and-file members of the CSU and the CDU there is a growing
feeling that Mr Kohl's passionate commitment to Europe may be a vote-loser.
In a comprehensive opinion survey published yesterday by the interior
ministry, only 18 per cent of west Germans and 12 per cent of east Germans
said they could see real advantages for the country in EC membership. A
majority believed advantages and disadvantages were equally balanced.
On the other hand, most voters still believed that most difficulties - with
the important exception of employment policy - could best be resolved at
European level.
Mr Stoiber's ideas were criticised sharply by Mr Peter Kittelmann, EC
spokesman for the CDU in the German parliament. He said they went against an
agreed CDU and CSU policy paper agreed only last week and could be explained
only in terms of provincial Bavarian politics. He was referring to the
threat of a rise in support for the far-right Republicans in the state,
campaigning on an overtly anti-European platform.
On the very same day, Mr Kohl issued a statement reiterating his European
convictions, although he too stopped short of defining Europe as a federal
state.
