FT  01 SEP 93 / VW accusation over Opel secrets affair
ADAM OPEL is doing everything it can to prevent a 'factual' discussion of
its industrial espionage allegations against Volkswagen executives, while
fuelling rumours aimed at destabilising the Wolfsburg group, VW charged
yesterday.
Volkswagen employees might also be involved in spreading false stories and
media manipulation, in which Opel 'played a role', according to Mr Otto
Ferdinand Wachs, a VW spokesman.
Mr Wachs was responding to a newspaper report, promptly denied by the legal
authorities yesterday, that public prosecutors were considering arresting Mr
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the VW production director at the centre of
the row between the two automotive groups.
"Interested parties' - which did not include the prosecutors' office, Mr
Wachs stressed - might also have an interest in unsettling members of VW's
supervisory board, due to meet on Friday to hear a progress report on an
independent internal investigation of the allegations.
Meanwhile, Mr Lopez has cancelled at short notice a talk he was to have
delivered to a meeting of FDP Liberal Democrat MPs in Nuremberg this week.
It is understood he was urged to do so for fear of compromising efforts to
bring Mr David Herman, Opel chairman, to the negotiating table with Mr
Ferdinand Piech, VW head.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, Bonn economics minister, who is trying to arrange a
meeting, is a senior FDP member; Mr Otto Lambsdorff, former party chairman,
is a member of the VW board of supervisors.
According to Mr Wachs, Mr Herman had shown 'no interest at all' in meeting
Mr Piech after further efforts by Mr Rexrodt last Thursday. 'Opel always
diverts the discussion with new arguments,' he said.
It was a great shame; Mr Rexrodt was trying to do his best for both
companies, he added, while admitting VW had most interest in a 'gentler'
process because it was suffering most from the affair.
According to legal experts, arrest warrants in such cases may be issued only
if there is reason to believe a suspected person may flee or commit a crime
such as obstruction of the course of justice.
'Where can Lopez go?' asked a spokesman for the criminal investigators,
noting that as a result of the publicity surrounding the case he had become
as recognisable as Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Opel officials could not be reached for comment.
