FT  02 DEC 93 / DTI official admits he was 'cavalier' on Iraq exports
A government official agreed yesterday that he had been 'cavalier' in
overriding the Foreign Office when he approved a temporary export of machine
tools to Iraq.
The admission was part of a catalogue of omissions and failures to take
action over warnings about the military uses of British machine tools which
emerged at a hearing of the Scott inquiry into arms-related exports to Iraq.
Mr Anthony Steadman, former head of the Department of Trade and Industry's
export licensing unit, told the inquiry that he had not waited for Foreign
Office approval before he decided to license the export of machine tools for
an exhibition in Baghdad.
Lord Justice Scott said to him: 'As far as the DTI was concerned, the
importance of trade was more important than concerns of the FCO.' Mr
Steadman agreed, but said he had approved only a temporary licence.
'It was fairly cavalier, wasn't it?' said Lord Justice Scott. 'Yes,' replied
Mr Steadman, adding 'I didn't wait for the FCO to give their decision,
that's true. I couldn't wait because the export would have been out of
date.'
Lord Justice Scott told him: 'You could have waited. The export would have
been missed but you could have waited.'
Mr Steadman said he had circumvented procedures on an earlier occasion when
he had approved the temporary export of other machine tools to a trade fair
in Baghdad in 1989. 'It did seem a sensible approach, given the cumbersome
nature of the control procedures we had to go through.'
Refusal to allow the shipments would have damaged British industry, he said.
Mr Steadman earlier admitted to the inquiry that he had approved machine
tool licences after receiving a clear intelligence warning that they were
for the Iraqi missile programme. He said he could not recollect seeing the
report even though he knew a copy had been made for him.
He blamed the omission on 'intense and relentless' pressure of work in the
unit. Lord Justice Scott told him he did not understand why the licence
application had not been dismissed out of hand at the outset.
The hearing was told that Mr Steadman failed to notice warnings in a series
of Intelligence reports, sometimes because he had not seen the reports and
sometimes because he had not noticed the relevant information.
In one case, he said, he had failed to spot the name Matrix Churchill - the
company at the centre of many of the reports - even though it had been
spelled out in block capitals.
He told Ms Presiley Baxendale, counsel for the inquiry, that he had kept one
intelligence report, contrary to normal practice. But he had not noticed
Matrix Churchill information in it.
'I know it seems a conundrum but I didn't pick it up,' he said.
