FT  30 JUN 93 / NHS to switch research funding
THE Department of Health yesterday announced plans to switch most of the
National Health Service's spending on research and development, currently
Pounds 316m a year, to the assessment of new drugs, medical equipment and
other treatments.
The strategy for creating an 'evaluative culture' in the service is
contained in a health department document published yesterday. The strategy
includes closer links with industry and the publication of guidelines on the
best health technologies.
'Quality care will reach patients through the efforts of well-informed
health professionals and managers,' said Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health
secretary, announcing the programme.
An expert commission will compare, for example, the treatment of kidney
disease with drugs or with dialysis equipment.
The results will be disseminated by a new team of marketing and media
specialists.
Professor Michael Peckham, author of the document, said this should
encourage hospitals to make use of new treatments more quickly. 'There is
generally a poor uptake of research findings by clinicians and health
service managers,' he said.
But the plans received a mixed response from the medical technology
industries. 'We question the competence of bureaucratic committees to
evaluate different treatments,' said Mr John Griffin, chairman of the
Association of British Pharmaceutical Industries.
Mr David MacKenzie of the British Healthcare Industries Association, which
represents medical equipment manufacturers, said: 'Britain has a trade
surplus in medical equipment, but this is falling. What we really need is
money to develop new equipment.'
Prof Peckham said the new programme would eventually see more than half the
service's research and development budget spent on technology assessment.
The commission will also look at new strategies in such areas as community
care, hospital staffing and how research and development funds are allocated
to hospitals.
As well as technology assessment, the NHS will establish a set of goals in
research and 'initiate major programmes of R&amp;D on NHS priority topics'.
Prof Peckham said that it was difficult to know what existing research
projects, if any, would be dropped to provide cash for the assessment
programme because an audit of the way money is currently spent was not
finished.
The health service spends 1.1 per cent of its budget on research, a figure
that Mrs Bottomley has said will rise to 1.5 per cent.
'The R&amp;D initiative will ensure that knowledge-based quality care becomes a
reality,' she said.
Research for Health. Department of Health, Room 449, 79 Whitehall, London
SW1A 2NS.
