FT  01 NOV 93 / Loyalists plot the demise of consensus
THE loyalist paramilitary Ulster Defence Association announced seven months
ago that it was planning to intensify its murder campaign against Catholics
in Northern Ireland.
The UDA, banned in August last year, is a thinly disguised front for the
Ulster Freedom Fighters, which carried out the weekend atrocity in the
Rising Sun pub, Greysteel, County Londonderry.
In an interview with a Dublin newspaper earlier this year, one of the UDA's
six-man commanding council said: 'It's entirely a joke to say that someone
who is killed in the heart of a republican area is innocent.'
The UDA's aim, he said, was to defeat the 'pan-nationalist front' - a term
used by unionists for what they perceive as an emerging alliance between the
IRA, its political wing Sinn Fein, the Social Democratic and Labour Party
led by Mr John Hume, and the Dublin government - all aimed at the eventual
achievement of a united Ireland.
The UDA's main strength lies in Protestant working-class areas of Belfast
such as the Shankill and Newtownards Roads. The IRA's Shankill bomb a week
ago was aimed at the UDA headquarters.
The significance of the latest UFF atrocity is that it took place in
Londonderry, the political heartland of Mr Hume's SDLP, which over the past
decade has managed to avoid much of the political violence that has plagued
Belfast.
Mr Hume's lobbying in Brussels and the US has attracted large sums of EC
funds and US inward investment to the Londonderry area, to the benefit of
Protestants and Catholics alike, and to the point where business confidence
is buoyant.
The SDLP controls the Derry council, but has pioneered 'power-sharing',
giving a significant role to minority unionist parties, including the
hardline Democratic Unionists.
It is ominous that the UFF gunmen who carried out the slaughter in the
Rising Sun appeared to care little that both communities mixed there, and
that the victims were from both religions.
It was not the 'heart' of a republican area. Indeed, the attack appears to
be a deliberate attempt to drive a wedge between the two communities and to
break down the consensus politics pioneered by Mr Hume.
The effect will be to spread sectarian violence more widely through the
province, and to make the need for political initiatives all the more urgent
if the situation is to be kept from spiralling out of control.
