FT  26 MAY 93 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (11): The markets remain wary -
President Clinton's problems are hurting the dollar
AT A time when the new US president should be enjoying the political
honeymoon afforded to all new White House occupants, and aggressively
pushing his new policies through Congress, Mr Clinton's economic reforms are
in jeopardy.
His stock with the financial markets, the business community, the media, and
even the public, is also falling fast.
Not surprisingly, the president's problems have hurt the dollar. The Federal
Reserve may have recently intervened on its behalf, but the currency remains
near all-time lows against the yen, and only a few pfennigs above where it
started the year against the D-Mark, in spite of declining German interest
rates and a rapidly weakening German economy.
The economy has slowed down from the strong rates of growth seen at the end
of 1992. After expanding by 4.7 per cent in the final three months of last
year, gross domestic product grew by only 1.8 per cent in the first quarter
of this year.
Judging by a host of recent indicators, second-quarter growth is not likely
to rebound strongly, either. Concern about the economic outlook has reached
a point where analysts have begun warning that the Federal Reserve may have
to cut interest rates once more.
While the economy has stumbled, so has President Clinton, whose political
fortunes have nose-dived since the euphoria surrounding his first few weeks
in office.
He has also been rapidly losing the confidence of the public, who appear
unhappy about his planned tax increases and worried by the president's lack
of legislative success. A politically insecure president is never good for
the dollar, least of all one who is struggling during the opening months of
his first term.
To make matters worse, in recent months the Clinton administration has given
the foreign exchange markets the impression that it favours a weak dollar
against the yen, apparently in the hope that this would help to narrow the
US trade gap with Japan. The impression was first formed in February, when
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, spoke in support of a stronger
yen before reporters at the National Press Club.
Within days, that impression had crystallised after Mr Clinton, at a meeting
with Japanese prime minister Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, said that he expected the
US trade deficit with Japan to shrink because of the weakening dollar/yen
rate. Not surprisingly, foreign exchange dealers took this as an excuse to
sell the former and buy the latter, lowering the exchange rate from Y125 at
the start of the year to Y110.
Since then, it has barely budged, in spite of central bank intervention and
a policy reversal (of sorts) by the administration.
Under pressure from Tokyo, which worries that the strong yen will hurt
Japanese exports at a time when the domestic economy is in a slump, Mr
Bentsen explained that there had been some 'misperceptions' about the
government's stance on the dollar. He did not expressly say that he now
favoured a stronger dollar against the yen, but he warned that the
government stood ready to fight 'excessive volatility' in the markets. To
some observers, the whole episode underlined President Clinton's naivety
when it comes to handling issues of global finance.
Against the D-Mark, meanwhile, the US currency has remained relatively weak,
primarily because recent gradual and modest reductions in German interest
rates have not been enough to significantly narrow the differential between
US and German rates. What is more, hopes that the US Federal Reserve might
start tightening monetary policy later this year have been temporarily
dashed by the deceleration in US economic growth.
The dollar/D-Mark rate may have also been affected by heavy selling of
dollars by the Bundesbank. Speculation in the foreign exchange markets
suggests that the German central bank, which bought billions of dollars last
autumn during the crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism, has been
steadily selling those dollars in the markets to rebalance its reserves.
Economists are divided over where the economy is heading, but the consensus
is that it will record a steady, if unspectacular, rate of growth for the
rest of the year - somewhere in the range of 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent.
This does not necessarily bode well for the dollar, but what does is the
likelihood that the German and Japanese economies will weaken throughout
1993, and that the Bundesbank and the Tokyo government will lower interest
rates in an attempt to spur domestic economic activity.
The Bundesbank, in particular, is likely to take a more aggressive easing
stance, now that it apparently believes inflationary pressures are under
control.
Dollar investors, however, cannot count on the interest rate differential
being narrowed further by a tightening in US monetary policy. As Mr Edward
Yardeni, chief economist with CJ Lawrence in New York, says: 'We believe
that the Fed's number one concern is to keep the economy growing. So the
recent weakness in the foreign exchange value of the dollar shouldn't be an
obstacle to lower rates.'
As for President Clinton's role in the dollar's future, it is too early to
tell if his current problems are merely the early-term hiccups of a freshman
administration, or, more worryingly, a precursor of worse to come. Whatever
happens, it is fair to say that, for now at least, the foreign exchange
markets do not have much confidence in the new president.
