FT  12 FEB 93 / Leyland Daf strike would force closure, say receivers
THE RECEIVERS for Leyland Daf warned the company's 5,500 UK employees
yesterday that any industrial action to try to halt redundancies would force
the closure of the entire company.
Workers at the Leyland Daf plants in Lancashire, Glasgow, Oxfordshire and
Birmingham were balloted yesterday on possible strike action in a last-ditch
move by the unions to try to strengthen their ability to negotiate better
redundancy terms.
Mr Murdoch McKillop, one of the joint administrative receivers, warned in a
letter to all employees that the alternatives facing the company were
'either to save cost by actioning the redundancies or to close the whole
business down'.
The receivers said the workforce would be cut 'in the near future' by 30 per
cent across the company, implying the imminent loss of about 1,650 jobs.
Mr McKillop warned that 'if there is strike action then all 5,500 jobs with
Leyland Daf will most likely be lost, with a knock-on effect to suppliers'.
Leyland Daf is the UK subsidiary of Daf, the beleaguered Anglo-Dutch
commercial vehicle maker, which collapsed into receivership last week with
total debts of more than Fl 3bn (Pounds 1.1bn) and after running up losses
of more than Fl 800m in the past three years.
The company has a total workforce of 12,650, and the Dutch administrators
for Daf in the Netherlands warned earlier this week that more than half of
the 6,500 jobs in the Netherlands and in Belgium would have to be cut.
Workers at all the Leyland Daf plants agreed by substantial majorities at
mass meetings yesterday morning to hold immediate secret ballots to win
support for possible strike action against the company in a move to try to
strengthen the bargaining hand of the workforce in achieving better
redundancy terms.
The results of the ballots will be announced this afternoon.
The workforce is not expected to take strike action, but the unions have
been advised that once any workers have been made redundant they cannot
lawfully strike or pressurise the company in other ways.
Union leaders were aware after their talks with the receivers on Wednesday
that redundancies were imminent, and decided to take co-ordinated action in
a pre-emptive move to try to improve the redundancy terms of workers now
facing dismissal in the first wave of job cuts.
Mr Karel van Miert, the European commissioner for competition policy, said
yesterday the EC would investigate any government subsidies offered to bail
out Daf. He said the EC had approved state aid for the motor industry in the
past as long as the cash was matched by cuts in capacity.
He told the European parliament that his staff was monitoring plans to
salvage the core Daf truck operations in a new company, New Daf.
He also raised the possibility of giving aid from the EC Social Fund to help
alleviate the social consequences of Daf's collapse. 'The Commission can
intervene by means of the European Social Fund with measures designed to
help employment stability and to develop new employment possibilities,' he
said.
Union leaders pointed to the contrast between the cash compensation
redundant Daf workers will receive in the Netherlands and the amounts UK
workers can expect now that the company is in receivership.
Europe's car sales tumble in January Page 2
Sales of UK trucks and vans falter Page 9
Letter Page 16
GM improves Page 19
