FT  24 MAR 93 / EC agrees plan for ecological audits
EUROPEAN Community environment ministers yesterday agreed on a
Community-wide ecological audit scheme. This will enable industrial
companies to sign up voluntarily to environmental protection goals they
themselves would set, but external auditors would verify.
The logic of the scheme is to use the market to stimulate continuous
improvement in environmental management by industry. Companies participating
in the scheme will have to make fully public the details of their
environmental performance, within agreed norms of commercial
confidentiality.
When the European Commission first drafted its proposals in 1990, eco-audits
were to have been mandatory for all industrial companies above a certain
size - and some industrialists fear that the voluntary scheme will in time
become obliga tory.
But the Commission and some companies which have already introduced
environmental auditing believe the voluntary mechanism will gradually be
seized on by businesses searching for competitive advantage in an
increasingly eco-conscious market. It is parallel to the similarly
market-based 'eco-label' scheme, agreed in December 1991, whereby companies
will apply for endorsement of their products as environmentally friendly
according to common EC standards.
Under the audit scheme qualifying companies would be able to publicise their
'green' credentials, probably through the EC emblem of 12 gold stars and a
statement indicating their participation.
But they will not be able to use the endorsement on product advertising or
on products or their packaging.
The main qualifications for participating are:
Putting in place environmental policies, goals and management systems;
Systematic self-assessment, through site audits at intervals no greater than
three years;
Full provision of information to the public on the results;
Independent verification by external auditors - who will be put on licensed
registers by each member state, within 21 months of the start of the scheme.
The regulation should come into force towards the end of this year, once
common standards are agreed by the Commission and the 12 member states.
