FT  14 AUG 93 / The weaver's tale: A boost for the makers of Harris Tweed
A modern loom powered by a weaver pedalling like a cyclist is arguably the
most encouraging thing the Harris Tweed industry has seen for decades. The
loom, one of the first of many that will be installed on the Western Isles
off the coast of Scotland next year, should help revive an industry that has
been in steep decline.
'The new loom is far less effort to work than the old one, yet it is
producing twice as much cloth for that effort. And it makes much less
racket,' says Mr Callum Maclean, a weaver at Point of Ness on the island of
Lewis.
The new loom should also help improve the economy of the Western Isles,
where the population is falling and which two years ago faced criticism when
its council lost Pounds 23m in the collapse of the Bank for Credit and
Commerce International.
At the heart of the weavers' woes has been their much-loved and now
out-dated treadle-driven Hattersley looms, which produces cloth with a width
of 75cm. Most clothing manufacturers worldwide demand fabric with a width of
150cm, the industry standard. The island weavers were increasingly out of
step with the garment industry, and the big manufacturers' refusal to adjust
their machine settings for Harris Tweed threatened the existence of a craft
dating back to the mid-19th century.
But now there is hope: the new lightweight loom, which produces Harris Tweed
with a width of 150cm, could transform the industry. Mr Aneas Maclean, a
weaver from the village of Garynahine in the Western Isles, calls the loom
'a lifeline for the industry'.
The mills and weavers are embarking on a five-year Pounds 9.5m programme to
re-equip themselves. About 45 per cent of the funding will come from the
industry itself, including the weavers, and the rest from Western Isles
Enterprise (the local offshoot of Highlands and Islands Enterprise) and from
the European Community.
Some Pounds 5m will be spent on buying the new looms, Pounds 2m on adapting
the mills to the new width and Pounds 2m on marketing; Pounds 500,000 will
be spent on training the weavers.
'It has taken a crisis to bring the industry together and listen to what
we'd been telling it,' says the Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
Each new loom will cost about Pounds 13,000. The weaver is expected to
contribute Pounds 4,000 with the rest coming from grants. The first 100
looms, arriving on Lewis at a rate of two a week, should be in operation by
the end of next year, and the first 150cm Harris Tweed could be produced for
the 1994-95 selling season.
Harris Tweed is one of Scotland's most famous home-grown products. Often
thick, always hard-wearing and usually woven in sober browns and greens,
reflecting the bleak Hebridean landscape, it has been popular for
generations with the British gentry and rich Americans.
What makes the tweed unique is that it is produced from pure wool in the
Western Isles and woven in the homes of the weavers. Only if these
conditions are met does it receive the stamp of authenticity from the Harris
Tweed Authority, the industry regulator, and command a premium price.
All the other processes in weaving the tweed, from spinning and dying the
wool to finishing the cloth, take place in four textile mills on Lewis.
Having spun the yarn, the mills pass it on to self-employed weavers who
their Hattersley machines in sheds adjoining their houses.
Using outworkers gives Harris Tweed its unique quality: each tweed receives
the personal attention of a weaver and helps sustain a cottage industry.
Weavers' jobs have been one of the main casualties of the crisis in the
industry since 1987 when fashion in men's clothing moved from woven jackets
to knitted pullovers. Harris Tweed's sales in its biggest market - men's
sports jackets in the US - fell sharply. Output dropped from 5m metres of
tweed in 1985 to about 1m metres last year (worth only Pounds 5.5m). The
number of weavers has fallen to 400, from about 2,000 in the 1960s.
The crisis forced the industry to examine itself. A working party formed by
the mills and weavers found that potential consumers were put off by the
cloth's rough texture and heaviness. Jackets of 12-ounce tweed last for
decades but, as Mr Harris Mackenzie, managing director of Kenneth Mackenzie,
the most modern of the mills, says: 'People no longer want to keep their
clothes that long.'
The demand for lighter and softer tweed is now being met: design changes
have produced tweeds weighing only 6 ounces a yard, and newer tweeds are
softer.
But problems associated with the fabric paled besides the impediments
associated with the weavers' anachronistic looms. A solution did not emerge
until 1990 when Mr John Griffith, a loom maker from England, produced a
prototype, foot-driven 150cm loom. The first of his machines, made by Bonas
Griffith, his textile machinery company, arrived on Lewis last year.
The new loom permits much finer patterns such as subtle checks. It also
produces softer cloth of higher quality, which should appeal to the women's
market.
Mr Ian Mackenzie, secretary of the islands' weavers association, says the
loom 'gives us a lot of the advantages of a power loom without losing the
magic of the Hebrides'.
A group of weavers is being trained to use the looms. While they are
enthusiastic about the new product, the weavers are worried about repaying
the Pounds 4,000 which they will have to borrow as their contribution
towards the cost of the looms. Most of the weavers have been on 'less than
part time work' in recent years.
Mr Ian Mackenzie of the islands' weavers association, while sympathising
with their anxieties, is confident about the future. He says that the tweed
market has turned up this year - output is expected to reach 2m metres,
nearly twice last year's figure.
But there is a lingering uncertainty. Could Harris Tweed now lose its strong
identity as the weavers use looms that can produce a wide range of cloth?
Many in the industry believe cloth weighing less than about 6 ounces should
not be classified as Harris Tweed.
There may be a further danger: as weavers find it easier to make Harris
Tweed and increase output, so the fabric may lose its exclusivity.
