FT  29 JUN 93 / Shake-up plan for police authorities
THE GOVERNMENT intends to broaden the make-up of police authorities beyond
elected local politicians and magistrates under proposals published
yesterday.
In future, five of the 16 members of each police authority will be appointed
by the home secretary, who will also appoint a paid chairman.
Announcing the white paper proposals in the Commons, Mr Michael Howard, home
secretary, said the reforms were intended to reduce what he called 'paper
pushing' and to improve the crime prevention and detection record of
Britain's 128,000-strong police force.
The proposals, which drew immediate accusations of 'creeping centralisation'
of the police force, include boosting the number of special constables from
nearly 20,000 to 30,000 and freedom for police authorities on how to spend
their share of the Pounds 6.2bn national police budget. The 43 police forces
in England and Wales will also have to publish annual performance results.
Mr Howard vetoed a proposal by Mr Kenneth Clarke, his predecessor, that the
Metropolitan Police should be answerable to a more independent authority,
although a new body will be set up to help him oversee its operations.
He also lowered expectations of an early reduction in the number of police
forces operating in England and Wales.
The reforms, which will be followed tomorrow with the recommendations of the
Sheehy inquiry into police pay and conditions, drew mixed reactions. Mr Tony
Blair, the shadow home secretary, said the proposals were bankrupt and
represented a 'misguided piece of prejudice against local policing'.
Mr Alan Eastwood, chairman of the Police Federation of England and Wales -
which represents rank-and-file officers - said the white paper would not put
more officers on the beat.
John Burrow, chief constable of Essex and president of the Association of
Chief Police Officers, welcomed greater flexibility in budgets but seriously
questioned the need to reconstitute membership of police authorities.
Blueprint for police, Page 8
