FT  22 MAY 93 / Spanish Socialists put up a fight
A SHORT, sharp Spanish election campaign officially began yesterday, as two
nationwide opinion polls showed the ruling Socialists of Mr Felipe Gonzalez
in the lead but well short of winning enough seats on June 6 to be able to
govern on their own.
Addressing 25,000 supporters in a Valencia bullring, Mr Gonzalez appealed to
voters for help to continue modernising Spain and to ensure it was never
again isolated from the rest of the world as under the Franco regime.
The latest polls - one in the Madrid daily newspaper Diario 16 and the
another in the Catalan daily El Periodico - both seem to reflect a surge in
Socialist support even after May 13. That was when the government was forced
to devalue the peseta by 8 per cent and when it published official figures
showing that 253,000 people had lost their jobs in the first three months of
the year.
The opinion polls confirmed the feelings of some seasoned observers of
Spanish politics that the main challenger, the conservative Partido Popular
 -whose leader, Mr Jose Maria Aznar, was welcomed in Britain by Prime
Minister John Major this week as 'Spain's next prime minister'  - has failed
to capitalise on the government's economic troubles.
Diario 16 said its poll showed the Socialists winning 35 per cent of the
vote to the PP's 33 per cent. El Periodico had the Socialists at 35 but the
PP at 30.7 per cent, well down on most recent polls.
Voter turnout on June 6 is expected to be as high as 80 per cent. But some
polling organisations say as many as 5 per cent of the electorate may not
make up their minds how to vote until they have their ballot papers.
While the Socialists appear to have made big gains at the expense of their
opponents after the devaluation, the party has been made to appear
incompetent in the principality of Asturias, which it governs. In an effort
to capture votes, the regional government recently announced it had secured
agreement from a foreign investor to build a Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn) oil
refinery in the region.
But the Saudi International Bank, which the Asturians had announced was
leading the project, has denied all knowledge of it. It seems that no-one in
Asturias ever bothered to call the bank to check the credentials of a
mystery middle-man who conducted negotiations and who has now disappeared.
The Asturian Socialists are not saying whether they paid the man any
commissions.
