FT  28 SEP 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (26): A wilderness betrayed
/ Management
EXTREME CONDITIONS by John Strohmeyer Simon &amp; Schuster Dollars 23 287 pages
A QUARTER of a century has passed since oil was discovered in northern
Alaska, leading to an explosion of economic activity in that icy wilderness.
The discovery brought untold riches to a region of 400,000 people. Over
those years, Alaska has accumulated a Dollars 13bn endowment fund, and today
it is the only US state with negative taxation: it actually pays money to
its people, rather than the other way round.
But was it worth it?
This well-researched, highly readable book suggests the answer might be
'no'. It provides a lurid account of the corruption and waste that came with
sudden wealth, and its appalling impact on the state's natives and natural
life.
Many of the effects are well known: the Exxon Valdez disaster, the
trans-Alaskan oil pipeline whose costs rocketed from Dollars 900m to Dollars
8bn, the Hickel Highway which ploughed a deep scar half way across the state
and now lies barely used.
But much of the book is about the more insidious effects of Alaska's riches.
Money went straight to the state legislature's head and spawned a series of
ill-fated state-backed programmes, like the Dollars 100m spent to create a
local agricultural industry - in a state locked in snow and ice most of the
year. The state also invested millions in a bank and a housing corporation,
both of which foundered.
More distressing in a way is Strohmeyer's account of destruction at the
grass roots. Native communities were virtually wiped out by the oil rush,
and only survived by mindlessly exploiting the forests and fisheries which
they were given as compensation. In the towns, development careered out of
control, and most urban centres are now blighted by vacant shopping malls.
An especially vivid chapter chronicles the ruination of the Kenai river,
once one of the world's finest salmon runs, now a mayhem of jetboats,
waterfront properties and unscrupulous fishing guides.
So intoxicated did Alaska become with big oil that the legislature dropped a
requirement that oil companies separately account for their activities in
the state. This was done to keep the oil companies happy, but it enabled
them to ship wealth out of the state at will. No one calculated the price of
oil development, so long as the money kept rolling in.
All very predictable, perhaps, and some readers may suspect the account is
exaggerated. But Strohmeyer - a journalist immigrant to Alaska - treats his
emotive subject with coolness and vivid detail which gives it a special
force.
