FT  07 JUN 93 / Clinton searches for compromise in unitary tax row
THE CLINTON administration is quietly pressing California to change its
company tax laws in a way that could settle the long-running dispute over
its worldwide unitary tax system while raising more money for the
financially-strapped state treasury.
If the change were to be made soon enough, it could also head off
retaliation threatened by the British government against US companies and
spare the Clinton administration from having to take sides in the lawsuit
between California and Barclays Bank, which is the test case for the unitary
tax system.
But some big California companies are beginning to move against the proposed
change, which could cost them money, and state legislature officials say it
will be hard to bring together the Democratic and Republican support it
would need.
US Treasury officials are encouraging California to move to a mandatory
'water's edge' system of corporate taxation, which state officials calculate
could raise between Dollars 155m and Dollars 175m a year of additional
revenue.
Under this system companies are taxed only on income from operations within
the borders of the US, whereas the worldwide unitary method calculates their
global income, and then taxes it in proportion to their payroll, property
and sales within the state.
California has already introduced water's edge reporting as an option,
bowing to arguments from Washington that compulsory unitary assessments were
out of line with the international tax system.
But foreign companies complain that they have to pay a fee to select this
option, and that California reserves the right to overrule their choice and
impose a unitary tax assessment.
Moving to compulsory water's edge taxation would bring California in line
with the other 49 states and with most countries, and ought to settle the
issues raised in the Barclays case, on which the Supreme Court has asked for
the federal government's views.
But 20 to 30 per cent of companies operating in California, including
Caterpillar and British Petroleum, benefit from the unitary system, and have
in the past lobbied against a move to mandatory water's edge reporting.
The administration does not want the risk of California losing before the
Supreme Court; the state, still in recession and needing to fill another
Dollars 8.6bn budget deficit by June 30, could stand to lose as much as
Dollars 4bn on Barclays and other related cases.
Mr Brad Sherman, chairman of the California's State Board of Equalization
and a member of the state's Franchise Tax Board, is leading the effort to
switch to water's edge. He argues it would raise revenue, prevent damage to
international investment in California and reduce the risk of British
retaliation.
