FT  11 JUN 93 / Arts: 'Blithe Spirit': dated as dry martini - Theatre
Noel Coward wrote Blithe Spirit during a week's holiday at Portmeirion in
May 1941. He said, 'I will admit that I knew it was witty, I knew it was
well constructed and I also knew it would be a success.' The play ran for
2,000 performances in the West End. From the stage, Margaret Rutherford and
Kay Hammond were joined by Rex Harrison for David Lean's fine 1945 film.
The play's assumptions rather than its language, have dated, especially when
they are laid bare in Mark Piper's nervy production at the Richmond Theatre,
Surrey. The play should become funnier as the actors relax, but at the
moment it falls short.
Blithe Spirit tells of a novelist, Charles, who calls in a medium, one
Madame Arcati to conduct some psychic research. She manages to materialise
his first wife, Elvira, visible and audible to him alone, and intent on
having him join her on the other side. Charles's second wife, Ruth, handles
the situation well until Elvira kills her in a car accident fixed for
Charles. He is then haunted by two ex-wives who are finally exorcised by
Madame Arcati and the Maid.
This is a comedy of perception. On stage, Coward has Charles replying to
Elvira but seeming to talk to Ruth; but the play also presents ideal
femininity in 1941: blithe, bonny, spirited and anything but flesh and bone.
It is this perception which has begun to date the play.
Literary mediums, from Robert Browning's Mr Sludge to TS Eliot's Madame
Sosostris, are rarely so terrestrial as Madame Arcati, beautifully played
here by the substantial Peggy Mount. She also carried a miscued scene when
the gramophone failed to work - 'I'll sing it then.' Geoffrey Davies as
Charles, Marsha Fitzalan as Ruth, and Louise Jameson as Elvira maintain a
quick banter and scurry round the fine drawing-room set.
Where would Coward be without the dry martini ('anyone can write a book, but
it takes an artist to mix a martini dry enough') and the place name: 'You
were feckless and irresponsible and morally unstable . . . I realised that
before we left Budleigh Salterton'?
Richmond Theatre (081 940 0088) until June 12
