FT  25 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Comet growth helps lift Kingfisher to
Pounds 205m - Retailer goes for volume with low prices on 500 products
SIR GEOFFREY Mulcahy, chairman of Kingfisher, yesterday committed the
retailing group - which owns B&amp;Q, Woolworth, Superdrug and Comet - to a
policy of everyday low prices as a way of enhancing earnings in the 'lower
growth 1990s.'
As a first step, B&amp;Q and Woolworth would be introducing permanently lower
prices on a range of 500 products this week.
This was not the beginning of an Easter price war, Mr Mulcahy said: 'A war
has a beginning and an end. This will just go on and on.'
However, the strategy implied that gross margins would have to fall.
Analysts welcomed the latest development in Kingfisher's strategy.
'Kingfisher is one of the few retailers which understands what discounting
is really about,' said Mr Paul Deacon of Goldman Sachs. 'It is about driving
volume . . . and has been proven with the US experience.'
Mr Mulcahy was announcing profits for the year to January 30, which showed a
5 per cent increase to Pounds 205m under the accounting standard FRS 3.
This was after a Pounds 26.4m write-down (Pounds 1.9m gain) on the
development portfolio, and a Pounds 3.2m (Pounds 11.4m) charge on the
disposal of group properties.
Under the old accounting standard, profits were depressed by a Pounds 23.5m
net exceptional charge - arising from the property write-down - from Pounds
228m to Pounds 211m.
Turnover rose to Pounds 3.55bn (Pounds 3.39bn).
The sharpest improvement came from the Comet chain, which sells electrical
goods. Operating profits rose from Pounds 9.1m to Pounds 17.7m.
Like-for-like sales increased by 15 per cent.
Mr Mulcahy attributed Comet's growth to a refocusing away from the high
street to out-of-town centres, better management and an improved product
range.
B&amp;Q, suffered a 10 per cent decline in operating profits to Pounds 81.1m on
increased sales. However, sales were 16.5 per cent ahead in the last two
months of the financial year, and the improvement in trading performance had
continued.
Woolworth improved by Pounds 6.4m at the operating level to Pounds 77.8m,
fuelled by strong contributions from computer games, toys, and kitchen
products.
Superdrug's profits were marginally higher at Pounds 34.8m (Pounds 34.6m).
The division was examining new markets following the success of retailing
discounted perfumes. Kingfisher was also beginning to look into introducing
pharmaceutical services in Superdrug, with two outlets already operating
pharmacies.
Finally, Mr Mulcahy said the planned merger with Darty, the French
electrical goods retailer, was due to be completed in June.
Darty shareholders would have 12 per cent of the enlarged group following
the transaction and the Pounds 313m rights issue launched by Kingfisher to
help fund the merger.
The final dividend is raised by 0.5p to 9.5p, for a total of 13.7p (13p).
Earnings per share fell from 35.2p to 31.3p. Under the new accounting
standard, earnings increased from 28.5p to 30.1p.
See Lex
