FT  12 JAN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Heavy selling hits second-line stocks
THE UK equity market retreated for the fifth successive trading session,
dragged down by some exceptionally heavy selling of the Footsie future and a
growing list of bearish economic and political factors at home and abroad.
The only glimmer of light during a gloomy trading session came with a better
than expected opening by Wall Street, which enabled London to edge up from
the day's lowest levels.
Nevertheless, the FT-SE 100 Index suffered another substantial setback,
closing 25.8 off at 2,773.4, while second-line stocks, represented by the
Footsie Mid 250, ran into a welter of selling which drove the latter down
about 43 points.
The market opened on a tentative note, with marketmakers looking for signs
of a technical rally after the previous week's sell-off. Little buying
developed, however, and share prices began to wilt in the face of steady
selling.
Pressure came from the gilt-edged market, which reeled from talk that today
might bring details of a Pounds 2.5bn gilts auction. Also, dealers were
increasingly aware of persistent market stories of a growing list of rights
issues in the pipeline.
The heat on the market was turned up a notch in mid-morning when a big
seller of the Footsie future, rumoured to have been on behalf of an overseas
fund, appeared in the derivatives market. The big player was thought to have
sold upwards of 3,000 contracts, triggering waves of index arbitraging, or
buying of the future and selling of stocks in the cash market.
The FT-SE 100, up 2.2 at its best, some 30 minutes after the opening,
subsequently reversed to trade at the day's lowest point, 2,761.5, or 37.7
points down, just before the opening of Wall Street. The latter kicked off
level and gradually edged higher, injecting a much-needed note of confidence
into the London market, which responded by rallying almost eights points by
the close of trading.
There was less confidence in second-tier stocks, where the Footsie Mid 250,
which has outperformed the FT-SE 100 since its inception last October, ended
a net 42.8 off at 2,889.9, having been down around 45 points at worst.
Consumer lending figures for November were viewed as slightly disappointing
and bearish for a retailing sector still feeling the effects of poor
quarterly sales figures announced last week by Boots. Yesterday saw a bear
raid launched against retailer Alexon and poor performances from some of the
UK's leading store groups, such as GUS, WH Smith and Dixons, the last-named
due to release interim figures this morning.
Composite insurers were targeted as likely candidates to raise money via
rights issues. Commercial Union was heavily sold, as was General Accident.
There was consolation for market operators in the continuing high levels of
turnover in UK equities. Last week saw daily turnover comfortably above the
Pounds 1bn level all week, reaching Pounds 1.49bn on Friday. Volume
yesterday picked up strongly after a rather sluggish start, eventually
reaching 592.7m shares.
Some strategists still view the equity market as overvalued, pointing to a
historically high price/earnings ratio of around 17. Senior marketmakers,
however, continue to see the recent retreat by equities as a healthy
correction.
