FT  17 MAR 93 / Leading Article: The choice over Russia
THE DECISIONS facing the Group of Seven countries now urgently conferring on
how to assist Russia may soon become both more difficult and more
inescapable. The west may have to choose between an anarchy created by
totalitarians and an autocracy run by democrats. This choice has to be made
in favour of those committed to reforming Russia.
Russia is caught in a war between a reforming government that bears
responsibility, but is almost powerless, and a reactionary parliament that
possesses power, but bears little responsibility for its use. The
constitution producing this slide to anarchy is a legacy of one of the most
centralised states in history. No less paradoxically, the forces exploiting
democracy are nostalgic for communism, while the leader battling with
parliament is the man who kept out the tanks during the August 1991 coup.
A popular referendum would, Mr Yeltsin hopes, reinforce his legitimacy as
the directly elected leader of Russia and allow him to to alter the
constitution and expedite economic reform. More power for the government
would mean suspension of a parliament that blocks its urgent measures and
subordination of the central bank and other institutions to the government's
will.
The west may soon have to choose between an obstructive parliament and a
government aiming to introduce the conditions for stable democracy,
including a market economy. It would have to choose Mr Yeltsin. It cannot
side with parliamentarians whose hard core is anti-market, anti-democratic
and anti-western. Democracies must back even authoritarian rulers if the
alternatives are worse.
Stable evolution
The larger question is this: if Mr Yeltsin imposes presidential rule, can it
work, in the sense of producing conditions for market reform and stable
democratic evolution? The answer is that he would succeed only if the
government pursued reform single-mindedly, if it took the reasons for reform
to the people in a much more effective way than at present and if the
assistance which the west is now debating were directed at alleviating the
suffering of the victims of reform.
There is no lack of voices in the centre of Russian politics which say that
President Yeltsin is already beyond 'saving' by western support; that the
country is in such an advanced state of disintegration that no central
power, presidency or congress, can lead it, and that the radical reform
strategy would be violently rejected if pushed through by an authoritarian
power.
Economic disintegration
These are substantial objections. Furthermore, the government is not the
only group with a plan for market reform: one benign effect of the past year
and a half has been that there now exists a free-market 'party' in
opposition, in which substantial figures like Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, the
creator of the '500-day plan', play major roles. Time, however, is short, as
Mr Yeltsin underscored yesterday after his talks with President Francois
Mitterrand. Only an end to the debauching of the currency, combined with
continued privatisation, offers hope of averting an economic disintegration
that no democracy could hope to survive.
Russia is now disintegrating. Its regions increasingly go their own way. If
the central power continues to weaken, Russia will become ungovernable. Thus
the alternative to the effective exercise of power by Mr Yeltsin's
government is the west's chief nightmare: a nuclear-armed Russia under
xenophobic control or, worse, under no control at all.
There can be no guarantee that supporting the government will work, but the
west has too much to lose not to give vocal and effective assistance, up to
and including the point where the president concentrates authority in his
hands. If it had helped sooner and more aggressively, things might not have
reached this pass. Guarantees should be sought on early elections, a new
constitution and the firm grounding of democratic rule. But in foreseeable
circumstances, supporting Mr Yeltsin remains the west's only choice.
