FT  19 OCT 93 / Another attempt to clear the decks for recovery
IT IS ALWAYS dangerous to call the turn in a company's fortunes, but
yesterday's profits warning and rights issue announcement from Trafalgar
House might just about mark the nadir for a company that has lurched from
problem to problem since its ill-fated takeover of Davy in 1991.
At least that is the way its new chairman, Mr Simon Keswick, of the Hongkong
Land group, presents it. Assuming its new convertible preference shares are
counted as capital, Trafalgar will have no net debt once its planned rights
issue is complete. It will also then have shareholders' funds appropriate to
its Pounds 4bn turnover.
'It'll be the strongest engineering conglomerate almost in existence,' says
Mr Keswick, adding that he believes gearing inappropriate for cyclical
businesses such as those in which Trafalgar House is engaged. He says
Trafalgar will have the financial strength to take equity stakes in the
privately financed infrastructure projects which are becoming increasingly
fashionable.
The aim of rebuilding Trafalgar's financial strength so that it can compete
in the construction and engineering project business also explains its
decision to reorganise its banking facilities. Its new arrangements with the
HSBC Group will reduce the number of its banking relationships to between
five and 10 from around 80.
Most importantly they will carry more flexible covenants. Though Trafalgar
will not admit it, it is widely thought the covenants under its old
arrangements limited the provisions it was able to make at the time of its
previous rights issue in February.
The new arrangements also involve enhanced foreign exchange and bonding
facilities - guarantees of performance normally required by the customer in
major construction projects - as a further means of improving the company's
competitive edge.
The vision of the new Trafalgar is one of a company centred on construction,
engineering and shipping. But yesterday's announcement also leaves few
doubts that a lot more effort will be required to turn the vision into a
thriving reality.
Trafalgar's decision to launch a rights issue in the form of
interest-bearing convertible preference shares rather than equity is a tacit
admission that, although it is sticking to its promise of a 2p final
dividend, it will be a long time before ordinary shareholders can expect
much of a return on their investment.
Moreover, the company has also been unable to dispose of unwanted assets as
quickly as it expected. The Ritz Hotel,for example, is likely to be taken
off the market and may be given closer management links with Hong Kong's
Mandarin group.
Trafalgar argues its latest write-downs are the result of a more exhaustive
appraisal of its business prospects. Its new finance director only arrived
in June, after its last rights issue in February when it announced
provisions of Pounds 100m, mainly on its commercial property portfolio.
That gives the impression that the decks are being cleared for recovery,
especially since the company indicated yesterday that it was now
experiencing a modest inflow of cash from a combination of advance payments
for contracts, better management of working capital and property sales.
Provided the momentum can be maintained, investors may give Hongkong Land
their support despite the unorthodox way it has taken control of the company
without making a full bid.
Mr Keswick says that, having paid USDollars 500m for its 25 per cent share,
Hongkong Land itself 'has taken a very considerable risk'. He also admits,
though, that UK institutions would be the first to round on Hongkong Land's
reluctance to take full responsibility itself if the new management failed
to make good.
Lex, Page 22
