FT  27 JUL 93 / Survey of Ghana (7): Production quadruples - Gold is now the
biggest earner
'THIS mine will bring in new revenue, foreign investment and help the whole
area to develop,' said President Jerry Rawlings at the opening in February
of the Iduapriem gold mine in Ghana's western region, marking the latest
development in the industry's continuing expansion.
No sector of Ghana's economy provides such striking evidence of the benefits
of economic reform as the country's thriving gold mines.
Liberalised mining investment laws have attracted Dollars 900m of new
capital and helped to quadruple the country's gold production to 1m ounces a
year since 1986, putting the mineral above cocoa as Ghana's leading export.
Export earnings this year are expected to exceed Dollars 375m, compared with
Dollars 343m last year, and Dollars 304m in 1991. Furthermore, if the
Ministry of Energy and Mines plans are fulfilled, production will double to
2m ounces a year by 1997.
Central to the revival of the sector has been the Minerals and Mining Law of
1986 which brought in a new wages and income policy for mine workers,
coupled with the efforts of the Minerals Commission which liaises with
foreign investors. In the privatisation programme under way the government
hopes to raise Dollars 100m by reducing from 55 per cent to 35 per cent its
stake in the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation (AGC), a joint venture with
Lonhro, the British conglomerate.
Ashanti is one of the richest gold deposits in the world; it accounts for
nearly 80 per cent of Ghana's gold exports. It has a total concession of 256
square kilometres; its deposits are extensive and high-grade. AGC's reserves
average eight grammes a ton, helping to keep production costs within the
lowest 15 per cent in the world.
An independent assessment of Ashanti's existing and proposed operations,
carried out by James Askew Associates of Perth, Australia, has established
proven and probable reserves of 9.1m ounces of gold, or a 10-year mine life.
The International Finance Corporation has helped to syndicate a Dollars 140m
loan, beginning a 10-year investment worth about Dollars 555m to develop
Ashanti.
The Ashanti Mine Expansion Programme (AMEP) is designed to raise its output
to 1m ounces a year by 1996, drawing on the latest techniques in sulphide
mining and metallurgy in order to develop large sulphide deposits adjacent
to some existing deep mine and open pit operations.
Meanwhile the gold deposits of the western region of Ghana are also
attracting investors. The Iduapriem mine, about 300 kilometres west of
Accra, is owned and operated by Ghanaian Australian Goldfields (GAG), a
joint venture between Golden Shamrock Mines (68.95 per cent), the
International Finance Corporation (20 per cent) and the Ghanaian government
(10 per cent).
Golden Shamrock is the Australian group controlled by Mr Oren Benton's
Concorde group, based in Denver, Colorado, which trades 70 per cent of the
world's uranium.
After an initial investment of Dollars 10m by GAG, the International Finance
Corporation connection helped the company to raise a Dollars 55m loan from a
syndicate made up of Swiss Banking Corporation, the Netherlands' ING bank,
the German and Dutch aid finance agencies DEG and FMO, and Ecobank, the West
African regional trade bank. The mine began producing last September and is
producing gold ahead of its target rate of 120,000 ounces a year, worth
about Dollars 46.8m at the mid-July 1993 price of about Dollars 390 an
ounce.
The new open cast mine contains an oxide ore body with about 2 ounces of
gold per bulk ton and GAG expects it to yield about 1m ounces of gold by the
end of this decade. Golden Shamrock hopes to use the GAG as a base for
further mining ventures in Ghana - or elsewhere in West Africa.
A few kilometres from the site is the old Prestea mine, where Gold Fields of
South Africa bought a controlling interest in January - following closely
after another acquisition from the state authorities, the old mine at
Tarkwa, by Newmont of the US. The Prestea mine now run by Gold Fields has
larger (but much deeper) sulphuric ore deposits than Iduapriem, but
under-investment had made the mine uneconomic for many years.
Although gold seems set to retain its leading role, diamond earnings will
pick up, say industry officials. Output from the main producer, Ghana
Consolidated Diamonds Ltd - about 150,000 carats in 1991 - is projected to
rise five-fold over coming year.
Manganese exports remain below the 1974-75 peak of 638,000 tons, but
rehabilitation of the Ghana National Manganese Corporation's mine has
increased production from 159.000 tons in 1983 to 364,000 tons in 1990.
