FT  25 AUG 93 / Arts: The Cenci - Theatre
The brief career of Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822), poet and atheist,
strayed into drama in 1819 with The Cenci, an ungainly tragedy bravely
staged by The Damned Poets Theatre Company at the Lyric Hammersmith Studio.
The Cenci is domestic horror from 1599. The debauched and lubricous Count
Francesco Cenci, quavering on the edge of sanity, tyrannises over his
household. Only his daughter, Beatrice, stands up to him. But when he rapes
her, the rest of the family, egged on by a slippery cleric, Orsino, has
Cenci strangled to death while he sleeps. The murder is discovered by an
emissary from the Vatican with a warrant for Cenci's arrest; instead, he
arrests the family. Beatrice's brother and step-mother confess under
torture, and are sentenced to death.
While Shelley was writing this, his sister was turning out the much more
popular and profound Frankenstein. Instead of modern science fiction,
Shelley looked back to Greek tragedy and to Shakespeare, the unacknowledged
hero of the play. Cenci is murdered while he is sleeping, like Duncan in
Macbeth; and the assassination is set about with strange noises and finished
off with a knocking at the castle gate, again like Macbeth.
Shelley's friends felt the same way; the English Romantic poets reinvented
Shakespeare in their own image. Keats was haunted by the sound of the surf
in King Lear, Coleridge thought he was Hamlet, and managed three plays
himself. But none wrote a play in this obscure-Shakespearean style.
The verbal action is unremitting. Every character comes on impelled to
speak; and, in accordance with Shelley's views on language, everyone here
speaks in metaphors so convoluted that it is hard to grasp the point of each
scene. The melodramatic plot has a dreadful claustrophobia about it. The
actors are bunched and squashed into a small versatile set (Bruce Gallup)
which transports the action from court to prison with a speed Group 4 could
usefully copy.
The acting, under the uncalm direction of Sydnee Blake, responds to the
excesses in Shelley's text. The effects on stage range from pointless
bluster and overdone pauses through to genuinely felt lines, experienced as
they are delivered. Louise Bangay as Beatrice and Craig Pinder as Cenci have
an uneasy time settling into the mutual loathing Shelley scripted for them,
but Bangay manages to find variety in her roles as abused daughter and fiery
avenger. Other highlights are Andrew Hawkins as a limber prelate, and
Stanley Lloyd as a politic cardinal. Elsewhere the acting was too frenetic
and over eager to do the work of Shelley's own energetic verse.
Despite the intractability of Shelley's drama and the excesses of the actors
faced with the daunting task of putting it on stage, this Cenci is worth
seeing. The company should be applauded for its nerve. Shelley was writing,
as Beatrice says, of 'deeds which have no form, sufferings which have no
tongue,' and it is a bold enterprise to try to stage them.
Lyric Hammersmith Studio until September 11 (081 741 8701)
