FT  14 DEC 93 / Business and the Law: Benefits of the Bar's broken monopoly
 -The effects of last week's decision to extend rights of audience in the
High Court to solicitors
It has taken almost 15 years of pressure and wrangling but the Bar's
200-year monopoly on advocacy in the higher courts has finally been broken.
Last week, Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, and England's four most senior
judges approved the Law Society's application for wider rights for
solicitors in private practice in England and Wales. The move will allow
solicitors to represent their clients in court - at present they are
confined to magistrates' court and county court advocacy.
The big City law firms have been quietly getting ready for High Court
advocacy, and the decision marks the start of an intense period of training
to prepare advocates for the challenge. It also puts an end to the
increasingly redundant notion that solicitors are mere general practitioners
and that it is barristers who are the true specialists.
The decision also represents a personal triumph for Lord Mackay. Rights of
audience for solicitors formed the central plank of what he had promised in
1989 would be 'the biggest shake-up of the legal profession this century'.
The shake-up has taken longer than he hoped, but he has survived the
hyperbole and at times intense hostility to his plans from the Bar and
judiciary. Whatever the Bar may say, this one measure will, over time,
change the practice of law in England and Wales irrevocably.
But perhaps those with the biggest cause to celebrate are the clients,
particularly international clients of City law firms, many of whom have
never understood why the person who knows their case backwards has to hand
it over to someone else to present in court.
Mr David Fraser, a litigation partner of Baker &amp; McKenzie, the world's
biggest law firm, says US clients accept the English system (there is an
element of a two-tier system in the US), but there is a resistance to paying
for an outsider to enter the loop at a late stage.
In future clients should benefit from a reduction in the cost of litigating,
and from greater choice and flexibility in the way their cases are handled.
This can only boost London's position as a centre of commercial litigation
and increase the already significant contribution of more than Pounds 400m
which international commercial litigation makes to Britain's invisible
earnings.
Mr John Trotter, a senior litigation partner at City solicitors Lovell White
Durrant, says the cost savings will depend on the nature of the individual
case.
If there remains a need for someone to take the solicitor's traditional role
of back-up and support to counsel, the savings from having a solicitor as
opposed to a barrister doing the advocacy may not be large. The main savings
are likely to come from not having to inform counsel about a case at a late
stage and from avoiding the Bar's 'brief fee' system, he says.
At present barristers' fees for a case are made up of a 'brief fee', a form
of retainer for taking on a case, and a daily fee or 'refresher', for each
day spent in court.
For a commercial trial estimated to last four weeks, the brief fee could be
as much as Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 40,000. If the case settles after two
days, the barrister loses only the daily refresher.
The Bar's justification for this system is that barristers have to be paid
for preparatory work carried out on a case and for the the time blocked out
in their diaries for the possible duration of the case. If a case settles
after two days, the barrister could be left twiddling his thumbs for three
and a half weeks.
Commercial clients will not agree to pay solicitor advocates a brief fee,
says Mr Trotter. The advocacy element of the case will be charged on a time
basis, so that, if the case settles after two days, the client will only pay
for two days. This should produce substantial savings, he says.
The Bar says that using solicitor advocates will be more, rather than less,
expensive. It believes that solicitors' considerably higher overheads will
make it impossible for them to compete on cost.
This is one of the main reason's why the Commercial Bar, in particular, is
not overly concerned by solicitors gaining rights of audience.
Mr Julian Wilson, a litigation partner at City solicitors Herbert Smith,
believes solicitors can compete effectively on cost in spite of higher
overheads.
First, cost savings can be made by removing the duplication of effort in
briefing a barrister. Second, solicitors are now more competitive on price -
the recession has put enormous downward pressure on solicitors' fees, which
the Commercial Bar has been sheltered from.
Most solicitors agree, however, that solicitor advocates will not appear in
the High Court overnight. It will be an evolutionary process, because of the
hoops they must jump through to qualify for a High Court advocacy
certificate.
Solicitors will have to show a degree of 'relevant' advocacy experience. The
big unknown is how the Law Society will interpret the rules about what is
and what is not relevant experience.
At the moment the rules suggest that experience in arbitrations and before
tribunals, applications before a judge in chambers, and experience gained in
the High Court instructing and working with barristers will all count.
The rules also suggest solicitors will have to show experience of formal
advocacy in court. This is likely to mean advocacy in the county court,
where solicitors already have automatic rights of audience. This could
present a problem for City law firms, because they do not do much county
court work.
The irony, says Mr Wilson, is that under the rules as they stand the
high-street solicitors who do the vast bulk of county court advocacy work
and may not want to do High Court advocacy will find it easier to qualify
for a High Court advocacy certificate than solicitors with the most
experience of the High Court.
Mr Wilson hopes that in county court cases, where high-street solicitors
would normally brief a barrister, they will in future refer county court
advocacy work to City law firms.
The resulting increased competition for county court advocacy would benefit
clients by leading to improvements in efficiency and lower prices.
There are plans to set up a commercial county court for central London next
summer with a jurisdiction of Pounds 50,000 - until July 1991, claims above
Pounds 5,000 went to the High Court. The new London commercial county court
would provide a valuable training ground for the City firms.
The firms are under no illusions, however. They know that gaining enough
county court work for their solicitor advocates will be difficult,
particularly if, as Mr Trotter points out, each solicitor has to show
experience of 20-25 court appearances a year for two years to obtain the
certificate.
In spite of these obstacles, the big City firms are determined to train
their solicitors to become advocates to offer clients a modern, all-round
commercial litigation service.
How much High Court advocacy do they expect to do? Mr Wilson would not like
to hazard a guess, but it will be many years before the majority of Herbert
Smith's advocacy requirements can be met in-house, he says.
Mr Trotter is also reluctant to be drawn, but would not be surprised if, in
10 years, Lovells is doing between 30-50 per cent of its own High Court
advocacy.
So it seems there will always be a need for a Commercial Bar, albeit a
slimmed-down one.
The problem for the Bar is that its training ground for the next generation
of barristers appears to be rapidly disappearing. City solicitors doing
county court work and high-street solicitors beginning to compete for Crown
Court advocacy will mean less work for junior barristers to cut their teeth
on.
And if Crown Prosecution Service lawyers get the right to prosecute in Crown
Court trials, there may no longer be enough work for junior barristers to
enable the independent Bar to survive.
