FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (25): Trying to bridge the gap - Scientific
research
ALONG Tian Lin, a kilometre-long stretch of road in West Shanghai, dozens of
newly-built computer shops are taking the plastic wrappings off their signs
and preparing to start business. Managers of the electronics factories along
Tian Lin expect that within months it will be packed with customers, who
will be able to walk away with almost any kind of computer or component they
want.
The Chinese government hopes that many of the goods in streets like Tian Lin
will eventually be Chinese-made. But that will depend on a transformation
taking place in Chinese science and technology - one of the government's
priorities since opening up the economy.
The central questions are how much that transformation will depend on
importing technology, and whether China can develop a vigorous research base
of its own.
Chinese science lost a generation of scientists and technicians during the
Cultural Revolution, when many of the best were sent to work on the fields.
Though many were later reinstated, those who held doctorate degrees from
western universities before the turmoil are now mostly over 70 years old.
The current scale of scientific and technological research is huge: some
5,000 research institutes - generally separate from the universities - which
are directed and funded by the Beijing-based Academy of Science, industry,
regional colleges and the military.
However Professor Zhu Lilan, a polymer chemist who is vice minister of the
State Science and Technology Commission, estimates that Chinese scientific
research, while strong in some subjects, is still a decade behind the
cutting edge of world science. In some areas, such as communications and
nuclear science, China has been able to take advantage of an overlap between
military and civil interests.
But according to western diplomats, 'a shortage of money to buy equipment
has been a handicap in the natural sciences (physics, chemistry, biology),
while the social sciences still look stunted - they don't yet have enough
autonomy (from state ideology)'.
THE technological standards of Chinese-made goods have also been low. The
evidence is visible in any department store: most electrical and electronic
goods are imported. Even those which are Chinese-made often use imported
components where reliability is needed - Chinese refrigerators use Yugoslav
parts.
To bridge the gap, the government has been sending science students abroad
to study - although half do not return, according to the science ministry.
Prof Zhu takes a benevolent view of this: 'The world is becoming more open -
a global village. You cannot say any more who can go where, but it does not
matter for science where scientists work.'
She adds that 'the important thing is to create better conditions here so
that they return'. In western diplomats' eyes, however, 'there is some
debate whether it has been a conscious part of government policy to let them
go because the country has not up to now been able to absorb them'.
China's attempts to improve its science are focusing on areas which might
yield commercial applications. However, researchers' 'lack of understanding
of the market' is a formidable obstacle, admits a ministry official.
One response has been to collaborate with foreign scientific research
institutes, particularly in the US, and with foreign investors, especially
in electronics and telecommunications.
The electronics ministry, which estimates that the sector is now 5 per cent
of industrial output, believes that some Dollars 3bn has been invested in
joint ventures.
To encourage investment, the Chinese government has begun to pay attention
to the question of protection for copyright and intellectual property. IBM,
the computer giant, among many other companies, has cited this as a
considerable concern, although Beijing ministries insist that legal redress
for such theft is possible.
Meanwhile, as China grapples with these problems, there is little doubt of
the thirst for technological products.
Beijing's largest bookstore, in the Wangfujing shopping district, is
evidence alone: one of the fastest-selling technology books is a manual on
Microsoft Windows, the US-designed personal computer software that has won
worldwide popularity. It may, though, be many years before Chinese companies
mount a challenge.
