FT  15 SEP 93 / Business and the Environment: Testing the waters - The
ecological management of Lake Baikal
Lake Baikal, the deepest fresh water lake in the world, is often portrayed
as a symbol of how Soviet industrialisation policies rode rough-shod over
Russia's environment.
Today, it provides a litmus test of whether international co-operation can
help Russia tackle ecological problems as it attempts to build a democratic,
market-based society.
The size of Belgium and still basically unspoilt, Lake Baikal has a unique
ecosystem and contains 20 per cent of the world's reserves of fresh water.
The lake's most visible problem is an eyesore: a vast cellulose and paper
plant built in the 1960s which belches grey smoke through dozens of chimney
stacks and dumps waste water into the lake.
But the old Communist system which could erect this plant in such a location
also spared Lake Baikal from capitalist-style threats to the environment
such as mass tourism and property development.
The damage caused by the plant is limited to a relatively small area. But
with the switch to market principles, tourism and exploitation of timber and
agriculture can only increase, generating new challenges of sustainable
development.
As a result, the lake is threatened not so much by damage caused to it
already, but by what could happen to it unless market forces now being
unleashed in Russia are managed with care.
Although he desperately needs western funds and expertise to prevent further
harm, molecular biologist Mikhail Grachev, head of the Limnological
Institute which studies and makes policy recommendations on Lake Baikal, is
worried by some of the offers of assistance made so far.
His latest concern is the World Bank, which last month sent a first mission
to the area to identify possible projects.
'They are looking for alternative science,' says Grachev. 'They asked for
project ideas and said they would choose which ones they want to fund. Maybe
it is possible to behave this way somewhere else, where there are stone
caves, but in Russia this is impossible.
'If they want to decide which projects are good and which are bad, they must
decide together with established Russian institutions that have studied the
lake for decades.'
Grachev's complaints touch a raw nerve as the World Bank undergoes
soul-searching on what its role should be in the countries it is supposed to
assist. The debate is particularly relevant in the unchartered waters of
Russia, which despite its lack of capitalist experience, has rich scientific
potential, an active ecological movement and expertise on its own problems.
Potential for the abuse of aid and the tensions between the government in
Moscow and the regions are two further reasons for the World Bank to ally
its wealth and expertise with a reliable partner at local level.
'If they give money to someone, probably some people will buy computers,
cars and go to America 20 times. They will get only noise in return,' says
Grachev, of the World Bank's search for 'independent' Russian experts.
Although funded by the state, his institute has accumulated unrivalled
knowledge of the lake and has been at the forefront of efforts to protect
it.
By making more judicious use of local experts, he says, the World Bank could
make aid funds go further. Less money would be spent on consultants who fly
in and out of the country on expensive flights. It would avoid the
duplication of efforts which is plagueing most spheres of aid to Russia. It
would also support local people, including Russian scientists who face
severe cuts in funding by the state.
As an example of potential waste, Grachev said the World Bank had told him
it had a Dollars 600,000 (Pounds 387,000) Japanese grant for a feasibility
study on developing ecological tourism in the Lake Baikal area. Not only was
this a vast sum compared with the annual budget of his institute, but
Germany has already begun funding studies on the same subject.
Andrew Bond, a member of the World Bank mission, acknowledges that there is
a 'great deal' of information already available at local level. But, he
says, 'the transfer and collation of knowledge, and who the decision-makers
are is not quite clear'. He adds that the Russians need help in developing
environmental management skills to prevent a recurrence of problems such as
the cellulose and paper plant.
'Environmental management has been undervalued, not only by the general
public but by many environmentalists. This is because it is much easier to
latch on to a problem and feel comfortable with having solved that
particular problem.'
It is true that Grachev says one of his first priorities is for western
experts to survey the paper plant's assets and come up with suggestions on
how to convert it to alternative uses or close it down altogether. But apart
from money to restructure the plant, Grachev acknowledges the need for
intellectual help, particularly in the field of law and economics.
Legislation currently being piloted through parliament to protect Lake
Baikal is a pre-condition for the lake to be declared a world heritage site
by Unesco, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation. The law establishes a core zone where no construction can take
place, and requires local factories to present ecological passports.
Grachev is placing his hopes on the present generation of Russian law
students and says they would benefit from exposure to western practice of
environmental law.
In a modest example of successful co-operation so far, Helmut Lieth, a
retired professor of ecology at Osnabruck University, has brought groups of
German ecology students to Lake Baikal to pass their experience on to
Russian students. Thanks to his efforts, the local city of Irkutsk is being
twinned with Leipzig in eastern Germany to help it attract sponsors and
contacts to help its ecological and industrial problems.
Grachev is confident that even the World Bank will come to see things his
way. 'I am patient. They will come back with new ideas.'
