FT  07 JUL 93 / Leading Article: Crime, justice and efficiency
THE WISDOM of the 352 recommendations in yesterday's report from the Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice should be assessed by the extent to which
they will reduce the miscarriages of justice that have discredited Britain's
criminal justice system. Although the scope of the inquiry has rightly been
broadened to address other aspects of public unease, it was launched
following the overturned convictions of the Maguire Seven, the Guildford
Four and the Birmingham Six. Restoring confidence in the criminal justice
system is vital not only in the battle against crime in the UK, but also in
convincing other countries that they can co-operate with the British
authorities in pursuing criminals.
Thus the recommendation that an independent tribunal be set up to review
alleged miscarriages of justice is welcome. So, too, is the loosening of the
restrictions on what may be considered by the Appeal Court in reviewing a
case. These proposals should ensure that discredited convictions can in
future be overturned more speedily than the 16 years taken with the
Birmingham Six.
However, dealing with alleged miscarriages should be the final step in
ensuring that justice is done. More important are measures to reduce the
chances of mistakes in the first place. That means overhauling the process
by which crimes are investigated and convictions obtained. At present, the
police are under pressure to clear up crimes by finding a culprit and
extracting a confession, sometimes with inadequate corroborative evidence.
The string of miscarriages has made juries suspicious of the police and
reluctant to convict on such evidence.
Interrogation techniques
Rectifying this means shifting the emphasis from securing a conviction,
however unsatisfactory. Some of the commission's recommendations will assist
in this. For example, opening up forensic evidence to the defence should
encourage more objective examination of this specialist material, which is
often crucial to a case. Better training for the police in interrogation
techniques would reduce the number of confessions that later turn out to be
groundless. A more rigorous approach to identification of suspects will
ensure that the defence learns about witnesses who have failed to identify
the accused.
However, other recommendations made by the commission are less convincing
and could further reduce public confidence in the system. In particular, the
removal of the right to a jury trial seems ill-judged when there is so much
concern about the criminal justice process. The rationale for the
recommendation is that defendants who opt for trial by jury often end up
pleading guilty and receiving the same sentence that would have been imposed
by the magistrates' court. In some cases, their motive is to delay the day
of reckoning, in others, the mistaken belief that they are more likely to be
acquitted. But such behaviour can be deterred by offering lighter sentences
for early guilty pleas - a form of plea bargaining that the commission
sensibly advocates.
Adversarial approach
Similarly, requiring the defence to disclose its case before trial is an odd
recommendation for a justice system which is based on the adversarial
approach. Under such a system, it is the duty of the prosecution to prove
the guilt of the accused and of the defence to throw doubt upon the
prosecution's case. One option considered was a switch to the inquisitorial
approach used in countries such as France, where judges supervise the
prosecution case and the defence's duty is to co-operate in establishing the
truth. Since the commission rejected switching to an inquisitorial system,
requiring the defence to disclose its case appears to be seeking the best of
both systems - potentially at the expense of the accused.
Indeed, many of the commission's recommendations seem more concerned with
improving the likelihood of securing convictions than with restoring public
confidence. It is certainly the case that locking up genuine criminals is as
important as not locking up those who have been wrongly accused. However, it
is clear that mistrust of the police and the courts is important in reducing
the effectiveness of the system. By becoming more concerned with efficiency
than justice, the commission may have missed an opportunity to improve both.
