FT  08 MAR 93 / Italian PM urged to rethink corruption decrees
ITALY'S President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro last night invited prime minister
Giuliano Amato to reconsider controversial decrees reducing the political
impact of the corruption investigations sweeping the country.
Mr Scalfaro's step, in a formal letter to the prime minister, followed the
resignation of environment minister Carlo Ripa di Meana from the government
in protest over the decrees.
Mr Ripa di Meana, who resigned from the Socialist party last month, is the
fourth minister to quit in less than a month. Mr Amato's finance, health and
justice ministers all left after falling under suspicion.
The judiciary and opposition parties reacted with hostility to the decrees.
Mr Francesco Saverio Borrelli, chief public prosecutor in Milan, where
investigations began, said the decrees would lead to paralysis of the
investigations and make it impossible to discover who was responsible.
The decrees, approved by the cabinet on Friday, would transfer the
investigation of illegal political funding from magistrates to politically
appointed regional prefects. They would make the offence punishable by fines
and a ban from office rather than prison.
The plans attempt to distinguish the widespread practice of illegal funding
from the more 'serious' crimes of demanding and paying bribes, which would
remain criminal offences.
Magistrates in Milan met yesterday to consider the implications of the
decrees, which would absolve many politicians now under scrutiny. Mr
Borrelli later said the views of the five judges leading the investigations
were 'exactly opposed to the sense of the proposals'.
Earlier, Mr Gerardo D'Ambrosio, Milan's deputy public prosecutor, said: 'The
public will find it difficult to accept that those being accused should
decide to let themselves off.'
The national magistrates' association expressed concern about the measures
and the use of decrees to push them through.
The strength of opposition to the government's plans, broadly reflected in
leading newspapers, suggests ministers will face a hard time obtaining the
necessary support for the proposals. They can become law immediately but
must subsequently be backed by parliament.
The measures were designed to minimise the disruption to public life caused
by almost daily disclosures of kickbacks and illegal party funding. They
were strongly defended by Mr Amato and Mr Giovanni Conso, justice minister,
who drafted the decrees.
Both men denied the plans were designed to muzzle the inquiries, which have
led to the arrest of more than 100 politicians, businessmen and party
officials. Mr Conso said the measures, which would make illegal funding no
longer a criminal offence, were a tough response to the problems raised by
the inquiries and not an attempt to duck 'the moral question'.
It was disclosed yesterday that Mr Giovanni Prandini, former minister of
public works, is under investigation.
Rome warns against steel subsidy curbs, Page 2
Observer, Page 15
