FT  03 JUN 93 / OECD Ministerial Meeting: Jobless-rate alert pulls out all
stops
WORDS such as 'serious', 'disturbing' and 'alarming' are strong stuff in the
subfusc world of international economic institutions such as the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
But the OECD's interim report on unemployment, published last night, deploys
all three in an attempt to alert policy makers to the problems posed by
nearly 36m jobless in the industrialised world.
The organisation warns that the 'new and severe deterioration of the
employment performance' of its 24 member-states since the late 1980s is
'serious in its own right'. It brings 'individual hardship, economic loss
and threat to the social and political fabric'.
High unemployment could also trigger wrong policies such as:
Hasty and possibly ill-conceived macro-economic expansion.
Inappropriate reversal of earlier labour-market reforms introduced to help
economies modernise.
Further resort by countries to open or disguised protectionism.
But while it is easy to list the dangers that unemployment brings, the
report makes clear that solving the problem will be extremely difficult.
Present-day unemployment is 'in larger part structural,' the OECD says.
Action will be needed on several fronts - ranging from macro-economic
policy, through education and training to creating the right incentives for
entrepreneurship and ensuring that social policies, intended to help the
weakest in society, do not destroy jobs.
The OECD says the most important macro-economic measure would be for
governments to make big reductions in their structural budget deficits. This
would reduce interest rates and create conditions favourable to higher
consumption and investment.
Countries have to adapt to technological change. The OECD is convinced the
potential of the new information technologies to create jobs has not been
fully realised. Even the most flexible economies will have to brace
themselves to handle 'radically new perceptions and attitudes, and
fundamental changes in the processes of design of production, and of work
organisation'.
It follows from this that the OECD economies must remain open to
international competition while strengthening their capacity to adapt and
the ability of their workers to enhance or change their skills.
The report makes clear that 'low productivity jobs warrant the payment of
only a low wage'. The way for the future, especially in Europe where the
jobless total is expected to rise to nearly 23m next year, lies in
higher-productivity jobs filled with workers with higher skills rather than
in minimum wages or a narrowing of wage differentials.
Low-paid jobs may be useful. They can introduce the young to work and serve
as a 'port of entry' for immigrants to the labour market. 'But the overall
strategy must be that people not become trapped in them and that low-paid
jobs should not become widespread.'
The OECD therefore calls for a balanced policy of greater wage flexibility
'buttressed with a comprehensive policy, which would include education, the
school-to-work transition, training and retraining'.
Countries need a sound and modernised initial education system, better links
between academic and vocational studies and an adult training system adapted
to the needs of both employers and workers.
But education and training will not be sufficient. Active labour-policies
are needed to cut the time people spend on the dole and to make vacancy and
job matches more efficient. Enterprise needs to be encouraged.
'Access to start-up capital and, even more so, to long-term capital during
the early expansion period is very important.'
The Paris-based OECD was one of the first international organisations to
sound the alarm about rising unemployment. It has taken a year to produce a
30-page interim report on the subject. The fact that another year's work is
planned shows how intractable a problem unemployment has become in the
industrialised world.
