FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (10): Socialist showcases - Special economic
zones
CHINA'S long march towards a market economy began in a sleepy border town to
the north of Hong Kong called Shenzhen in Guangdong province.
Along with two other towns in Guangdong and one in neighbouring Fujian
province, Shenzhen has become the showcase for what China's leaders now call
the country's socialist market development.
These 'special economic zones' (SEZs) pioneered many of the reforms in
company management, decentralised economic decision-making and forms of
co-operation with foreign investors that are now commonplace throughout the
developing regions of China. In pursuing these policies, the SEZs recorded
startling high rates of economic growth.
In 1979, Shenzhen - the biggest and most successful of the SEZs which also
include Zhuhai and Shantou in Guangdong, and Xiamen in Fujian - had a
population of 320,000 and was one of the poorest localities on the mainland.
Today it is the richest area in China with a population of 2.2m. Its per
capita income, at more than Yn10,000 (Dollars 1,720), is nearly seven times
the national average of Yn1,540.
Shenzhen has grown at breakneck speed. From 1980 until 1992 its gross
domestic product rose by an annual rate of 46 per cent a year - making
Shenzhen one of the fastest growing micro-economies in the world for which
data exist. During the same period, industrial output expanded at an annual
rate of 61 per cent, and exports by 63 per cent a year.
Mr Chen Biao, deputy director of Shenzhen's Planning Bureau, says: 'We have
a planned economy, but we have grown very fast. We call it 'Shenzhen-style
speed'. (With output growing) at 40 per cent a year, we are quite happy.
'Our target is to turn Shenzhen into an export-oriented SEZ for advanced
industry and services - a socialist Hong Kong with economic prosperity and
an adequate legal framework, to borrow the words of Deng Xiaoping.'
'Shenzhen-style speed' would not have been possible without the latitude the
Chinese central government gave the SEZs to determine their own economic
development. Of this, the most important was administrative
decentralisation.
Allied to preferential tax and foreign investment policies, decentralisation
of decision-making power allowed the authorities to cut through much red
tape. It also gave full play to the 'pragmatism' and 'flexibility' for which
Chinese officialdom has recently become famed.
This was recently underlined when the financing of the Yantian container
port - one of China's five strategic deep water ports - on the west coast of
Shenzhen, was unveiled. The Yn500m (Dollars 86m) first stage development
will be owned and funded 70:30 by Hong Kong investors and a Shenzhen-owned
company.
As the SEZs, and Shenzhen in particular, developed they have also benefited
from high level political backing from China's military-industrial complex.
Shenzhen has become the window on the world for many of China's so-called
'third line' industries - the military complexes that were transferred to
regions deep in China's heartland in the 1950s and 1960s to protect them
from the then perceived US threat.
Across the Pearl River estuary in Zhuhai, a similar story of rapid economic
growth and big plans for future development can be told.
Both localities are feeling the pinch induced by the central government's
tightening of monetary policy. Idle, half-developed, building sites are,
however, a more common sight in Zhuhai than in Shenzhen.
Of larger significance to the two SEZs - in particular Shenzhen - is that
costs of land and labour have risen in line with the growth in their
respective economies. Both run the risk of pricing themselves out of the
market.
Officials on both sides of the Pearl River are aware of the danger. They are
now talking about the next stage of development, which envisages a growth in
services such as banking and finance, and a growth in high-technology and
less labour-intensive industry.
Shenzhen has an ambitious plan to re-orient its economy. The city's planners
want to turn Shenzhen into China's main export and foreign exchange earnings
centre and a base for advanced technology, banking and finance. To date,
however, there is little sign that foreign investors view either Shenzhen or
Zhuhai as places to locate high-tech industries - most foreign investment is
directed at infrastructure projects, and assembly rather than original
manufacturing or research and development.
