FT  03 MAR 93 / Prescription charges to increase by 13%
PRESCRIPTION charges are to rise by 13 per cent to Pounds 4.25 next month,
the government announced yesterday. The rise of 50p gave rise to protests
and warnings that it would force many patients to do without treatment.
Pre-prescription payment certificates and other charges will also rise by 13
per cent. The charge towards dental treatment will rise from 75 per cent to
80 per cent.
Details of the rises, expected to raise an extra Pounds 278m for the NHS,
were announced by Dr Brian Mawhinney, the health minister, in a Commons
written reply. Under the changes, needy and elderly people and those who
receive free prescriptions on medical grounds will remain exempt.
The value of optical vouchers for spectacles, available to children and
people on low incomes, will be raised by 2.75 per cent.
Dr Mawhinney said 80 per cent of prescribed items were dispensed free, more
than at any time since prescription charges were reintroduced in 1968.
He claimed that the new charges were still significantly less than the
average total cost of a single prescription item.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, accused Mrs Virginia Bottomley,
the health secretary, of 'caving in' to the Treasury. He said: 'This is a
government that is prepared to tax the sick and not the rich.'
The British Medical Association said the sick were being used to 'bolster
the severe underfunding of the NHS'. Real growth in NHS funding for this
year stood at less than 1 per cent. It added: 'We would like to see a fairer
system which avoids deterring patients from seeking the necessary medical
treatment.'
The Royal College of Nursing said the rise was 'another hurdle to health
care for many thousands of families hit by recession and unemployment'.
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society warned that more and more patients would be
unable to afford the medicines prescribed for them.
The BMA is telling its members to seek local-level recognition in trust
hospitals in readiness for an expected shift from national bargaining on
doctors' conditions of service.
By next year almost all hospitals and community health services will have
become locally managed trusts which can seek to negotiate changes in terms
now negotiated nationally.
