FT  18 JAN 93 / Leading Article: Social justice
THE Labour party's Commission on Social Justice meets for the first time
today, to begin its ambitious work of devising policies for a fairer and
more just society. The commission has been compared to the Beveridge
Committee whose ground-breaking report 50 years ago provided a blueprint for
the postwar welfare state. Similarly, radical thinking is needed in the
1990s, with increasing numbers dependent on social security benefits and
equality of opportunity a sham for many.
The commission's chairman, Sir Gordon Borrie, has a remit to explore much
more than taxation and social security. But resolving Labour's difficulties
over tax and benefits is the most important task facing the commission.
At the last election, the centrepiece of Labour's programme was a commitment
to raise the state pension by Pounds 5 a week and child benefit to Pounds
9.95 a week. Welcome though these increases would have been to the least
well-off, they hardly represented the promised land. Yet because they had to
be paid to all pensioners and families, the cost was Pounds 3.5bn - needing
tax increases the electorate was not prepared to endorse. The lesson is that
benefits paid to everyone are ineffective in tackling poverty. They cannot
be high enough to meet real need without unacceptable taxation levels.
Universal benefits are also inefficient - too much money goes to those who
have no need of it. Fifty years ago, paying benefits to all pensioners and
families was a good way of targeting poverty. Today, it is no longer a
struggle for most parents to feed and clothe their children. And while many
pensioners depend on benefits, others have substantial income from
occupational pensions. Money going to affluent families and woopies
(well-off old people) could be better spent on those who struggle to make
ends meet.
Sir Gordon's commission must convince Labour that providing sufficient help
for those with the greatest need cannot be done with universal benefits.
Instead, means-testing must be used to target resources on pensioners with
inadequate occupational pensions, one-parent families and families with
low-paid bread-winners. Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, appeared to
pre-empt such a conclusion at the launch of the commission by his support
for retaining the state pension and child benefit on a universal basis. Sir
Gordon should not be inhibited by this declaration, but instead should see
it as an indicator of the challenge his commission faces in changing
Labour's thinking.
One important step in winning acceptance for greater targeting will be to
address the justified fears of those who oppose more means-testing. In
particular, new ideas are needed to increase the take-up of means-tested
benefits - such as using computerised income tax records to target payments
to those in need.
Ways must also be found to preserve incentives to work and save, since the
withdrawal of benefits as income rises interacts with the tax system to
leave many individuals scarcely better-off than before. To ease this poverty
trap, the rate at which benefits are withdrawn as income rises needs to be
reduced. The present rules which penalise pensioners with capital must also
be changed if means-testing pensions is not to be a powerful disincentive to
save for retirement.
Breaking away from universal benefits is, of course, only part of the agenda
for social justice. The commission intends to investigate the underlying
factors behind poverty, including inequalities in health and education. And
it plans to probe the 'middle-class welfare state' which provides expensive
tax subsidies for those well-enough off to own a home. In all this, however,
the answer will be more means-testing, not less. Since the electorate is
unlikely to vote for higher taxes, more benefits for the have-nots must mean
less for the haves.
Unless scarce resources are targeted on real need, Labour's aim of creating
a more just society will remain illusory. The commission should think
radically and Mr Smith should listen hard.
