FT  07 AUG 93 / Cutting drugs bill 'hits the wrong target'
THE prices of prescription drugs are rising less quickly than other costs in
the National Health Service, the Association of British Pharmaceutical
Industries said yesterday.
The pharmaceutical industry is opposing attempts by the government to reduce
the NHS's annual drugs bill - now about Pounds 2.3bn in England alone - by
measures including extending the limited list which restricts certain drugs
that doctors can prescribe.
Dr John Griffin, association director, yesterday accused the government of
'hitting the wrong target' by its efforts to cut prescribing costs.
'How can the government justify further cutbacks on medicines when other
costs in the NHS are so much greater?' he said. 'They should be supporting
better public health by increasing use of medicines rather than waiting for
patients to end up as expensive hospital cases.'
Dr Griffin, presenting the association's annual report, said drug-price
inflation was 2.5 per cent last year, compared with 8.5 per cent in the rest
of the NHS.
Drug prices have fallen by 15 per cent in real terms over the past 10 years,
the association said. Total spending on drugs remained less than 10 per cent
of the total NHS bill.
The list is intended to cut costs, but, Dr Griffin said, it 'would mean
British patients getting older, cheaper medicines rather than the best and
would delay or deter the search for (new) medicines'.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, has taken a strong stand on the
need to control drug costs. She has said she cannot justify forcing NHS
employees to accept pay increases limited to 1.5 per cent while the drugs
bill is rising by many times that amount.
The Department of Health is one of the Whitehall departments being surveyed
for savings under the government's review of public spending.
The association also produced the results of a survey of general
practitioners yesterday that showed 72 per cent of respondents wanted the
government to withdraw the limited list of drugs.
Some 75 per cent of GPs thought the list would affect drugs research - new
treatments might find it difficult to join the limited list.
The survey also found that 49 per cent of MPs, including 20 per cent of
Conservative MPs, wanted the government to withdraw the limited list.
The association claims that research in the British pharmaceuticals industry
could be put at risk by the government's policies on prescribing. Its annual
report points out that one fifth of all investment in research and
development in Britain - Pounds 4m a day - is spent by pharmaceuticals
companies.
Dr Griffin called on the government to recognise that its Health of the
Nation programme to improve overall health standards would need increased
resources.
