FT  16 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Kantor seeks new rules in free market game
WHEN he cancelled this week's talks with the EC, Mr Mickey Kantor, the US
trade representative, was saying that the rules of the game must change.
His message was that his patience for the squabbling and last minute bandage
'solutions' which he believes have produced little gain for American
companies in the past was running out.
Senator John Rockefeller, a Democrat from West Virginia, summed up the US
mood on Capitol Hill last week when he said: 'Our policy has been that we
are for free trade, that we are for improved market access and a Uruguay
Round, while our strategy has been, in any given crisis, to do the minimum
necessary to avoid some kind of congressional action. Neither that policy or
strategy has accomplished much.
'Marathon trade negotiations are now well into their seventh year. Our trade
deficits have begun to rise again. Numerous bilateral problems, particularly
with Europe, seem permanently on the table.'
Mr Kantor has said much the same, though more diplomatically, since taking
office.
Mr Kantor has repeatedly stated his aim: 'Comparably open markets.' The
'comparable' can be defined unilaterally by the US through sanctions or
through real negotiation. He has also clearly defined his key role as the
enforcer of US trade laws. The 1988 Trade Act required the administration to
report on the extent to which foreign governments discriminated against US
products and services in government procurement, and to act appropriately to
remove the discrimination.
In 1991 Mrs Carla Hills, then the US trade representative, said France,
Germany and Italy had discriminated against foreign suppliers of heavy
electrical equipment or telecommunications equipment. Consultations were
requested and Mrs Hills vowed that, if US concerns were not resolved within
60 days, the president would implement sanctions to take effect by January
1993.
Two months after that deadline, Mr Kantor is prepared to act. He would also
'be pleased to sit down with the EC,' he said.
Meanwhile, he has been taking comments from US companies, most of which
support the initial sanctions. There could be a second tranche of if the EC
retaliates - a move Mr Kantor said he does not expect.
Most US companies do not recommend the US withdraw from the Gatt procurement
code, a step Mr Kantor is considering. Many believe the US should bring a
complaint to Gatt on the grounds the EC utilities directive fails to provide
national treatment for US companies.
The EC can be pardoned for its 'surprise' at Mr Kantor's impatience. For
four years it dealt with a trade representative who believed it to be 'a
failure' if sanctions went into effect. Mr Kantor has seen the results of
past US accommodation. He has not liked what he sees.
