FT  11 DEC 93 / International Company News: New Paramount bids expected
Preparations were under way yesterday for a new round of bidding in the
Dollars 10bn takeover battle for Paramount Communications following a
Delaware supreme court ruling which was hailed by US shareholder rights
groups. Lawyers said the decision could mark a significant shift in legal
mood.
The court ruled on Thursday that the board of film and publishing group
Paramount had to consider a hostile Dollars 10bn bid from QVC Network, a
television shopping channel headed by Mr Barry Diller, on an equal footing
to a friendly Dollars 9.5bn bid from Viacom, a cable television company.
The court, upholding the judgment of the Delaware chancery court, threw out
various Paramount defensive barriers frustrating the QVC bid. It also
criticised the Paramount board's failure to evaluate seriously the QVC
offer.
The board of Paramount is to meet on Monday to draw up guidelines for what
will amount to an auction of the business.
Wall Street is expecting fresh bids from both QVC, whose offer is currently
worth about Dollars 85 for each Paramount share, and Viacom, with an offer
worth around Dollars 80 a share.
However, analysts said the current bids were already extremely high relative
to Paramount's profits outlook, and future offers might not top Dollars 90
to Dollars 95 a share.
On Wall Street, Paramount shares slipped Dollars  1/8 to close at Dollars 81
1/4 yesterday.
Mr Ralph Whitworth, president of United Shareholders Association, a
shareholder rights group, hailed the Delaware court's ruling as 'very
positive'.
Mr Whitworth was referring to the judge's remarks that 'the market should
determine what is in the best interests of shareholders'.
QVC's lawyers played down the legal implications of the ruling, arguing that
it simply reinforced existing Delaware law. Paramount, however, argued that
the verdict 'expanded' the law.
The judgments of the Delaware courts play a central role in US corporate law
because most large companies are incorporated in the state.
Some independent legal authorities said that while the judgment did not
necessarily change the substance of Delaware law, at the very least it
marked a significant clarification of the takeover rules. They said it
spelled out more forcibly the circumstances in which directors were obliged
to seek the highest auction price for their shareholders.
The lawyers said the importance of the case could lie in a perception that
the mood of the court had shifted towards greater scrutiny of directors'
actions and support for shareholder rights.
'This thing is clear,' said Mr Leo Herzel of the Chicago law firm Mayer,
Brown and Platt. 'The Delaware courts are going to be much tougher on boards
of directors.'
Mr Herzel attributed the shift in mood to the growth of institutional
shareholder power in recent years, and to a succession of financial
scandals, notably the collapse of several savings and loans organisations in
the late 1980s.
Since the landmark Revlon case in the mid-1980s, the Delaware courts have
required boards of directors to auction off their companies for the best
price when it is inevitable that the company will be sold.
However, in 1989, in a move seen as a blow to shareholder rights, the court
allowed publishing group Time to reject an attractively-priced bid from
Paramount Communications in favour of a long-planned merger with Warner
Brothers, which Time said offered better long-term potential.
On that occasion, the court ruled that boards were not obliged to abandon a
careful corporate plan for short-term shareholder profits 'unless there is
clearly no basis to sustain the corporate strategy'.
On Thursday, the court rejected Paramount's argument that its case
paralleled that of Time. It said Paramount was obliged to seek the 'best
value' for shareholders because the deal with Viacom involved a change of
control in the company, since the majority of voting shares in the combined
group would be held by Mr Sumner Redstone, the chairman of Viacom.
