FT  09 AUG 93 / Dark motives seen in Hanoi's power policy
FOREIGN investors in Vietnam and their domestic counterparts are becoming
increasingly frustrated with the country's power supply.
In Saigon, the former South Vietnamese capital and the focus of foreign
investment in the country, frequent brownouts mean factories and many
offices have invested in expensive generators to keep equipment running.
As the Vietnamese economy continues to grow, the demand for electricity
outstrips the ability of the system to provide it. Officials in the ministry
of energy say demand in the south is at least 20 per cent above capacity,
and the gap is likely to widen over the next few years.
Economic development is concentrated in the south of the country, while most
of the country's electric power is generated in the north. Some foreign
observers suggest this is aimed at keeping the south in thrall to the north.
A dam and hydroelectric plant in northern Vietnam has worsened the
imbalance. The dam, which was started as a Soviet aid project and which will
produce 8.5bn kilowatt hours a year when the final turbine is switched on
later this year, will more than meet demand for power in the north. Yet
Hanoi has plans for a second dam and power plant up river, at a cost of up
to Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.6bn).
The government is expected to apply for a project loan from either the World
Bank or the Asian Development Bank. However, as this type of centralised
project has fallen out of favour with the institutions, Hanoi may have to
look elsewhere to raise the money.
The government is already committed to finding at least Dollars 550m for the
construction of a 1,500km transmission cable from northern Vietnam to the
south. It is claimed this will balance supply in the two halves of the
country, and cut the level of power lost in transmission.
However, the line will not be completed for at least another year.
The energy ministry has a long-term development plan to increase generating
capacity to 25bn kilowatt hours by the year 2005, from 10bn kilowatt hours
this year.
According to Mr Nguyen Tien Hai, a director at the ministry, growth levels
can cope with the increased demand in the short term, but after 1996 the gap
between supply and demand could widen rapidly as rural industries and small
businesses are set up.
