FT  26 JUN 93 / Calling Dr Dalek - your patient is waiting: A revolution in
surgery where robots are taking an increased role in the operating theatre
YOU ARE about to have the anaesthetic before an operation to remove a brain
tumour. Would you feel happier knowing that the most delicate part of the
procedure was to be carried out by the gently trembling hand of the world's
most skilful surgeon - or by a rock-steady robot? That question will soon be
more than a fantasy because surgery is in the early stages of a technical
revolution. The first step has been the spread of 'keyhole' operations over
the past five years. Instead of cutting open the patient, the surgeon uses
instruments guided by telescope through tiny incisions. Soon, it will be
possible to work by remote control on patients thousands of miles away,
using a combination of telecommunications and virtual reality.
The most striking sign of change, though, is the way surgeons are starting
to welcome robotic assistants into their operating theatres. Within the past
few months, robots have helped to carry out hip replacements in California,
prostate operations in London and brain surgery in Grenoble, France. Later
this year, gall bladder removal, hernia repair and a variety of other
abdominal operations will be added to the list of robotic accomplishments.
Despite this, even the most enthusiastic surgeons say it is likely to be
several years before they would consider leaving a robot to operate on its
own.
The late Hap Paul, chief inventor of California's Robodoc, cautioned: 'We
have to move very slowly and carefully because one false move by a surgical
robot - and this whole technology is set back by many years.' Robodoc is the
world's largest and best-financed project in medical robotics. Since
November, 10 patients at Sutter general hospital in Sacramento have had hip
replacements with the aid of Robodoc, a 250 lb automaton programmed to carve
the cavity for an implant in the thigh bone.
Although Paul died two months ago (at only 44), Integrated Surgical Systems,
the company he founded with financial and scientific backing from IBM, is
forging ahead. It is waiting for approval from the Food and Drug
Administration to carry out a clinical trial of Robodoc with 300 patients in
three US hospitals.
Why should a patient trust a robotic tool rather than the skilled hands of a
human specialist? The most important reason is that an electronic arm is
capable of precision well beyond that of the steadiest and best-trained
surgeon. ISS hopes to prove this through its trial, in which patients will
be allocated at random into one group treated by Robodoc and another
receiving conventional hip replacements.
Surgical robots promise more than improvements in existing procedures, says
Patrick Finlay, managing director of Armstrong Projects, a fledgling UK
medical robotics company based at Beaconsfield near London. 'The reduced
collateral damage and greater precision of the robot will make it possible
to do operations that would otherwise be too risky to contemplate. For
example, a tumour very close to the optic nerve can be tackled without
making the patient blind.'
Several different types of surgical robot are under development around the
world. Robodoc is an 'active' robot that actually cuts human tissue.
'Orthopaedic work is an attractive application because the robot is working
on hard tissue that doesn't move if you prod it,' notes Brian Davies, an
engineer specialising in medical robotics at Imperial College, London.
Most operations, however, involve cutting soft tissues - a task that is more
delicate than carving bone. So far, only 'passive' robots have been used for
this type of surgery. They may move instruments inside the patient, under
the surgeon's direction, but they do not yet wield a scalpel or laser beam.
An example is Laparobot, which Armstrong Projects is developing with Mark
Ornstein, a surgeon at the London Clinic. Laparobot will give someone
carrying out keyhole surgery the impression of 'walking around' inside the
patient's body, using tele-presence techniques. A keyhole surgeon views the
operating site with a miniature video camera at the end of a thin optical
tube, inserted into the body through a puncture hole (typically, in the
tummy button). This instrument, called a laparoscope, projects the scene on
to a TV screen above the patient.
Normally, an assistant has to hold the laparoscope and move it when the
surgeon needs a different view. But Laparobot itself senses the position of
the surgeon's head and moves the image accordingly. If the surgeon pushes a
foot button and moves his head to the left, the robot will change the view
inside the patient's body. For this year's initial trials at the London
Clinic, Laparobot will work with an existing TV monitor - but the next stage
will be for the surgeon to wear a helmet-mounted display which will give the
impression of being immersed in the operating environment. As he looks
around, the scene will change as though he were actually inside the
abdominal cavity.
Further in the future lies the prospect of linking the surgeon's finger
movements to the control of micro-instruments within the body. 'Laparobot
will make the surgery more efficient - less stressful for the surgeon,
faster and more accurate, and with less risk of damage to the patient,' says
Ornstein.
Armstrong is also working with Professor David Thomas, of London's National
Hospital for Neurology, to develop Neurobot, a system for carrying out brain
surgery. By the end of this year, they hope to have demonstrated an
'image-guided robot' that will help the surgeon position his instruments at
the correct point in the brain to perform the operation. The next stage will
be for Neurobot itself to insert the instruments.
A surgical robot is given as much prior information as possible about
relevant parts of the patient's body - usually, from a CT or MRI scan. Its
computer converts this into a digital model of the patient. Although the
surgeon works out in advance the path of the operation, based on the
computer model, the system must be flexible enough to respond to unexpected
events.
Neurobot, for example, will have a sensor inside the patient's head. If it
detects the presence of an unexpected blood vessel, it will prompt the
surgeon for advice. Its software might propose a modified route, taking the
new information into account, but the robot will not go ahead until the
surgeon has signalled his approval.
Finlay says a good indicator of progress in surgical robotics will be the
increasing amount of freedom given to the robot. 'Although the surgeon will
never cease to participate, it is realistic to envisage a situation similar
to the relationship between an airliner captain and his autopilot, in which
the human provides a supervisory and monitoring role and is available to
take over the critical manoeuvres,' he says.
The consultant need not be in the operating theatre with the patient. In
tele-surgery projects under way in the US and France, an experienced surgeon
uses a video link to supervise a junior doctor in a hospital hundreds of
miles away. The surgeon could equally well supervise a distant robot,
although local medical and nursing staff would still have to be present in
case the system crashed.
Everyone involved in medical robotics is obsessed with safety. Yet, as
Davies points out, there are no agreed safety standards for robots operating
on people, whereas regulations require industrial robots to work in metal
cages. (The fact that two workers in Japan have been killed by factory
robots going out of control shows the need for such rules).
'There are two views on safety,' says Davies. 'One is that it's acceptable
to start out with an industrial robot provided you put in a top-level
software system to bring the thing to a halt in the event of some failure.
But, in my view, that's not safe enough. I think you need to re-develop the
robot from the basic servo level upwards, building in safety at every
level.'
That means giving the surgical robot the equivalent of a metal cage, with
duplicated software and hardware constraints to prevent it moving beyond
pre-defined limits. And it must move slowly enough for the supervising
surgeon's hand to hit the stop button in time to avoid damage if all the
safety systems fail. Demonstrating safety is not enough, though. Growing
concerns about the financial costs of medical care are forcing both public
health authorities and private hospitals to demand evidence that new
technology will deliver benefits that outweigh its expense.
Drugs have long had to justify their effectiveness in large-scale clinical
trials but, until now, new surgical procedures and medical equipment have
been introduced with remarkably little systematic assessment. A report on
medical research earlier this year by the UK government's Advisory Council
on Science and Technology (Acost) pointed out: 'With the exception of
pharmaceuticals, demands for evaluation have been questioned because it
'stands to reason' that the new techniques will be 'better'.'
Peter Doyle, research director of ICI and chairman of Acost's medical
research committee, gives keyhole surgery as an example of a procedure that
has been introduced 'haphazardly' without proper evaluation. The report says
the National Health Service should require all new medical devices to be
assessed under controlled conditions, and their cost effectiveness measured.
Miles Irving, professor of surgery at Manchester University's Hope Hospital,
says that such assessment is all the more necessary 'because surgeons face
strong consumer pressure to introduce new procedures before they have been
properly evaluated.'
Hap Paul felt that pressure when he was looking for sites to test Robodoc.
'Tertiary care centres in the US - the big university hospitals - see this
as an advance that will help them attract patients,' he said. 'So, we have
to be very careful in choosing our sites, to make sure it's not just a
publicity stunt for them.'
Indeed, says John Hutton, a health economist at York University, US
experience shows that patients regard hi-tech equipment in itself as an
indicator of quality, whether or not there is any clinical evidence to prove
its superiority. Therefore, hospitals compete by buying more and more flashy
machines - and their charges shoot up far faster than inflation. The
introduction of an internal market in the NHS is likely to lead to similar
competitive pressures in the UK.
ISS believes its clinical trial will enable orthopaedic hospitals to justify
buying a Dollars 750,000 Robodoc, doing 400 hip replacements a year, on the
basis that implants from robotic operations last longer than those inserted
manually and so save money in the long run. But the recent history of
medical research and technology, from antibiotics to diagnostic scanners,
shows that while each development can be justified in isolation as being
cost-effective, the overall result is to add substantially to the financial
burden of health care by creating new demand from patients and adding to the
number of elderly people in the population.
Two decades from now, only second-class patients will choose to have a
purely manual operation. But, in contrast to labour-saving robots in a car
factory, surgical robots can only make the process more expensive.
Enthusiastic medical technologists can answer any question except one: how
will we pay for it?
