FT  20 OCT 93 / No tragedy despite dramatics: Tony Jackson explains why,
behind the bribery scandals and strikes, Italian industry is doing rather
well
Italian industry is bothered about its image these days, and with good
reason. The casual visitor need only switch on the TV or pick up a newspaper
to be confronted by a public relations disaster of the first magnitude: yet
more executive arrests and suicides, yet more Mafia killings, yet more
strikes.
Oddly enough, though, Italian industry is in some ways doing rather well.
This year, Italy is headed for its first trade surplus since the war. In the
first six months, exports were up nearly 20 per cent. The severe domestic
recession means profits are down; but the Italian stock market - for what it
is worth - has been one of Europe's star performers this year.
Part of the paradox is easily explained. Amid the general mayhem of the
corruption scandal which has enveloped business and government, Italian
employers have enjoyed one remarkable piece of luck. For decades, they had
been obliged to raise wage rates in line with inflation - the so-called
scala mobile system. In July of last year, the scala mobile was abolished.
Two months later, Italy left the European exchange rate mechanism and the
lira was devalued by more than 20 per cent.
But it was Italy's membership of the ERM which had caused the scala mobile
to be abolished in the first place. The lethal combination of rising wages
and a fixed currency gave employers the ammunition to demonstrate that the
old system was unsustainable. But just as that burden was removed, so too
was the currency straitjacket. Italian industry is thus enjoying the best of
both worlds.
Mr Giorgio Garuzzo, chief operations officer of Fiat, says: 'Between 1987
and 1991, the cost of labour in Italy went up by 9-10 per cent a year,
nearly twice the rate of France or Germany. Since the lira was not
devaluing, we lost 20 or 30 percentage points of competitiveness in that
period. So we fought against the scala mobile, and we won. Then devaluation
came, and overnight we were back to the economics of 1987. We had regained
all the ground we'd lost.'
The economic situation is thus in one sense surprisingly benign. As befits a
country whose prime minister, Mr Carlo Ciampi, is a former governor of the
central bank, inflation is running at a mere 4.3 per cent, more than a full
percentage point down from a year ago despite devaluation. In the
state-owned industries, wage rises are running at practically zero. How long
this will all last is another matter. As a senior Italian official remarks:
'The level of competitiveness of Italian goods is absolutely exceptional at
present. This is another way of saying the lira is undervalued.'
But there may be broader reasons for not taking the headlines at face value.
Mr Innocenzo Cipoletta, director general of the employers' federation,
Confindustria, says: 'In a Latin country like Italy, changes are always
dramatic. Whenever you change, you are in crisis.'
And, he argues, Italy has been here before. 'In the 1970s, we had inflation
of 20 per cent, huge balance of payments deficits, an IMF loan, a political
crisis and a dramatic rise in terrorism. Nobody would have given a lira for
our chances.' In the event, of course, the 1980s proved a boom time for
Italian capitalism, for which it is only now paying the price.
This argument is part of a wider thesis, which says the Italian economy has
a persistent habit of lagging behind the rest of Europe and then catching up
in bursts. The catch-up phases, such as the late 1960s and most of the
1980s, are euphoric. The economy is now in one of the corresponding
downswings, characterised by deep gloom and - as Mr Cipoletta puts it - the
conviction that Italy is merely the most advanced of the developing
countries.
At the level of individual industries, the process of lag and catch-up is
neatly illustrated by Fiat. Conventional wisdom says that if Europe has one
carmaker too many, Fiat - with its unproductive plant and lacklustre models
 -could well be it. But Fiat's new plant at Melfi, in the lunar landscape of
Basilicata in southern Italy, is startlingly modern. Its layout is
revolutionary, its level of automation extreme. Its claimed productivity -
79 vehicles per worker per year - is very nearly the highest in the world.
Its remote site was chosen partly because the local workforce had no
previous knowledge of the car industry. The oldest man in the plant, the
works director, is just 35.
Italy is catching up in another sense. For many decades, the economy has
been cursed with an enormous and inefficient state-owned industrial sector.
Great chunks of it, from banking to steel, are now to be privatised. The
process is contentious, since privatisation is a potential weapon against
corruption and therefore resisted by the old guard. But it seems unlikely
that Italy can resist the European privatisation vogue: and in any case, the
hugely indebted Italian state badly needs the cash.
This is not to deny that the private sector has a stiff job ahead of it. For
a start, the corruption scandal - known locally as Tangentopoli ('Bribe
Cities') - has done serious harm, even if some industrialists are inclined
to shrug it off. The damage, says Mr Cipoletta, has been enormous. Or
perhaps not, according to a senior colleague at Confindustria, Mr Rosolino
Orlando. 'Companies weren't involved in Tangentopoli,' Mr Orlando says.
'People were. If you want to buy an Italian machine tool or Italian
textiles, you don't think about Tangentopoli. You don't buy images, you buy
products. You buy on price and service.'
Behind this inconsistency is a resentful feeling among many industrialists
that they were in some sense victims of the political system. The
ambivalence is well expressed by Mr Garuzzo of Fiat, who at one point had a
warrant out for his arrest over Fiat's involvement. 'This is a welcome
process,' he says. 'The process of doing business with the state must be
transparent. If the scandals are the price of righting the situation, the
scandals are welcome. But if the scale of it was not known, its existence
was common knowledge. So perhaps we should clean our laundry less publicly.'
Even without the corruption scandal, the image problem remains. Take, for
instance, labour relations. In recent months there has been a recurrence of
that old Italian bugbear, the rail strike. There has also been a
particularly nasty conflict at a state-owned chemical plant at Crotone, in
Italy's deep south.
Employers in the private sector take a predictably hard line on this. 'We
have to pass through a period of strikes over the next year,' says Mr
Cipoletta of Confindustria. 'If not, you can't change anything. You can't
get rid of 50,000 teachers without causing tension in the educational
system. The rail strike going on at present is a good strike.'
As for the Crotone dispute, employers say, this is a typical instance of
managerial incompetence in state-run industries. For northern managers,
there is a further sub-text: Crotone is in the south, so what else can you
expect?
This is a reminder of yet another persistent problem: the regional tensions
within the Italian state. In the wealthy regions of the industrial north,
there is deep resentment over the cost of propping up the impoverished
south. But it is one thing for northern industrialists to argue - as they do
 -that the south should forget industry and concentrate on tourism and
agriculture. It is another to go along with more extreme talk of separatism,
which from a business viewpoint is a prescription for chaos.
Dr Roberto Tronchetti Provera, vice-chairman of the Lombard employers'
federation, based in Milan, says: 'Separatism would solve nothing. Perhaps
we would pay less taxes, but we need the southern market. Our members are
working not just in the European single market but in the domestic market.
We need rules to allow them to operate properly within it.'
But however formidable the list of problems, the case for optimism remains.
None of the issues is new; the point is that they are all being addressed at
once. The process is both painful and humiliating. But one cannot quite
dismiss Dr Tronchetti Provera when he claims: 'Italian companies will come
out of this period much stronger than before. Not in the near future, but in
the medium term, Italy will be a very interesting area.'
