FT  28 MAY 93 / China on the defensive over Tibet: Beijing's rising
sensitivity to international pressure
THE DALAI LAMA, the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, this week said he had
been 'deeply distressed' over China's use of force to put down
demonstrations in Lhasa, and also over the 'deteriorating situation' there.
But at another level, the exiled leadership in Dharmsala, northern India,
must be deriving some encouragement from the recent turn of events. On few
occasions since the Dalai Lama fled into exile in 1959 after the failure of
an armed rebellion against Chinese rule has the Tibetan issue received such
favourable attention in the west.
Beijing itself is under considerable diplomatic pressure over Tibet and
other human rights issues; and this at a moment when it is particularly
vulnerable to such pressure.
Difficulties China faces persuading the world it is doing its best to
improve the lot of Tibetans were underscored last weekend when a European
Community fact-finding mission ended in recrimination after reports surfaced
alleging that the authorities had detained two Tibetans who had wanted to
make contact.
Chinese denials that the arrest of a Tibetan tour guide and a monk had
anything to do with the presence in the region of the EC mission were not
especially convincing. A foreign ministry spokesman in Beijing accused the
two of engaging in separatist activities.
Riots in the streets of Lhasa followed a day after the EC envoys returned to
Beijing which merely served to deepen impressions that all was not well on
the roof of the world. The EC report on its investigations can hardly avoid
some form of censure, thus multiplying bad news on the human rights front
for China. The Tibet issue is unlikely to go away.
In Beijing, a western official who monitors human rights issues, said that
'unless the Tibetans get some real autonomy, there's not going to be peace.
We can't see light at the end of the tunnel.'
Adding to pressures on China are the issues of its trading status with the
US, and also its attempts to secure nomination for Beijing to stage the 2000
Olympiad.
Both these issues have afforded China's critics in the west additional
leverage on human rights, much to Chinese consternation.
US congressmen have used renewal of China's Most Favoured Nation trading
status as the pretext for a strong push on Tibetan rights. Congresswoman
Nancy Pelosi, introducing a revised bill last month that would attach
conditionality to MFN renewal, said the bill had 'placed more emphasis on
the political situation in Tibet and the Chinese threat to Tibetan culture.'
Among these provisions is one that demands that China cease 'financial and
other incentives to encourage non-Tibetans to relocate in Tibet.' Other
items call on Beijing to adhere to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and to cease religious persecution in China and Tibet.
The fact that references to Tibet in the latest Pelosi bill have been
stiffened by comparison with the 1992 version attests to the success of the
Tibet lobby to push its case, and to attract influential supporters inside
and outside Congress.
Since his 1989 Nobel peace prize award - the same year as the June 4
massacre of pro-democracy activists in Beijing's Tiananmen square - the
Dalai Lama has also become more visible internationally. National leaders
who might have been reluctant to receive him for fear of angering China, now
appear more than willing to risk the diplomatic fallout.
Thus President Bush met the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader last year, and
Mr Clinton, along with Vice-President Al Gore, has done so this year. Mr
Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, received the Dalai Lama earlier
this month in London - a meeting that drew protest from Beijing.
Beijing's options regarding Tibet would seem to be rather limited, since
there is no sign that it might be willing to address the autonomy issue.
Indeed, there has been little progress on that front since Mr Deng Xiaoping,
China's paramount leader, observed in the late 1970s that everything was
negotiable on Tibet except independence or separation.
China's most authoritative recent statement on Tibet came in September last
year with its white paper 'Tibet - Its Ownership and Human Rights
Situation,' which unequivocally re-stated historical claims to the region,
but at the same time held out something of an olive branch to the Dalai Lama
in a form of words employed often in the past.
'So long as the Dalai Lama can give up his divisive stand and admit that
Tibet is an inalienable part of China, the central government is willing to
hold talks at any time with him,' the White Paper, issued by China's State
Council, or 'cabinet,' said.
In the meantime, China is seeking to counter waves of negative publicity by
giving added prominence in its official media to 'positive' developments in
Tibet: thus, recent New China News Agency despatches reported that Tibetan
officers are assuming more responsibility in People's Liberation Army ranks,
Tibetan women are becoming more fashion-conscious and more lamas (religious
figures) are taking the capitalist road by going into business.
It is this latter development - the commercialisation of Tibet - that may
lie behind some of the recent unrest, together with the effect of rising
prices in a region whose incomes have traditionally lagged well behind other
more prosperous areas. Indeed, last Monday's disturbances are said to have
begun as a protest against increases in grain prices, and then to have
developed nationalist overtones.
The economic opening of Tibet has also brought with it something of a
'goldrush' of Chinese merchants who have sought to exploit opportunities in
a frontier area where competition may not be as hot as elsewhere in China.
In the process, some ethnic Chinese in Tibet have become conspicuously
wealthy, fuelling resentment of less well-off Tibetans.
What may prove even more of a threat than Han chauvinism to Tibetan culture
and respect for the spiritual leadership of the Dalai Lama in the long run
is modernism in all its forms. Fabled Lhasa, Shangri-La as it has often been
described, now boasts more than 70 Karaoke bars, and prostitution and
drug-taking is said to be rife.
A western human rights activist was recently quoted as saying after a visit
to Lhasa: 'It's the degradation of society - alcohol, bars, prostitutes.
Tibetans call it a Chinese conspiracy, but it's probably not. Full-blown
economic development is the policy.'
