FT  24 APR 93 / Books: The face behind the distortion - Distraction was the
name of Bacon's game, not shock
THE GILDED GUTTER LIFE OF FRANCIS BACON by Daniel Farson Century Pounds
17.99, 273 pages
IN ONE of his Interviews with Francis Bacon (new edition 1979) David
Sylvester asked him about the recurring image of the Crucifixion in his
painting. The painter said that the Cross was only a convenient 'armature'
for different forms, and denied that it had any religious significance in
his work although the outline treatment, he agreed, was derived from
Cimabue. Bacon saw the whole subject as 'just an act of man's behaviour, a
way of behaviour to another'.
This reply led Sylvester to probe further: why, if that was so, did an aura
of religion hang over several other paintings, such as the famous series of
popes with their origin in the portrait by Velasquez of Innocent X. This
prompted Bacon to make a distinction between being a painter in a period
when the Christian faith was a part of the culture out of which the work
came and being a painter now, when it was not.
'You see (Bacon continued), all art has now become completely a game by
which man distracts himself; and you may say it has always been like that,
but now it's entirely a game. And I think that that is the way things have
changed, and what is fascinating now is that it's going to become much more
difficult for the artist, because he must really deepen the game to be any
good at all'.
What is so shocking in Bacon's work to the spectator - the distortions of
the human face into the blurred grotesquerie of his portraits, the ripping
open of the human body where the innards are repulsively exposed, and the
gestures of suffering transmitted in screaming countenances - is that all of
these were for Bacon simply various ways of 'deepening the game'.
The artist remains neutral, dispassionate, unaffected by these horrors. If
anything he sees an aesthetic beauty in them, just as he loves the tonal
beauty of the reds of the slaughtered carcasses hanging in a butcher's shop.
And now in the recollections of Daniel Farson who, as a drinking pal and
fellow-roisterer over 30 years, knew Bacon well, a similar attitude - of
deepening the game while standing aloof from it - emerges throughout Bacon's
life.
This book of Farson's is not any kind of formal biography, rather an
extended piece of anecdotage, placing Bacon firmly in his natural habitat,
the world of the Soho pubs. It is slight but readable, some of it re-cycled
from Farson's Soho in the Fifties; but the same story told many times is an
endemic feature of Soho society, and the book certainly gives a revealing
and lively view of Bacon as he appeared to his bar-stool chums.
He gravitated to Fitzrovia early on, when he arrived here from Ireland where
he had been brought up by his father, a horse-breeder; or rather by the
latter's groom and stable-lads who indoctrinated him into homosexual sex. In
the frenetic days before the second world world in London, Bacon was a
struggling, penniless, obscure, gay young artist, working briefly in the
rag-trade. What is remarkable is how loyal Bacon remained for the rest of
his long life not to any particular individual (he was ruthless about
ditching ex-friends and ex-dealers) but to the Soho pubs-and-clubs milieu.
Most artists leave their youthful haunts behind them when they become rich
and famous, but not Bacon. He was still to be found at Muriel Belcher's The
Colony Room ('little more than a small and shabby room with a lavatory and a
telephone at the back') or the York Minster ('the French pub' after its
proprietor, Gaston Berlemont) even when his paintings were on sale for
telephone number sums at the Marlborough Gallery, many of them to be snapped
up by the Tate or the Museum of Modern Art in New York. A sprightly
octogenaraian, he died just over a year ago, leaving his entire estate worth
around Pounds 10m to his long-standing boyfriend.
Bacon had a great contempt for money but luckily, from around 1950 onwards,
was never short of it. A few weeks ago I reviewed a biography of Maurice
Chevalier which revealed how he would go to extraordinary lengths to avoid
paying a restaurant bill even after he had become a millionaire. Bacon was
just the opposite. He always paid for the drinks and for the meal afterwards
and became angry with anyone who tried to do so instead.
It was, Farson tells us, the custom for him to say at the end of a heavy
Soho drinking-session, 'let's go ' - at which point four or five of them
would repair across the road to Wheeler's fish restaurant in Old Compton
Street where they would tuck into plates of oysters washed down with
champagne, all paid for by Bacon (eventually). The book contains an
interesting photograph from the 1950s of Bacon at his regular table there,
surrounded by fellow-painters including Lucian Freud and Frank Auerbach, but
the company was not usually quite as distinguished as that.
Bacon's well-known passion for gambling - he was an habitue of casinos in
the South of France - appears as an offshoot of this same uninhibited
attitude to money. Farson follows him abroad to the green baize pastures,
enumerating some of his very large wins and equally large losses. It was all
part of trying to get the maximum kicks from each lifelong minute with no
thought of the consequences.
This attitude extended to his own work. He seems to have had a distaste for
much of that too. Yet he was a tireless worker, making full use of the early
morning from six onwards, capable of painting his way doggedly through some
almighty hangovers; but, having spent weeks finishing something, he would
frequently destroy it because it displeased him. Farson describes how Bacon
once saw in the window of a Bond Street gallery a portrait he had done of a
friend who had stolen it from his studio. He wrote out a huge cheque for it,
and then stamped it to extinction on the pavement outside.
I once met him and can vouch for the captivatingly ebullient, fearlessly
spontaneous manner of which Farson gives many examples. Farson says that
Bacon rarely talked about Ireland and his background but strangely enough on
this occasion he did. He tried to define the Irish attitude to sex, which he
described as being in a large measure 'the immorality of the mouth' by which
I understood him to mean talking about it rather than actually doing it.
That, one gathers from Farson, was not something of which Bacon himself was
guilty.
