FT  19 JUN 93 / UN set to seize Somali warlord
UNITED NATIONS forces in Somalia were preparing yesterday to try to seize
the defiant warlord, General Mohammed Farah Aideed, in the wake of the
military blitz on his militia on Thursday.
But the streets of Mogadishu were quiet and UN officials appeared to
indicate a low-key approach to Gen Aideed after the turmoil and killings of
the past fortnight.
With his military stronghold destroyed in the UN action, Gen Aideed was
reported to be hiding with a group of his most loyal followers in a 'safe
house' in the capital.
UN military sources said they would move in and arrest him before long 'in a
way that will minimise civilian casualties'.
US Army Lt Col Kevin McGovern said that detaining Gen Aideed had not been a
goal of the air and ground assaults aimed at crippling his capability to
wage war against UN peacekeepers.
'If we got him, fine. If we didn't, fine,' Col McGovern said. 'We're not out
to make him a martyr.'
UN special envoy Admiral Jonathan Howe said Thursday's operation, which
included a 12-hour ground assault, was 'totally successful' despite
casualties on both sides.
Five UN soldiers - four Moroccans and a Pakistani - were killed and 46
wounded. Hospitals said more than 60 Somali civilians were killed and more
than 100 injured.
At his White House press conference on Thursday night, President Clinton
declared the military action over. It was to undermine Gen Aideed's ability
to 'wreak military havoc' in Mogadishu and to show that the killing of 23
Pakistani UN troops on June 5 would not go unpunished.
During Thursday's fighting, a missile fired by a US attack helicopter hit
the compound of a French aid agency, International Action Against Famine,
killing a Somali worker and wounding seven.
Mr Gregoire Goodstein, the agency's logistical co-ordinator in Somalia,
questioned the wisdom of the UN assault. 'I don't think it was necessary,'
he said. 'I don't think they needed anything that big. It doesn't solve
anything.'
In an ambush yesterday a French television sound technician was killed by
gunmen. Jean-Claude Jumel, 50, had just arrived with other members of a TF1
television crew at Mogadishu airport and was heading into the city when
their vehicle was ambushed.
