FT  24 JUN 93 / Money Markets: Expectations lower
SPECULATION on the UK money market that the government might soon reduce
interest rates eased yesterday, after the Bundesbank made only a minimal cut
in its repo rate.
Another factor was what some participants in the money market interpreted as
signals by the Bank of England through its normal dealing operations that
imminent monetary loosening is unlikely.
There were other signs that the move earlier in the week towards lower
interest rates across Europe was running out
of steam. The Bank of Spain cut one of its money-market dealing rates by
about 25 basis points to below Tuesday's average of 11.55 per cent, but kept
its key intervention rate at 11.25 per cent.
The cut in the Bundesbank's repo rate from 7.6 per cent to 7.59 per cent
caused little excitement. It was seen as a minimalist response to calls for
lower official rates to offset growing signs of economic decline across
Europe.
The German central bank said unsatisfactorily high inflation meant it must
remain cautious in its monetary policy to avoid triggering a rise in capital
market interest rates.
Even so, a cut in the bank's official discount and Lombard rates is still
considered likely over the next few weeks. One theory is that the Bundesbank
had been almost forced to lower the repo rate to provide the German money
market with sufficient funds to cover the June reserve requirement for
commercial banks.
In Britain many money market participants think bank base rates are unlikely
to come down soon. That was illustrated by a slight rise in the three-month
interbank rate, quoted last night at about 5 7/8 per cent, up about  1/16
percentage point.
On the futures market, the September sterling contract mirrored this trend.
It shed 5 basis points to 94.16. The December contract closed at 94.28, down
3 basis points.
Some dealers interpreted the relatively large amounts of late assistance by
the Bank yesterday and Tuesday as a sign that the Bank was casting doubt on
theories that cuts in base rates might be imminent to help signs of
recovery.
Others felt that the size of the late assistance, which reached Pounds 445m,
was related to technical factors caused by commercial banks' unwilling-ness
to part with bills earlier in the day. Total injection of funds by the Bank
to the money market was Pounds 1.493bn.
