FT  26 JUN 93 / International Company News: Bryson resigns as Eli Lilly
chief
MR VAUGHN Bryson resigned yesterday as chief executive of US pharmaceuticals
group Eli Lilly because of clashes with its board and was replaced by Mr
Randall Tobias, the vice-chairman of American Telephone &amp; Telegraph and head
of its international operations.
Lilly said Mr Bryson, who is 54 and had only been chief executive for 20
months, had decided to retire because of 'differences with the board over
management philosophy.'
A company spokesman declined to elaborate, but Lilly  - best known for
Prozac, the world's top-selling anti-depressant drug  - has been plagued by
problems over the past year, leading to disappointing financial results.
The company's stock rose on yesterday afternoon's news as analysts
speculated that Mr Tobias might be more successful in solving its
difficulties. The shares closed at Dollars 51 1/4 , up Dollars 1 7/8 , in
trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr Tobias, 51, has been an outside director of Lilly since 1986. He will
also take over as chairman of the group from Mr Richard Wood, who retired as
chief executive in 1991 but stayed on as chairman.
Mr Tobias, who was elected vice-chairman of AT&amp;T in 1986, has been with the
telecommunications group throughout his career, apart from two years in the
army.
He has been a long-time close associate of the telecommunications group's
chairman, Mr Robert Allen, who was his first supervisor when he joined AT&amp;T
in 1964. AT&amp;T has yet to decide how to fill his positions.
Mr Tobias has played an important role in AT&amp;T's recent push to become a
much broader communications and computer business and a more important
international presence. He has been chairman of its AT&amp;T international
subsidiary since 1991.
Lilly's recent problems have included new competition for Prozac, its
primary engine of growth; a shutdown at an emergency heart defibrillator
plant when the Food and Drug Administration found production defects; and a
mix-up in regulatory filings over a cardiac catheter. Last October it
reported its first quarterly loss since 1951, when it started to report
results publicly.
