FT  11 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Medeva surges to Pounds 36m following
hectic year
MEDEVA, the rapidly growing pharmaceuticals company, yesterday reported a 47
per cent increase in earnings per share after a hectic year of corporate
activity that saw sales rise 75 per cent.
Pre-tax profits for the 12 months to end-December surged from Pounds 16.7m
to Pounds 36m, on sales of Pounds 144.2m.
Fully diluted earnings per share increased from 8.3p to 12.2p.
The recommended final dividend goes up by 50 per cent to 1.5p, making a
total of 2.25p (1.5p) for the year.
Mr Bernard Taylor, chairman, said Medeva was in a 'transition from an
association of acquired businesses into a much more integrated
(prescription-based) pharmaceutical company.'
Acquisitions and investment meant a net cash position of Pounds 40.7m turned
into net debt of Pounds 34.2m, giving gearing of 47 per cent at the year-end
after generating Pounds 34.2m from operations.
Interest was covered 27 times by operating profit.
Gross margins increased by 10 percentage points to 55 per cent but the tax
rate jumped from 18 per cent to 30 per cent and is heading for 33 per cent
this year.
Mr Taylor said it was difficult to identify exactly the level of organic
growth but that it was in excess of 20 per cent.
This growth was a measure of the quality of the products and the marketing
organisations Medeva has bought with a number of its acquisitions.
'We are obtaining synergies,' said Mr Taylor. 'Not one of our acquisitions
is on the basis that it would be additive.'
The group was continuing to put in place the building blocks for a
significant pharmaceuticals company and would, therefore, be making
acquisitions through the issue of new shares rather than more debt.
Medeva still needed geographical coverage in Germany, Italy and the Benelux
countries and would be looking for new product lines and products that were
nearing the end of their development process.
COMMENT
Medeva's relative under-performance in the last eight months is surprising
for a company doubling profits and lifting earnings by 47 per cent. On
profits forecast at Pounds 50m this year, or 14.7p of earnings, the shares
still trade at only a modest premium to the market. But Medeva is weighed
down by special factors that go beyond membership of an out-of-favour
sector. Firstly, pharmaceuticals investors are unused to such quick-fire
acquisition and remain, frankly, uncertain of the quality of organic growth.
On top of this lingering incredulity is a more traditional fear - that
Medeva will make another big acquisition soon and reduce debt through a
sizeable rights issue. On both counts, now may be the time to reassess.
Underlying growth appears to be reaping benefits in the US - although Mrs
Clinton's health reforms may yet surprise. And investors should remember
that, to date at least, Medeva has deployed its rights proceeds to great
effect, even if the acquisitions have obscured the organic growth.
