FT  08 NOV 93 / Survey of Computers in Finance (8): Nightmare of mismatched
systems - The problems of mergers and technology issues
THE NUMBER of UK building societies is dwindling year by year. Industry
analysts predict there will be fewer than 50 left at the end of the decade.
Although the Leeds Permanent and the National and Provincial building
societies last month called off their attempt to create the biggest-ever
society merger, after discovering a clash of management styles, the merger
aim was only the latest in a steady stream whereby many small-to-middle
ranking societies have joined together or been swallowed by the majors.
In any successful merger, the smooth integration of the two parties'
computer systems is essential. If mishandled, the technology mismatch
frustrates the business plan and drains away the anticipated cost benefits.
Indeed, incompatible technology has sometimes been cited as a reason for
calling off such mergers, although IT professionals tend to dismiss this as
a smokescreen to conceal other problems.
For all the talk of open systems, most building societies - and banks -
still have central computer systems that will prove incompatible. Open
systems have made inroads among the desktop/branch level applications, but
they are invariably backed up by a proprietary, mainframe system running
bespoke software. Yet the consensus of opinion is that such IT difficulties
should not obstruct a merger, if the business case adds up.
In a merger, larger societies will usually impose their own technical
procedures on a smaller group, junking the smaller society's system and
loading the data on to its own larger system. Technical problems are more
likely with a merger of two societies of similar size, where employees on
each side have a vested interest in fighting for retention of their own
systems and procedures. Then IT may become the battleground for the power
struggle as to who comes out on top after the merger.
Information technology 'reflects the whole business culture of the way an
organisation works,' comments Nigel Walsh, marketing director of electronic
banking specialists, the Software Partnership. 'IT isn't an appendage - it's
at the heart of the business.'
At the centre, he adds, the technology is still largely about the automation
of core processes, the software for which will more often than not have been
developed in-house. Building societies may share the same products, but each
will have evolved its own procedures for handling them. Even package systems
for mortgages or investment products will usually have been tailored to suit
that society's particular idiosyncrasies.
The best approach, suggests Mr Walsh, is to disentangle the systems
delivering services to the customer from the central systems behind them,
allowing the latter to be migrated or replaced after thorough evaluation.
The race to achieve 'transparency' (common service to customers in branches
of each society) from day one of the merger can distract attention from
longer-term planning, says a report, 'Maximising the success of mergers and
acquisitions in the building society industry' - published by Touche Ross
management consultants.
'There are unique circumstances in each merger process,' says John Rushden,
associate with Touche Ross. 'Societies which have grown through acquisition
may inherit a mixture of different procedures and systems that need to be
rationalised and re-engineered.
'In the short-term, it may be best to retain the 'best of breed' among the
systems used by each party, but that may add to the cost-base,' he says. In
the longer-term it may be better to replace them altogether, which is often
the most politically acceptable option if there are champions of existing
systems in each society.'
Networks, as well as central systems, can be a large source of compatibility
problems, notes Mr lain Davidson, director of financial systems division at
Unisys. But, he adds: 'Enforced change may not be a bad thing if it pushes
societies to replace systems that were outdated, anyway. Otherwise it is
best to standardise on the best of breed from each party as quickly as
possible.'
He is sceptical of suggestions that the costs of converging computer systems
may swallow up the expected cost-savings from a merger - 'the savings from
rationalisation, such as branch closures, should outweigh the short-term IT
costs. And in the longer-term, say five years, the merged society will have
significantly lower IT costs.'
One man with plenty of hands-on experience of building society mergers is
Brian Bonny, deputy chief executive of Portman Building Society, which was
itself formed by the merger of the Regency &amp; West of England with the then
Portman Wessex in 1990.
Before that, Mr Bonny reckons to have gone through a merger or acquisition
process with the Regency once every year since 1983.
'There have never been two cases the same,' he observes. 'But the objective
is always the same: to achieve full integration by the target date. So it's
vital very early in the merger process to set up an appropriately resourced
team to review the IT requirements.' It is at 'the detail level' that the
stumbling blocks occur, in the subtleties of operating procedures,' he adds.
There are different ways of crediting interest to an investment account, for
example, and such points have to be identified at an early stage to avoid
problems.
When the Portman Wessex merged with Regency &amp; West of England, the two
parties were near-equal in size. The former was based on Unisys while the
latter was already reviewing its IT strategy with a view to replacing its
NCR mainframe and associated software which dated from the 1970s.
'To achieve the merger by October 1, 1990 we had to make the best of the
systems we had, and decided to run all the investment products on the Unisys
system and mortgages on the NCR,' recalls Mr Bonny. The wider IT strategy
review was completed the following year and resulted in a decision to move
on to the ICL-Omnia VME system. In December, Portman will absorb the much
smaller St Pancras Building Society, and will load the latter's data on to
its Omnia system.
Starting next year, Portman's Omnia system will be migrated from VME to VME
Open, offering the prospect of putting its Unix sub-systems on the same
platform.
'Open systems are not in general use in any building societies I know of -
it's always just around the corner,' adds Mr Bonny. Migrating to VME Open
should be helpful in assisting any future merger process, but he insists
that present IT incompatibilities should not be a barrier to mergers - 'if
you are 'in IT' you should be able to face up to the challenge and find a
cost-effective solution,' he says.
'Mergers involve many considerations - market share, reserves, members . .
.IT is just one component and it shouldn't be the Achilles heel in the
decision.'
