FT  13 DEC 93 / Irish rivals both aim at Major: Disquiet surfaces in Dublin
as Ulster unionists threaten to withdraw parliamentary backing
Mr John Major last night faced conflicting pressures from the Dublin
government and the Ulster unionists as the weekend murder by the IRA of two
Northern Ireland policemen cast a shadow over the Anglo-Irish peace
initiative.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said that after their
Brussels' meeting he had agreed with Mr Major some '70 per cent' of the
proposed joint statement they hope might persuade the IRA to end violence.
That raised expectations that two leaders could hold a further meeting this
week to clear the remaining obstacles.
Officials from both governments worked through the weekend on the text and
Mr Major and Mr Reynolds plan to speak on the phone later today to assess
progress.
As Mr Major consulted cabinet colleagues, Downing Street still appeared
hopeful of a pre-Christmas accord.
But the Irish prime minister warned he was not prepared to sign an anodyne
declaration which would not offer a reasonable prospect of a permanent
cessation of violence.
Amid pessimism in Dublin on the prospects for a substantive statement, Mr
Reynolds said that guarantees for the Protestant majority in Ulster had to
be balanced by recognition of the nationalist aspirations of a large
minority.
The key differences now centre on the issues of self-determination and on
Dublin's proposal for an all-Ireland convention, involving all political
parties north and south. Mr Reynolds signalled in Brussels that he could
accept a statement which did not explicitly endorse the 'value' of eventual
unity. But Dublin's acceptance of a unionist veto over any change in
Ulster's status had to be set in the wider context of Irish
self-determination.
Irish government officials reaffirmed yesterday that Mr Reynolds 'will not
sign a statement that will not achieve the result of a cessation of
violence'. If agreement could not be reached, a final pre-Christmas summit
was unlikely.
The two governments' task in attempting to square the circle between
unionist fears and nationalist terrorism was underlined by a blunt warning
from two leading members of the Ulster Unionist party directed at Mr Major.
Mr John Taylor, MP for Stangford, said any move towards a united Ireland
would prompt his party to threaten the government's majority by opposing it
in any vote of confidence. Mr David Trimble, MP for Upper Bann, accused Mr
Reynolds of 'effectively acting on behalf of the IRA'. He said Mr Reynolds,
by taking on the Hume-Adams proposals, was talking about 'surrender by
stages' to the IRA.
He rejected any concessions to Mr Reynolds's proposals and ruled out the
possibility of agreeing to a peace conference representing all parties in
the republic and Northern Ireland.
But Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA,
repeated his call for Irish self-determination. He said acceptance of the
need for majority consent in Northern Ireland had to be seen as an interim
part of a process towards national self-determination.
Meanwhile Sir Hugh Annesley, chief constable of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary, said that the IRA had nothing to offer Northern Ireland except
death and suffering.
His comments came after two police officers were shot dead by IRA gunmen at
Five-miletown in Fermanagh. Several people were arrested.
