FT  20 JUL 93 / Boots withdraws heart drug after two-year study
BOOTS, the UK drugs retailer and manufacturer, yesterday withdrew its heart
drug Manoplax, dealing a serious blow to its ambitions in the world
pharmaceutical market.
A two-year study has shown that patients taking light doses of the drug were
more likely to be readmitted to hospital than those using a placebo. Earlier
this year, the same study had found that heavy dosages caused more deaths.
The heavy dosage was then withdrawn in the UK, but not in the US, the only
other market in which the drug had obtained clearance.
The company had since given up attempts to obtain registration elsewhere in
the world.
The clinical trials leading to yesterday's decision involved 3,000 patients
in North America and Scandinavia between July 1991 and April this year. In
April it was established that patients taking the heavier 100mg dose for
congestive heart failure were more likely to die than those taking an active
placebo. Last week, Boots found that further scrutiny of the same data
showed patients on the lighter 75mg dose being readmitted to hospital in
larger numbers.
The company had previously held out high hopes for the drug, which cost an
estimated Pounds 100m to develop. However, the City had come to regard these
claims with scepticism because of delays and rising costs.
The move leaves Boots without any patented drugs on the market. The last
drug of its own invention to be launched in the UK was the anti-arthritis
drug Froben in 1977.
Boots said the move would cost it Pounds 35m in stock write-offs and
'provisions against manufacturing facilities'. It said there would be no
factory closures at either of the two sites making Manoplax, at Nottingham
and Cramlington, Northumberland. Job losses, however, could not be ruled
out.
Boots said it did not expect any litigation as a result of the study's
findings. 'We have behaved in the usual ethical way,' the company said.
'This is an unfortunate outcome of an additional clinical trial we chose to
undertake.'
The company said it would save on marketing expenses for the drug, which
last year cost Pounds 20m, and on research and development.
The net effect would be a slight increase in profits and cash flow. Its
shares rose 13p to 435p. Analysts said this was partly because of hopes that
the company would decide to sell off its drug division, which has been
widely seen as too small to be viable.
The company denied any such plans yesterday.
Lex, Page 14
Background, Page 15
