FT  30 JAN 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Two companies struggling from the
Belfast ruins - Jimmy Burns visits a business park on the dividing line
between catholic and protestant
THE FARSET Enterprise business park in West Belfast backs off against an
18ft high fence separating two communities: protestant and catholic. Its
front gate gives on to the Springfield Road, a notorious killing ground for
the terrorists on both sides.
Eight years ago the site was a piece of open ground: the houses that once
stood there bombed to ruins. It became a community centre, and subsequently
a business park, as a result of government investment aimed at healing the
wounds of sectarian division.
Farset is one of 26 business parks in Belfast, but the only one established
where the the two communities meet. It is something of a test case for small
businesses struggling to survive against the background of recession and a
relentless campaign of political violence.
Since the park opened three and half years ago, three small businesses have
failed. But among the dozen that have survived, two in particular have shown
what can be achieved when all the odds seemed stacked against them.
Northern Ireland Fireworks
has managed to carve a business niche with full government approval even
though under Northern Ireland law the sale of fireworks manufactured locally
is banned.
It is run by Danny Davison, a 40-year-old former lorry driver who worked
part-time, gathering experience of fireworks in companies in the UK and the
US. In November 1990, Davison approached the Local Enterprise Development
Unit LEDU (the goverment backed small business agency) for a Pounds 6,000
grant, and the Farset Business Park, which draws some if its funds from the
International Fund for Ireland, for a further Pounds 5,000 low-interest loan
(6 per cent repayable over two years) to set himself up as Northern
Ireland's only local 'supplier of display kits and operator of fired shows.'
A further Pounds 2,000 came from Davison's own savings and that of his
partner.
Davison imports his fireworks from England and mainland Europe under licence
and then arranges their display with the approval of the security forces and
the Northern Ireland Office.
In the first year of trading in 1990/91 turnover was Pounds 24,000, just
below the target of Pounds 25,000. In 1991/92 the company's order book
expanded with turnover to Pounds 52,000, above the year's target of Pounds
50,000. A business that began with two full time staff, and two part-time
staff, now employs 19.
Davison says the company is successful because: 'What we try and give the
public is something that is spectacular, but colourful and peaceful at the
same time. There is no danger and the whole family can enjoy it. It makes a
change from bombs.'
He works from a ramshackle two floor hangar, filled with bits of cardboard,
and rough sketched lay-outs. Here Davison tailors his display according to
the budget of the customer, working out the position of the fireworks, the
sequence of their explosions, on frames which range in height from 50ft to
3,000ft.
The company arranges small displays for children's parties and club events,
but its main income is generated by big public displays arranged for borough
council festivals. Its customers have included staunchly loyalist
organisations in the Shankill Road, as well as catholic charity events in
southern Ireland.
Among its more spectacular projects was the organisation of the firework
display for Belfast's Christmas celebrations at the end of 1991.
Politics is never far from this potentially explosive business. 'I know that
if I moved this business to the Shankill some of the boys who work with me
wouldn't come,' says Davison.
And yet management of the business park has a policy of picking its tenants
according to strict financial criteria.
Charlotte McFarlane, the business park's administrator, says: 'We don't ask
people what religion they belong to here. A business is a business or its
not.'
Its a philosophy which Davison shares. 'We straddle both sides of the
community here,' he says.
Bob Jenkins's flat Midlands accent is scarcely audible above the din of his
workshop, but there is no doubting his determination to make his presence
felt.
'I've got the distinction of being the only Englishman who stayed on. I like
the place,' says Jenkins.
A decade ago Jenkins worked as a quality engineer for the De Lorean sports
car plant in Belfast. When the plant closed in 1983, some of the workers
returned to England from where they had been recruited initially.
Jenkins married a local woman and took a job with United Technologies in
Derry. He subsequently sought employment in England, but not for long. In
the mid-1980s the couple returned to Northern Ireland for an event that was
to change the pattern of their lives: the birth of their child Laura Lee.
When a spinal tumour left the child paraplegic Jenkins decided to put all
his efforts into using his skills to develop orthopedic equipment for the
physically handicapped.
The idea for the company with his daughter's name arose out of Jenkins'
links with Belfast's specialist Musgrave Park Hospital which adapted a
wheelchair for Laura Lee.
Jenkins recalls: 'At the time I was out of a job. One of the consultant
orthopedic surgeons who knew I'd been an engineer said, 'There are various
products the hospital is developing, why not start up your own business and
see if you can help out?''
Jenkins in 1989 was among the first small business men to enter Farset. He
obtained a capital grant of Pounds 5,100 covering 50 per cent of the cost of
new plant and machinery and an employment related grant of Pounds 6,300 from
LEDU. He also got a Pounds 3,100 grant from the Government's Making Belfast
Work initiative specifically targetted at businesses in deprived areas of
the city.
His company's turnover was Pounds 10,000 in 1990/91, below the Pounds 12,000
target. In 1991/92 turnover was Pounds 17,000 below a target of Pounds
22,000.
In his workshop Jenkins has been developing a range of products for disabled
people ranging from special potty chairs and toilet training aids for
children to suspended arm support systems for muscular dystrophy patients.
But Jenkins admits that struggling to stay financially afloat in the middle
of the recession has not been easy. He is about to go into partnership with
another larger company at Farset which does structural steel and ornamental
cast iron work.
'I hope to have the cash flow necessary to research and develop new products
over a longer period, ' says Jenkins.
'The best small businesses can hope for in this society is to survive. I may
not have grown much, but I'm still here. That gives me a sense of
achievement.'
Northern Ireland Fireworks and LauraLee Medicaids are based at Farset
Enterprise Park, 638 Springfield Road, Belfast. Telephone: Belfast 242373
