FT  02 JUL 93 / Settlement time to decrease
THE BANK of England-sponsored task force on securities settlement in London
has outlined a slimmed-down version of the overly ambitious plans contained
in the Stock Exchange's ill-fated Taurus project.
At the heart of the new plan is an electronic settlements system, likely to
be run initially under the auspices of the Bank of England, but conceivably
contracted out to a commercial supplier. The Stock Exchange is unlikely to
have a further role in the settlement of securities transactions.
Settlement is the completion of a transaction after the delivery of
securities to the buyer and the delivery of payment to the seller has been
achieved, along with the transfer of title of the securities.
Britain's two-week settlement period is far longer than that of other main
markets and regulators are concerned about the risks that poses. Should
either party fail, losses to other market participants with unsettled trades
could pose a risk to everyone.
Key elements of the plan are: By July 1994 the Stock Exchange's Talisman
system will be adapted to accommodate 10-day 'rolling' settlement.
By January 1995 the system will be able to accommodate five-day rolling
settlement, although private investors will be free to negotiate a different
settlement period with their broker if they wish.
The move to five-day rolling settlement is likely to force private investors
to place their stock in the nominee name of their broker - a move many are
likely to resist.
A new system to replace Talisman will be set up and carry the acronym Crest.
It is not expected to be operational until 1996 and will be a transfer
mechanism for equity trades allowing those holding stock within the system
to electronically receive stock and receive payment.
The system will eventually be capable of settling transactions on the same
day that bargains are struck.
Participants will have the option of 'dematerialisation' - receiving
notification of ownership by computer only - or may receive certificates if
they wish.
Membership in Crest will be optional but those wishing to join will have to
meet specific criteria. This especially applies to registrars who maintain
records of share ownership - some of whom may have to upgrade their systems
significantly to accommodate the faster settlement times.
Membership will be open to institutional investors, stock brokers,
registrars and custodians.
Crest will also have the capacity to handle most so-called 'stock events'
such as dividends, announcements of rights issues and proxy voting in
conjunction with registrars.
It is recommended that a bank acting for Crest, likely to be the Bank of
England, could be at the centre of the payments system and have real-time
accounts for each of the settlement banks.
Participants would have to have accounts at one of the settlement banks. The
Bank of England intends to admit as settlement banks only those which are
currently now part of the Clearing House Automated Payments System.
