FT  07 OCT 93 / Howard acts to curb crime as Tories shift to the right
THE Conservative party conference gave enthusiastic backing yesterday to
plans announced by cabinet right-wingers for a dual crackdown on criminals
and social security claimants.
Civil liberties groups condemned the announcements, which included the
abolition of the right to silence for defendants in criminal cases and tough
action against benefits claims by non-resident European Community citizens.
Lady Thatcher, who arrived in Blackpool last night, refused to comment on
the announcements or the continuing row over an unflattering description of
Mr John Major expected to be contained in her memoirs to be published later
this month.
However, the conference debates demonstrated the growing confidence among
her supporters that Mr Major is being forced to move towards their position
on crucial issues, including Europe. The prime minister's cabinet supporters
said the right had been encouraged to flex its muscles by a shift in Mr
Major's rhetoric towards the Eurosceptic views endorsed by many rightwing
MPs.
Senior ministers said his attempts to placate the right could backfire by
prompting a rebellion among previously loyal MPs on the centre and left of
the party.
The most striking rightwing intervention came from Mr Peter Lilley, the
social security secretary, who used his speech to launch an attack on EC
social security rules.
Mr Lilley's attack on 'benefits tourism' by EC citizens visiting the UK
contained implied criticism of EC institutions which won sustained applause
from grass-roots members.
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, was also cheered for his promise to
restore 'people's freedom to walk safely on the streets and sleep safely in
their homes'.
He announced a package of 27 initiatives, ranging from new prisons to
greater police powers and support for victims during court cases.
The package was widely regarded as a response to strong campaigning by Mr
Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, who has challenged the Conservatives'
traditional image as the party of law and order.
It was welcomed by the Police Federation and the Association of Chief Police
Officers, which said it would 'help redress the balance in favour of justice
for victims, witnesses and the mass of law-abiding citizens'.
However, the Prison Officers Association said members would be 'greatly
angered' by Mr Howard's decision to commission private sector companies to
run the extra prisons.
Most attention centred on legal changes announced by Mr Howard which will
allow prosecutors to draw attention to a defendant's refusal to answer
police questions.
Howard aims to curb 'tidal wave' of crime, Page 10
Prison expansion brings bonus for private sector, Page 10
