FT  22 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC approves Argentine fisheries
agreement
THE EUROPEAN Community has approved a new three-year fishing agreement with
Argentina which grants EC vessels access to Argentina's rich fishing grounds
for the first time, while giving Argentine fish exports preferential access
to EC markets.
The community's ships will be able to operate in Argentine waters, which
were previously restricted to local ships, in association with Argentine
companies. European import tariffs will be reduced to 5-10 per cent for
Argentine supplies. Furthermore, the EC will provide the Argentine industry
with USDollars 33m in cash grants for the industry. The agreement covers
exports of 250,000 tonnes of hake, cod and Illex squid.
The new agreement is considered an advance on similar accords signed between
Brussels and third countries because it increases the involvement of local
companies. Owners of EC vessels must form joint ventures with Argentine
companies. This is intended to modernise the Argentine fishing fleet, by
allowing local companies to replace their ageing ships with more modern
European ones. Catches are not intended to increase, because EC ships must
be either equal in capacity or smaller than the Argentine ships they are
replacing.
However, the local industry fears that the newer European ships will
increase fishing pressure on hake - already close to maximum levels.
Overfishing would not only threaten stocks but erode prices and thus offset
the benefit of lower tariffs. Last year Argentina's fish catch rose 10 per
cent to a record 692,000 tonnes.
The industry suspects that the agreement will benefit the Spain - which has
a large number of idle fishing ships - more than Argentina. Mr Mario
Olaciregui, president of Harengus, Argentina's largest fishing company,
said: 'There is more optimism about the accord in Vigo than there is here'.
However, he recognised that the agreement will modernise Argentina's fishing
fleet and provide funds for scientific research.
The government also says that the agreement advances its claims to the
Falkland Islands. Mr Guido di Tella, foreign minister, the agreement will
'make (the islanders) realise that we have very important friends'. However,
the EC excluded the Falklands' 150-mile fishing zone from the agreement and
established a 30,000-tonne limit for catches of the Illex squid - the
Falklands' most lucrative species.
Last December, Argentina began selling low-priced fish licences aimed in
part at undercutting those sold by the Falklands, thus reducing a key source
of revenue for the islands.
Britain and Argentina are to hold new fishery talks in Buenos Aires in
December.
