FT  03 APR 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Dramatic recovery by dollar
THE DOLLAR rebounded dramatically against the D-Mark in yesterday's late
afternoon trading in Europe, despite a poorer-than-expected US employment
report for March, writes James Blitz.
The March non-farm payroll figure, by far the most important indicator for
dollar investors, showed a net decrease of 22,000 against market
expectations of an 80,000 rise.
Its immediate impact was to push the dollar sharply lower against the German
currency, from about DM1.5950 just before the figure was announced, to a low
of the day of DM1.5875.
However, the dollar's fall triggered an intense bout of short covering by
foreign exchange dealers. In what one analyst called 'a classic day in the
currency market', dealers turned on their heels after about half an hour of
dollar selling.
They pushed the dollar up nearly 3 pfennigs in less than two hours to a high
of the day of DM1.6160. The US currency later closed in London at DM1.6050,
more than  1/2 a pfennig up on the day. After losing a lot of ground to
sterling at the start of the day, the dollar closed nearly a cent higher
against the pound at Dollars 1.5175.
The dollar's rebound came after closer examination of the payroll figure
itself. Although the March figure was weak, the astonishing figure for
February was actually revised up from an increase of 365,000 to one of
367,000.
Mr Mark Brett, an economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd in London, believes
that both the February and March figures taken together are positive for the
dollar. 'There are 150,000 jobs being created every month in the US and that
adds up to a recovery,' he said.
He also believes that the dollar proved to be well underpinned technically.
He said that the 130-day moving average for the dollar yesterday was
DM1.5890, and the currency was unable to break convincingly through that
support level.
However, the market appears to be divided over where the dollar is going
from here.
Mr Jim O'Neill of Swiss Banking Corporation, a long time dollar bear,
believes that the dollar could see some short-term appreciation, but will
later dip to DM1.52 at the very least.
'The US economy,' he says, 'is stuck with a tremendous structural problem.
Even if we are not going back to a full blown recession, the speed of
recovery is disappointing.'
He also believes that the franc fort policy of the French authorities must
be solidified in the next few weeks, and that this will attract strong
support from the German authorities and investment in French bonds.
