FT  19 JUN 93 / Siberian odyssey with no end in sight: Gillian Tett on the
plight of a group of American families who went to Russia to adopt children
EARLIER this year Tom and Cathy, a well-meaning couple from Sacramento,
California, decided to adopt a Russian baby. They armed themselves with
official papers,a video camera and plenty of American food, and set off.
Another 13 families joined them each in a separate quest for a new child.
In the event, their supplies of patience - and peanut butter - proved barely
enough. What Tom and Cathy - they do no want to be too closely identified -
had planned as a brief mercy mission turned into an odyssey that led them
into battle with bureaucrats and local political leaders - before finally
dumping them, in uncertain exile, in Novokuznetsk, a Siberian mining town.
'What we were wanting to do was give some hope to a child. We never thought
it turn out like this,' said Tom, when I ran into them in the seedy
corridors of the town's only official hotel. With their sneakers, T-shirts
and money belts, they looked deceptively like an American tourist group -
except that there was little reason why any tourist would ever chose to
visit, let alone stay, in a town as unlikely as grimy, smog-filled
Novokuznetsk.
Tom and Cathy's endeavour was far from unique. In the last two years, as the
former Soviet republics have been flinging open their doors to the west,
Russia - along many other East European countries - has become increasingly
attractive to Western couples desperate to adopt children. The trend seems
to be growing. According to the American embassy in Moscow, around 100
children are now being officially adopted by Americans each month, with a
much larger, but unknown, number being adopted by other nationalities - and
through illegal channels.
Under Russian law, children can only be adopted by foreigners if they have
handicaps or incurable diseases - although in practice, the regulations have
often proved distinctly elastic, especially in the face of the large fees
that many Russian adoption agencies are now demanding.
'Many of the children who have been given Soviet certificates saying they're
handicaped are not really bad at all,' says Katharine Allen, a doctor at the
American medical centre, who examines most of the children adopted by
American parents.
But for Tom and Cathy, members of the Sacramento Warehouse Ministries
Church, bending the rules did not sit easily with their humanitarian ideals.
Indeed, as their group earnestly explained, one reason for choosing to adopt
in remote Novokuznetsk had been because it was outside the grasp of the
semi-legal adoption agencies that are now dominating the 'business' in the
big cities and demanding five figure fees.
'We came out here to do things properly,' said the pastor who spoke for the
group. 'We are doing everything we can according to their laws.'
But in a country where every region is acting as a law unto itself, finding
who administered the 'laws' had been extremely difficult. At their first
stop in Moscow, they had theoretically received full rights of adoption -
and as far as the grateful orphanage and local health ministry had been
concerned, that had been enough. Within days of arriving in Novokuznetsk,
the group had been allocated 20 handicapped children, and had set about
'bonding' with their new offspring.
'We went and bought them toys and tried to talk to them,' explained Jean, a
nurse, as she sat clutching a polaroid photograph of a thin, pale child that
she insisted was now 'hers.'
But then the local education ministry stepped in: according to its
understanding of the 'law' the papers were insufficient and the health
ministry did not have the right to approve adoptions.
'Many people here do not like to think that Americans can come in and buy up
our children. We feel that it lessens our national pride,' admitted one
local bureaucrat, who, like most of the officials involved in the saga, was
reluctant to give her name.
Letters were exchanged, visits made and intense back door political lobbying
started. Then, as the weeks dragged on and the negotiations collapsed the
local administration banned the Americans from the orphanage.
'We sit here and we know the children are so close, but we can't do
anything,' continued Jean, shakily, as she sat on a broken armchair in the
hotel, almost a month after she had first arrived in Novokuznetsk.
So what had they been doing with themselves?
There was a pause. Their faces began to reflect a little of the strain,
exhaustion and culture shock of previous weeks. For about half the families,
this trip had been their first real chance to find a child. Few of the group
had ever travelled before outside America and none spoke Russian.
'We sit here, go for walks, wait,' muttered Tom, a sales representative by
profession.
'Oh and go shopping,' said another.
Shopping? I wondered.
'There's nothing to buy. We found some baby clothes when we arrived - but
they were winter baby clothes so now they're no good,' added Jean sadly.
'Oh - and Tom's making a video of the trip. He wants to have something to
show his little girl when she grows up,' added another. 'Well, that's what
we hope.'
There was not much more to say. They murmured vaguely about 'growing
experiences', I gave them my old newspapers - and then gratefully flew out
of Novokuztnetsk on the next flight.
A month later I phoned their headquarters in Sacramento to find out what had
happened. The reply was pained. The group had returned to America after two
months. Only three of the children had been allowed to go with them, with
promises made that more could be collected later this year.
'We are not bitter,' Sue Westrom, programme director from the Sacramento
Christian Adoption Programme, insisted evenly. 'We understand the problems
because some people have abused the system in the past.'
But what were the families like Tom and Cathy, who had waited for so long,
going to do?
Continue to wait, and hope, she said - and then go back to Novokuznetsk in
the autumn, armed with yet more paper work, video tape, and perhaps a fresh
supply of peanut butter.
