FT  10 NOV 93 / Survey of Austria (9): Profit, but little joy - Banking:
rationalisation is the theme
MOST BANKS in Europe are either already enjoying or anticipating enjoying
the impact of lower interest rates on their basic business.
Austrian banks are in the first category, having already had a taste of
wider spreads as the Austrian National Bank has dared for some months to
push a step ahead of the German Bundesbank in lowering rates.
Profits of Bank Austria (BA), the country's largest bank, jumped 51 per cent
in the first half, to Sch2.01bn, while those of Creditanstalt soared 77 per
cent to Sch2.3bn.
Both banks made clear that the gains had to be seen against extremely
depressed results last year, and that the profit surge came mainly from
trading activities, but they were nevertheless optimistic for significant
improvement in the year as a whole.
In spite of this pleasant outlook, there is not much joy in Austrian banking
circles these days. Rather, a pall of unfinished business hangs over the
scene, leaving a certain amount of anxiety in the boardroom of nearly every
major bank.
Rationalisation has been the key theme in Austrian banking for several
years. The country has a ridiculous number of bank branches, one for every
1,340 residents. However, for a long time, most banks were well armed with
hidden reserves and state backing, and so could afford to take a fairly
relaxed attitude to the hard decisions that had to be taken.
Now, after huge losses in foreign misadventures and, more recently, domestic
losses, the big banks are coming to the end of their reserves, and the
government wants to sell out. Smaller savings banks, too, are under pressure
from nervous local authorities to throw in their lot with larger groups.
The main focus in the past year has been on Bank Austria, the country's
largest bank following its creation in November 1991, from the merger of the
city of Vienna's Zentralsparkasse savings bank group and Landerbank.
BA realised from the start that it had to close about 50 of its 407
branches, but it has had to proceed cautiously because of trade union
sensitivities. It has also had immense problems trying to integrate the
computer systems of the two banks, and faces a huge provision to cover the
costs of the old Zentralsparkasse pension obligations. By a quirk of
history, Zentralsparkasse employees were not included in the otherwise
universal state pension system.
Analysts reckon that by the time these matters are settled in two or three
years, BA will have completely used up its roughly Sch6bn in hidden
reserves.
Another area of tension is the country's large savings bank sector. The
problem here, paradoxically, is that rationalisation has proceeded so
quickly that it has altered the balance of power in the system.
In the mid-1970s, there were over 170 savings banks, and each had a
relatively small stake in their large central clearing organisation,
Girozentrale. As a result, Giro could dominate the organisation and pursue
its wholesale banking business as it saw fit.
In the 1980s, the two largest savings bank groups, Zentralsparkasse and
Erste Oesterreichische (First Austrian), bolstered by a landmark court
judgment facilitating the sale of savings banks by local authorities, went
on acquisition sprees.
The result today is that only 80 savings bank organisations remain, and
Zentralsparkasse, now part of Bank Austria, and Erste together control over
half of the shares of Giro, since renamed Girocredit.
Being large universal banks in their own right, Bank Austria and Erste have
no need of a clearing organisation like Giro and tend to see it as a
competitor, particularly in capital markets business.
Not surprisingly, Giro has squirmed uncomfortably under these new
constraining forces, and has tried various strategms to force its two
largest shareholders to sort the situation out.
The main proposal, first made three years ago, was that Bank Austria should
sell out of the savings bank sector, and that Erste and Giro should merge. A
first round of negotiations in the summer of 1991 collapsed in mutual
recrimination, and a second attempt is now at a sensitive stage.
It now seems clear that Bank Austria will sell its 31 per cent stake in
Giro. The problem is: who will buy it, and at what price? BA put down a
marker, when it sold the stake at the end of last year to an affiliate, in
order to crystallise capital gains to cover loan losses, at a
self-determined price of Sch400 per share. This would indicate a value of
Sch16.4bn for the whole bank.
That is perhaps a bit on the high side, even though Giro's profit
performance has improved substantially this year. But any reasonable price
would be beyond the ability of Erste alone to pay. Its total assets at June
30 this year of Sch184bn were significantly less than Giro's Sch330bn at the
same point.
Moreover, Erste is at best a diffident buyer. It has carved out a successful
niche in retail banking, and is nervous about making its life more
complicated.
Hence, an effort is being made to form a consortium that would include the
other largish savings bank groups from provincial capitals. But it all takes
time.
'The 20 key people in the savings bank sector are beginning to understand.
Now they have to tell 60 others and get their supervisory boards to agree,'
an Erste director explains.
Ownership and control are also live issues at Creditanstalt. The bank's
proud patrician management has been eager for several years to rid itself of
state control.
The government cut its capital stake from 60 per cent to 49 per cent several
years ago, but it still holds 70.5 per cent of the votes. Last year, as its
own budgetary problems mounted, it became more eager to sell, and in
November, it emerged that negotiations on the sale of a 20 per cent stake to
General Electric of the US had taken place.
These apparently came to naught, and in the spring an attempt was made to
merge the bank with the very large Raiffeisen group of co-operative banks,
with Raiffeisen buying the government's stake.
Creditanstalt's management balked at this project, and the government agreed
that it was not a sensible solution. Since then, as a result of the sharp
rise in the CA share price this year, there has been much talk of floating
the government's shares in the market.
That is clearly the wish of the bank's management, which would rather not be
faced with another strong controlling or influential shareholder. Mr
Ferdinand Lacina, the finance minister, is not convinced that it is the best
solution.
'Their interest is not necessarily the same as ours,' Mr Lacina says.
