FT  18 MAR 93 / Marketing (Management and Advertising): Blending genius and
magic - Guinness believes brand development is the key to its future
Has Guinness lost its genius? The question has been asked ever since
recession ended the company's meteoric growth record in the late 1980s. It
will be highlighted again today, when Guinness is expected to report a sharp
fall in last year's profits.
The doubts turn on more than the weak international economy and soggy
consumer spending. The fundamental issue is how much more mileage the
company can extract from the marketing magic which has helped it generate
profits by persuading Scotch drinkers around the world to keep trading up to
ever more expensive brands.
The blunt response from Tony Greener, Guinness's chairman, is that the world
ain't seen nothing yet: 'If somebody says: 'I thought Guinness's marketing
was pretty good,' I say yes, it is a hell of a lot better than five years
ago. But it is absolutely nothing as good as we aspire to in the future.'
Indeed, he says, the task of turning the company into a thoroughbred
marketing organisation has barely begun. Until recently, the overriding
priorities were to reorganise the spirits division, following the
acquisition of the Distillers Company in 1986 and to gain control of
international distribution.
Attention started to focus less than three years ago on brand development,
which Greener regards as the key to Guinness's long-term future. Since then,
more than 50 senior marketing executives have been hired from heavyweight
consumer products companies including Procter &amp; Gamble, Mars and Unilever.
The challenge now, Greener says, is to unite the company around a basic core
of shared beliefs, rooted in a clear appreciation of the distinctive skills
which the drinks business requires.
'If you look at P&amp;G or similar companies, one of their great strengths is a
system, a way of doing things which has proven successful over a long
period. We are starting - underlined - to get together a group of people who
are beginning to understand what it takes.'
Injecting so much new blood all at once is, he admits, a mixed blessing.
'While bringing all these guys in has been necessary and marvellous as a
stimulus, at some stage the process has to slow down a bit. You've got to
consolidate and say, that's great, but around here this is what works. So
forget your fancy ideas for marketing soap flakes, chocolate biscuits,
fragrances, or whatever.'
So what does work for Guinness? The starting point, says Greener, is that
all Scotch tastes much the same.
'We have massive amounts of research which show that people can't tell the
difference between one Scotch and another. Though they swear total
allegiance to one product and would never dream of drinking Brand X, in
blind tastings Brand X is more often than not what they select.'
The only real point of differentiation is image. In the spirits business,
says Greener, it is cultivated only incidentally through advertising. The
really vital brand-building is done in the 'on-trade' - the clubs, bars,
cafes and pubs where what people drink is often a signal about who they
think they are. 'Unless you've got that on-trade franchise, it's difficult
to build anything else.'
The second rule is to keep telling the same story. 'You're talking about the
presentation of a product, the outlets where you'll find it, pricing,
advertising, promotions - every single point of communication between an
individual and that brand. The whole marketing mix has to come together to
hit the target in a particular way.'
The central challenge Greener has set for Guinness is to develop a coherent,
company-wide, set of brand values and identities which is also flexible
enough to be adapted to local conditions in each of the 180 countries in
which its spirits are sold.
'If you think of the number of contact points and the number of times the
message has to be relayed to individuals around the world, it is an enormous
process - the time, the money involved and, above all, the consistency of
the message. There is no quick fix, no magic wand I can wave. The key words
really are consistency of message over a very long period of time.'
