FT  29 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Chairman paid Pounds 375,000 after
governance rethink
MR RICHARD PESKIN, chairman of Great Portland Estates, is to receive Pounds
375,000 as a one-off payment for giving up a management arrangement which
fell outside the guidelines of the Cadbury report on corporate governance.
The company yesterday announced that it was ending the long-standing
arrangement by which Great Portland paid management fees to Basil &amp; Howard
Samuel, a company controlled by Mr Peskin. Some institutional shareholders
disliked the deal because it concealed the size of Mr Peskin's pay package.
Mr Roger Payton, deputy chairman, told shareholders that Great Portland's
directors were 'conscious that relationships of this nature, whilst
perfectly valid and proper, are no longer in tune with today's perception of
corporate governance'. Under Mr Peskin's new service contract, he will
receive an annual salary of Pounds 325,000, fixed for two years, in addition
to his fees as chairman of Pounds 25,000.
Mr Peskin's total salary of Pounds 350,000 makes him one of the highest paid
figures in the property industry. Last year, Mr Peter Hunt, chairman of Land
Securities, drew Pounds 266,000; Mr John Ritblat, chairman of British Land,
drew Pounds 336,300; and Mr David Goldstone of Regalian drew Pounds 376,000.
Mr Payton said that the decision to award Mr Peskin the one-off payment
stemmed from an awareness of the necessity to secure his full-time services
for the foreseeable future.
Great Portland is to acquire Basil &amp; Howard Samuel for Pounds 98,987 in
cash, which is equivalent to the value of its assets. Mr Payton told
shareholders that Mr Peskin had been generous in 'putting the interest of
the company ahead of personal gain' by not opting to sell his management
business to a third party and by not requiring compensation for early
termination of the arrangements.
At Great Portland's AGM in July, Mr Peskin said he was 'genuinely
astonished' by criticism of the management agreement. The cost of B&amp;HS's
services, 4 per cent of Great Portland's gross rental income, was 'on a true
comparison the lowest of all the major property groups', he said.
Lex, Page 26
