FT  18 MAR 93 / Technology: Ups and downs of hypertension - High blood
pressure treatments are working so well that scientists are looking beyond
traditional cures, writes Clive Cookson in a series on drug discoveries
Drugs to bring down high blood pressure are one of the great successes of
pharmaceutical research.
Over the past decade the industry has given doctors dozens of new drugs to
treat hypertension - the medical name for the condition - by several
different mechanisms. Their sales are worth more than Dollars 10bn (Pounds
7bn) a year, three times as much as the total market for cancer drugs.
'The treatment of hypertension is very good now and the side effects are
minor,' says Desmond Julian, medical director of the British Heart
Foundation, 'and because there is a range of drugs, you can normally find
one to suit any particular patient.'
In industrialised countries, 15 to 20 per cent of the adult population has
high blood pressure. Julian says patients with mild or moderate hypertension
should not be put on drugs straightaway; their doctors should urge them to
make changes in diet and lifestyle.
But for the 5 per cent of people with severe hypertension, drugs are usually
required to bring blood pressure down to a safe level.
Clinical trials have shown that the greatest benefit of hypertension
treatment is a 40 per cent reduction in the risk of suffering a stroke,
which is caused by the rupture of blood vessels in the brain. The effects on
other forms of cardiovascular disease are less clear-cut; indeed there is
still no statistical proof that lowering blood pressure cuts the risk of a
fatal heart attack.
The four main categories of anti-hypertensive drug, in order of increasing
novelty and price, are:
Diuretics, which reduce the volume of blood by increasing the flow of urine
from the body. A secondary effect is to open up small arteries by removing
sodium. Most diuretics are cheap off-patent drugs.
Beta-blockers, which slow down the heart beat, particularly during exercise
and emotional stress. ICI's Tenormin, the first blockbuster
anti-hypertensive, recently lost its patent protection.
Calcium channel blockers, which relax the blood vessels by blocking the flow
of calcium ions into the surrounding muscles. Patents are also expiring on
the first group of calcium blockers introduced in the mid 1970s such as
Bayer's Adalat.
ACE inhibitors, which block angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). This
prevents the formation of angiotensin II, a potent constrictor of blood
vessels. The pioneering ACE inhibitor, Bristol-Myers Squibb's Capoten
launched in 1981, has recently been overtaken by Merck's Vasotec, now the
world's best-selling heart drug.
Faced with such a wide selection of drugs, how does a doctor find the best
one for each patient? According to Julian: 'for the majority of people it's
a matter of trial and error. It's quite arbitrary which drug you start out
with'.
The treatment of hypertension varies considerably from country to country.
In the cost-conscious UK, normal practice is to start the patient on a cheap
diuretic or beta-blocker and, if the response is unsatisfactory, move to a
more expensive drug. In the US, a doctor is more likely to prescribe a
calcium blocker or ACE inhibitor as first-line therapy.
In an attempt to gather more information about the long-term effect of
different therapies, two large-scale clinical comparisons are planned: one
in Europe to be organised by Peter Sever of St Mary's Hospital, London, on
behalf of the British Hypertension Society; and one in the US, sponsored by
the National Heart, Blood and Lung Institute.
Each trial will cost at least Pounds 35m and will involve 30,000 people with
high blood pressure who will be treated for five years with either a
diuretic, an ACE inhibitor or a calcium channel blocker. The results should
show ifthe premium prices charged for the new drugs are justified by
superior performance, not only in lowering blood pressure but in reducing
deaths from heart attacks and other cardiovascular disease.
The trials may confound expectations and show that diuretics give as many
benefits as ACE inhibitors and calcium blockers, in the same way as the
recent Isis-3 mega-comparison of heart attack treatments undermined sales of
the expensive new clot-busters tPA and Eminase by showing that cheap old
streptokinase was just as effective.
Until comparative clinical data become available, sales of competing
hypertension drugs will depend, above all, on the marketing skills of their
manufacturers. There is fierce competition not only between the different
classes of medicine but also within each class.
Indeed, the ACE inhibitor sector is the best example today of 'me too'
development in the pharmaceutical industry. Tom McKillop, technical director
of Zeneca Pharmaceuticals (soon to be spun off from ICI), says ACE
inhibitors are a very unusual sector of the drugs market because there is
strong competition between several patented products. This is exerting a
downward pressure on prices, similar to that introduced by generic
(off-patent) drugs in more mature sectors.
'The ultimate anti-hypertensive has not yet been found,' says Claes
Wilhelmsson, research director of Astra, Sweden's largest pharmaceutical
company. 'But we have stopped all our research on traditional hypertension
drugs.'
There are so many products on the market that bring down blood pressure
safely and effectively that no company is trying to produce new ones, says
Jurgen Reden, research director of Germany's Hoechst. 'We are looking now
for drugs that do something more than reducing blood pressure - for example
producing a protective effect on the cardiac muscle and avoiding chronic
cardiovascular disease.'
ACE inhibitors show some beneficial side-effects, beyond controlling
hypertension. They seem to have some protective effect on kidney function
and to improve the general condition of blood vessels.
Companies with cardiovascular research programmes are therefore exploring
ways to intervene elsewhere in the metabolic pathways that control blood
pressure and heart function, such as the renin-angiotensin system and the
kallikrein-kinin system. For example, Jurgen Drews, research director of
Switzerland's Roche, says his company is investigating a new class of renin
inhibitors which would act at the very beginning of the process that leads
to high blood pressure.
The overall aim of such research, according to Reden, is 'all-round
protection of the heart, by keeping the blood vessel walls clean and in good
condition'.
High blood pressure results from the interplay of multiple genetic and
environmental factors. A research finding of great long-term significance
was announced last October; an academic team from France and the US, headed
by Jean-Marc Lalouel of the University of Utah, identified the first human
gene linked to hypertension.
Variations in the angiotensinogen gene were found to be related to
hypertension in families in Paris and Salt Lake City. It is believed to
affect blood pressure by controlling the retention of salt in the body.
Scientists say at least four other genes - and perhaps as many as 20 - are
likely to be involved in hypertension. As more are identified, it should be
possible to develop genetic tests to identify people at risk - and perhaps
eventually to think of correcting the genetic defects through gene therapy.
However, as Sever points out, high blood pressure is undoubtedly a disease
of western civilisation. 'Although the genetic link is an extremely
important and interesting finding, remember that the environment you live in
also controls your blood pressure,' he says. 'No one living in the African
desert ever suffers from hypertension.'
The series continues next month with a look at treatments for hay fever and
other allergies.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TOP 10 HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE DRUGS 1991
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Brand         Company                Category                   Sales
                                                          (Dollars m)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Vasotec       Merck                  ACE inhibitor              1,745
Capoten       Bristol-Myers Squibb   ACE inhibitor              1,580
Tenormin      ICI (Zeneca)           Beta blocker               1,180
Cardizem      Marion Merrell Dow     Calcium-channel blocker      912
Procardia XL  Pfizer                 Calcium-channel blocker      896
Adalat        Bayer                  Calcium-channel blocker      850
Calan         Monsanto               Calcium-channel blocker      508
Trental       Hoechst                Other vasodilator            399
Zestril       ICI (Zeneca)           ACE inhibitor                395
Lopresor      Ciba-Geigy             Beta blocker                 345
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Datamonitor
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
