FT  12 NOV 93 / Nails in the cabinet
The British government op-erates in a 'well nigh permanent atmosphere of
crisis'. I take the phrase from Lord Hailsham, who deployed it in a
celebrated lecture on the cabinet seven years ago this week.
If that was true of the then Mrs Margaret Thatcher's administration, which
rested on a majority of 100-plus, it is doubly so of Mr Major's, which has a
theoretical majority of 17, constantly threatened by around a dozen
potential rebels and usually supported by Ulster Unionists. You would not
get this impression from the son-of-Hailsham lecture given by Lord Wakeham
on Wednesday night. The latter is not only the leader of the House of Lords,
but also 'Lord Privy Seal', which means that he can be deployed as chairman
of many of the committees of the cabinet that the prime minister himself
does not head.
Lord Wakeham paints a picture of a smoothly functioning team, every member
of which is devoted to the doctrine of collective responsibility.
Departmental ministers take the lead in presenting policies, first by
circulating written proposals to other heads of department who may have an
interest and subsequently by appearing before the relevant cabinet
committee. As I read him, ministers are the engines of government. Often,
his own chairmanship oils the wheels. The Treasury is the brake.
The unspoken subtext of the Wakeham address, delivered at Brunel University,
Middlesex, is that while Mrs Thatcher tried to dominate the proceedings, and
resorted to ad hoc committees as a means of avoiding awkward discussions,
nice Mr John Major adopts a more conciliatory, structured approach.
Conciliatory yes; structured maybe. There is no hint of any forum in which
our elected political servants, possessed of sufficient back-up, can enjoy
an open and prolonged discussion on topics of importance. Brainstorming -
just kicking a proposition around - is hardly possible. Nobody has the time.
The civil service, which likes to maximise paperwork, would not permit it.
Departmental boundaries are uncrossable. The atmosphere of panic prevails.
To be fair, the Lord Privy Seal does not pretend that the cabinet runs the
country. It only meets for a few hours on Thurs-day mornings. There would be
no time in which to get much thrashed out even if there was a willingness to
let such a thing happen. Take the 'unified Budget', which has been
introduced this year. A simultaneous announcement of spending and taxing
plans is due at the end of the month. Yet the actual Budget will not be seen
by non-Treasury ministers until the morning of the day of its delivery to
Parliament. In short, the cabinet has a light supervisory role. It can
sometimes be the scene of genuine argument, as may have been the case with
spending this year, but, as Lord Hailsham discerned in 1987, the real work
is done by subcommittees. Cabinet government, he said in his Granada
Guildhall lecture, 'is one of the permanent gifts conferred by British
political genius on the science and art of civilised government'.
You have to be English to appreciate just how the shape of that gift has
evolved. Although nominated by the prime minister, British ministers are
each appointed separately under the royal prerogative. If you follow Lord
Hailsham's account, the office held by Mr Major arose out of an accident of
history. It happened in 1714, when the Elector of Hanover became George I.
Since he could speak no English, and was obliged to converse with Walpole in
dog Latin, the latter presided at ministerial meetings. It took two further
centuries of rolling English constitution-making for the title 'prime
minister' to be given legal recognition. The original honorific, 'first lord
of the treasury', was retained alongside the new one. In the 19th century
Gladstone wondered whether a prime minister - first lord - had the right to
fire ministers he had invited to join his cabinet. Today, as Lady Thatcher
can attest, dismissals are free, but each one creates an enemy on the
backbenches.
All British prime ministers must at one time or another have longed for the
brutal simplicity of the American method. When Mr Richard Nixon was
re-elected in November 1972, a form was handed out stating bluntly that
'every appointee of cabinet rank will be expected to be the president's man
in the department and not the department's advocate to the president'. A box
was provided alongside this and other, similar instructions for newly
appointed ministers to tick. That would show that it had been read,
understood and accepted.
The Nixon method was Mrs Thatcher's aspiration, but in fact British
government works the other way around. Departments capture all but the most
powerful ministers, and send them forth into Whitehall to represent the
interests of their clients. The transport ministry represents road
construction companies; defence, weapons suppliers; agriculture, farmers;
the department of industry - if Mr Michael Heseltine, looking fit and
relaxed, has anything to do with it - British industry.
You could characterise, if not caricature, parts of the current system thus:
lobbies for interested companies and trade associations plant ideas on
officials, who put them up to ministers. When privatisation is involved,
some public servants, and some politicians, eventually make their fortunes
by taking jobs with the newly created companies. Placing lucrative contracts
can also help. Companies that benefit support the governing party. The
balancing factors are, first, strongly motivated ministers who do not need
the money (among whom I would number the president of the board of trade)
and, second, the daily, anxious count of Conservative backbench votes.
The chief whip, Mr Richard Ryder, has more to say about the constant panic
in Whitehall than perhaps any other player. His calculations will determine
whether the post office can be privatised (no), London's buses can be
deregulated (no) or the government can afford to put up an imaginative,
wide-ranging programme in next week's Queen's speech (no). Only Mr Kenneth
Clarke is theoretically beyond this constraint. If the chancellor, backed by
Mr Major, cannot get his Budget, whatever it says, through the house, the
government will surely fall. You can, however, bet that even now he is
counting votes.
