FT  11 JAN 93 / Pits rescue may need power levy
THE government is examining closely a plan to add a special levy to
consumers' electricity bills to try to resolve the damaging public row over
pit closures while avoiding new costs to the hard-pressed exchequer.
The levy option has been welcomed by some senior ministers as a way of
keeping some of the 31 threatened pits open while reinforcing the the
government's claim that the mines are uneconomic.
It is also believed to parallel a similar scheme being drawn up by the
Commons trade and industry committee whose report on the coal industry is
expected later this month.
A senior official close to the trade and industry department's coal industry
review cautioned last night that the levy was only one of a number of
possible solutions to the pit-closure controversy. But he conceded that it
neatly resolved many of the political obstacles to a compromise solution.
Figures under discussion suggest that a time-limited subsidy of Pounds 10 a
tonne might be necessary to keep the pits viable while their productivity
was increased to meet a target price of Pounds 36 a tonne.
The levy would be aimed at financing the estimated Pounds 700m a year cost
of providing a Pounds 10-per-tonne subsidy while not adding to government
expenditure. A precedent already exists with the levy imposed on electricity
bills to finance nuclear energy costs.
Three draft reports by Boyd's, the Pittsburg mining engineers, consultants
Caminus Energy, and Ernst &amp; Young, the accountancy firm, are nearing
completion. They will give ministers an analysis of the viability of the
threatened pits, the general market outlook, and the relative
competitiveness of British Coal.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is also awaiting the
report of the Commons trade and industry committee before tabling a white
paper outlining government proposals.
Under European Community rules, any increase in fuel subsidies could mean
subsidy cuts for other fuels. This is because the UK is using its allowed
fuel subsidies in full on nuclear power and renewable energy.
Today Lord Parkinson, the former energy secretary, will warn against further
government intervention in the coal industry. Speaking in a BBC TV Panorama
programme, he will argue that industrial action by miners made it
'absolutely inevitable' that the electricity industry would seek to
diversify.
On the same programme Mr Neil Clark, the British Coal chairman, says that
even if the government takes all the steps the corporation is seeking he
cannot envisage more than 15 pits surviving in the long term.
Hanson coal interests, Page 13
