FT  04 SEP 93 / Prosecutors to question VW chairman
CRIMINAL investigators probing the suspected theft of General Motors'
industrial secrets by Volkswagen executives plan to question Mr Ferdinand
Piech, group chairman.
He and Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the company's production director
at the centre of the investigation, would be interrogated 'as sure as they
say 'amen' in church,' the Darmstadt prosecutors' office said yesterday.
But legal officials would first have to complete their examination of a haul
of documents and computerised information seized from the vehicle group's
Wolfsburg headquarters in a raid on August 26.
The office recently suggested Mr Piech would not be called because, a
spokesman said, 'he is not a suspect'.
An interim report on a private probe within VW, presented to the group's
supervisory board yesterday, contained 'no findings to warrant industrial
espionage accusations,' the company said in a statement last night.
Officials said after an all-day meeting of the board that Mr Piech and Mr
Lopez would not be leaving.
The investigations involving Mr Lopez and three associates, who left the
General Motors group in March, are primarily concerned with suspicions of
the systematic theft of secrets from Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary.
The supervisory board, which appoints and oversees the work of executive
directors, was also told yesterday that group profits in 1993 could be
adversely affected by poor performances at the Seat subsidiary in Spain and
in north American and Asian-Pacific markets. However, the German parent and
the group would show a profit in the third quarter after a DM1.6bn (Pounds
646m) loss in the first half.
The statement issued after the board session once again showed signs of a
retreat from earlier declarations that the company would break even or
return to profit this year, and that Mr Lopez would remain until he had been
found guilty.
The supervisory board also reinstated Mr Ulrich Seiffert as main board
research and development director with immediate effect. He was removed in
mid-March on the same day Mr Lopez was appointed.
The VW supervisory board, which appointed auditors KPMG Deutsche Treuhand on
August 13 to carry out an independent probe, said yesterday it expected a
full report by the end of October.
