FT  09 JAN 93 / Sport: Old-fashioned friends at the Park - Rugby Union
IF I had a penny for every time I was asked to name my favourite golf course
then I could probably afford to buy a new set of woods, a dozen balls and
have a few pence left. No one, however, wants to know which is my favourite
rugby club. So since you won't ask, I will tell you. It is Rosslyn Park.
Geography has nothing to do with it. I live in north-east London; Rosslyn
Park are in south-west London. It has more to do with where I feel most
comfortable. Harlequins are too smart, Blackheath not quite good enough and
Wasps are difficult to find, out there, somewhere, in north-west London.
Besides, I always feel uneasy as I pass in the lee of Wembley, a stadium I
associate with soccer.
Someone once said that love is blind and friendship closes its eyes. I am
blind to Rosslyn Park's faults. The pitch has a slope and parking is poor,
inadequate for the days when Leicester, Northampton and Bath arrive with
their coach loads of supporters yelling 'oggy, oggy, oggy'. But in the grand
scheme of things does this matter? They do the best after-match sandwiches
of any first-class club, serve the strongest cups of tea and the warmth of
their welcome has to be experienced to be believed.
Sadly Rosslyn Park are tumbling down the leagues faster than a man sliding
on a patch of ice. Relegated from the first to the second division last
season, they are now in imminent danger of falling in to the third division.
Why is this?
A simple answer might be old-fashioned morals. They will not pay players nor
are they prepared to offer the sort of financial incentives available at
other clubs: cars, help with mortgages, that sort of thing. Players join
other first-class clubs and use them as a flag of convenience. They stay a
while, give of their best and then leave. These men are the gigolos of the
game. Not to put too fine a point on it, they are bought.
It is rather different at Rosslyn Park where the players receive only
legitimate expenses and must pay an annual subscription of Pounds 60 and buy
their own club ties.
Rosslyn Park have some similarities with the Jesuits. Once they have got
you, they have got you for life. I had not been to Priory Road for at least
a decade when I went to watch Rosslyn Park play Northampton in 1991. Yet the
moment I entered the ground and walked past the small wooden hut where the
programmes were on sale and tickets had to be bought, it was as if I had
never been away.
Rivulets of beer slid over the clubhouse floor and discarded crisp packets
floated on them. Noisy supporters stood on the grass between the clubhouse
and the pitch. Beaming beatifically over this scene was Andy Ripley, the
former England number 8, wearing his famous rimless granny glasses.
Ripley was just one of the former players I came across on that and
subsequent visits to the Park. Bob Mordell, the ex-England flanker who went
to play rugby league, was back at his old club. So was Steve Tiddy, the
darting wing who leaned so far forward when he ran he looked as though he
would fall on his face.
And there in the front row of the wooden stand was the craggy-faced forward
Phil Keith-Roach, who joined Rosslyn Park when he was 13 and only stopped
playing for the club when he was 42 because he had broken his neck. As I
drove home that night I reflected that it was reassuring how little had
changed at Rosslyn Park in recent years.
'We are in a new era money-wise and in terms of amateurism and I am not sure
that we have taken to it easily or naturally,' said Keith-Roach last week by
way of explanation for Rosslyn Park's plight. 'Perhaps we have been a bit
slow off the mark. We haven't known how to play this recruitment business.
It is still a lovely club and our aims and ambitions are high. We have never
been big on expenses and freebies because we have never had the money.'
Rugby in 1993 is not the game it was in 1987. The success of two World Cups,
the rise of leagues, the irresistible surge towards the best players making
money from it, the new laws, all these have changed the game more in the
past five years than in the previous 25.
Rosslyn Park have made a distinguished contribution to rugby for more than
100 years not least in organising the national schools sevens each spring.
If the game at the highest level loses clubs with their distinctive appeal,
the game itself will be the poorer. Long may Park As Ripley, the club
chairman, said in his speech at the centenary dinner: 'Rock on chaps, rock
on.'
