FT  13 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Richemont spin-offs are confident - Dunhill
and Rothmans shareholders receive restructuring plans for the new groups
A DOWNBEAT announcement from Dunhill Holdings did not dent the confidence of
the other participants in the restructuring of the Richemont empire.
Shareholders were yesterday sent details of the proposed reconstruction of
the tobacco and luxury goods businesses into two new quoted companies and
the return of surplus cash to the shareholders of Rothmans and Dunhill.
The proposals will result in the creation of two new groups - Rothmans
International and Vendome Luxury Group.
The new Rothmans will comprise all of Rothmans' existing tobacco businesses
and certain tobacco trade marks currently owned or controlled by Dunhill or
by Richemont with cigarette brands including Rothmans, Dunhill, Peter
Stuyvesant, Craven A and Golden American.
Lord Swaythling, chairman of Rothmans, said the company continued to
experience recessionary conditions in the main world economies, political
uncertainties in certain of its markets and volatility in the currency
markets.
The competitive trading environment in a number of cigarette markets also
created uncertainties, although the new Rothmans had limited exposure in the
US, where traditionally high margins have been eroded by the cigarette price
wars.
He said: 'The new Rothmans group is, however, expected to benefit from
cost-efficiency measures already initiated. While the total volume of
cigarette sales in many markets is static or in decline, overall worldwide
tobacco consumption is increasing.
'This provides opportunities for international tobacco companies to sell
quality cigarette brands, particularly to markets where opportunities for
export or local production have been traditionally limited through import
restrictions, government policy or lack of convertible currency.'
Under the reorganisation, the luxury goods businesses of Dunhill will form
part of Vendome, the Dunhill tobacco trade marks will be transferred to the
new Rothmans and Pounds 75m cash will be returned to Dunhill shareholders.
Vendome said it would be one of the world's largest luxury goods groups with
a portfolio of premier brands. Its principal brands would be Cartier, Alfred
Dunhill and Montblanc, which together accounted for 85 per cent of the sales
of Luxco and Dunhill. The combined group's turnover would compromise:
jewellery 14 per cent; watches 38 per cent; writing instruments 13 per cent;
and leather goods 10 per cent.
Mr Joseph Kanoui, the Swiss chairman and chief executive of Vendome, said
bringing together Richemont's Luxco and Dunhill luxury goods businesses
under unified ownership would enhance their ability to shape and take
advantage of changes in the industry. He believed the combination of Luxco
and Dunhill would produce purchasing, distribution and other savings.
On prospects for Vendome, he said the strength of its brands and management
team, the geographical spread of its sales and the integration of
manufacturing and distribution activities should enable it to perform well,
in spite of the depressed economic conditions in some of its markets.
The board also believed that an improvement in economic conditions should
favour the Vendome group given that both Luxco and Dunhill have historically
grown at rates in excess of the economies of the principal markets in which
they operated.
Mr Kanoui said that, unlike Dunhill, Luxco had not adopted long-term hedging
policies because it believed the geographical spread of its activities gave
it a natural hedge against foreign exchange movements.
Meetings for shareholders in Rothmans and Dunhill will be held on September
7. Subject to their approval, dealings in the new Rothmans and Vendome
shares will start on October 25.
Shareholders with 1,000 Rothmans B shares will receive 1,000 new Rothmans
units, 500 Vendome units and Pounds 757 cash. Holders of 1,000 Dunhill
shares will receive 133 new Rothmans units, 749 Vendome units and Pounds 443
cash.
The cash element totals Pounds 525m, of which Richemont will receive Pounds
300m. Following the restructuring, it will own 61 per cent of Rothmans and
70 per cent of Vendome.
