FT  19 JAN 93 / Mahathir set for clash with sultans
MALAYSIA seems set for a constitutional crisis resulting from an
increasingly bitter confrontation between the government of Dr Mahathir
Mohamad, the prime minister, and the country's nine sultans (hereditary
rulers).
Dr Mahathir yesterday brought constitutional amendments into parliament
which would abolish rights guaranteeing the sultans' immunity from
prosecution in courts. The amendments would prevent them pardoning members
of their own families and would relax rules on reporting of any royal
misdeeds.
The sultans issued a statement shortly before parliamentary proceedings
began rejecting Dr Mahathir's amendments, saying the future of the monarchy
in Malaysia was under threat.
Legal experts say the Malaysian constitution stipulates a majority of the
sultans, each of whom takes a turn as king, must give their consent to any
constitutional changes affecting the monarchy.
Dr Mahathir insists he has the right to push the amendments through
parliament. He rejects criticism that he wants to abolish the monarchy but
says the sultans must be made accountable for their actions.
The present stand-off originated in an incident late last year when one of
the sultans is alleged to have beaten up a sports official. The local media,
which had once avoided all adverse comment on the sultans, then began
fulsome reporting of other alleged royal misdemeanours.
Dr Mahathir insists most of the population firmly supports the government's
moves against the royalty, although the sultans are still regarded by some
sections of the community as an important symbol of the country's Malay and
Islamic identity.
The prime minister's critics say he is seeking to increase his executive
powers. Parliament is today expected to approve the government's amendments.
It is then likely the sultans will challenge the action in the courts.
That could lead to a long legal battle and possible unrest in the Malay
community as government and royalty vie for popular support.
