FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (18): Clinton seeks a new start - Sino-US
relations
THE MEETING due to be held in Seattle tomorrow between President Clinton and
Mr Jiang Zemin, China's president and communist party general secretary,
could signal a new phase in the complex relationship between Washington and
Beijing.
Though officials of both sides have been cautious about the meeting's likely
outcome, China has called it a 'Sino-US summit'. Mr Li Peng, the premier,
said earlier this month: 'It conforms with the common interests of the two
countries and is conducive to safeguarding peace and stability in the
Asia-Pacific region for China and the United States to maintain a stable and
constructive relationship.'
Mr Clinton has set the tone for deeper links by embarking on a new
multi-faceted approach to China in recent months.
On the one hand, he has set new conditions for next year's renewal of
China's most-favoured nation (MFN) trading status - thereby creating new
strains in the relationship and posing a severe threat not only to Chinese
economic progress but also to US exports and imports. US officials insist
that MFN status will be revoked if there is not significant progress on
human rights, trade and nuclear proliferation issues.
The US has also stepped up pressure on China by imposing sanctions because
of weapons sales to Pakistan. Relations were further impaired by US pursuit
of a Chinese ship it suspected of carrying poison gas ingredients to Iran.
An inspection found no trace of them and China demanded an apology.
But on the other hand, Mr Clinton has sent a number of top officials to
Beijing to engage China in much higher-level discussions on issues such as
trade, human rights, agriculture and military matters.
The US agriculture secretary, Mr Mike Espy, last month became the first of
Mr Clinton's cabinet to visit Beijing and senior officials from the State
and Defense departments as well as the deputy US Trade Representative have
all held talks there.
This contrasts with the approach of the Bush administration, which
substantially reduced official contacts after the 1989 Tiananmen Square
killings but resisted congressional pressure to set conditions on MFN
renewal.
The Bush approach provoked fierce criticism from congress members concerned
about human rights, but also caused alarm among academics and businessmen
who saw Washington failing effectively to address China's growing economic
power and regional influence.
The new US tack is an attempt to construct an over-arching policy of
engagement with the aim that issues which are thorny, such as trade and
human rights, become simply part of a much broader relationship and lose the
high profile which hampers progress upon them. It recognises not only
China's sheer complexity but also its rapid economic development, in which
US business is deeply involved, and its growing regional links.
Recent contacts have been friendly and US officials see scattered signs of
progress, for example on specific trade issues such as pirating of
copyright. China has undertaken to publish all regulations relating to trade
in a new official gazette, removing the bugbear of secret rules. There are
hints of a closer understanding on implementation of a memorandum on prison
labour.
However, in spite of these indications, US officials are also at pains to
make clear that the threat of MFN termination is real. Mr Warren
Christopher, secretary of state, told businessmen last month that MFN could
not be renewed next June unless there was steady and significant progress on
human rights, trade and nuclear proliferation.
The US demands are mainly general. But US officials said specific progress
must be seen in implementation of the memorandum on exports of
prison-produced goods, and on the granting of passports to eligible Chinese
citizens who wish to travel.
The picture as seen from the US is mixed. China is thought to have freed
most of the dissidents who were arrested for their 1989 activities in the
Tiananmen Square demonstrations, and has released some other dissidents.
However, it also launched a further round of arrests of dissidents and
reporters and new trials are expected soon.
Against the greater freedom of speech now evident in China must be set a
recent official announcement which could signal a clampdown on satellite
receivers which allow millions of Chinese to watch the Hong Kong-based Star
Television network and other satellite broadcasters.
China's view of these issues starts from an entirely different position and
results in vehement rejection of the US approach.
The Beijing government's concerns are principally domestic, with its main
foreign policy objectives being preservation of its borders and the
development of friendly relations with all countries so as to permit
continued economic development. It believes that development of the economy
takes precedence over pursuit of a western concept of human rights. Beijing
rejects the idea that a developed China poses a threat to the world as
'shallow'.
It says that trade and human rights are separate issues which should be
treated as such, and that MFN is normal practice rather than a favour for
the US to grant.
Termination of MFN status would be a double-edged sword, says Mr Wu Jianmin,
foreign ministry spokesman.
'Both China and the US will be hurt,' he says, pointing out that the two
governments have common interests in economic development.
'A lot of Americans do not really understand much about China,' says Mr Wu.
'Quite often there is a gap between people's perception and reality.'
Mr Wu wants closer contacts including further visits by US senators and
congressmen. When they visit, he says, they 'come to realise that we are not
talking about human rights on the moon or in a vacuum. We are talking about
human rights on the earth.'
