FT  20 JUL 93 / US airlines may be opened to more foreign investment
PRIVATE SECTOR foreign airlines would be allowed to own up to 49 per cent of
the voting stock of US carriers under the tentative recommendations of an
emergency government commission on the US airline industry.
However, such deals would only be allowed on condition that the foreign
governments concerned agreed 'liberal' aviation pacts with Washington. At
present foreign companies may own up to 49 per cent of the equity of a US
carrier, but only 25 per cent of the voting stock.
In its working draft, the commission also calls for tax relief for US
airlines, asserting that the industry suffers from 'a large and
disproportionate tax burden.' However, it says, 'the industry itself,
primarily by taking on excessive debt, must bear its fair share of the
burden for its current state'.
President Bill Clinton appointed the commission in May to find ways of
strengthening the lossmaking industry. Members of the commission, who
divided themselves into four working groups to write the draft report, will
now thrash out their differences.
The draft recommendations, some of which were released yesterday, will be
reviewed by the full presidential commission and final recommendations made
in September. The draft report specifically rejects reregulating the
industry, which has seen the gradual removal of strict rules governing
fares, routes and working practices over the past decade. However, the
report calls for the close involvement of the US government in the
industry's business plans. It recommends the creation of a presidentially
appointed financial advisory committee, which would define 'financial health
standards for airlines and advise the secretary of transportation when an
airline's financial condition poses risks to itself or the industry'.
The transportation department would monitor the financial heath of airlines
and review, with the proposed financial advisory committee, a company's
financial plans. The secretary should use his existing authority to
'encourage a return to financial health', says the draft.
Among its recommendations on international trade policy, the draft warns
that the current system of negotiating bilateral aviation pacts 'is no
longer conceptually sound nor sufficiently growth oriented'.
It calls for the negotiation of multinational agreements encompassing
liberal provisions for passenger and cargo services; charters; cross-border
investment and ownership; cabotage; market access; system capacity; and
customs and immigration facilities.
It wants the stature of international air service negotiations raised and an
ambassador-at-large appointed to lead them.
The draft report's recommendations also include the reduction of current US
ticket and cargo taxes.
