FT  27 MAR 93 / Arts: A King tempted - A sometimes risque US exhibition
'Oh Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation . . . ', begin the Penitential
Psalms written, according to medieval opinion, by King David.
AROUND 1500, Jean Bourdichon, versatile court painter to the French king,
produced an astonishing image of the sort of thing guaranteed to excite the
Almighty's wrath: King David peering from a bow-window at a sizzling
Bathsheba. It is just one of many lovely things to be seen in The Bernard J.
Breslauer Collection of Manuscript Illuminations, now at New York's
Pierpoint Morgan Library on 39 East 36th Street (closed Mondays).
Sadly, this exhibition of 104 single illuminated leaves, publicly exhibited
for the first time, finishes on April 4. (The scholarly catalogue costing
Dollars 49.95 (Pounds 35.10) can be bought mail-order; 212-685-0008.)
Breslauer is a distinguished rare book-dealer who has built up his
remarkable collection over 25 years. It consists of illuminations dating
from the 11th to the 17th centuries, roughly half of them by Italian
Renaissance artists. Not to be overlooked is an early 20th century
contribution by the execrable Spanish Forger whose additions to two
14th-century Italian leaves have a certain piquancy: it was a director of
the Pierpoint Morgan Library who in the 1930s, debunked this now
sought-after faker.
Bathsheba, one the other hand, is very much the real thing, down to her
anatomically correct genitalia. Even the elder Cranach did not dare as much
with his goddesses and nymphs. His dumpy Bathsheba washing her feet is fully
dressed. Whereas minor 16th century German masters went further in their
erotic prints, the memorable thing about Bourdichon's Bathsheba is that she
should feature in a devotional book.
The four splendid Bourdichon leaves in the Breslauer collection once
belonged to the so-called Book of Hours of Henry VII, now in the British
Library in London. However, it is more than likely that this book was
painted not for Henry Tudor, but for the louche eye of a French king.
Traditionally, the Psalms were illustrated by the Penitence of King David,
expiating in the wilderness his sin of first committing adultery and then
sending Bathsheba's husband to his death in the front line. Penitent David
features in a Book of Hours made by a French painter for that much-sinning
monarch, Henry VIII.
It was quite another thing to show Bathsheba, the seductive little baggage
who caused all the trouble. Yet it appears that this became a speciality of
French illuminators. Bourdichon's bathing beauty suggests that there were
ways of cheering up the time a king was expected to spend on his knees.
No one now dismembers medieval manuscripts for their illuminations, as
collectors did so shamelessly in earlier generations. However, one benefit
of the practice is that a single leaf is a lot easier to display and view
than a bound book. An illustration for the month of October shows a party of
noblemen going hawking in delightful sun-hats. It was made for the sumptuous
Bona Sforza Hours, also in the British Library but minus 16 leaves stolen
when thieves broke into the workshop of the famous Milanese illustrator,
Giovanni Pietro Birago.
Birago valued his loss at a staggering 500 ducats - five times the value
that his contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci, put on his 'Madonna of the Rocks'.
Today, that might seem sufficiently unlikely to make us wonder if perhaps
the artist was trying it on. Because most of us rarely see medieval or
Renaissance books, there is a tendency for the type of paintings we do see
to skew our understanding of the range of skills which connoisseurs in the
Renaissance demanded of artists.
The special value of the Breslauer Collection is that its dozens of
dazzlingly virtuoso images challenge the supremacy of wood and canvas. None
does so more eloquently than Simon Bening's 'Rest on the Flight into Egypt',
one of six leaves in the exhibition by this great Bruges master. This scene
of St Joseph bringing his bonnet full of apples to the seated Virgin,
measures only 4 in by 3 in and yet, unquestionably, it is a tour-de-force.
A harmonious balance of blues and greens beckons the viewer into a landscape
which seems to stretch for miles. Tiny figures, Herod's soldiery, search
unavailingly through the immensity of crags, forests, and meadows although
the spectator feels that there can be no place for evil in this ethereal
country. What a fortunate man Breslauer must be. Might he now be persuaded
to extend his generosity to this side of the Atlantic?
