FT  10 AUG 93 / High stakes in title fight: Competing claims for land
Unravelling title to land and property is not easy in a country with a past
like Poland's.
It was occupied by the Germans in 1939. Then, in a 1945 deal between Stalin
and the western powers, its eastern and western boundaries were shifted
200km west, as it was given a large tract of former eastern Germany in
compensation for a 200km swathe of eastern Poland which was integrated into
the former Soviet Union.
During the war, the Nazis had already confiscated large numbers of buildings
and private estates. In the years that followed, the communist regime
continued the process, nationalising almost all the privately owned land in
Poland.
As in the rest of eastern Europe, the collapse of communism in Poland in the
1980s has meant the revival of the property issue. Growing numbers of former
owners and their heirs have demanded the return of their property, whether
it be land, factories, apartment blocks, houses or water mills.
The Polish government has been struggling to clarify and define the issues
involved in a restitution bill, designed to combine the interests of tens of
thousands of claimants with the rights of those who have been using their
property for decades.
For example, 2.7m hectares of land were confiscated from landowners after
the second world war. Of these, 1.7m hectares were distributed to peasant
farmers, who still hold the land. The 3,000-strong former landowners'
association says it only wants back land still held by the state.
In addition, 16,500 country houses, large and small, were confiscated. Only
200 remain habitable, largely because they were developed as schools,
conference centres or state farm headquarters.
If there is consensus on anything, it is that the issue must be resolved.
Without a restitution law, 'foreign and domestic investment and
privatisation remain impeded', says Nabarro Nathanson, the UK law firm, in
its study of the latest draft version of the bill.
Mr Maciej Raczkiewicz of Epstein Engineering, a US company operating in
Warsaw, agrees up to a point. 'It's a problem but not an overwhelming one,'
he says. 'Getting building permits out of the city bureaucracy causes more
of a headache.'
Developers who have faced repeated problems getting finance for their
buildings have blamed the delay on difficulties in clarifying land title.
But it is at least partly caused by an overloaded and inefficient
bureaucracy.
Indeed, over the past three years, western investors buying into Polish
enterprises have shown scant regard for the claims of former owners,
trusting government assurances that they would be compensated when the
restitution law was passed.
The Swarzedz furniture factory in northern Poland was one of the first state
companies to be privatised. When it was sold in a public share offer in
1991, the government held back 5 per cent of the equity to compensate for
the claims of two former owners who came forward.
PepsiCo Foods International, which bought control of the Warsaw-based Wedel
chocolate company in 1991, ignored the fact that Mr Karol Whitehead, an heir
of the former owner, had been trying for the past year to persuade the
government to recognise his well-documented claim to the factory.
'The heirs of the owners of E Wedel hold to this day all the prewar shares
of this company,' says Mr Whitehead.
Legally, however, wherever property was taken over in accord with communist
nationalisation decrees of 1945 and 1946, it remains the property of the
state until a restitution law is passed. Wherever a former owner can prove
that the nationalisation decrees were violated, property has been restored.
The draft law, which had started its passage through parliament before it
was dissolved at the end of May, provides for three forms of compensation.
These are: the return of the property in question; where that is impossible,
'equivalent' property; and third, compensation in the form of privatisation
coupons, which could be used to buy shares in privatised assets.
These provisions would apply only to Polish citizens domiciled in the
country at the time the law came into force, and not to the large number of
Polish people still living in exile.
The government is considering the creation of a 'reprivatisation reserve',
which would consist of 5 per cent of the equity in majority state-owned
joint stock companies and which would provide for the means to compensate
for property that cannot be physically restored.
However, with the outcome of elections on September 19 uncertain, no one
knows when the restitution law will be passed. Meanwhile, a senior official
in the privatisation ministry says of land that belongs to the Treasury
under the postwar decrees: 'At the moment there is no law which would permit
us to give this land back. When one is passed, then we will be able to do
something. Until then our hands are tied.'
