FT  27 AUG 93 / Police raid VW head offices: Homes of ex-GM executives
searched in probe into alleged espionage
MORE than 60 police and criminal investigators yesterday raided Volkswagen's
head offices and the homes of several VW executives to search for secret
data allegedly stolen from Adam Opel, the General Motors German subsidiary.
At 9.30am search squads simultaneously entered eight separate locations in
and around Wolfsburg in the most dramatic move yet in the four-month-old
investigation into allegations of industrial espionage against Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW's production director, and three colleagues.
The residences of the four men, all of whom abruptly joined VW from the US
group last March, are understood to have been among the targets. Also
searched was the VW management institute in Braunschweig, close to the
company headquarters in Wolfsburg, and the group's official guesthouse.
Around 20 public prosecution officials, an unknown number of officers from
the federal criminal bureau and 40 police from three municipal forces are
believed to have taken part.
The search had been suspended by 7.30pm, but officers were due to return
this morning, a VW spokesman said. He had no information on any material
which might have been removed.
The raid is the most significant development made known publicly since
confirmation in mid-July that secret Opel documents, some allegedly
assembled at Mr Lopez's instructions, had been found in the former home of
two of his associates. Speculation grew yesterday that Mr Lopez might be
forced to quit.
In a newspaper interview yesterday, Mr Klaus Liesen, head of the group's
supervisory board, backed away from former statements implying unconditional
backing for Mr Lopez. 'I will put my hand in the fire for no-one,' he said.
Yesterday's search comes at a delicate moment in efforts by Mr Gunter
Rexrodt, German economics minister, to broker peace talks between Mr
Ferdinand Piech, VW group chairman, and Mr David Herman, Opel chairman. The
minister was due to meet Mr Herman at Frankfurt airport last night, when he
was expected to present the Opel chief with a draft public apology from Mr
Piech for insinuations made by the VW head and colleagues against the GM
group.
Mr Franz Wauschkuhn, Mr Rexrodt's spokesman, said yesterday the government
had no interest in the legal issues, 'but we must think beyond the immediate
situation to the longer term'.
The minister was worried because of potential damage to relations between
the US and Germany. 'A way must be found for them to work together sensibly
. . . Asian competitors must be rubbing their hands,' Mr Wauschkuhn added.
Mr Liesen, appeared relaxed and well-rehearsed as the raid took place.
Several of the VW public relations team calmly repeated they had been
expecting a search, and welcomed it as a step likely to end the speculation
about Mr Lopez.
Mr Piech was out of the plant at the time of the raid, rumours about which
had circulated for almost two weeks.
Mr Georg Nauth spokesman for the Darmstadt public prosecutors' office in
charge of the criminal investigation, said time had been needed to question
witnesses and examine further evidence to pinpoint the data to be looked for
and the most likely places for it to be found.
It was unlikely that statements would be issued immediately on any possible
evidence uncovered, he said. Mr Nauth added that as well as interrogating
junior VW employees, who allegedly fed Opel data into the VW data base, the
prosecutor in charge of the case, Ms Dorothea Holland, had also questioned
Mr Carl Hahn, former VW chairman. Mr Lopez and his associates had not yet
been interviewed.
Opel said in a statement: 'We assume the investigating authorities do not
take such action without having strong reasons to do so.'
VW AND THE LOPEZ ESPIONAGE AFFAIR
Page 2
Rivals watch 'miracle man' self-destructing
Shy investigators relish the limelight
GM chief has the edge
Editorial Comment, Page 13
Lex, Page 14
VW takes sharp fall, Page 15
