FT  25 MAR 93 / Replacement of press watchdog urged
THE COMMONS national heritage committee yesterday entered the debate on
privacy and the press by publishing 43 recommendations intended to curb
excessive media intrusion into individuals' private lives.
The committee's report says that while a free society requires the freedom
to say and print items inconvenient to those in authority, all individuals
are entitled to a 'zone of privacy'.
Although the committee says prominent figures - such as royalty,
politicians, media personalities, business and sports celebrities - cannot
expect the same privacy rights as the general public, they must be allowed
to keep aspects of their lives out of the public gaze.
The report's main concern is with ordinary citizens, particularly innocent
victims of crime, who are caused additional distress by media attention.
The report severely criticises the Press Complaints Commission, the industry
watchdog. It suggests there have been many more breaches of the press code
of conduct than have been reported to the commission, which is faulted for
refusing to accept complaints from third parties and for not monitoring
press behaviour.
The committee argues that the commission should be replaced by a press
commission with more extensive powers to punish breaches of the code. The
code should be amended to refer to an 'area of privacy' as a fundamental
right and to delete references to anti-social conduct.
The report rejects the idea of a statutory press complaints tribunal, as
recommended by Sir David Calcutt in his recent review of press regulation.
'Unless future events show such a tribunal to be utterly unavoidable . . it
would be far preferable to rely on voluntary regulation.'
It calls instead for a protection of privacy law, which would make it a
civil offence to obtain or publish harmful or embarrassing personal
information and photographs, and persistently to intrude on individuals'
privacy.
Legislation would also make electronic bugging, unauthorised photography and
trespass criminal offences as the government has already pledged. In
addition, the report calls for intrusive surveillance devices to be
registered or licensed.
Legal aid should be available for actions brought under the legislation and
extended to cover defamation.
Civil and criminal offences could be defended on the grounds of public
interest, which would include preventing or exposing crime, protecting
health and safety and 'informing the public about matters directly affecting
the discharge of any public functions of the individual concerned'.
The proposed commission should be charged with upholding press freedom and
be able to enforce the code of practice by ordering the publication of
corrections, requiring the payment of compensation and fining offenders.
The new commission, says the report, should also set up a complaints
hotline, establish regional offices, conduct regular research into public
attitudes to the press and initiate inquiries into the industry.
The commission should be backed up by a government-funded press ombudsman,
accountable to parliament. The ombudsman could take similar measures to
enforce the code of practice, but would have statutory powers and the right
to refer cases to the High Court.
The report also adds that voluntary regulation of the press should be
strengthened by adherence to the code of practice part of editors' and
journalists' contracts.
Privacy and Media Intrusion, HMSO, Pounds 12.15.
MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE
A protection of privacy bill to prohibit obtaining and publishing harmful,
unauthorised or inaccurate information, and persistent intrusion of privacy.
Unauthorised eavesdropping and trespass to obtain personal information to be
made criminal offences.
Legal aid for libel actions brought under the bill and for defamation cases.
Replacement of Press Complaints Commission by a Press Commission, with
authority to enforce the press code of practice by fining offenders and
requiring payment of compensation.
Appointment of a publicly-funded press ombudsman with statutory power to
order corrections and apologies, fines and compensation and the right to
refer cases to the High Court.
Intrusive surveillance devices to be licensed or registered.
Compliance with code of practice to be written into employment contracts of
editors.
