FT  08 JUN 93 / Business and the Law: Haggling a discount on criminal
justice - John Mason on calls for formal plea-bargaining in England
The introduction of a formal system of plea bargaining into the English
criminal justice system - a move that would have far-reaching consequences
for the courts' handling of all crime from burglary to fraud - now appears a
distinct possibility.
Plea bargaining, where defendants agree to plead guilty in exchange for a
lesser sentence, is known to be under active consideration by the Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice due to report in July. The growing consensus
among lawyers is that the commission is likely to favour it if sufficient
safeguards can be built in.
The move, which is supported by the bulk of the legal establishment, is
driven by largely pragmatic considerations. The post-war rise in crime has
left the English legal system dangerously overstretched when dealing with
all forms of crime. Plea bargaining is seen as a means of radically reducing
the number of cases going to trial.
The legislation of the 1980s aimed at financial crime has created a separate
problem - lengthy and costly fraud trials. The problems encountered in fraud
trials, such as Blue Arrow, has left confidence in such proceedings dented.
There are a number of suggestions, such as earlier disclosure of the defence
case, on how to bring these trials under control. But the complex nature of
the offences means there is only limited room for improvement. The problems
of making these trials shorter and more manageable are likely to remain
almost intractable. Plea bargaining is seen by many as the most effective
solution.
To some degree, the introduction of formalised plea bargaining would amount
to an extension and formalisation of what already takes place. Although
officially discouraged, prosecutors and defence lawyers often confer
informally with the frequent result that some charges are dropped if a
defendant pleads guilty to a lesser charge.
But what is not possible is negotiation about sentence. It was once possible
to obtain a reasonable indication from the judge before trial what length of
sentence he had in mind. The scope for this, however, has been reduced in
recent years.
Under the plea bargaining system favoured by most judges and barristers,
judges would indicate the length of sentence before trial by reference to a
system of guaranteed 'discounts' for an early plea.
A point of contention would be whether or not to adopt the American practice
of giving the prosecution the power to decide sentence discounts - a power
seen by many lawyers as likely to result in unfair pressure on defendants to
plead.
With fraud and other financial crime, plea bargaining is also in line with
current thinking about the enforcement of financial regulation. With a loss
of confidence in the UK's current self-regulatory regime expressed by
several leading City figures over the past three years, many have looked to
the model provided by the American Securities and Exchange Commission as the
way forward.
This is the approach favoured by the Serious Fraud Office whose director, Mr
George Staple, has advocated plea bargaining to the Royal Commission as the
most effective way of cutting the time and expense of fraud trials.
Mr Staple's thinking, based on the American experience, goes further. In
line with the reassessment of which financial misdemeanours are dealt with
by the courts and which by regulatory authorities, he sees the SFO and other
criminal prosecutors collaborating further with regulators. Plea bargaining
could then be part of a system which includes substantial fines, restitution
to the victims of financial crime and other regulatory penalties such as
disqualification.
The intention is clear. Mr Staple emphasises that the public interest
demands that, because of the seriousness of some offences, such cases be
dealt with by the courts.
But the prosecuting authorities will be looking for a guilty plea at a very
early stage, perhaps even before charges are brought.
The scenario envisaged is one where, after the SFO first acts, defendants
co-operate from the outset knowing that plea bargaining will be available.
Deals will be done along the lines of those done in the USA in the case of
Mr Ivan Boesky.
How this would work in practice is uncertain. With more 'routine' crimes,
such as burglary, the issues are more straightforward and most lawyers
expect the introduction of plea bargaining would produce fairly instant
results.
With white collar crime, the outcome of its introduction is less
predictable. One lawyer speculated how the Guinness scandal might have been
dealt with had there been formal plea-bargaining. How would Mr Gerald
Ronson, who received a one year jail sentence and a Pounds 5m fine for his
role, have responded if given the chance to negotiate at an earlier stage?
Guilty pleas from Mr Ronson and others convicted over Guinness would have
avoided the long court proceedings that took place over some six years. On
the other hand, how much room for manoeuvre would the judge and prosecutor
have in such a case before the final deal was seen publicly as resulting in
too lenient a punishment?
The public appetite for such a pragmatic approach to the delivery of justice
would have to be addressed. Safeguards to prevent the innocent being
pressurised into pleading guilty is the other main concern.
Among defence solicitors in white collar crime, opinions vary on how great a
danger this would present. According to Mr Anthony Burton, of Simons,
Muirhead and Burton, such problems would be relatively easily dealt with in
the case of the average fraud defendant.
Usually intelligent, middle class and well-versed in the techniques of
negotiation, most fraud defendants would be better able to cope with the
pressures of bargaining, he believed. They would also have been in contact
with their lawyers for longer than 'blue collar' defendants and be surer of
their advice.
Mr Burton sees principled reasons for introducing plea bargaining. Any
defendant should have the right to know whether or not he faces a jail term.
But he does not think this will necessarily lead to the very early pleadings
some prosecutors hope for. Defendants would still want to wait until the
case against them was clear before starting to negotiate.
Mr John Clitheroe, of London solicitors Kingsley Napley, foresees the
introduction of formal plea bargaining resulting in a tremendous increase in
the pressures on both defendants and their legal advisers.
Any advice to plead guilty could only be given with considerable time and
thought, particularly given the possibility that pleading guilty to a less
serious charge could still result in loss of reputation or livelihood
through disqualification.
A business background and experience of negotiation may have only limited
value to the white collar defendant considering making a plea, he said.
Unlike many burglars, it is likely to be their first encounter with the
criminal justice system.
'There is nobody in the world who panics more than the City professional
facing the prospect of going to jail,' he said.
