FT  05 MAR 93 / A vote could set them free
Britain's political logjam could be broken by a well-tested explosive force
 -the referendum. Both sides could use it. The prime minister could blast
away the gridlock in the Conservative party by promising its anti-Maastricht
rebels a plebiscite when (if?) the government decides to exchange sterling
for a European currency. The leader of the opposition could unite the Labour
party around his campaign for 'a citizens' democracy' by undertaking to
consult the people on proportional representation.
There is one small snag. Both Johns - Major and Smith - are against
referenda. They regard the device as unconstitutional, an affront to the
sovereignty of parliament. This objection is specious. Plebiscites have two
functions. First, they express the popular will. Important constitutional
changes should be endorsed by direct vote. Second, they rescue politicians
in trouble. This is not a wholly ignoble cause. They are all rascals, but
they are our rascals. From time to time they have to be extricated from the
consequences of their own follies.
The 1975 referendum on Britain's membership of what was then called the
Common Market fulfilled both functions. It saved the Labour government, and
it legitimised Britain's membership of the EC. The 1979 referenda on the
devolution of parliamentary powers to Scotland and Wales, also called by
Labour, was a party fix. Scotland voted yes, but not by a large enough
majority to overcome obstacles devised by parliamentary opponents of
devolution.
A party fix would do nicely for the Tories right now. The parliamentary
battle over the bill to ratify the Maastricht treaty is blocking normal
government business. The Conservatives are at war with themselves. A quarter
of their normally loyal backbenchers have voted against the bill, or
abstained. The cabinet is sorely divided; one minister confessed the other
day that he had contemplated resignation over Maastricht 'many times'.
An unwritten, perhaps unspoken, deal has been struck. Europhobe ministers
will stand by Mr Major and support his bill. The headline scares of last
weekend are groundless. Messrs Howard, Portillo and Lilley are not plotting
a Thatcherite coup. In return, the prime minister will cast aside thoughts
of rejoining the exchange rate mechanism before the next general election.
That comforts the sceptics, who believe that the ERM will collapse. Some of
them assume that full monetary union will not be possible in their
lifetimes. A promise of a plebiscite on British participation in a single
currency union would add extra assurance. It would cost Mr Major nothing: he
cannot bind future parliaments. He would have to eat some past words, but
that is a price he may have to accept, if he finds himself with his back
against the wall with the rebels' spears at his throat.
Meanwhile he lives in hopes. He is relying on signs of the end of recession,
plus rousing speeches such as the one he is due to make at a party conclave
in Harrogate tomorrow, to see him through. He may escape the humiliation of
being forced to concede a referendum, but he cannot bank on it. He is living
from day to day.
The Labour leader is playing a longer game. His party's commission on
electoral reform is expected to report next month. Whether or not it comes
out firmly in favour of PR for elections to the Commons Mr Smith will have
to take a view. The one most likely to keep his party united would be an
indication of his personal preference, plus a promise of a referendum. If he
follows the logic of his own recent strong speech on constitutional reform
his leaning should be towards PR.
Let us ignore for just a moment the usual crass calculations about what this
would do for relations with the Liberal Democrats. A referendum on the
method of election is justifiable on its own merits. Voters everywhere are
becoming disillusioned with politicians. Electorates that have been
consulted show that they are keenly aware of the merits of competing
systems. The Italians, who have too long endured an unwieldy list mechanism
may yet discover that the people are better judges of what is in their own
interests than are the parties. In Ireland, for example, Fianna Fail failed
twice - in 1958 and 1968 - to end the single transferable vote method of
elections to the Dail.
In New Zealand the voters have spoken with dramatic force. The two main
parties stumbled into last September's referendum along a trail of broken
promises, slippery statements, and competitive bids for popularity.
According to a paper delivered by the political scientist Richard Mulgan at
the Australian National University, politicians from these parties
'confidently expected that they could draw on traditional Anglo prejudices
against the immobilism and unaccountability of coalition governments and
against the smoke-filled-room aroma of party lists'.
They therefore loaded the dice in favour of the Westminster
first-past-the-post mechanism that has long suited them so well. Voters were
asked to think, first about whether they wanted a change and, subsequently,
about which of four alternative systems they would prefer. On a 55 per cent
turnout, 85 per cent favoured an end to first-past-the-post and 70 per cent
chose the German model, with its mixture of constituency and list MPs. This
from New Zealand, which harbours a closer replica of English society than
any other on earth.
Before he talks of a referendum, Mr Smith needs to think. A clumsy
introduction of PR into the fag-end of last April's election campaign
appears to have cost Labour dearly. A careless commitment to a plebiscite in
the next Labour manifesto would leave several questions unanswered, not
least about why Mr Smith favoured a change (if he did) while his deputy, Mrs
Margaret Beckett, opposed one (which she almost certainly would). Those who
still dream of Labour ruling on its own would be set against those who
believe that it stands a chance only in coalitions. The Labour leader would
have to come off his personal fence, even if he allowed his immediate
colleagues to campaign against one another, as they did in 1975. Will it
happen? Picture Mr Smith striding out in front of his party the better to
lead it. I don't believe it either, but it would be explosive.
