FT  22 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Iraq inquiry told of chemical sales
A GOVERNMENT-owned company exported to Jordan equipment of possible use in
chemical and biological warfare in spite of intelligence warnings that the
country was being used to divert defence-related goods to Iraq, the Scott
arms-for-Iraq inquiry heard yesterday.
Giving evidence was Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Glazebrook, a retired army
officer who was a member of a Ministry of Defence working group that vetted
defence sales to Iraq in the 1980s.
Lt-Col Glazebrook said defence intelligence had circulated information in
November 1984 suggesting that Jordan was being used as a diversionary route.
Nevertheless nuclear, biological and chemical (NBC) protective clothing and
armoury and large quantities of a chemical antidote were included in a
Pounds 270m defence package with Jordan at the end of 1985.
The package, which included radar equipment, spares for tanks, and a variety
of ammunition, was arranged by International Military Services, a company
wholly owned at the time by the Ministry of Defence.
Defence sales to Jordan when the package was signed largely fell outside the
restrictions covering exports to Iraq and Iran, particularly of equipment
related to chemical warfare of the kind then being waged between the two
countries in the Gulf conflict of the 1980s.
According to internal Ministry of Defence documents made available to the
Scott inquiry, Lt-Col Glazebrook conducted a virtual one-man crusade within
his ministry to alert senior colleagues to the implications of the
intelligence warnings on Jordan.
The documents suggest that Lt-Col Glazebrook's efforts intensified after he
learned that sensitive NBC contracts had been added to the original
Jordanian defence package.
At yesterday's hearing, Lt-Col Glazebrook said: 'I had an uncomfortable
feeling that there were things going on behind my back.'
The additional items of NBC protective equipment were on a quarterly report
sent by the Ministry of Defence export sales department to Lady Thatcher,
then prime minister, in February 1987. At the time Jordan was negotiating
extra financing to cover its defence package.
In a memo to his superiors at the MoD, two months later Lt-Col Glazebrook
asked: 'Is this another case of IMS smuggling NBC equipment to Iraq in
contradiction of HMG's guidelines?'
The MoD, under pressure from Lt-Col Glazebrook, subsequently agreed to
tighten monitoring of defence sales to Jordan but only after the
controversial items in the defence package had been justified.
According to Lt-Col Glazebrook, the MoD in 1987 also approved the export of
parts for ground to ground missiles of a kind that were also made available
to the Iraqis by the then Soviet Union.
The inquiry hearing continues today with Lt-Col Glazebrook as witness.
