FT  03 JUN 93 / Patten's attack angers head teachers
THE RIFT between the government and the teaching profession deepened
yesterday after Mr John Patten, the education secretary, accused head
teachers of 'turning back the clock to an educational dark age'.
Mr Patten's speech to the annual conference of the National Association of
Head Teachers in Newcastle upon Tyne met with a fiercely hostile reaction,
punctuated by hisses, jeers and shouts of 'rubbish'. Mr David Hart, NAHT
general secretary, said it was the roughest reception head teachers had ever
given an education secretary.
Writing in today's Financial Times on school league tables, Mr Patten says:
'Some (people) now seem to want to conceal information . . . It cannot be
right that education should be left - uniquely - as the public service for
which there is no freely available information on performance.'
Disputes over national curriculum testing and school league tables
overshadowed Mr Patten's announcement at the conference that sweeping
reforms of teacher training in primary schools would be published next week.
He said the burden would be shifted from higher education towards schools
and 'new routes into teacher training' would be opened up.
Delegates believed this signalled the end to the profession's 'graduates
only' status which it has enjoyed since 1972. The Department for Education
will publish full details of the reforms next week.
Mr Hart said the speech had been the opportunity for people to release pent
up feelings which had grown up over several months.
'If Mr Patten was not able to anticipate that he would receive an attitude
that was somewhat hostile, then he has totally misjudged the mood of the
profession,' he said.
'League tables do not make any contribution to the improvement of schools.'
Conference motions calling for a new, wider-ranging review of the national
curriculum, and for league tables of school performance to be discontinued,
were passed unanimously. Mr Patten described this as an attempt 'to reinvent
the past and go back to the closed secret garden of education'.
The three biggest teachers union are boycotting national curriculum tests,
due to start in secondary schools on Monday.
David Owen adds: Labour responded by claiming Mr Patten's speech had 'set
back the teaching profession a hundred years'.
Mr Win Griffiths, shadow schools minister, said the education secretary had
downgraded and deprofessionalised teaching and expected people to believe
this would improve quality.
'Teachers are, and must remain, professionals and not technicians,' he said.
Patten faces jeers, Page 11
Quality control to stay, Page 20
