FT  06 DEC 93 / Equity Markets: Investors monitor franc - Currencies
Today's French repo tender will be the focus of most market activity as
traders wait to see whether the franc continues its rise following last
Friday's rate cut.
The Bank lowered its intervention rate by 25 basis points to 6.20 per cent,
triggering expectation that the franc would rise further to regain its old
ERM floor and then move up to around FFr3.41 against the D-Mark - its level
before the summer currency crisis.
On Thursday the Bundesbank set off a round of minor interest rate cuts
around Europe by setting its repurchase rate at 6 per cent for an
unprecedentedly-long period of five weeks.
Even though the German central bank left its main Lombard and discount rates
unchanged, this move led to cuts in Belgium, Spain, France and the
Netherlands.
The franc has been strong enough to weather a cut in its rate for some time,
and market observers regarded the easing as a fait accompli after the rate
cuts in other countries. Today's current account for France will be another
bright spot. Imports' bigger fall than exports in 1993 also helped to
underpin the franc. Trade growth is expected to add 0.6 per cent to gross
domestic product this year and next.
European interest rate cuts will help the markets digest whatever comes out
of the Brussels summit on December 10. If Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime
minister, has to give ground on agriculture, then a cut in French interest
rates might ease the pain.
But if the summit sets the scene for a collapse in the trade talks - though
this is looking increasingly unlikely as all have committed themselves to a
successful conclusion - then currencies will undoubtedly be greatly
affected, especially the most heavily-traded.
If the GATT talks go to plan, this will set the tone for a gentle rise in
the dollar. The US recovery seems firmly established with economists
expecting GDP to approach 5 per cent in the fourth quarter. Some expect to
see the dollar at DM1.75 by early in the New Year, aided by lower European
rates.
This week should be something of an anti-climax after the excitements of
last week's Budget, which sent the UK stock market to a new high. The pound
should though derive some support from economic statistics, such as consumer
credit, during the week. An increase of around Pounds 350m in net
outstanding credit is projected, which would be consistent with signs of a
tentative consumer-led recovery.
The trade data, meanwhile, have been confusing given the lack of
comprehensive statistics. Exports appear firm.
