FT  03 FEB 93 / Ex-SAS man tells jury of NCP spying
A SECURITY company hired by National Car Parks to spy on Europarks, its main
business rival, prolonged its industrial espionage to earn more money from
NCP, an Old Bailey jury heard yesterday.
Preliminary investigations into Europarks by KAS, the security company set
up by Sir David Stirling, founder of the Special Air Service, indicated the
company was winning car park contracts fairly by undercutting NCP, the court
heard.
Europarks was not winning business by obtaining confidential information
about NCP as its rival had initially suspected.
Identified only as Mr C, a former consultant with KAS agreed the contract
had been revived as an 'earner' on the initiative of Mr Kenneth Edwards, a
KAS finance director, and others.
Mr C, a former SAS soldier, said he had then briefed Ms Jane Turpin, a
former Army captain, on security procedures before she was planted as a mole
in Europarks' organisation. Mr Simon Hewitt, then a manager with KAS, and Mr
Edwards had separately told him of their intention to use Ms Turpin to 'get
the information or to see if there was any information'.
Mr C agreed that the management of KAS, which he had once regarded as the
'Rolls Royce' of security companies, was more than 'a bit of a shambles'.
Mr Hewitt and Mr Gordon Layton, NCP chief executive, both deny conspiring to
defraud Europarks by dishonestly acquiring information relating to its
business affairs between January 1987 and January 1989.
Earlier Mr David Paterson, another former KAS employee, described how he
wrote a feasibility report outlining a possible covert operation to gain
information about Europarks and its personnel as well as another project to
identify security deficiencies in NCP.
He also described his attempts to secure a job with Europarks using a false
curriculum vitae which left out his work as a policeman and
counter-insurgence intelligence operative in Rhodesia. He admitted deceiving
Europarks but he had regarded the NCP project as the legitimate activity of
a security company.
The trial continues today.
