FT  06 MAY 93 / Letter: Africa needs new economic medicine
Sir, Your comment on our Africa: Make or Break report ('Diagnosing Africa's
ills', April 29), is right to point to the past and present policy failures
of some African governments. Misguided economic policies, autocracy, endemic
corruption and armed conflict have been part of the lethal cocktail which
threatens to consign the region's citizens to deepening poverty.
This is why northern governments should encourage the moves towards
democratisation, peace and economic policy realism now taking place in many
African countries with a 'Marshall plan' for recovery.
Seven years after the Group of Seven industrial countries grudgingly
accepted the need for debt relief, the world's poorest region is being
drained of Dollars 10bn annually.
There can be no moral or economic justification for this, especially in the
wake of the massive debt relief measures agreed for Russia. This is why
Oxfam is calling on Britain to press for a new initiative on African debt at
the G7 summit in July.
Structural adjustment programmes (SAPs), implemented by African governments
under the tutelage of the World Bank and the IMF, have failed to create a
platform for economic recovery and even more conspicuously to address the
challenge of poverty alleviation. The World Bank's own most recent review
confirmed that SAPs have a particularly bad record in terms of restoring
investment, the yardstick against which recovery prospects must be measured.
In part, this can be traced to the impact of deflationary monetary policies
and sweeping trade liberalisation measures under SAPs. These have exposed
fragile, but potentially competitive, manufacturing industries to increased
competition in the face of spiralling interest rates and rising import
costs. The predictable result has been disinvestment, de-industrialisation
and mounting unemployment.
Rather than apportion blame between doctor and patient, surely it is time to
recognise that both are hooked on the wrong medicine. It is time for the
World Bank and IMF to surrender their dogmatic attachment to an outmoded set
of economic prescriptions. What is needed is a new approach to adjustment,
based on redistribution policies, selective import liberalisation, more
carefully phased market reforms and above all a commitment to increased
investment in human capital.
Stewart Wallis,
overseas director,
Oxfam, 274 Banbury Road,
Oxford OX2 7DZ
