FT  21 OCT 93 / Political Notebook: The real threat to Mr Major
IT IS Mr John Major's critics on the right of the Tory party who grab the
headlines. It is his once-natural but now disgruntled allies on the centre
and the left who will decide his future.
Conservative MPs have returned to Westminster in sullen rather than
rebellious mood. Renewed unease over the imposition of value added tax on
domestic fuel and coal industry closures and the risk of a Commons revolt
over rail privatisation provide a warning of further storms ahead.
For the time being though the prime minister's most vocal rightwing
opponents have taken their lead from Baroness Thatcher.
The 'One of Us' rhetoric of the party's Blackpool conference has persuaded
them that Mr Major is at least a partial prisoner of his predecessor's
ideology.
They agree with Lady Thatcher that to sink him now would merely hand the
game to the altogether less malleable Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor.
This conditional, and often disdainful, loyalty from the irreconcilables has
been strengthened by the mood of constituency activists. More than one rebel
MP has been told in no uncertain terms by his local association that further
disloyalty may result in de-selection.
Then there are the forthcoming elections to the party's backbench committees
at Westminster. Last year the rightwing swept the board, winning virtually
all the main posts on the 1922 Committee and the executive of the finance
committee.
Many of them subsequently defied the government over the Maastricht treaty
and have also campaigned vocifer-ously against tax increases.
The threat of a counter-coup from government loyalists in the annual
elections which follow next month's Queen's Speech has persuaded them of the
wisdom of a period of relative silence.
The expectation is that Mr Major will quietly discourage a left/right battle
for the committee jobs. In return the right will give tacit support to a
modest package of tax increases in the Budget next month.
So the prime minister, who resumed this week the 'back to basics' theme of
his party conference speech, believes he has bought himself a breathing
space.
There is a price. The most striking feature of the post-holiday gossip in
the lobbies and bars of Westminster this week has been the vehemence of the
attacks on Mr Major from the centre and the left of the party.
The rhetoric of the conference has left a sour taste in the mouths of those
on the Tory backbenches - and in his government - who have consistently
backed Mr Major's approach to Europe, the economy and the welfare state.
Mr Peter Lilley is a particular target. He is accused, even by one or two of
his cabinet colleagues, of exploiting the prime minister's weakness to evade
the rules of collective responsibility.
Friends of the social security secretary deny he is disloyal. Mr Major is
said to have congratulated him personally on his controversial conference
speech. They do not dispute though that as one of the so-called 'bastards'
in the cabinet he is vociferous in pressing a Thatcherite agenda.
The important point though is that Mr Major is being accused by his natural
supporters of abandoning friends in order to appease his enemies. If he has
become a prisoner of the right, why should the centre-left support him?
The question overstates the shift over the past few weeks. The rhetoric may
have a Thatcherite edge but the important people in Mr Major's government -
Mr Douglas Hurd, Mr Michael Heseltine and Mr Clarke - have not abandoned
their commitment to one-nation Toryism.
Perception, however, often counts as much as reality in politics. In the
rough months ahead a truce with his party's Thatcherite right will not be
enough to restore Mr Major's political authority.
To negotiate the inevitable political rows over rail and coal privatisation,
over the Conservative manifesto for the European elections and over higher
taxes, he will need enthusiastic support on the backbenches. For now he has
lost it.
The talk of a prime minister 'on probation' is being heard on the left as
well as the right.
Ministers have joined those who are ready to admit they would find it
difficult to support Mr Major if the government suffered a bad defeat in
next summer's European and local elections. They wince every time they hear
Lady Thatcher congratulate him on his rediscovery of her brand of
Conservatism.
Mr Major may need, for the time being, the quiescence of the Tory right. But
if he does not represent the silent majority on the Tory backbenches he does
not represent anyone. It was they, after all, who got rid of Lady Thatcher.
