FT  30 JUL 93 / Coalition to push hard for reform
DOCUMENTS intended to outline the policies to be pursued by the coalition of
parties aiming to form Japan's next government yesterday provided clues to
some of the issues which could easily divide them.
In putting together the policy statements, the seven parties from the lower
house, plus one pro-reform grouping from the upper house, were careful to
pay respect to the sensitivities of each member and use language vague
enough to keep everyone happy.
The coalition members are the Social Democratic party, the Japan Renewal
party, the Komeito, the Japan New party, the New Harbinger party, the
Democratic Socialist party, and the United Social Democratic party. They
were joined by the Democratic Reform party, an upper house group, which will
not vote for the prime minister.
Their policy agenda began with an all-embracing, idealistic agreement
affirming their intention to push for political reform by the end of this
year, and made clear that there will be no sudden shifts in foreign or
economic policy. They are in favour of peace, market forces, and safe food
and energy supplies.
More interesting is the fine detail further down in their accord, which
promises a 'people-oriented' budget next year, as well as the
decentralisation of government functions, a pet policy of Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa, the JNP leader and a former provincial governor, who is annoyed by
the concentration of resources in Tokyo.
The parties agreed to discuss an income tax reduction, which is already on
the discussion table, and to co-operate with other nations in solving
international trade imbalances through 'market-oriented economic rules,' a
reference to the US pressure on Japan to reduce its large and growing trade
surplus.
While supporting a resolution of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade
talks, the parties declare they are opposed to the opening of Japan's rice
market, one of the still unsettled agricultural issues and of particular
interest to politically influential farmers' groups.
However, Mr Hosokawa, as well as senior members of the JRP, have argued in
favour of rice imports, and the policy appears to have been included to
ensure the support of the SDP, the largest opposition party, which is
against liberalisation. Trade reformers in the JRP may be counting on a
collapse of the coalition before a Uruguay Round agreement.
The SDP had also opposed participation in the UN peacekeeping operation in
Cambodia, but has relented for the sake of the coalition, which says Japan
should 'co-operate in UN-led international peacekeeping operations'. The
parties also plan to 'pursue the reform of the UN,' presumably including a
permanent seat on the UN security council.
A coalition government would want to 'reform the education system' and make
Japanese children 'individualistic and independent.'
Foreign ministry officials expressed concern that a coalition government
would be unable to react quickly to an unexpected crisis. There was also
concern at the ministry that the parties would want to freeze or cut defence
spending if they are in charge of preparing the next budget. Another foreign
ministry official said the coalition will have difficulty dealing with tough
trade requests from the US.
Officials at the finance ministry expected no substantial changes in
budgetary or taxation policies by a coalition, and are reassured that Mr
Tsutomu Hata, JRP leader, is a former finance minister.
COALITION'S POLICY ACCORD
Reform of the political system by the end of the year, including the
introduction of system of single-seats and proportional representation, as
well as tougher punishment for corruption and a ban on corporate donations.
Strengthen Japan's international profile by playing an important role in the
quest for peace and disarmament by honouring existing basic policies on
diplomacy and defence
Base ecnomomic policies on market forces, and maintain co-operation with
other countries in a stable development programme; take responsibility for
strict safety controls on food and energy generation.
Show remorse for involvement in the (second world) war, and show willingness
to promote peace in and development of Asia and the world.
Encourage development of a lively, welfare-minided, and cultured society
