FT  23 APR 93 / Technology: Vorsprung durch aluminium - Audi and Alcoa are
preparing to launch a tough but lightweight luxury car
When Audi launches its latest top-of-the-range luxury car next spring it
will be the culmination of one of the few joint venture projects between a
European and a US company to have reached a successful outcome. For the car
will be built mainly of aluminium, using technology jointly developed by
Audi, the up-market subsidiary of Germany's Volkswagen group, and the
Aluminium Company of America, the western world's biggest aluminium group.
How was it possible for companies with such different cultures to stay the
course during the 11 years the project - called the aluminium intensive
vehicle project - needed to come to fruition?
The answer, it seems, is that the bosses at both companies were personally
involved at the start, were dedicated to the project, and never gave up
pushing for its ultimate success.
Audi and Alcoa set themselves some daunting objectives and it was not clear
until well into the project that these could be achieved. As Heinrich Timm,
manager of the Audi team involved in the project and an engineer who has
been with it since the start, says: 'At the begining nobody could guarantee
that the concept would work.'
The companies set out to design and build an all-aluminium car. But
aluminium is much more expensive than steel, the traditional material used
for car construction, so it was not going to be viable simply to substitute
aluminium for other materials in most of the components.
Instead, the partners set out to design a car that had many fewer individual
components and structures than were used in steel vehicles. This involved
developing new aluminium alloys which would be safer than steel - which
would crumple in a controlled way, for example, if a vehicle was in a crash.
At the same time, it was recognised that constructing an aluminium car would
require a very different approach from the conventional car assembly line.
New production processes had to be developed too.
Consequently, there were many times when the dedication of the men at the
top was tested. There were times when engineers began to believe some of the
objectives simply could not be reached; times when accountants asked
searching questions about the budgets.
But the bosses would not accept defeat. At Audi there was Ferdinand Piech,
the 'father' of the project and Audi's chairman, until he was promoted
recently to become chairman of the Volkswagen group. He believed Audi was
underrated in the car market and deserved a 'place at the top table' with
German rivals BMW and Mercedes, and Jaguar of the UK.
He also believed that Audi would not gain this recognition by producing
'me-too' cars which simply copied the virtues of those made by the
competition. Audi needed to set itself apart by taking a technological lead
over its rivals. With this objective in mind, 11 years ago Audi launched the
world's first four-wheel-drive saloon car, the Quattro. Audi also started to
use galvanised steel to make its cars more rust-resistant.
Piech was already thinking about the next generation of Audi cars when he
put his proposition to Alcoa. There it was seized on with enthusiasm by Fred
Fetterolf, Alcoa's president until he retired two years ago, who could see
it might well provide an important new market for aluminium. The joint
venture was up and running in 1982.
Although many objectives were set, there were no deadlines. This removed a
great deal of pressure from the Audi and Alcoa engineering teams but it also
increased the chances that one or both of the bosses would run out of
enthusiasm or patience. In the event, it was the engineers who sometimes
temporarily ran out of of steam. 'But whenever we suggested we should stop
the project because we did not think we could find solutions, they said we
must carry on,' Timm recalls.
This backing, needed several times during the past 11 years, was
unstintingly given even when Audi and Alcoa ran into troubled times. For
example, Audi lost ground in its most-important export market, the
highly-competitive US luxury car market, because of the bad publicity that
arose when some customers experienced unexpected acceleration problems.
As for Alcoa, there were even some years, in the wake of the oil supply
crises in the 1970s, when some of US group's senior managers seemed to have
lost faith in the future of aluminium, a metal whose production process
absorbs huge amounts of energy.
Throughout that difficult period Fetterolf remained steadfastly behind the
AIV (aluminium intensive vehicle) project.
'We are very happy with the association with Alcoa,' says Franz-Josef
Kortum, who has taken over from Mr Piech as Audi's chairman. 'It works very
well because both sides are dedicated to show the world this concept will
work and can bring the world new technology. Alcoa is fighting for the
aluminium story and we also have much to gain. We can make our slogan
Vorsprung durch Technik come to life.'
From the outset it was decided each of the companies would pay its own
costs. It was expected that during the research and development phase those
costs would fall about equally on each of them. From this early work they
developed special aluminium alloys for a spaceframe, a skeleton-like car
body structure, composed of fewer than 100 extrusions and castings which can
be welded by robots. This compares with the conventional car structure that
requires spot welding of as many as 300 stamped steel components. The new
aluminium alloys and castings processes improve the metal's strength and
toughness, enhance its 'crushability' - the ability to crumple evenly and
predictably - and its shock absorption.
For car makers, the new technology offers several advantages: it cuts the
weight of a car's body by about 35 per cent compared with traditional steel
bodies without reducing the vehicle's size; it reduces tooling expense by as
much as 50 per cent, and cuts the number of parts to be stocked and the time
taken from design to production.
The partners agreed that, at a certain point, they would go their own ways
with the technology. Alcoa has built a Dollars 70m (Pounds 46m) plant at
Soest in Germany to produce the spaceframes and other aluminium components
for Audi and will be offering the technology - and products from the Soest
plant - to other car makers.
Audi has spent about DM1bn (Pounds 400m) to bring its new luxury car to the
market. Kortum says: 'This is our most important project. We are trying for
the second time for success in this segment of the car market and this is a
great challenge for the company. But we will set new standards in this
segment. We have changed the rule that says the bigger and better the car,
the heavier it must be. It is true that cars generally have improved
enormously, but the weight has increased enormously too.'
He says the new Audi will offer drivers 'a new experience because of its
light weight, stiffness and rigidity and safety'. Many will find its
performance and low fuel consumption astonishing. 'And this is because it is
built of aluminium.'
Kortum says, however, it is not yet possible to promise that all Audi's cars
will one day be using this technology. At present the process is economic
only for production runs of up to 100,000 cars a year but the partners are
looking for ways to make longer runs viable.
In the meantime, before the new car is launched Audi's biggest marketing
challenge, ironically, is to undo some of the aluminium industry's work in
promoting the metal as the ideal, recyclable, material for beverage cans and
other types of packaging. Kortum says: 'Our marketing must emphasise that
all aircraft and rockets use this material. We must re-educate people so
that they associate aluminium with high technology, not with something you
throw away when you have finished with it.'
