FT  31 DEC 93 / Resounding thud as reputations tumble: FT writers nominate
the world's biggest flops in a year reverberating with the sound of breaking
political moulds
If a year can be summed up - metaphorically speaking - in a noise, then 1993
will probably be remembered as echoing with cracks and thuds. The cracks
were the sound of political moulds breaking across the western world. The
thuds were the consequence, as figures and institutions long thought
impregnable fell from their pedestals.
It was a year of flops, but not just any sort of flops: these were downfalls
on a spectacular, in some cases one might say heroic, scale.
Take Japan's Kiichi Miyazawa, for example, the last in an unbroken 38-year
line of prime ministers from the Liberal Democratic party. Two years ago,
Miyazawa was viewed as the thinking person's LDP faction head, a relative
liberal in a party leaning to the right, and possibly the man who would
change the hitherto unchangeable Japanese political system. In the end, his
role was that of frail leader, overwhelmed by the wider forces conspiring to
overturn the old order.
An enduring image of the former prime minister in Japanese minds is his
embarrassed silences when he was questioned about political scandals
implicating the LDP officials who had given him his turn at the top.
He was humiliated when a rebel faction in the LDP brought down the
government by supporting a parliamentary no-confidence motion. His fall was
completed in July, when the LDP lost its majority in a general election and
Miyazawa resigned from the party leadership.
Nowhere were the cracks and thuds more resounding than in Italy, where an
ever spreading web of corruption scandals brought down the political system
of four decades and, with it, many of the country's leading politicians.
The pre-eminent exemplars were Bettino Craxi, the Socialist leader, and
Giulio Andreotti, the perennial Christian Democrat fixture in government.
Throughout the 1980s and until 1992, they were the most powerful political
duo in Italy. This year both have been been toppled.
The first to be investigated for corruption was 59-year-old Craxi. Accused
of receiving illicit funds, he was forced to step down as Socialist leader
in February. It was not until April that the magistrates caught up with
73-year-old Andreotti, seven times prime minister. He now faces both
corruption charges and the more serious accusation of links with the mafia.
Whatever else happens in the unpredictable world of Italian politics, it is
unlikely that Craxi and Andreotti will enjoy power, or its fruits, again.
That is not necessarily true of Russia's discredited and incriminated
politicians. Ruslan Khasbulatov and Alexander Rutskoi, formerly speaker of
the Supreme Soviet and vice-president, were the ring-leaders of the abortive
Moscow uprising in October. They will be 'celebrating' new year and the
Russian Christmas in Lefortovo prison. As they do so, they may find just a
little consolation in the results of this month's Russian parliamentary
elections.
They pitted themselves against President Boris Yeltsin, believing that the
people would be with them. The parliamentary results show that they had some
reason for thinking so: the kind of policies they espoused were those of the
far right and left parties which, together, will make the largest bloc in
the new parliament.
The full story of their attempted coup and its suppression has not been
told. It may never be, and they may wait as long for a trial as the alleged
coup plotters against Mikhail Gorbachev have waited for theirs. Therein lies
another reason for a little cheer in the dungeons: three of these plotters
were elected to the new parliament and will return to active political life.
Never say never again is the best motto in the new Russia.
The opposite is probably the case for Canada's Kim Campbell, living proof of
the maxim that six months is a long time in politics. Acclaimed in June as
the glamorous new leader of the Progressive Conservative party and the
country's first woman prime minister, she and her government went down in
October to the most humiliating defeat in Canadian political history. The
Tories emerged from the general election with just two of the 295 seats.
By December, party officials had put pressure on Campbell to step down as
leader. The sharp-tongued Vancouver native summed up her brief and brutal
political career by suggesting a title for the book she plans to write:
What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?
A flop of a less sensational, though still ignominious, kind was Steffen
Heitmann, the man nominated amid great hullabaloo to become the next federal
president of Germany, but who then withdrew. Perhaps the most remarkable
thing about him is the fact he is so unremarkable. He was singled out by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl as the easterner who should become president next
June. But his ill thought-out conservative views and lack of public
relations skills left him prey to the scorn of the media.
He will be remembered for his views on foreigners (no wonder they're
unpopular if they steal the washing from your line); on women (they should
stay home and raise families); and the end of Germany's 'special role' -
somehow suggesting, if not meaning, that the Holocaust might be forgotten.
He will be remembered for little else.
One of 1993's more surprising discomfitures was that of America's Ross
Perot. For the diminutive Texan businessman this was not a vintage year, at
least compared with 1992, when he scored the second highest percentage of
the vote in a presidential election ever by an independent candidate.
His Waterloo was the North American Free Trade Agreement and his televised
Wellington was Al Gore. The vice-president not only exposed him as a
bad-tempered autocrat, which is hardly new, but got him blamed for turning
the debate on Nafta into a victory for President Bill Clinton.
Political obituaries may be premature, because his sort of money can still
buy a lot of publicity and Perot, impervious to criticism, counts on the
blind loyalty of the 2m odd members of his United We Stand America. But the
deeper he gets into conventional politics and policies like Nafta, the less
he is trusted by the public.
It seems the humbling of businessmen dabbling in politics has been a general
trend this year. In France, Bernard Tapie - perma-tanned entrepreneur,
former minister and working-class hero - was mired in a range of scandals
from alleged match-rigging at his Olympique-Marseille football club to
alleged fraud at Testut, one of his few remaining businesses. By year-end,
Tapie faced official investigations over the Testut affair, after the
lifting of his parliamentary immunity, and had been voted 'biggest
disappointment of the year' in Paris-Match magazine's annual poll.
In Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, ousted as prime minister in elections by
arch-enemy Benazir Bhutto, provided further proof that business and politics
do not mix. Sharif, an industrialist from Punjab, Pakistan's richest
province, won praise early in his administration for liberalising the
economy and promoting business interests. But he ran into criticism for
overspending, and his most lasting legacy is a mountain of public debt.
In Nigeria - a country where business and politics almost always mix, with
disastrous results - Chief Ernest Shonekan flopped twice. A leading
businessmen, he was appointed head of a transitional government in December
1992, but made no conspicuous headway with solving the country's problems.
After General Ibrahim Babangida, the military leader, reluctantly stepped
down in August, he was made head of state and commander in chief, but he
failed to deliver on promises to revive Nigeria's Structural Adjustment
Programme. By the time he was removed in November, the government faced
soaring inflation, mounting debt arrears and a crippling budget deficit.
Even some businessmen who stuck to their last found it a humiliating year.
One such was James D Robinson III. Back in January, the suave 57-year-old
head of American Express staged what seemed a great corporate survival act
by shrugging off a coup attempt by some of the non-executive directors.
Instead of applauding, however, Wall Street blew a giant raspberry. American
Express's shares fell nearly 10 per cent.
Within five days it was all over. Under pressure from shareholders, Robinson
packed his bags. By the summer, American Express's shares were up 60 per
cent.
In Europe, the most spectacular business reversal was suffered by Volvo
chief Pehr Gyllenhammar. A startled Gyllenhammar discovered in December that
the company he thought he was driving towards a merger with France's Renault
was veering out of his control. The man who had been Mr Volvo for 22 years
was forced to resign as chairman by a management and shareholder rebellion.
Instead of capping his career by becoming chairman of Europe's second
largest vehicle producer, 58-year-old PG is left facing 1994 without a
full-time job.
By Robert Thomson, Robert Graham, John Lloyd, Bernard Simon, Quentin Peel,
Jurek Martin, Alice Rawsthorn, Michael Holman, Richard Waters and Hugh
Carnegy
