FT  11 DEC 93 / All the power to the president: The Russian people vote
tomorrow on a draft constitution. John Lloyd looks at the implications
A draft constitution goes before the Russian people tomorrow. It is a
document which might not shake the world, but it will form a vital part of
its stability because of Russia's importance and fragility.
Its adoption by the people and its acceptance by the Russian political class
would sustain and enlarge the still fragile area of democratic practice.
But its rejection, either because a majority of those voting are against it
or because the required 50 per cent of the electorate do not turn out, could
usher in a period in which institutions have no base and a division of
powers cannot develop because all formal political power remains monopolised
by the president.
'Better vote for this imperfect document than have none,' said Yegor Gaidar,
leader of Choice of Russia, the leading liberal group, mustering a lukewarm
endorsement for his president's draft. 'We'd again find ourselves in the
situation of legal chaos . . . where everything depends on whom the defence
ministry supports, on who has a pistol in their hands, on who, at the vital
hour, can best organise their forces in Moscow.'
Such a period could see the unravelling of a Russian power structure which,
since the closure and suppression of the former Russian parliament in
September and October, has been sustained by a presidency which is the
source of all power but whose shaky legitimacy has depended on a promise to
create a legislative chamber and a 'law governed state' underpinned by a
constitution in which the citizen can find rights and the politicians a
role.
But there is a countervailing view, which has been powerfully put in the
course of this campaign - although those who put it differ on whether or not
their objections to the constitution are greater in importance than the
danger of chaos.
The document itself is one which would provide presidential powers greater
than any other major democratic country, save perhaps France. The
president's powers would lie in his ability to appoint the prime minister
and approve the prime minister's choice of government - and to dissolve
parliament if it failed to agree.
The president would appoint judges, top military and the chairman of the
Central Bank - although most of these need parliamentary approval. And the
powers would lie in his ability to call referenda, and, perhaps most
threatening of all, in the clauses which gives the president the right to
issue decrees which need no oversight or approval by any other level of
power - so long as they can be shown to be in accord with the constitution.
A less obvious danger lies, paradoxically, in the breadth and generosity of
the articles on human and civil rights, on the entitlements each citizen
would have, including the right to a job, to medical care, to support, even
to clean air. The sheer scale of the promises reduce the document to a
formality because they cannot be observed.
Perhaps the most popular criticism is that voiced by Stanislav Shatalin, the
veteran radical economist: that the final draft, drawn up by Yeltsin's tight
circle of advisers and amended - it was said - up to the last minute by the
President himself, was not approved by a constituent assembly, or by the
regional and republican leaders who had earlier participated in the
constitutional discussions. Because of this, the argument runs, the
constitution is not a framework for a great country's future democracy, but
one for a particular president's immediate needs.
But it is in this aspect that the draft constitution is most like that of
other major democratic states.
This point is strongly made by Professor Vladimir Tumanov, one of Russia's
top judicial experts and one who took a part in the final drafting: 'I don't
agree with those who say that this is a 'transitional' document.
'All contemporary European constitutions were adopted, in one way or
another, in a 'transitional period' but they're still working and after they
were adopted they assisted stability.'
An example: the Italian constitution, first drafted in 1946 immediately
after the war and finally coming into force from January 1, 1948, has as its
first words: 'Italy is a democratic republic founded on labour.' The wording
reflects the power and the prestige of the two left-wing (anti-Fascist)
parties at the time: the Italian Communist Party and the Italian Socialist
Party. Yet, for all the stamp of the times, Italy for much of the post war
period, has been ruled by a right of centre party.
It is to the US which most Russians look when they seek to compare
themselves: and in comparing constitutions they see at first a presidential
constitution, and one enacted in times of conflict (with the British).
But US specialists who have studied the Russian draft say the parallel
doesn't hold: the US constitution was one in which the participating states
reluctantly ceded powers to a weak centre. And the constitution is largely
non-specific in the rights it grants, creating only a framework of
permissiveness within which specific prohibitions are left to be defined by
case law.
A central point, often obscured in the smoke of the Russian battle, is that
the working of a constitution is less important - within certain boundaries
 -than the attitude of the authorities towards it.
Russia's politicians and its citizens are new to the democratic arena: they
have experience only of decorative constitutions. They have witnessed a
parliament destroyed, and the old Soviet era constitution torn up by a
president who now asks for support for a new state law.
Will these citizens accept it tomorrow? And can these politicians make it
work?
