FT  06 MAY 93 / Survey of Switzerland (6): 'We can give an example to
Europe' - Interview with the president
IAN RODGER talks to Adolf Ogi, transport minister and this year's president
of the Swiss Confederation.
QUESTION: In spite of the rejection by the Swiss people in a referendum last
December 6 of the government's proposal to join the European Economic Area,
you are maintaining your policy of seeking closer links with the European
Community.
What paths can you follow and what problems will you face?
ANSWER: Our main goals now are to avoid isolation and possible
discrimination arising from our non-participation in the EEA. That means we
must pursue bilateral relations with the EC with a view to concluding
certain agreements.
We are fully aware that we cannot get bilaterally what we have rejected
multilaterally. Nonetheless, we are not going on our knees. We have a range
of assets which are of interest to the EC. For example, they need fast 'just
in time' transportation systems through the Swiss Alps.
I also think we can give an example to the new Europe of how to function if
you accept certain rules. We are a country with four languages, four
cultures and 26 cantons. We know that it is not normal that a country like
ours can live in peace and freedom.
We know that we have to work every day so that this construction,
Confoederatio Helvetica, can go on and become stronger. So we think we have
something to offer to Europe, and that Europe has absolutely no interest in
putting us in a corner.
So far, the EC appears to be proving reluctant to negotiate a bilateral air
agreement. Is there anything Switzerland can do to accelerate the process?
We have a new transit agreement with the EC. Under it, we are going to build
two new tunnels through the Alps which will be beneficial mainly to our EC
neighbours, but we did not ask them for money. (In return, the EC agreed to
negotiate a bilateral air agreement with Switzerland.) We have no doubt that
the EC will honour its commitments.
How soon and under what conditions do you think it would be sensible to seek
the approval of the Swiss people for a renewed approach to joining the EEA
or the EC itself?
We have to be very careful. We do not want to produce another 'No' before
Austria, Sweden and Finland have their referendums on joining the EC.
Referendums have become important signals in Europe. The one in
Liechtenstein - which had a positive result - made the front pages of
newspapers.
So if there is a second try, we must be sure we can get it through. It is
not possible at this time to give a schedule. Things in Europe change so
quickly these days.
The economy could have an influence, what Denmark and Britain do -
everything is interrelated. There is an initiative (petition campaign for a
referendum) under way. If it gets a lot of signatures, that could change the
situation. But it will definitely not be this year.
Has Switzerland's refusal to join the EEA had any concrete impact on the
economy?
We have both positive and negative signs, but it isn't yet possible to
analyse it. And, after all, the EEA isn't yet in force.
Since the EEA rejection, the government has launched initiatives to
liberalise the Swiss economy unilaterally, in particular a so called
Swisslex package of 27 laws. Will these get bogged down or watered down
because of pressures from vested interests?
Our view is that we have to be economically at least as liberalised as the
EC. We had everything going for us for such a long time. Nearly everybody
was rich. When you are rich, you do not work as hard as you should. We
needed a sort of big bang. We did not need a 'No' to the EEA, but it will
wake us up. The government is convinced that if we want to realise the
necessary changes, the package aspect is essential. So far, the various
parliamentary committees have agreed with us.
In a month's time, there will be one referendum on the purchase of new
fighter aircraft for the Swiss airforce and another on how much land should
be made available to the army for training. Do Switzerland's neighbours need
to worry about the country retaining its ability and will to maintain
security at this crossroads of the continent?
We are the only country where the people can vote on such matters. We had a
referendum four years ago on abolishing the army and the great majority
voted in favour of keeping it. Tell me another country that would have had
such a vote and where the people would have voted yes. I am persuaded that
we can win these referendums.
We have a well trained and well equipped army. Under our new policy - Army
95 - we are going to make it smaller, but it will be better. We have
responsible and well brought up young people. Only a very few do not want to
enter the armed services. Do not worry. You will be able to count on
Switzerland in the future to look after security at this crossroads of
Europe.
The EEA vote and the tensions in January and February over the election of a
new member to the Cabinet revealed some strong divisions in internal Swiss
politics. Do you think that the governing coalition will continue to
withstand these strains?
The European issue did not lead to extraordinary strains inside the
government coalition, but the tensions it produced are much deeper than
those during the Cabinet election.
We have differences between the French-speaking part and the German-speaking
part, between old and young, between those who live in towns and those in
the countryside. As president, I have to help get our peoples together
again.
Differing opinions among the four coalition partners are frequent. We have a
very free coalition - there is no written agreement among them - and so we
have no precise government programme. Also, we always have changing
alliances within the governing coalition. Sometimes, where you come from is
more important than your party.
The battle over the Cabinet post arose largely because a woman was proposed
for the vacancy. Are Swiss women going to remain militant?
Yes. We need more women in politics, but I am against quotas. I think it has
to develop normally. You have seen this in cantonal elections in recent
weeks. In Neuchatel, twice as many women candidates were elected.
The Swiss government has been running large deficits in recent years. Are
the Swiss becoming like citizens in other countries, wanting more government
services but not wanting to pay the taxes to finance them?
In my view, the deficit is one of our most important problems, but compared
with our European neighbours, we're still doing fairly well. I think we are
overcoming the situation. It isn't that we are better than others, but we
are still in control of the problem. The deficits are mainly due to the
economic slowdown, but a mentality has developed because we were a bit
spoiled. Now we are taking off our jackets, rolling up our sleeves and going
back to work. But it will take some time before we have a result.
