FT  29 DEC 93 / Tide of gloom starts to ebb: There is reason to believe that
European economies are bouncing back
It is easy to be glum about Europe.
Overall output in the continent's 19 advanced industrialised countries is
thought to have fallen this year for the first time since 1975.
Western Europe's jobless total is rising inexorably. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development in Paris forecasts that 22m, or 11.5
per cent, of the region's labour force will be out of work in 1995.
Unemployment, now about 10.7 per cent, has more than doubled in the 18 years
since the first serious recession of the postwar years.
Business and consumer confidence is weak. For most, the long upsurge of
prosperity of the 1980s is a distant memory. So is the age of political
miracles that brought the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of
communism just four years ago.
With few exceptions, Europe's political leaders appear exhausted. Their
governments are deeply unpopular and, saddled with rising budget deficits,
incapable of pump-priming economic recovery.
Yet 1993 may turn out to be the year in which Europe's fortunes turned.
Although it will be remembered for recession, currency crises and
lengthening dole queues, 1993 is ending more positively for the members of
the European Union and their immediate neighbours.
The economic fundamentals have improved. More important, the sense of drift
has stopped. Businesses, governments and the European Commission have woken
up to the remorseless increase in competition worldwide. Britain's two tough
budgets this year, the 'Standort Deutschland' debate in Germany and the Bonn
government's subsequent conversion to the doctrine of more work and less
leisure, plus the Commission's white paper on Growth Competitiveness and
Employment, are symptoms of a change of mood.
More telling is what is happening in businesses in the UK and on the
continent. Companies are becoming leaner and meaner. The spectre of
competition from the newly industrialising countries of east Asia has made
the US practice of 'downsizing', with heavy job losses, respectable in
Europe. Trade unions are for the most part quiescent and in some cases
willing to aid management rationalise operations.
This month's boardroom clear-out at Metallgesellschaft, the German
industrial conglomerate, after the discovery of large losses, was novel in
its ruthlessness. Even the long-running and baffling business soap opera
centring on allegations of theft and industrial espionage against Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the Volkswagen group production director, began
with a serious purpose when VW sought out the former General Motors director
to push through a cost-cutting revolution within the group.
Such trends are sure to intensify once this month's Uruguay Round accord to
liberalise world trade comes into force. The agreement, even before
ratification, could act as a spur to companies to invest and rationalise.
Over time, the Gatt accord should promote growth, with Europe standing to
gain more than most other regions of the world from freer trade. Computer
simulations from the OECD suggest that the Uruguay Round will add at least
Dollars 270bn in 1991 prices to world income in 2002. The European Union's
share is estimated at Dollars 71bn, equivalent to 1.7 per cent of the
region's gross domestic product, while that of the European Free Trade
Association (Efta) countries is put at Dollars 38bn or 6 per cent of
regional GDP.
The real benefits should be greater. Such computer calculations take no
account of the increased business confidence that should flow from freer
trade or the fact that this month's accord has been felicitously timed after
so many years of delay and frustration.
Several European economies have performed unexpectedly well in recent
months. Britain's recovery is firmly established. German gross domestic
product grew in the third as well as the second quarter. France appears to
have touched bottom. Trends in smaller economies such as Austria,
Switzerland, Ireland and Denmark have been encouraging.
The charts, showing relative unit labour costs in manufacturing, illustrate
how several big European economies (Germany is an exception) are more
competitive internationally than they were a year ago, while Japan has
suffered a substantial set back.
Short and long-term interest rates have fallen over the past year as the
Bundesbank has cautiously eased its monetary policy. The German 'repo rate'
is at 6 per cent compared with 9.75 per cent in September 1992, just before
the first European monetary crisis, which resulted in the exit of sterling
and the lira from the exchange rate mechanism. Since then, UK and Italian
short-term rates have roughly halved. France's short-term borrowing costs
have fallen close to German levels from about 14 per cent in the 1992
currency crisis and 9 per cent in late July this year before speculative
flows forced the August decision to widen the system's fluctuation margins
to 15 per cent.
Inflation in Europe is low, with the OECD projecting a deceleration for its
European members, excluding Turkey, to an average annual rate of 2.3 per
cent by the end of 1995 from about 3.1 per cent at present. Oil prices have
fallen in real terms to levels last seen before the first oil shock of 1973.
Large gaps between potential and actual output in countries such as Italy,
France and the UK suggest that home-made inflationary pressures will remain
subdued.
To be sure, there are risks. Given the political instability of the Middle
East, only the brave would bank on oil prices remaining at their present low
levels of less than Dollars 15 a barrel. In spite of the past year's falls
in nominal interest rates, real rates are relatively high. Some of the
optimism that propelled European equity markets to new peaks this month
could evaporate if German inflation proves more stubborn than expected and
the Bundesbank slows its cautious rate-cutting policy.
In some countries, tighter fiscal policies to combat swollen budget deficits
could weaken recovery. German GDP is widely expected to fall again in the
first half of 1994 as benefit cuts, higher petrol taxes, a wage freeze for
civil servants and increased pension contributions take DM60bn from
consumers. In Britain, voters have reacted less positively than financial
markets to Mr Kenneth Clarke's November Budget, which, with that of Mr
Norman Lamont in March, will cost taxpayers a cumulative Pounds 15bn to
Pounds 17bn in three years.
The fiscal legacy of the recession years in most countries, heavy household
debts in the UK and Scandinavia, the continuing need for businesses to
restructure to stay competitive, and consequent high unemployment will make
for a joyless recovery. There will not be much of a 'feel good' factor in
Europe in the years ahead.
Europe will seem to many of its citizens to be in recession long after
growth has returned, posing a real threat to incumbent governments. Germany,
Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden go to the polls next year and political
upheavals cannot be ruled out.
But looking beyond 1994, there is a good prospect of steady, if
unspectacular, growth over a prolonged period with low inflation. Western
Europe may even be moving into what future generations will call a 'golden
age'. But it could take many years before it feels that way to its
inhabitants.
