FT  29 JUL 93 / Rao government survives no confidence motion
THE MINORITY government of Mr P V Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister,
yesterday survived a parliamentary motion of no confidence by a narrow
margin of 14 votes, after days of intense political horse-trading.
The motion, brought by the Communist Party of India (Marxist) on Monday, was
supported by the Hindu right-wing Bharatiya Janata party, the National Front
and Left Front parties. It was defeated by 265 votes to 251.
The opposition parties alleged that the Rao government had failed because of
its 'involvement' in the Bombay financial scandal, its inability to stop
last December's destruction of a mosque at Ayodhya and the violence that
followed, and failure on the economic front with a liberalisation programme
which, they said, would leave the country's poor worse off.
A confident Mr Rao told parliament that he saw no difference from the two
previous motions he had defeated in the last 25 months, and that identifying
charges against him was 'like looking for a few needles in a haystack.'
Mr Rao attacked the Communists for deriding his liberalisation programme
when it asked for help in industrialising West Bengal, the one state where
there was a left-wing government. He said Indian economic reforms had a
'human face' which had not allowed thousands to lose their jobs, as they had
in other countries.
'The ill effects of liberalisation have been forestalled,' he said.
Mr Manmohan Singh, the finance minister, said that the economic situation
had considerably improved in the past two years, and that two years were too
short a time to judge his reforms package.
Mr Rao announced that his government would introduce bills this session to
de-link religion from politics, and to initiate electoral reforms. He made
no mention of the charges of corruption against him and his party, or the
Bombay financial scandal, but talked instead of how the ruling Congress
party was committed to solving the problems of farmers and handloom weavers.
The Communists said last night that though the Congress government had
scraped through, it had 'suffered a political and moral defeat by managing
to cling on by resorting to a shameless use of money power and
horse-trading.'
The Opposition alleged that the ruling party had bought at least seven MPs
of the Janata Dal faction headed by Mr Ajit Singh, which announced only on
Tuesday that they would support the motion.
Chaos prevailed on the floor of the House as one of the MPs was charged by
his colleagues of entering the house drunk, and another Congress (I) MP, who
had been hurt last week when police quelled a violent demonstration in
Calcutta, was brought in on a wheelchair.
