FT  11 OCT 93 / The Week Ahead: UK recovery back in the spotlight -
Economics
A RUSH OF figures from the UK this week may, if good, quell misgivings about
the strength of the recovery, with data on inflation, output, unemployment
and retail sales expected.
The retail price inflation figures will be awaited with particular
apprehension following August's surprisingly sharp increase. Many analysts
have promoted the view that inflation in the UK is 'dead' and were shocked
to see the headline rate leap from 1.4 per cent to 1.7 per cent. Underlying
inflation - which excludes mortgage interest payments  - rose from 2.9 per
cent to 3.1 per cent.
Forecasts for manufacturing output are modestly upbeat, and analysts expect
unemployment to remain where it is - 10.4 per cent of the workforce.
This is also a busy week for statistics in the US. Economists will be
looking to see whether figures for retail sales, initial claims, industrial
production and trade figures confirm the gloomy picture of the economy
highlighted in last week's non-farm payroll figures.
Today: US, Columbus Day - Treasury market closed.
Japan, National holiday - markets closed. Yeltsin makes first official visit
to Japan.
France, September CPI (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 2 per cent on year).
UK, September PPI input (down 0.2 per cent on month, up 6 per cent on year),
output (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 4.4 per cent on year), excluding food,
drink and tobacco (up 2.7 per cent on year).
Norway, September CPI (up 0.5 per cent on month, up 2.2 per cent on year).
Tomorrow: US, Federal governor Lindsey addresses Industrial Bankers
Association in Washington. Johnson Redbook week ended October 9.
Japan, August machine orders (down 1.1 per cent on month, down 13.8 per cent
on year).
Germany, publication date of German constitutional court decision on
Maastricht announced in Karlsberg. IG Metal Management Board meeting in
Frankfurt to discuss 1994 pay claims.
UK, monthly monetary report. Panel of economic advisers - seven wise men -
meet chancellor. Chancellor addresses annual banquet of Worshipful Company
of Glovers.
Canada, August department store sales.
Sweden, Nobel prize for economics awarded.
Wednesday: US, Greenspan testifies before House Banking on Federal
accountability. September Atlanta Fed Index.
UK, August manufacturing output (up 0.4 per cent on month, up 1.8 per cent
on year), industrial production (up 0.4 per cent on month). September retail
prices index (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 1.7 per cent on year), excluding
mortgage interest payments (up 3.1 per cent on year).
Spain, September CPI (up 0.5 per cent on month, up 4.3 per cent on year).
Thursday: US, September retail sales (up 0.5 per cent), excluding cars (up
0.6 per cent), producer prices index (up 0.2 per cent), excluding food and
energy (up 0.2 per cent). Initial claims week ended October 9 (325,000).
State benefits week ended October 2. Car and truck sales 1-10 October. Money
supply data for week ended October 4. September money supply.
UK, September unemployment (no change). August average earnings (3.5 per
cent), unit wage costs (down 1 per cent in latest three months).
Canada, September leading indicator (up 0.3 per cent on year). August wage
settlement increases (up 1 per cent).
Sweden, September CPI (up 0.9 per cent on month, up 4.2 per cent on year).
Friday: US, September CPI (up 0.2 per cent), excluding food and energy (up
0.2 per cent). August merchandise trade (Dollars 10.5bn deficit), exports
(Dollars 37.9bn), imports (Dollars 48bn), industrial production (up 0.2 per
cent), capacity utilisation (81.8 per cent). October preliminary Michigan
sentiment. August business inventory (up 0.3 per cent). September real
earnings.
Japan, September CPI (up 0.2 per cent on month, down 3.5 per cent on year).
Canada, August merchandise exports (up 1.2 per cent on month), imports (up
0.7 per cent), merchandise trade surplus (Dollars 1.1bn).
Korea, North-South Korean talks.
During the week: Germany, September cost of living. August retail sales
(down 2.2 per cent on year), September WPI (flat on month).
Spain, September unemployment rate (16.5 per cent), September M4.
Netherlands, May trade balance.
Denmark, September CPI (up 0.4 per cent on month, up 1.3 per cent on year).
August unemployment rate (12.3 per cent).
