FT  19 JUL 93 / Financial Law Panel chief named
MR COLIN BAMFORD, head of finance and banking at Richards Butler, the law
firm, is to be the first chief executive of the Bank of England-sponsored
Financial Law Panel.
The panel, chaired by Lord Donaldson, has attracted wide support from some
150 subscribers in all sectors of the financial services industry. It will
address ambiguous legal issues which would otherwise jeopardise London's
standing as an international financial centre.
The panel was set up after a High Court ruling that local authorities do not
have the power to enter into interest-rate swap and currency swap
agreements, a decision which cost banks hundreds of millions of pounds.
Lord Donaldson said the panel, set up in March, has received numerous
requests to examine aspects of City law. 'Some of these were wholly
ambitious, such as 'Let's examine the laws of bills of exchange',' he said.
While that brief may be too wide, others are likely to be taken up.
Among these are the legal liabilities of so-called shadow directors - those
who are not company directors but sometimes assume duties similar to
directors. Lord Donaldson said the term is often applied to company doctors
called in to help avoid a corporate collapse, but could be applied to a
commercial or investment bank working closely with a company being rescued.
The question has arisen as to what liability such individuals may have to
shareholders if things go wrong.
Another issue likely to be high on the agenda is the legal status of what
are known as netted positions in a liquidation.
Securities groups frequently have several simultaneous transactions with
each other so that they may be both creditor and debtor. These positions are
usually netted so that each group's exposure subtracts credits from debts.
But if a securities company were to fail with outstanding transactions, a
liquidator may well ask the debtors to repay all they owe while insisting
that the failed group's creditors accept repayment of something considerably
less than 100p in the pound.
Lord Donaldson said numerous requests had been received by businesses
wanting to know how to engage legally in specific transactions. In these
instances, he said, the panel would be looking at a broad range of similar
transactions in an attempt to reach a decision which would be applicable to
the activities of a broad range of market participants.
