FT  08 SEP 93 / Survey of Mobile Communications (8): The 'street wise' take
to telepoint - Paul Taylor examines the progress of public cordless
telephone services
By general agreement, the launch of telepoint services in Britain in 1989
was little short of a debacle. But, despite the inauspicious start, the
UK-developed public cordless telephone service is proving a success in some
overseas markets, particularly in south-east Asia.
At the same time operators have found ingenious ways to turn basic telepoint
into a two-way service while equipment manufacturers such as Canada's
Northern Telecom have developed enhanced telepoint services.
Telepoint's brief but chequered history began in the mid-1980s when
Ferranti, the Manchester-based electronics group, developed a 'second
generation' digital cordless telephone technology known as CT2 which allowed
outgoing calls to be made within 100 metres of designated public points - or
base-stations.
In 1988 the British government licensed four groups to provide telepoint
services based on CT2. Unfortunately, the systems were incompatible with
each other, overpriced and poorly marketed in competition with cellular
services.
Even multinational backing was not enough to save three of the services
dubbed Creditphone, Phonepoint and Callpoint. All were abandoned within
three years, having accumulated fewer than 10,000 subscribers between them.
By the end of 1991 the fourth licence held by a consortium called BYPS,
comprising Philips, Barclays and Shell, had been sold to a new owner,
Hutchison Telecom, part of the Hong Kong-based Hutchison Whampoa group.
At that stage most industry analysts were ready to write off telepoint for
good. But some equipment manufacturers including GPT, the UK-based
telecommunications equipment manufacturer, Motorola of the US and Northern
Telecom, coupled with network operators like Hutchison, have persevered with
the technology.
There is little disagreement that telepoint has taken longer to take off
than originally expected. But along the way some important marketing lessons
have been learned and telepoint services have proved a commercial success in
some markets.
In Hong Kong three operators, Hutchison, Chevalier Telepoint, and most
recently Pacific Telelink, backed by Vodafone, the UK cellular telephone
network operator, have launched successful services over the past 18 months.
Altogether, they have around 55,000 subscribers and are still growing
rapidly.
Telepoint services have also proved popular in Singapore, where the Callzone
service was launched at the start of 1992 by Singapore Telecom and in
Malaysia and Thailand where telepoint services are provided by the national
carriers. At the end of last year Callzone had more than 21,000 subscribers,
while Fonepoint in Thailand connected 5,000 subscribers in its first few
months of operation.
Mr Ken Miles, project manager for GPT Market Systems which supplies
telepoint infrastructure to Chevalier in Hong Kong, attributes the success
of telepoint services in these countries to their 'street culture' and dense
urban populations - both factors which lend themselves to telepoint
services.
'Everybody in Hong Kong either has a mobile phone or a pager,' says Mr
Miles. There are over 800,000 pager users in Hong Kong, many of them aged 18
to 25, and this is the market which has been targeted successfully by the
telepoint operators.
Hong Kong telepoint handsets and services are very cheap but the big
advantage of having both a pager and a telepoint phone is that it enables
the network operator to provide a pseudo two-way service and overcome one of
basic telepoint's main drawbacks - its inability, in standard configuration,
to receive incoming calls.
All three telepoint operators in Hong Kong now provide a 'meet me' service.
This works as follows: Suppose someone wants to reach a telepoint subscriber
with a pager. The pager number is dialled and the system asks the caller to
hold. A message is then sent to the pager asking the owner to dial a pre-set
number. Provided the telepoint subscriber dials the number within 60 seconds
the call is connected. If there is no response from the pager the caller is
put through to a voice message centre.
This system has proved so successful that telepoint operators elsewhere are
now adopting it. In the UK Hutchison's 'Rabbit' service has been testing a
variation of the 'meet me' service using an integrated telephone/pager
handset.
In France where France Telecom's Bi-Bop service was extended from Strasbourg
to Paris in April and signed up 10,000 subscribers in the first month, a
'meet me' service has been adopted together with an alternative system which
also provides pseudo two-way operation. Telecom Finland, which launched its
Pointer telepoint service last November, also began testing a similar
paging-based two-way service earlier this year.
Most industry experts agree that Hong Kong is probably a unique market in
Asia - not least because it is the only one with more than one telepoint
operator. However elsewhere in the Asia-Pacific region GPT has sold one
system in Vietnam, had expressions of interest from India and recently
signed an agreement to become one of the main suppliers of telepoint systems
to China.
Earlier this year GPT also won a Pounds 2m contract to provide a complete
telepoint network - including the world's first cordless PABX for the city
of Nigbo in Zhejiang province. In less developed countries like China,
telepoint can provide a cost-effective basic telephone service where
previously there was no service at all.
GPT has also supplied the equipment for Australia's first telepoint service
called 'Talkabout' which was launched in Brisbane in March by Australia
Telecom. Talkabout also achieves two-way operation, though in this case by
introducing a concept called 'neighbourhood telepoint' or 'islands of
cordlessness' where part of city or town is covered by CT2 base stations
linked by a switch.
Each subscriber has a unique number by which he or she can be called. The
system provides subscribers with two-way communications within the area
where they live and with their handset they can also be registered for their
office or for another telepoint network in another city - or even country.
In Canada an upgraded two-way version of the telepoint cordless telephone
specification has been developed by Northern Telecom and adopted as the
country's official cordless phone standard. In January the Canadian
government selected four consortia to build and operate national two-way
telepoint serv ices based on the CT2-plus class 2 standard which allows
subscribers to be reached anywhere on the network, provided that they are
within range of a base station.
The new technology also supports smooth handovers between base stations and
allows handset manufacturers to incorporate indicators which will tell users
whether they are in range of a base station needed to use the handset.
Even in Europe, telepoint is shrugging off its early image of being 'the
poor man's mobile phone' to find limited success in some markets, though
progress is still disappointing.
In the UK Hutchison's re-launched national Rabbit network is now complete
with over 12,000 base stations covering 700 cities and towns and more than
10,000 subscribers. Hutchison has been aggressively promoting the service
and emphasising telepoint as 'the pay-phone in your pocket' rather than as a
direct competitor for cellular. It has cut prices for handsets, home base
stations, calls and monthly subscriptions and set a target of 60,000
subscribers by the end of 1994.
In addition, new telepoint services have been introduced successfully in
Holland and Finland and a trial is under way in Belgium.
However, there have been setbacks elsewhere. The Japanese Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunications has put back its plans for introducing its telepoint
service until 1995 and in Germany Deutsche Telekom has abandoned plans for a
full commercial version of its Birdie service. Despite this, some important
lessons have been learned from the early disastrous telepoint experience in
the UK. Among these, analysts now agree that too many operators were
licensed and the service was mistakenly marketed as a competitor to cellular
instead of addressing a completely different segment of the market.
In addition, the three UK networks began with inadequate infrastructure in
place and handsets which were too expensive, working on incompatible
proprietary systems which caused customer confusion.
Today's telepoint operators have addressed most of these shortcomings and
have begun to extend the concept of cordless communications from the home
into the street and now the office where new cordless systems based on CT2
technology are beginning to appear.
