FT  25 MAR 93 / Technology: Making bright ideas shine - A commercially
successful invention is one in a million. Andrew Fisher begins a series on
avoiding pitfalls / Innovation
INVENTORS often fall in love with their ideas and find it hard to stop
talking about them. But ask them what their advice would be to anyone else
struck by an original idea and keen to make it commercial, and their reply
tends to be: forget it.
'It takes a lot of courage, faith, and obstinacy,' says James Dyson, a
successful designer-inventor whose products include the Ballbarrow - a
wheelbarrow with a pneumatic ball instead of a wheel - and a new vacuum
cleaner using high-speed cyclone technology.
'Having the idea is the easy bit,' comments John Endacott, an engineer who
has invented a new type of oil and water separator for offshore oil fields
which has been licensed by two companies. 'My advice to anyone coming up
with a new invention is: think about it, enjoy thinking about it, and then
throw the idea in the bin.'
That is where most ideas end up anyway, since the success rate for
inventions is tiny. Gazing round his spacious London office, one experienced
patent expert says resignedly: 'Ninety per cent of the files in this room
relate to nonsense - but I don't know which ones they are in advance.'
John Fisher, technical director of PA Consulting Group, agrees that
invention is the easy part. 'But bringing a product to commercial success is
extraordinarily hard.' This is a problem for big companies as well as
individuals and small enterprises. In his view, 'the risk associated with
innovation is due much more to incorrect market evaluation than technology
failure.'
Although the words invention and innovation are often used to mean the same
thing, there is a dividing line. An invention is an original idea or product
which may or may not be developed into something people want to buy.
Innovation is described by the Confederation of British Industry as 'the
successful exploitation of new ideas'; the definition includes not just
research and technology, but also management, marketing and training.
Nor is there a simple link between scientific discovery and economic
competitiveness. 'We need to recognise that innovation is as much market-led
as it is science-driven,' asserts Howard Newby, chairman of the Economic and
Social Research Council, an independent, government-backed body.
Thus the whole discussion about whether enough good ideas - from whichever
end of the industrial scale they stem - reach the commercial stage applies
to big as well as to small and embryonic companies. The Department of Trade
and Industry and the CBI are keen to help make UK industry more innovative.
A joint DTI/CBI study found that only one out of 10 British companies was
truly innovative, though three in 10 performed well in many aspects of the
innovative process, which it defined very widely.
Since a survey last year by CHI Research for Business Week listed no UK
companies in its worldwide ranking of the top 25 by technological strength
based on US patenting data - there were 11 each from Japan (including the
top four) and the US, two from Germany (Siemens and Hoechst), and Philips
from the Netherlands - it is clear that some form of action is required. UK
companies also rank well below foreign concerns in their spending on
research and development.
Apart from the DTI's intensified efforts to promote innovation, not just in
technology, the government also adopted a more pro-manufacturing stance in
its latest budget. But many inventors, management experts, and
industrialists - whether or not they are sceptical of the government's
efforts - believe there is a cultural anti-industrial bias in Britain which
tends to inhibit innovation and the adoption of new ideas.
This in turn, allied with the increasing difficulty of obtaining small-scale
finance, means that inventors wishing to commercialise their ideas face a
minefield of problems. 'The NIH (not invented here) syndrome was invented in
the UK,' says Paul Ambridge, a Design Council official who also chairs the
Institute of Patentees and Inventors.
Apart from deciding whether to have prototypes built, take out patents at
home and overseas, license their ideas to bigger companies, sell
shareholdings to outside investors, or simply give up when the going gets
too tough or the money runs out, inventors also have to develop an
understanding of the market. Many have no idea where to start and are liable
to run up against a wall of indifference when approaching companies.
'The general perception of an individual inventor,' says Hilary Trudeau, an
innovation consultant, 'is of someone with a propeller on their head who
spends three hours in your office and comes up with a silly idea. Some are
like that.' She has set up Support for Innovation, which sets out to screen
ideas so that only the best are presented to potential licensors.
This organisation is aimed at people with new technical or business ideas
who need to be advised on the problems of running their own business.
Licensing is probably the answer for most, she reckons. 'Most people with
technical skills would be hopeless at running a business.'
A possible solution which combines both finance and management is the
concept of 'business angels' - the commercial equivalent of 'theatrical
angels' - whereby entrepreneurs put some of their wealth back into industry
by helping new and struggling firms. This is well developed in the US, but
far less so in Britain.
'This is a vast untapped source,' believes Colin Mason, senior lecturer in
economic geography at Southampton university, who has studied this type of
financing. An additional benefit comes from the availability of management
experience as 'angels' tend to take a close interest in the operations in
which they have invested.
'I'm totally convinced that 'angels' are an idea whose time has come,' he
adds. 'They are virtually the only source of equity finance under Pounds
500,000.' However, mechanisms for putting potential (or so-called virgin)
angels in touch with those needing money are almost non-existent in the UK,
although the DTI is funding a two-year pilot scheme to set up business
introduction services.
With very little venture capital directed towards thrusting new and risky
high-technology ventures in these recessionary days, many inventors have to
turn to their high street banks. Despite the wave of recent criticism
directed at the UK clearers, however, not all inventors are dismissive of
their efforts to help. But only National Westminster has a fully fledged
Technology Unit, whose senior manager, Duncan Matthews, admits that 'banks
are technophobic'.
He, too, finds the 'business angel' concept an intriguing one and is looking
at how NatWest could play a part in helping it develop. His experience with
helping to finance technology-based companies has taught him their
potential. 'This is one area likely to have the most rapid growth.'
Sir Clive Sinclair, pioneer of the pocket calculator, the digital watch, and
the personal computer, believes the British public is receptive to new
ideas, but that finance to implement them is harder to come by than abroad.
'What is not realised by so many companies is that if they don't innovate
now, they've absolutely had it,' he believes.
His Zike electric bicycle - which looks like being more successful than the
earlier C5 electric vehicle, which flopped - is being manufactured by a
German-owned company, Tudor Webasto, whose chief executive, Alan Garnett, is
seeking new product ideas to supplement its main business of car sunroofs.
Garnett is a firm believer in innovation as a key to economic progress and
warns against the tendency to take too short term a view. 'We're in danger
in this country of getting into an almost survival-type culture where all
corporate energy is devoted to satisfying shareholders and end-year balance
sheets. We should be looking to the next generation of products.'
The series continues next week by offering practical steps for getting ideas
to market.
 --------------------------------------------
Applications for European patents
 --------------------------------------------
                            1987       1991
 --------------------------------------------
US                        12,206     14,991
Japan                      7,177     12,272
Germany                   10,032     10,467
France                     3,760      4,537
Switzerland                1,835      2,090
UK                         3,453      2,902
Italy                      1,615      2,036
Others                     5,882      6,687
 --------------------------------------------
Total                     45,960     55,982
 --------------------------------------------
Source: European Patent Office
 --------------------------------------------
