FT  02 DEC 93 / FT Traveller, Zurich (2): A harder line on drugs - The
city's policies have been tightened
Zurich's hard drug scene became infamous throughout the world in the late
1980s because the city's Pink-Green government adopted a liberal policy
towards its surprisingly large addict population.
Soon, gruesome photographs appeared in international newspapers and
magazines, spoiling the city's image for order and perfection in all things.
Tourism plunged, and the city's business community protested bitterly about
the policy and the associated petty crime that was driving visitors away.
Today, the Pink-Green coalition is still in power and the liberal policy is
still largely intact, although with some significant modifications.
For one thing, Zurich has driven away non-resident addicts, thus
substantially reducing the concentration of addicts and dealers. And it has
stepped up rehabilitation programmes, including from next year an experiment
in distributing low-cost heroin through legal channels.
For its part, the federal government has finally cracked down on asylum
seekers, mainly from the former Yugoslavia, who support themselves by
dealing in drugs.
In the past, it was impossible to subject these people to long imprisonment
or extradite them until their applications for asylum had been processed, so
they were often back in business shortly after being arrested. A new law
will soon make it possible to throw them out summarily.
From the visitor's point of view, there are two reassuring things about the
Zurich drug scene:
Addicts and dealers remain in a relatively derelict territory well away from
the main sightseeing and shopping areas.
There is remarkably little petty crime, such as shop break-ins, or mugging,
suggesting that most of the addicts are pretty well-heeled. Also, the Zurich
police force is deeply frustrated by orders from its political masters to go
easy on drug offences, and so it jumps with zeal on even the most minor
misdemeanour committed by these people. And the drug community knows it.
Visitors can examine the, admittedly depressing, scene quite safely, by
walking along Sihl Quai or Wasserwerkstrasse. It is probably best to do so
in daylight and in nondescript clothing.
What is less reassuring is the fact of the scene's existence, which seems
extraordinary in such a prosperous and well-organised place as Zurich.
Paradoxically, it seems, it is precisely this easy comfort and smooth
organisation that many young people cannot tolerate.
