FT  28 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Allied Textiles eases to Pounds 12.7m but
core strong
ALLIED Textile Companies, the Yorkshire-based textile manufacturer and
processor, saw pre-tax profits ease from Pounds 13.2m to Pounds 12.7m in the
year to September 30.
However, the group lifted its final dividend to 8.1p (7.9p) for a total
pay-out up at 12.6p (12.3p), covered 2.4 times by earnings of 30.8p (31.7p)
per share.
The contribution from textile activities rose to Pounds 8.64m (Pounds 8.53m)
in an economic climate that the company described as continuing to be
'unsettled.'
Mr John Corrin, chief executive, explained that order books had been down at
two weeks for the past nine months. They would have to rise to six weeks
before the company would think of increasing its workforce.
The textiles profits were struck after Pounds 800,000 of restructuring costs
at four sites, said Mr Corrin.
Mr Corrin ascribed the buoyancy of the textile results to 'quality products,
quality customers and that about 50 per cent of our products go overseas.'
He explained that direct exports accounted for 23 per cent of output, but
that this was bumped up by sales to customers who bought Allied goods on the
dockside, already documented, cleared and in containers ready to be shipped.
He added that the spread of Allied's textile businesses gave it more
protection than other companies enjoyed.
Group turnover grew to Pounds 129m (Pounds 112m), boosted by about Pounds
10m from the Pounds 4.2m acquisitions in France and Belgium. On a
like-for-like basis it was up 5 per cent.
In the UK, the turnover from wool processing was Pounds 22m, carpets Pounds
29m, synthetic operations Pounds 39m, spinning and weaving Pounds 27m, and
knitwear Pounds 3m.
The restructuring, across all divisions, was 'continuing', said Mr Corrin.
Income from financial activities amounted to Pounds 4.06m, down from Pounds
4.63m. Within that, property sales made Pounds 1.33m (Pounds 71,000),
property rental net of operating profits - where the investment properties
are used to shadow tax - came to Pounds 1.7m, traded investments to Pounds
200,000, and cash on deposit amounted to Pounds 2m.
Allied has Pounds 27m cash and Mr Corrin is keen to increase from the
contribution from Europe. Long-term borrowings were up at Pounds 11m (Pounds
6m) after the French and Belgian buys - the group borrows in foreign
currency to avoid exchange rate risks.
COMMENT
Allied divides its watchers. Some see it as secretive - yesterday it held
its first analysts' meeting - and others see it as quiet and canny, saying
it takes time and effort to understand. Certainly, it carefully chooses its
friends in the City. While some are suspicious of the variability of the
profits from financial activities, all agree that the textile results are
impressive. The management has an impressive record for picking up
undermanaged or otherwise distressed businesses, mending them, putting money
in and waiting for the benefits to accrue. It is not afraid to use its cash
in recession. Forecasts are about Pounds 14m pre-tax for the current year,
giving earnings of about 33p and a p/e of about 13.7, which stands at a
small discount to the sector.
