FT  22 SEP 93 / Cutbacks no surprise for parts suppliers
NEARLY 200 UK-based suppliers of components to Nissan's Sunderland plants
had been battening down the hatches well before they were told formally of
the end-of-year cutbacks at a plant meeting on Monday night.
Few among even the smallest suppliers to UK motor manufacturers have not
been fully aware of the downturn in continental European car markets and the
inability of even a recovering UK market to sustain car output levels.
GKN said cuts by Nissan and other carmakers had been largely discounted when
GKN further reduced its workforce by 1,000 earlier this year and streamlined
operations.
Mr John Southgate, GKN public-affairs director, said yesterday: 'We don't
necessarily wait to take action until it's in the public domain.'
GKN, Lucas Automotive and other suppliers were being informally warned as
long as two months ago that Nissan's output was set to fall sharply.
Lucas said yesterday: 'We had anticipated a slowdown across the market, and
Nissan forms part of that.'
It added: 'Production levels are already reflected in the 4,000 reduction in
employee numbers we made last year.'
Nissan represents only 2 per cent of Lucas' total Pounds 1.5bn annual
automotive turnover.
However, the impact on small local suppliers, in some cases set up initially
solely to serve Nissan, is inevitably much more severe.
Sommer Industry, a subsidiary of the French Alibert group, went into
production a stone's throw from the Nissan plant purely to supply the
interior trim of the Sunderland-built cars.
It has 110 employees and a turnover of about Pounds 12m. Aware of its
vulnerability as a supplier to a single customer it has been broadening its
customer base. Some 80 per cent of turnover comes from Nissan, and its
output of Nissan-related supplies will be halved from November 8. But it
plans no redundancies or lay-offs. The night shift will be suspended and
workers moved to other daytime tasks.
'For two months we will be able to live with it,' said one senior executive
yesterday. 'But if the situation should extend beyond 1993 perhaps our
position will have to be reviewed.'
Nearby, Ikeda Hoover also plans to tough it out. It makes seats and
headlinings for Nissan and again was set up with this specific role.
Mr Brian Hodgson, general manager, said that it would have to cut production
in line with Nissan but that it, too, intended to make no redundancies or
lay-offs among its 520 employees.
