FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (7):
When time can cost a fortune - Speed is essential when bringing drugs to
market
REDUCING the time it takes to bring a drug to market has become the
pharmaceutical industry's overriding objective. 'The most urgent and
immediate issue concerning the industry has been that of time to market,'
says Dr Jurgen Drews, president of international R&amp;D at Roche.
There are two mains reasons for shorter development time. 'First, you want
to help the unmet medical needs of the public you are trying to serve,' says
Dr Leon Rosenberg, president, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research
Institute.
'The second reason is the limited period that a drug is protected by its
patents. Time is money. Anything you can do to pick up time means millions
of dollars in sales,' he says.
The rule of thumb for drug development is that every day a drug is held back
from the market costs the drug company Dollars 1m, explains Mr David
Matheson, senior vice-president at Boston Consulting Group. Dr Willi
Stammberger, head of development at Hoechst, estimates that one month's
delay in launching an important new product results in a cumulative sales
loss of DM30m (Dollars 18.6m).
Being late hits the company in two ways. It adds costs to the development
bill and it reduces revenues at the end of the product's patent life.
Speed to market also offers competitive advantage. Dr George Poste, chairman
of R&amp;D at SmithKline Beecham, points out that no matter how good a compound
is, speed is essential. There is no point being five years behind a
competitor's product.
'It's fair to say that speed to market was the primary reason for success
during the 1980s,' says Mr Bob Easton, president of The Wilkerson group, the
New-York based consultants. 'It's no coincidence that the two fastest
companies - Glaxo and Merck - are also the world's biggest pharmaceuticals
groups.'
But while most groups agree on the need to accelerate drug development, the
performance of many groups continues to be disappointing.
'There's still tremendous variability in performance between different
companies,' says Mr Matheson, 'The fastest at conducting phase two and phase
three studies are three times quicker than the slowest. Some are taking
eight years and some as little as two and a half years.'
Many research and development directors justify the length of time they take
to develop drugs by pointing out it is far more difficult to prove safety
and efficacy in some therapeutic areas and indications than others. For
example, it becomes clear within a couple of weeks whether or not an
antibiotic works, whereas a central nervous system product can take years.
'Take the 5HT3s,' says Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive and head of R&amp;D at
Glaxo. 'Zofran for emesis was easy - you either feel sick or you don't. But
for anxiety, depression ordementia it's much more subjective whether or not
it works.'
'Many R&amp;D directors claim there's a problem of comparing apples and oranges.
They are slower because their portfolio has more difficult drugs in it,'
says Mr Matheson at Boston Consulting Group. 'But there is a systematic
difference between companies.'
There are huge differences in performance within therapeutic areas,
according to Mr George Farrington, head of pharmaceuticals at The Wilkerson
Group. In antibiotics, for example, the best companies can develop medicines
in 60 months, compared with 250 months for the worst.
One of the key areas that drug groups can improve is the management of their
portfolios. 'You have to match resources to the portfolio available, being
ruthless about which drugs they take into development,' says Dr Tom
McKillop, research and technology director at Zeneca. 'You can't run 12
compounds simultaneously and then decide which one to bet on.'
Many companies try to run too many candidates through their pipeline, which
slows down the development of all of them. Dr Rosenberg at Bristol-Myers
Squibb agrees that resources are always finite. 'We have come to the
conclusion that we need to focus our resources. Each compound at a late
stage of development needs the best clinical trials that we can offer,' he
says.
At Schering, Prof Gunter Stock, board director in charge of R&amp;D, says a
master plan is agreed at the start of the project. A key compound in
accelerated development must not be held up by lack of resources.
The correct mix of products within the portfolio is also essential, says Mr
Matheson. Groups must have a balance between familiar and new areas. If the
area is familiar the company will know the regulators and understand the
required end-points for the clinical studies. For new therapeutic areas, the
development scientists are leaping the fences for the first time.
There must also be a balance of risk within the portfolio, especially in
phase one trials, where the likelihood of a compound dropping out is higher.
Planning is critical, says Mr Matheson. Companies must consider:
A balance between obtaining the necessary data for registration but not
making the dossier too complicated.
Integrating a team of pharma-economists into clinical development process so
the cost-effectiveness of a drug can be incorporated in the regulatory
dossier.
Manufacturing. They must ensure adequate supplies of the compound are ready
for clinical trials. Many groups take the risk of manufacturing large
quantities before the end of pre-clinical development.
Starting the pivotal study - usually the longest and largest - as soon as
possible while ensuring the design is right.
Managing the dozens of investigators around the world necessary for the
trials. Some should be avoided because they cannot meet deadlines. Others
need administrative and computer support.
There is a problem of convincing scientists of the need for urgency: Dr
Stammberger explains: 'It is not clear to the average scientist on the bench
how much money you're losing by delaying a project.'
Coping effectively with the paper mountain that builds up from the clinical
trials.
However, Dr Drews at Roche warns that rushing a product to market is not a
panacea. 'Bringing products to market in any quality as quickly as possible
only makes sense if you have something worthwhile. There is no point
developing something at the speed of light if it is trivial.'
