FT  18 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Shocked by sound money
AFTER A period of exceptional buoyancy in world stock markets, investors
ought to be feeling exceptionally cheerful. Yet, paradoxically, many who
belong to the world's rentier class - retired people in the main - are
feeling poorer. Indeed part of the surge in the markets in recent months has
reflected panic buying of any form of investment that appeared to offer a
less paltry return than a deposit account at the bank. In effect, the urge
to compensate for a decline in nominal incomes is driving more and more old
people into high-risk assets in remoter markets. This is unfamiliar and
dangerous territory for a generation that came to regard high inflation as
the norm; and the nature of a rising market that makes some people feel
poorer bears thinking about.
What investors are now discovering is that unexpected disinflation can be
quite as arbitrary in its impact on incomes and wealth as unexpected
inflation. At first sight, there are some obviously symmetrical features in
the transition from the one process to the other. Borrowers who gained at
the expense of savers when inflation eroded their liabilities now find
themselves paying exorbitant real rates of interest. Yet it is on the asset
side of the personal sector's balance sheet that shocks are taking place and
where the money illusion created by inflation is turning into money
disillusion.
Perverse result
A collapse in nominal interest rates on bank deposits would not matter
overmuch if there were still a significant real return after allowing for
lower inflation. But in some countries, most notably the US, the real return
is now next to zero. In Britain it can still be possible to obtain a modest
positive real return on deposits. But savers' perceptions tend to be geared
to nominal rates, which have fallen sharply. They are thus desperate for
high-yielding assets, including fixed-rate bonds for which they have
hitherto had a marked aversion. The perverse result is that the chief
victims of inflation, older people, now feel that they are suffering as much
from the cure as the disease. Even more paradoxically, governments may
actually be subsidising savers at the taxpayer's expense by issuing long
bonds at too high a coupon, having earlier used inflation as a form of
hidden taxation.
Nobody can be sure what impact this is having on aggregate savings
behaviour. But it is conceivable that some people are saving more as
inflation comes down, just as they once saved more in response to an
acceleration in inflation. This would put an additional damper on an already
sluggish, debt-constrained recovery. Wall Street economist Henry Kaufman has
also argued that the emergence of the household sector as a bigger financial
risk-taker, swapping fixed-rate deposits for securities whose capital value
goes up and down, could increase financial volatility and cause consumption
to become more cyclical.
Less consumption
Inflation did, of course, cause the capital value of fixed-rate deposits to
change in real terms, so the increase in risk can be overstated. In the UK,
the postwar shift from a market dominated by private individuals to one
overwhelmingly captured by professional investors appeared, if anything, to
result in more rather than less volatility - a point that might run counter
to Kaufman's thesis. But perceptions are what counts; and it is not
implausible that a fall in market prices today might lead to a greater
negative wealth effect, and thus less consumption, than the earlier
inflationary erosion of capital in the 1970s.
One benign consequence of all this is that the banking system will be less
vulnerable to shocks. Money and mutual funds are not banking intermediaries;
if they invest in risky certificates of deposit in Thailand or junk bonds in
Argentina, the loss falls directly on investors. But if funds are prone to
move suddenly from the capital markets into the banking system and back, it
will wreak havoc with the monetary aggregates. And regulators will confront
more Barlow Clowes-type scandals, which will be hard to prevent in a global
retail investment market. Investors should remember, in their increasingly
desperate search for income, that fat returns invariably imply ferociously
big risks.
