FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (22): A time for consolidation - Foreign
institutions scent rich pickings
FOREIGN financial companies sniff rich pickings in India. But they are wary
of the time it might take to profit from the country's growing appetite for
financial services.
Indian businessmen are in some ways ideal potential clients for world-class
financial services, because India already has a fairly extensive range of
financial products.
In practice, newcomers face serious difficulties: Indian regulators are
steadily dismantling the restrictive controls which have cramped the
financial markets, but they are often hesitant.
The pace of change has been slowed by last year's scandal in the Bombay
securities market, in which money was illegally siphoned out of banks in the
stock market using fake documents. In particular, the Reserve Bank of India,
the central bank, was generally favourably disposed towards foreign banks.
But the foreign banks' role in the scandal has made the reserve bank very
cautious about promoting the interests of foreign companies.
Banking is the one section of the financial markets where foreign groups
have been allowed to operate throughout the period in which India closed its
economic doors to the rest of the world.
The former British colonial banks - Standard Chartered Bank, Grindlays Bank
(now ANZ Grindlays) and Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation - as well
as Citibank of the US and about 20 other foreign banks were permitted to
remain under foreign control even when domestic banks were nationalised.
However, their expansion was severely restricted, so they now have a small
fraction of the market.
Nevertheless, by offering better services than local banks and access to
foreign financial networks, foreign banks have established a lucrative
position at the top end of the market for both corporate and individual
customers. India's regulated interest rate structure - which guaranteed
banks large spreads - brought easy profits.
But the onset of financial deregulation, including interest rate reform, is
cutting those margins and forcing banks to expand value-added services.
Also, the uncertainty caused by economic reform has made many Indian
companies wary about borrowing money, so loan demand is slack. But the
restructuring of many companies has increased the need for other services,
such as merchant banks.
Mr Barry McCance, who heads the Indian operations of ANZ Grindlays, says
this is a period of consolidation for foreign banks as they deal with the
aftermath of the scandal. He believes they have important competitive
advantages, notably access to expert expatriate staff, the ability to train
Indian staff overseas and bring the latest products into India.
The reserve bank has recently invited entrepreneurs to apply for permission
to establish new privately-owned banks in India. No large foreign financial
services group has applied. But several foreign financial groups have
started to establish themselves in other areas.
For example, in stockbroking, Jardine Fleming, the UK/Hong Kong investment
banking group, last year opened an office in Bombay, which now has about 25
staff.
Other stockbroking groups which have set up shop in India include James
Capel of the UK, W I Carr, the broking arm of Banque Indo-Suez of France,
and Nomura Securities from Japan.
The brokers are closely watching the activities of foreign financial
institutions which have been permitted to invest directly in the Indian
stock market since last year. About 55 institutions have been approved, with
many more candidates in the pipeline. However, only about six are actively
investing in the market.
A handful of foreign financial companies have invested in joint ventures or
cooperation agreements with Indian partners. This year, GE Capital, a
subsidiary of General Electric of the US, has set up a joint venture in
consumer finance with Housing Development Finance Corporation, a public
sector mortgage bank. J P Morgan, the US investment bank, has signed a joint
venture in financial services, including merchant banking, with Industrial
Credit and Investment Corporation of India, a part-private part-public
development bank.
Two Hong Kong-based financial services groups have also forged similar
tie-ups - Asian Capital Partners with the Industrial Development Bank of
India and Peregrine Investments with ITC Classic Financial Services and
Enterprises, an affiliate of ITC, which is in turn a subsidiary of BAT
Industries, the diversified British group.
Fund management is also attracting foreign interest because India is ending
the near-monopoly enjoyed by the Unit Trust of India. Two US groups have
signed agreements with Indian partners - Pioneer Management Corporation with
the Investment Trust of India and Alliance Capital Management with the
Investment Trust of India. In insurance, Sun Life of the UK has a joint
venture with the Life Insurance Company of India to sell life insurance to
Indians living in Britain. It plans a similar partnership in India.
Not all the investments are new. Among merchant banks, Lazard Brothers of
the UK has had a stake since 1985 in Creditcapital Finance Corporation, a
joint venture with Mr Udayan Bose, a banker and Creditcapital's chairman.
Creditcapital now employs 200 people in corporate advisory services.
However, it has taken Mr Bose eight years to reach his present position near
the top of the Indian merchant banking market. Newcomers cannot expect to
join him very quickly. Apart from the official regulatory restrictions,
there are numerous unofficial and informal barriers. For example, the Bombay
Stock Exchange, dominated by individual brokers, has only this year admitted
its first corporate member. Foreign corporate membership is still some way
off.
