FT  15 MAY 93 / Leading Article: A gleam in Asian eyes
GOLD HAS always been a bolt hole for the nervous, and as this week's events
have demonstrated once again, there is never any shortage of things for
investors to be nervous about. The devaluation of the peseta within the
European exchange rate mechanism, the looming Danish referendum on
Maastricht, high-profile corporate bankruptcies such as at shipbuilders Swan
Hunter - the list can be compiled to suit all tastes in pessimism. Yet the
surge in the gold price to a 17-month high, and the simultaneous mid-week
plunge in the Dow Jones industrial average, were primarily attributable to
renewed fears of inflation. Rarely has investment opinion on the respective
risks of inflation and deflation been so polarised.
Last month investors subscribed for Dollars 175m worth of 50-year debentures
in aircraft manufacturer Boeing on a redemption yield of just under 8 per
cent, only 1 percentage point more than the yield on the US Treasury's
30-year bond. This implies not only a touching faith in price stability half
a century hence, but an even more touching belief in the durability of
companies - just when the troubles of giants such as IBM and Philips are
pointing to a shorter life cycle for corporate monoliths.
The steepness of the yield curve in the US, with short-dated paper as low as
3 per cent against long bonds yielding almost 7 per cent, admittedly makes
longer maturities attractive. But as the US newsletter Grant's Interest Rate
Observer puts it: 'In flight from 3 per cent, a person may buy a cat or a
dog instead of a yield.'
Or, in the present instance, a person may buy gold. Yet worries about
renewed global inflation look premature. In the US, where bond investors
twitched on Wednesday over a big increase in producer prices between March
and April, the figures for output, jobs and broad money still point to a
faltering recovery and minimal inflationary pressure. Japanese bond yields
of 4 1/2 per cent, even after the quarter point rise over the past month,
are not ringing inflationary alarm bells.
European doldrums
In Europe, meantime, the German and French economies will contract this
year. While Bundesbank officials warn loudly about inflation, the German
central bank's action on interest rates suggests mounting anxiety about
shrinkage in the real economy. Within that, countries such as the UK, with
its roller-coaster housing market, or Italy, with an overblown stock of
public-sector debt, clearly remain inflation-prone. Rising fiscal deficits
could also cause global trouble in the late 1990s. But this is not yet the
stuff of an enduring rally in the price of a commodity that Keynes dubbed
'the barbaric metal'.
The gold and gold futures markets are small compared with global bond
markets, and thus more susceptible to a ramp by large investors. But the
recent flurry also owes something to China, where a rapidly growing economy
is badly overheating. Estimates of urban inflation in China in the first
quarter of 1993 run close to 16 per cent, roughly double the probable
sustainable growth rate of the underlying economy. Yet liberalisation makes
it harder for the government in Beijing to slam on the brakes.
Chinese interest
Individual Chinese thus have an urgent need for a hedge. With only two
paltry domestic stock exchanges, local equities cannot do the job. Nor is it
easy for individuals to invest overseas. Gold, then, has a special
attraction for China's 1.2bn people, which is reflected in street prices for
the metal that exceed the world price by Dollars 200 or more. According to
the Gold Fields Minerals Services consultancy, China emerged last year as
the world's largest consumer of the precious metal.
The surge in the gold price, then, is partly a by-product of the
underdeveloped state of the mainland Chinese financial system. And since the
Chinese economy could now, on the IMF's latest purchasing power parity
estimates, be the world's third largest after the US and Japan, the pattern
of global portfolio demand is inevitably affected by this distortion. Nor
are such spillovers from the domestic into the global capital markets
anything new.
Distortions in the Japanese financial system, including a prohibition on
insurance companies from paying bonuses to policyholders out of capital
gains, explained the loss-making Japanese rush into high-yielding US bond
markets in the 1980s. The lifting of restrictions on foreign investment by
Swedish investment institutions prompted an equally unsuccessful invasion of
the London office property market around the same time, which has now been
followed by a similar and better-timed invasion by German institutions.
Clearly it helps if the domestic circumstance that precipitates a change in
overseas asset prices happens to coincide with a market trough. The
consolation for the Chinese is that the gold price, despite the ramp, is up
only 13 per cent on its low point this year; and at around Dollars 368 it
remains well below its 1980s peak of Dollars 835. But others should beware.
It is a volatile market that looks increasingly giddy.
