FT  02 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Three groups' shares rise on drugs approval
THREE PRODUCTS from British drug companies have received approval for sale
in the US. The move could bring in combined revenues of Dollars 1.5bn
(Pounds 980m) a year by 1998.
In a year-end spate of approvals, the US Food and Drug Administration gave
the go-ahead for Paxil, an antidepressant made by SmithKline Beecham,
Manoplax, a heart drug from Boots, and Tilade, an asthma treatment developed
by Fisons.
Paxil, branded as Seroxat in Europe, should be the biggest seller of the
three. Analysts believe it could become one of only a handful of
'blockbuster' drugs with sales of eventually of more than Dollars 1bn a year
throughout the world.
Sales in the US should begin in the next few weeks. SmithKline Beecham
shares rose 12p to 496p on New Year's Eve.
The approval of Fisons' Tilade ends a long period of uncertainty for the
company. The drug, upon which Fisons has pinned hopes for rapid growth in
the 1990s, has been awaiting US approval for almost six years.
In a departure from the company's usual practice, it will co-promote Tilade
with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, the US-based pharmaceuticals subsidiary of
Rhone-Poulenc, the french chemicals group. In return, Fisons will co-promote
Azmacort, RPR's asthma treatment, which works by a different mechanism.
Tilade will not be launched in the US until the second quarter of 1993, but
its shares advanced 15p to 245p on New Year's Eve.
Fisons also announced that it was abandoning attempts to revamp production
of one of the suspended drugs, Iron Dextran, a blood product, to meet FDA
requirements.
Boots was given a bigger boost than it expected by the terms of the approval
of Manoplax. The FDA's advisory committee had recommended approval only for
heart patients who could not tolerate the class of treatments called ACE
inhibitors. The ruling allows Manoplax to be given to any heart patient not
responding to other treatments.
Analysts forecast sales rising to Dollars 250m a year by 1998, and Boots
shares responded with a gain of 12p to 561p.
The FDA approved a fourth UK product, Indiclor, an imaging agent used in the
treatment of cancer and made by Amersham International. Although sales are
likely to be small in relation to the size of the company, Amersham shares
rose 17p to 619p.
Drug shares lifted, Page 13
