FT  14 SEP 93 / Letters to the Editor: A social side to business (5) -
Samuel Brittan's views on the legitimacy of the social elements of corporate
responsibility, reported on September 2, generated a large number of
letters. This is a selection
Sir, Samuel Brittan sees an ambiguity in the position of proponents of
'socially responsible' business. Do they claim the extra activities will
help a business's long-term profitability? Or do they assert that a business
should follow different objectives? The answer to both questions is 'yes'.
Business support for community and social causes may contribute to long-term
profit in three ways: by creating a favourable image of the company with
potential customers, setting it apart from its competitors; by improving the
motivation and productivity of its employees; and by expanding the market
for its products through fostering a stable, prosperous and well-educated
community, in however small a way. Appropriate external activities can make
business people sharper, more adaptable and less insular.
Few would see making profits as business's only responsibility. The manner
in which those profits are pursued, and the ways in which business can help
meet wider national goals, also matter, even if it is harder to define good
measures of success for them.
There is another justification for 'socially responsible' business, only
hinted at by Samuel Brittan. Skills and experience developed in business can
be usefully applied to tackling some aspects of the social problems he
mentions. the men and women in Whitehall, or in the townhall, may not always
know best.
Of course, it is wrong to expect 'corporate executives . . . to undertake a
large burden of public duties'. But it would be even more wrong not to tap
the talents of business people as part of our combined efforts to deal with
public issues that concern us all. Alastair Bruce,
Bruce Naughton Wade,
public affairs management counsellors,
Enterprise House,
59-65 Upper Ground,
London SE1 9PQ
