FT  13 MAY 93 / Conviction rate of SFO rises to 71%
THE CONVICTION rate of the Serious Fraud Office rose to 71 per cent of cases
brought last year, it was announced yesterday.
Mr George Staple, the SFO's director, said when introducing its annual
report that in spite of 'unbalanced' media reporting 1992-93 had been a good
year for the department, which was dealing effectively with fraud that
previously went uninvestigated and unprosecuted.
The rise in the conviction rate from 66 per cent in 1991-92 had been
accompanied by an increase in the number of guilty pleas by suspects. More
than 40 per cent of defendants pleaded guilty to offences last year compared
with about 33 per cent in 1991-92.
Mr Staple said the increase in guilty pleas not only saved court time and
expense, but demonstrated that the SFO's 'Section 2' powers, which remove a
suspects' right to silence when being interviewed, were proving effective.
'We are able to use these powers to demonstrate to defendants that the game
is up and this is leading to pleas of guilty,' he said.
In an an unusual move for a government body the SFO criticises media
coverage of itself as 'unbalanced' because of its concentration on a few
high-profile cases.
The office lists all but four of its 57 current cases - including those at
their early, and most sensitive, investigation stages.
Companies under investigation in such cases, include: the Baron Group
(allegations of obtaining property by deception), Durnford Ford (alleged
shortfall in client account of a firm of solicitors), European Leisure PLC
(share dealing), Landhurst Leasing PLC (allegations that it misrepresented
the adequacy of security in relation to sums borrowed), Letap
Pharmaceuticals Ltd (allegations of fraudulent trading), London United
Investments PLC (alleged offences concerning insurance and reinsurance), MTM
(allegations of falsely inflated profits), Norton Group (regarding
acquisitions by the company), Payroll Services Ltd (allegations of
misappropriation of client funds) and Richmond Oil and Gas (allegations
relating to share deals).
The report repeats the SFO's calls for a formal system of plea-bargaining to
be introduced as the single most effective way of shortening complex fraud
cases.
'A system could be introduced which would encourage guilty defendants to
enter pleas, while at the same time protecting them from improper pressure
to do so,' he said.
SFO's budget rose from Pounds 17.7m in 1991-92 to Pounds 21m last year
largely because of the high costs of the Robert Maxwell and Bank of Credit
and Commerce International affairs.
