FT  06 SEP 93 / Survey of Reinsurance (3): Man-made hurricanes - Europeans
foot the bill for the 1980s
THE early 1990s have witnessed the culmination of a series of adverse trends
in Europe's primary insurance industry which had their roots in the dynamic
financial markets and striving for international expansion in the mid-1980s.
In 1985, non-life reinsurers were publicly expressing anxiety mainly about
US liability business. By 1987, other concerns were coming more to the fore.
Munich Re, for example, noted 'the far-reaching consequences' of retention
of a greater share of risk both by commercial insureds and insurers.
Netherlands Reinsurance Group (NRG) commented that the resulting shift of
emphasis towards catastrophe cover would lead to 'increasingly unbalanced'
reinsurance portfolios and even greater volatility of results, which could
only be evened out if 'an adequate price is charged'.
At the same time, Swiss Re was observing 'the first effects of the EC 1992
project' in the shape of intensified competition, particularly for
industrial risks. This was precisely the area of business 'which has
repeatedly brought unsatisfactory results for years'. Munich Re, meanwhile,
had for years been criticising 'structural deficiencies' in the European
industrial fire market.
By 1988-89, Swiss Re was expressing concern over possible accumulations of
risk generated by restructuring of the primary insurance market, as well as
criticising 'blatant' underpricing in some areas.
The 1990 winter storms in Europe prompted it to call for 'fair distribution'
of catastrophe losses between reinsurer, insurer and policyholder.
Swiss Re is now addressing the twin problems of inadequate underlying
property rates and instability in prediction of natural catastrophe losses.
At the end of August, it announced that it planned to invest Dollars 100m
and to take a leading technical role in Partner Re, a new specialist
catastrophe reinsurer based in Bermuda.
'Industrial fire and property has been extremely bad also on a per risk
basis, especially in Europe, and especially in France and Germany,' says
general manager Walter Kielholz, whose company is 'trying very hard - I
can't put it otherwise - to pressure our clients into doing something about
it'.
'We are assisted in this by the prohibition of cross-subsidising of personal
and commercial lines,' he adds. But he sees a potential danger in the
impending liberalisation of all European Community markets. 'All our
experience of markets which liberalise indicates that rates tend not to go
up,' he comments.
Reinsurers can either reduce their support or toughen conditions, but in Mr
Kielholz's view some restructuring of the business itself is necessary. For
example, in continental Europe there has been a tendency not to encourage
industrial clients to take large deductibles, which are sometimes so low as
to be 'quite ridiculous'. He attributes this largely to distribution
networks focused on premium volume.
Each part of the business, he says, must be examined on a stand-alone basis
so that no client segment or class of business subsidises another. The
problem with a 'whole account' view was that it made it impossible to set
funds aside for very risky business.
'If the original business cannot be cured, an unhooking of the reinsurance
terms of trade from the original terms of trade is unavoidable,' he
concludes.
'Especially in areas of high risk, you have to have an absolute level of
control,' comments John Dowling, managing director of Eagle Star Re, one of
few remaining providers of significant proportional capacity in London.
Last year, with numbers of reinsurers withdrawing or heavily restricting
operations, the bargaining position of those remaining was strengthened,
particularly as catastrophes had ended the reinsurance spiral in which
participants earned a precarious living by 'taking in each other's laundry'.
In August, Cologne Re told clients that over the next five years it would
cease providing cover for catastrophe on a proportional basis.
In October, the UK market was notified by European reinsurers that cover for
damage from terrorist attack would no longer be included free in property
reinsurances. Munich Re, again, had been warning of the implications of
increasing political risk for property insurance for years.
In its 1993 annual catastrophe review, it stated that wherever there is a
risk of large losses, reinsurers must obtain in full a margin sufficient to
pay them 'irrespective of whether the original rates charged by their
reinsured clients provide these margins or not'.
Furthermore, account must be taken not only of past losses, but of the risk
that future catastrophe costs may be higher still.
The same argument applies to proportional business. With original prices so
low that they are often barely sufficient to pay for a medium-sized fire
claim, 'reinsurers are in effect covering major fire losses free of charge,
not to mention natural catastrophe losses,' says Munich Re management board
member Fedor Nierhaus.
Munich Re will no longer follow inadequate original prices, and will also
set limits on catastrophe exposure in proportional contracts, which Mr
Nierhaus describes as 'a matter of fundamental importance.' Such caps have
suddenly become the rule rather than the exception in the US.
Serge Osouf, president, reinsurance operations, of the French SCOR group,
says 'we decided to show the market that enough was enough'. SCOR's accounts
are probably the most transparent of any European reinsurer, with major
losses - and any subsequent recovery - shown more quickly than by its
competitors.
'We have to replenish and increase our catastrophe reserves, and therefore
we need better margins,' he says. SCOR group companies too will emphasise
non-proportional and facultative business, but will renew proportional on a
selected basis after careful review of catastrophe accumulations.
'We will co-operate with all clients who are prepared also to share their
good results,' he adds.
Perhaps the most radical step, however, was that taken by NRG. It announced
its complete withdrawal from non-life reinsurance in March afterobserving
that 'the vagaries of the American tort system  .. exploited by a surfeit of
plaintiff lawyers make it virtually impossible to transact liability
business on a profitable basis.
Trevor Petch is editor of the FT World Insurance Report
