FT  18 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Combatants square up over chips deal -
Whether it is a deal is itself in question
US and Japanese trade officials and industry executives meet in Hawaii on
Sunday to review progress on semiconductor trade. Tensions are high on both
sides.
The talks could be a watershed in a dispute that has tarnished US-Japan
trade relations for the past decade. They are the first formal meetings
between US and Japanese trade officials since President Bill Clinton took
office.
At issue is foreign access to the Dollars 20bn Japanese market for these
crucial components - sometimes known as 'chips' - in modern electronic
circuits. After long and heated negotiations, the US and Japan drew up a
bilateral 'arrangement' on semiconductor trade in 1986. With no substantive
changes on the market access issue, the pact was renewed for five years in
1991, giving Japan more time to achieve increased imports.
A deadline was set for the end of 1992, by which time the Japanese
government agreed that 'the expectation of the US semiconductor industry
that the foreign market share will grow to more than 20 per cent of the
Japanese market' should be achieved. Japan 'considers that this can be
realised,' the agreement stated.
The market share data for the final quarter of 1992 are due to be released
in the next two days. They will set the tone for the trade talks.
Already, industry and government officials in both countries have
acknowledged that it is unlikely that the 20 per cent 'expectation' will be
met. In the third quarter of 1992 the foreign market share reached 15.9 per
cent, its highest level since the signing of the 1986 agreement, when it
stood at 8 per cent.
Another increase of one or two percentage points is expected in the
fourth-quarter data. It might even be higher, some suggest, because the size
of the Japanese market declined last year as sales of consumer electronics
products slowed.
However, Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, said last week that
he would regard anything less than 20 per cent market share as 'serious, a
commitment not kept'.
'And we would begin our discussions from that point. A deal is a deal,' he
said.
Japanese government and industry officials argue that they have kept their
side of the bargain. The Electronics Industry Association of Japan (EIAJ)
notes that since 1986 foreign market share has doubled and that sales of
foreign-made semiconductors in Japan more than tripled to over Dollars 3bn
in 1991.
There has also been a significant increase in the establishment of long-term
relationships between US chip suppliers and Japanese customers and in the
number of 'design-ins' - when US chips are designed into prototype Japanese
products.
'We believe that in view of the increase in imports and the number of
alliances and design-ins, the US-Japan semiconductor co-operation effort has
got to be one of the most successful trade agreements the US has,' says Mr
Koji Matsui, deputy director of the industrial electronics division of the
ministry of trade and industry (Miti).
There is rising resentment in Japan over what is seen as abuse by the US of
the market share issue. The US industry has used market data to distort the
true meaning of the trade agreement, Japanese industry officials contend.
The 1991 agreement clearly states that 'the two governments agree that (the
20 per cent expectation) constitutes neither a guarantee, a ceiling nor a
floor on the foreign market share', the Japanese point out.
US officials maintain, however, that market share numbers provide a measure
of progress that has been invaluable in maintaining pressure on Japan to
keep up its efforts to increase market access. The Clinton administration
plans to include similar 'temporary quantitative indicators' in future trade
pacts.
At the talks in Hawaii, the US is expected to propose a market share target
beyond 1992. 'We are not going away until that number is achieved,' says Mr
Andrew Procassini, president of the Semiconductor Industry Association, the
US industry trade group. 'Our goal is to achieve a minimum of 20 per cent of
the Japanese market on an ongoing basis.'
The Japanese, however, will strongly resist any new market share goals, says
Mr Stan Anderson, Washington lobbyist for the EIAJ. 'It would be very, very
difficult for the Japanese side to ever accept another numerical goal of any
kind because the SIA has misused the clear language of the arrangement so
often,' he says.
'The Japanese delegation will go to Hawaii with the objective of trying to
convince the US that it remains committed to implementing all aspects of the
agreement,' Mr Anderson says.
'We are going to Hawaii to hear what the number is,' responds Mr Procassini,
'to see what response the US government will have and, if asked, to discuss
it with the US government. We are only concerned about a measure of openness
of the Japanese market, and that is 20 per cent market share.'
It is clear that the US semiconductor industry has the sympathies of the
Clinton administration. 'We must be prepared to act,' Mr Ron Brown, the
commerce secretary told a meeting of the SIA in Washington last month. 'We
must see to it that agreements are kept, even if it takes hard-nosed
head-knocking on our part.'
