FT  12 MAY 93 / Personal View: How to make the Ecu user-friendly
Will the European Currency Unit be the single currency for Europe, as laid
down by the Maastricht treaty? I have my doubts. The Community's 340m
citizens are unlikely to accept a strange new currency that none of them
knows - any more than Europeans were willing to accept Esperanto as a common
language earlier this century.
Just as English, with American help, has become the lingua franca of Europe,
so the Continent's single currency will probably be the one most familiar to
a large proportion of the population. Most likely, it will be the D-Mark.
The Ecu is weighted against a basket of EC currencies; it was created as a
'European' currency, neutral in nationalistic terms. It is widely used in
Eurobond transactions, and an Ecu clearing system is managed by commercial
banks. Further, it is used as a unit of account between governments, as well
as by some European companies.
However, the Ecu has some overwhelming practical disadvantages. It is viewed
by the market simply as one more foreign currency. Its value is not known
outside professional circles. There are no Ecu notes and coins, nor are
consumer goods priced in Ecu.
Additionally, the Maastricht plan for economic and monetary union (Emu)
suffers from a serious technical drawback. According to the Emu timetable,
member currencies' exchange rates will be permanently fixed in terms of Ecus
at the start of Stage 3 - which could be in 1997 or (more likely) 1999. Thus
the value of the Ecu will not be known until the close of business on the
last working day before Stage 3 starts.
Since the closing market rates are likely to be expressed to four decimal
places, consumers and savers will be expected to learn to live with the new
currency at a complicated conversion rate. The Ecu can be saved only if it
is made much more user-friendly. The simplest way to achieve this is to fix
the Ecu/D-Mark parity at Ecu1.00=DM2.00 from the beginning of Stage 2 on
January 1 1994. This compares with the present rate of DM1.953 to the Ecu.
The process would require a precise interpretation of the wording of the
Maastricht treaty. Article 109g states that, from the beginning of Stage 2,
'the currency composition of the Ecu basket shall not be changed'. If this
article were taken to mean that the percentage weighting (rather than, as at
present, the fixed amount) of each currency within the Ecu basket shall not
be changed, it would need only a minor adjustment over the 1994 New Year
weekend to reset Ecu currency weights to produce a fixed value of DM2.
This scheme would allow the Ecu's value to become instantly recognisable.
The D-Mark, which has a weighting of about 32 per cent in the Ecu basket, is
by far the best known currency among Community consumers. The Emu planning
process for banks and industry could begin in Stage 2, assisting the
transition. New German notes and coins could be issued during Stage 2
showing both the Ecu and D-Mark value. The Bundesbank would still have to
surrender influence over monetary policy to the European central bank. At
the same time, one of the Bundesbank and the German people's main objections
to Emu would be removed. They would keep the D-Mark; the Ecu would become
the 'Doppelmark'.
For France, such a plan might bring some loss of face. But the 'basket'
concept of the Ecu would be preserved, albeit in a more cosmetic guise. The
French could permanently fix the franc against the D-Mark at the beginning
of Stage 2. France could then issue Ecu notes which could be co-ordinated
with German designs and made legal tender in both countries. Following the
French government's success in weathering currency turbulence on the foreign
exchange markets since last autumn, the obvious round number parity would be
FFr100=DM30=Ecu15.
My proposal would bring an important challenge for Britain, which clearly
does not want to be left out of a move towards a single European currency.
Britain is close to an important round number relationship with the DM/Ecu.
At DM2.50, the Ecu would be worth 80 pence. Should Britain decide to rejoin
the exchange rate mechanism at or after the start of Stage 2 at a fixed rate
of DM2.50, the British public would have a reasonably simple conversion to
make. Britain, too, could experiment ahead of Stage 3 by issuing some Pounds
20 notes showing their fixed equivalent value at DM50 and Ecu25.
If people object to the word Ecu, the Financial Times (and perhaps the Sun)
could sponsor a poll to choose a more appealing name. Why not rehabilitate
the 'guinea'?
The author is managing director of Gaiacorp Currency Managers
