FT  08 SEP 93 / Smith pledges raise hopes over party-union reforms
MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, improved his chances of winning his battle
with some of Britain's biggest unions over the reform of party-union links
yesterday by promising to strengthen employment rights and union recognition
laws.
In a speech to the Trades Union Congress at Brighton, which was warmly
welcomed by many of his union opponents in the debate over party reform, Mr
Smith made a vigorous defence of trade unionism.
In a significant shift in Labour employment policy, Mr Smith said all
workers should be covered by employment protection legislation from their
first day at work instead of after a two-year probationary period. He also
said the unions should have a right to recognition by employers.
The Labour leader's speech was immediately attacked by Mr David Hunt, the
employment secretary, as 'the same old failed formulas which would increase
unemployment and undermine competitiveness'.
Mr John Edmonds, leader of the GMB general union, who is Mr Smith's leading
opponent in the dispute over party-union links, said: 'There is no doubt
that this speech has improved the mood marvellously. It has put the
constitutional tiff over selection of candidates into perspective. We all
want a solution.'
Many delegates said Mr Smith's speech was the most pro-union they had heard
from a Labour leader for a long time. Some commentators interpreted it as an
attempt by Mr Smith to distance himself from party 'modernisers'.
In spite of Mr Smith's positive tone, it was not clear whether he would win
the vote at the party conference over the introduction of one member, one
vote in the selection of parliamentary candidates.
But his speech may have helped to sway the conference delegations of unions
such as Nupe, the public-service union, and Usdaw, the shopworkers' union.
Some union leaders suggested that neither side would be able to win a
majority.
Before speaking to the TUC, Mr Smith said he remained committed to his
reforms, 'and I believe they will be carried by the party conference'.
In his speech, Mr Smith said that Britain's record on employment rights was
'a national humiliation' and he accused the government of advertising
Britain as a cheap labour site. He said employees should be 'full partners
in economic decision-making'.
On broader economic issues, Mr Smith impressed some of the party
leadership's critics. Making a firm commitment to full employment, he said:
'All instruments of macroeconomic management whether interest rates, the
exchange rate, or the levels of borrowing will be geared to sustained growth
and rising employment.'
TUC reports, Page 10
Editorial Comment, Page 19
