FT  01 SEP 93 / Survey of Africa - A continent at stake (11): In search of a
kick-start - Private sector
ONE of the most important challenges facing Africa in the 1990s is that of
kickstarting the private sector. But as Sir William Ryrie, retiring
executive vice-president of the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
says, Africa is the only region in the developing world where public sector
investment exceeds that of private enterprise. More than half the region's
investment is funded from aid.
This low level of private investment cannot be attributed to a shortage of
entrepreneurship, says Sir William, noting that since the African Project
Development Facility was launched in 1986, over 2,000 entrepreneurs have
sought its assistance,
The IFC - the World Bank group's private sector arm - has launched four main
initiatives in the region:
More than 23 governments have been advised by the IFC's Foreign Investment
Advisory Service (FIAS) on how to attract direct investment from abroad. The
IFC itself has invested in large energy sector projects in Cameroon and
Nigeria and in the Ashanti Gold Mine in Ghana. Much is expected from small
enterprise development programmes, seen as a partial solution to the
region's escalating unemployment problem and also as an area where Africa
has comparative advantage. In Ghana, for example, small enterprise accounts
for more than 80 per cent of manufacturing employment. Access to finance is
probably the main constraint on small firm expansion and the IFC's African
Enterprise Fund targets its lending and investment activities on small
businesses, funding some 58 projects in 18 countries since its inception.
The IFC has assisted 10 countries in privatisation programmes, though
progress has been slow.
The fourth initiative is fostering capital market development.
The World Bank's private sector programme has a broadly similar focus.
Initially, its support for private sector development targeted
infrastructural investment to complement industrial and agricultural
projects. This changed in the 1980s as the Bank focused on specific
obstacles to private sector growth, launching its Private Sector Development
Programme in 1989, with three main objectives - creating an enabling
business environment, restructuring the public sector and promoting
financial sector development. In the 18 months to mid-1992, it financed 42
projects in 24 sub-Saharan countries. In addition to its support of
privatisation, the Bank is working to strengthen the role of the state
through capacity-building and institution-building investments. In the
financial sector, its main task has been regulatory reform, including
liberalising interest rates, allied with institutional reform including
restructuring ailing banks, and establishing appropriate systems for
prudential regulation and bank supervision.
Yet there remain formidable obstacles. In Kenya, for example, a study found
that the average company needs 15 licences a year to operate, taking some
223 staff hours to acquire. Backhanders add 66 per cent to legal fees while
total costs including 'irregular charges' amounted to more than a fifth of
incremental profits. Given the scepticism over an early return of foreign
investment, the donors are right to bang the small enterprise drum. But in a
world where retailers and consumers want increasingly sophisticated quality
products, and where modern technology and scale economies demand heavy
investment, it is difficult to see small business playing more than a
residual role.
