FT  07 DEC 93 / International Company News: NIE's Pounds 42.3m pleases City
Northern Ireland Electricity yesterday pleased the market in its first
results since privatisation by announcing an 18.5 per cent rise to Pounds
42.3m in interim pre-tax profits and a dividend ahead 12.6 per cent at
3.39p.
Although the dividend increase was slightly below what most analysts expect
the regional electricity companies to pay on average in the current results
round, the City approved of the company's success in tackling its cost base.
Earnings per share for the six months to September 30 rose to 20.8p (17.9p).
Turnover of Pounds 206.2m (Pounds 188.4m) was helped by tariff increases of
6.6 per cent and a 2 per cent increase in units distributed (weather
corrected).
Sir Desmond Lorimer, chairman, said Northern Ireland's economy had not
experienced the booms and troughs that other UK areas had been through in
recent years and he expected the economy to remain healthy in the second
half of the year.
NIE's sales will also be helped by current trends in prices of coal and oil
which generate all of the province's electricity. Mr Patrick Haren, chief
executive, said the company did not expect to experience the same kind of
pressure for next year's prices as it did for this year's.
The company's performance in the first half of the year was helped by a 7.3
per cent reduction in controllable operating costs. Mr Gordon Woodworth,
finance director, said Pounds 2.6m, or 8 per cent, had been taken off
salaries and employee related costs.
The company reduced its payroll number from 3,413 in September 1992 to 3,157
this September and has set a target of 2,557 by March 1996.
Appliance trading moved from a Pounds 300,000 loss to a Pounds 200,000
profit.
COMMENT
When NIE was floated six months ago, the fear was that the association of
the region it serves with terrorism would cast a constant shadow over the
shares. In the event the shares have considerably outperformed the market in
spite of renewed political problems in Northern Ireland and they rose again
yesterday by 15p to 226p on a partly paid basis. The attraction of NIE is
that the external threats are minimal. Competition will take longer to bite
than on the mainland and the regulator's review of the distribution is
further away than that faced by the regional distribution companies for
April 1995. The management has also played its part in vindicating the
shares' outperformance by tackling costs more effectively than expected.
They still have some work to do to improve customer service but this is a
small downside. Assuming a dividend of 11.4 per cent, the shares are on a
prospective yield of 4.1 per cent. That is near the bottom of the recs'
range, leaving little scope for further outperformance. But there are few
dangers for shareholders.
