FT  29 SEP 93 / Business and the Environment: United colours of Pelourinho -
A Brazilian city's historic but decaying centre has been saved in a
pioneering project
Pelourinho, the name of an area in the centre of the north-eastern Brazilian
city of Salvador, means 'pillory' and in colonial times it was a place of
horror for slaves taken there to be thrashed. In modern, more egalitarian,
times Pelourinho became a place of danger for everyone, its crumbling
buildings and crime-infested alleys presenting the unsuspecting visitor with
the equal likelihood of being knifed or hit by falling masonry. By 1991, the
area was completely derelict, with 30 buildings collapsing each year.
But during the past two years, Pelourinho, described by Unesco as the most
important collection of baroque colonial architecture in the Americas, has
been restored to its 16th, 17th and 18th century splendour. The
transformation, the largest restoration project ever carried out in Brazil,
is the work of an enlightened local government which decided to rescue its
history before it was too late.
The Pelourinho project has yielded spectacular results in architectural,
cultural and economic terms. The vibrant pinks, yellows and blues of its
restored houses, churches and museums with stunning collections of sacred
art, are now drawing tourists and historians from all over the globe,
pushing Salvador from the eighth to the second most popular tourist
destination in Brazil.
As a result, the area, which three centuries ago was the commercial centre
of Salvador, has a thriving economy. The government has rented most of the
104 buildings restored so far to shops, bars and hotels. It has also
stimulated local culture by encouraging artists, dancers and musicians to
keep the area's bohemian character and African heritage.
The achievement is particularly impressive in a country where preservation
usually means abandonment and which, despite its minimal amount of heritage,
has no tradition of restoration.
When Pelourinho was declared a historic monument by Unesco in 1984 it was in
an advanced stage of rot. A few state governors had made half-hearted
attempts at restoration, but the work was not maintained by their successors
and the area had become a refuge of criminals, prostitutes and other low
life. Vivaldo Costa Lima, head of the Institute of Artistic and Cultural
Heritage (Ipac), says: 'It had become a place you visited with fear.'
But in 1991, Antonio Carlos Magalhaes became state governor for the third
time and decided that if Pelourinho was to be restored, it was now or never.
He says: 'I'd loved Pelourinho ever since I was mayor of Salvador and in my
first two governments I did a little, but was unsuccessful in getting
private and international support. In the end, I decided to allocate the
state's own funds. It's the most important Portugese baroque architecture
anywhere in the world and I wanted to give it back to the city.'
Last year, he set Ipac to work on four of the most decayed blocks and
already nearly 250 houses have been restored at a cost to date of Dollars
15m (Pounds 9.7m) - the final total for 600 buildings will be Dollars 40m.
Costa Lima says: 'Our mandate was to recuperate the houses and devolve them
to the economic and global life of the city without taking away their
character. The real priority was to preserve our history - stimulating
tourism was a lucky byproduct.'
It was not an easy task. The degradation of the buildings meant they were
inhabited mostly by squatters, who did not care for them, thus worsening
their decline. Poor wiring and clandestine electricity connections led to 20
fires in the past two years. Many had been divided and subdivided to shelter
hundreds of families, causing structural damage. One house was home to 154
people.
For the project to get under way, the inhabitants had to be moved out. Last
November, the government removed 434 families, spending Dollars 500,000 in
compensation, to enable them to rent cheap accommodation elsewhere. In the
beginning, there was plenty of opposition, so Ipac hired a sociologist,
Luciano Diniz Borges, to mount an educational project to explain to
residents that restoration would mean a better standard of living and the
chance of work. Today, just one legal case is pending.
The government either bought the few houses that were still in private hands
or did a deal whereby people with two houses gave one to the government and
got both restored or owners of just one house gave one floor to the
government.
Before restoration began, the state water and power companies installed
underground sewage and power cables. A battery of architects and historians
set to work, led by Adriana Castro and Etelvina Reboucas Fernandes, two
architects who both say the Pelourinho project is the most exciting
assignment they have ever had.
The first block of 104 buildings - approximately a tenth of the total area -
was the most degraded as well as that with the greatest concentration of
works of art. Fernandes says: 'Some areas were so run down, that if they
hadn't been restored then they would have been completely lost.'
One third of the first 104 houses had to be completely reconstructed.
Initially, restoration was carried out house by house, but the group soon
found it was no good restoring one house when next door there was a fire
risk, piles of rubbish or danger of collapse, so now the work is done in
blocks.
Traditional materials were used where possible, but the area has a serious
woodworm problem because of high humidity. To support rotting structures,
metal and reinforced concrete with plaster casing were necessary.
As the workers peeled away centuries of paint and plaster, they made
important discoveries. There was no buried gold, but they found stunning
wooden ceilings, painted ceilings and blue and white porcelain tiles. At
number 2 Francisco Muniz Barreto street, they found railings, balconies,
pulpits and tiles all completely covered by successive plastering. The
locals are spiritual people and the workmen were terrified when they
uncovered a huge hole in one house, convinced that devils would jump out.
Researchers thumbed through thousands of documents to find what the houses
had been like, and used chemical tests to detect their original colours.
Many visitors are surprised by the vibrant colours, but Costa Lima says that
is exactly how they were two centuries ago: 'We found that the paints had
all been imported from Europe - they must have been the pigments available
at the time.'
Once the first block was completed, the government started renting out the
buildings. To preserve the area's character some old institutions were
maintained, such as the Bar do Reggae, the house of Jorge Amado, Brazil's
best known writer, and the Filhos de Gandhi, a local African-inspired dance
group. Costa Lima says: 'To keep the local spirit we have allowed popular
bars, cheap restaurants and barbers, but we couldn't have a paternalistic
attitude. If artists have a public, then they can afford to rent at
commercial rates.'
To improve access on the narrow cobbled streets, as well as reduce
pollution, underground carparks are being built. Ipac hopes eventually to
ban all traffic. A special battalion of military police has been created for
the area to dispel its old reputation of violence.
The state government is using pictures of the restored area in a marketing
campaign to attract tourists to Salvador. Last month as the host city for
the Ibero-American summit, it received welcome publicity. The area is now
thronging with tourists and the museum of sacred art, which until last year
was abandoned and crumbling, now gets more visitors than any museum in
Brazil.
As a result, Borges says the local people have benefited from the project:
'We're generating lots of jobs in restaurants, bars, boutiques and hotels -
already more than 300, aside from those involved in the restoration - that's
far better than just giving bowls of soup.'
