FT  14 JUN 93 / Third US strike on Mogadishu
US AIRCRAFT pounded targets in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, last night for
the third night in succession, in an effort to blast a local warlord into
submission.
The latest attacks by AC-130 gunships came hours after Pakistani troops
serving with the United Nations opened fire on a crowd protesting against
earlier air raids. Witnesses said at least 12 and possibly more than 20
people were shot dead, though Pakistan denied its troops were responsible
for any killings.
Journalists watching from a hotel roof in central Mogadishu said the
aircraft fire last night was again concentrated near the residence of Gen
Mohamed Farah Aideed, the defiant warlord who controls much of the capital.
Gen Aideed's gunmen are blamed for the killing of 23 Pakistani UN troops a
week ago. Those deaths prompted the UN to call for the arrest, trial and
punishment of the gunmen and, by implication, of Gen Aideed for inciting the
killings.
Pakistan denied that the shootings yesterday were to avenge the death of its
soldiers. It said troops returned fire after being attacked by an armed
Somali group and it suggested any deaths were due to crossfire between
Somali factions.
The US air raids and the actions of the Pakistani troops have stunned and
angered Gen Aideed's supporters in the capital.
The attacks have buried the UN's humanitarian mission in Somalia, as
Mogadishu has turned into a city besieged by a multinational occupation
army.
Tanks patrol the streets. Helicopters swoop down to disperse crowds.
Lorry-loads of detained men, women and children are being corralled at the
grounds of the former university, now a US military centre.
UN tanks rolled by and ignored pleas for help from the many wounded in
yesterday's shootings.
According to Reuter's news agency, the Pakistani denial of responsibility
was disputed by witnesses, including journalists, who saw Pakistanis shoot
into a crowd without warning from a sandbagged fortress.
Pakistani troops also opened fire on Saturday after a crowd threw stones.
Two Somalis were killed, including a woman who died at Benadir hospital,
where the injured were being operated on without anaesthetic on makeshift
tables swarming with flies.
The heavy-handedness of the Pakistani contingent - the largest in the UN
force in Somalia - has been a leading cause of tension and hostility against
the UN in the capital. Brigadier Ikram ul-Hasan, commander of the 4,000
Pakistani peacekeeping troops in the Somali capital, told a press conference
that he was investigating yesterday's incident.
'The simple fact is that gunmen use women and children as human shields,' he
said.
The brigadier said he did not think his troops were an inflammatory
presence. Nor did he think there had been a violation of the UN's rules of
engagement.
Other UN military spokesmen have refused to comment. But the French relief
agency Medecins sans Frontieres, one of the few still operating in the
capital, said the killings were monstrous. At the hospital, a doctor said he
was sickened by the turn of events: 'The UN has started another war in
Somalia. The people are tired of war. Even if they kill Aideed, there are
thousands of other Aideeds out there to take his place.' The air strikes
have been very precise to try to avoid civilian casualties. US Cobra
helicopters and slow-flying aircraft picked out three armament sites and Gen
Aideed's radio station during the first strike over Mogadishu on Saturday.
The bombers returned before dawn yesterday to destroy what the UN claimed
was a 'veritable fortress' containing weapons, ammunition and armoured
vehicles. It belonged to Mr Osman Ato, Gen Aideed's financier. The explosion
lit up the night in the blacked-out city.
Later, a building held by Pakistani peacekeepers came under heavy rocket
attack from Gen Aideed's gunmen. Reporters visiting the bombed site
yesterday saw no evidence of burned-out ammunition stockpiles.
Mr Ato claims he stored only fuel and spare parts at his workshop. Gen
Aideed was also at the site. 'This is an unjust and criminal act against
Somali people,' he said.
