FT  14 SEP 93 / Cold comfort in future: David Lascelles on a study that
points to a greater reliance on coal and nuclear power
The world has enough energy to last at least another 50 years, which is
roughly when the oil and gas are expected to run out. But after that, what?
A futuristic look at the world's energy supplies has just been compiled by
the World Energy Council, a non-governmental organisation representing more
than 100 countries. Energy for Tomorrow's World tries to supply some of the
answers.
Sure, there will be new-fangled inventions such as hot rocks, super
batteries and cars that run on water. New industrial processes using much
less energy will also be developed. But none of them can be predicted with
certainty. Nor does the report think that renewables such as wind, solar and
tidal can make more than a marginal contribution because of their natural
limitations.
The two energy sources most likely to meet demand in the second half of the
next century, the WEC thinks, are coal and nuclear power. Reserves of coal
are currently sufficient for another 250 years, though that may shrink if we
start burning more of it. The technical potential for nuclear power is
'immense', according to the report.
This conclusion, though not wholly original, is bound to send shudders down
millions of spines. These are precisely the fuel sources which give rise to
the greatest controversy today and for which there is probably the least
amount of popular support.
Assuming the report is right (the four-year effort that went into it makes
it one of the most thorough ever compiled), what can the world do about it?
Several things, according to its authors.
The first is to try to curb the growth in demand. If we only tinker with the
problem, energy consumption could nearly double between now and 2020. This
would put a heavy strain on resources, particularly in the third world where
most of this growth will occur. But an energy efficiency drive could reduce
that growth to only 28 per cent over the same period, providing benefits not
just to the energy picture but also the environment. The scope for energy
saving is huge: a modern industrial economy wastes more than 95 per cent of
the fuel it consumes in traffic jams, heat loss and inefficient electricity
generation.
The second is to use technology to find better ways of providing energy:
recovering more from known reserves, or developing unconventional fossil
fuels such as tar sands, shale oil and synthetic gas.
The third is to jack up the price of energy to make it reflect environmental
costs which are currently 'free' such as the atmosphere. 'There will be a
growing awareness that the price of energy has in general terms been too
cheap . . .' says the report.
The fourth is to develop ways of making coal and nuclear more acceptable.
Technology can go 'a long way' towards cleaning up coal, and by early next
century advanced gasification techniques could be in use. The situation with
nuclear is more complicated because it is both a matter of developing
advanced technologies, and convincing the public that nuclear power is safe,
and that radioactive waste can be handled. Known supplies of uranium are not
sufficient to keep nuclear power going in the long term, which means that
the industry will have to turn to 'breeder' technology which uses the even
more unpopular plutonium. However, nuclear fusion, which uses light elements
such as hydrogen or helium, could be in commercial use by 2040.
A factor that weighs heavily in the balance of choice is the environment.
The WEC report says that the deterioration of the atmosphere is likely to
continue for much longer than is implied by recent international agreements
to curb carbon dioxide emissions (industrial countries have pledged to
reduce emissions to 1990 levels by 2000). Only the most 'ecologically
driven' of the report's four scenarios sees a fall in atmospheric CO levels
during the next century. In all the others it continues to rise beyond 2100,
mainly because of population growth in the third world. The report remains
agnostic on whether carbon dioxide causes global warming, as many believe,
but leaves little doubt about the trends.
For once, this is not a doomsday report about the lights going out. But it
will be a scare story for people who are concerned about heavy reliance on
nuclear and coal - at least as we know those fuels today. The message the
authors want to get across is that today's energy abundance must not obscure
the need for timely action to deal with next century's problems.
