FT  07 SEP 93 / Arts: Henze, Handel, Beethoven - Proms
ON SUNDAY we had a brace of BBC Proms: at noon, Hans Werner Henze's newly
completed Requiem, (followed by a public party in the park), and in the
evening the 'period' Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment playing Haydn's
and Beethoven's last symphonies. The special attractions of each had nothing
to do with the other.
Henze's Requiem has grown from a 1990 'Introitus' - written upon the death,
from an Aids-related illness, of the London Sinfonietta's artistic director
Michael Vyner - to a nine-movement work, one of his best. None of the
ancient liturgical text is actually sung, though its words apparently guided
the composing; Henze is not a believer, and has chosen to treat eight
sections of the Requiem as symbolic of related deep feeling - grief, fear,
loss and so on. He has borrowed a non-canonical ninth, the 'Ave verum
corpus', surely with Mozart's ethereally tender setting in mind.
Instead of voices, then, Henze has assigned eloquent solo roles to piano and
virtuoso trumpet, fronting a large chamber orchestra with many chiming
instruments, (celesta, vibraphone, tubular bells, handbells). The little
Geistliche Konzerte of Heinrich Schutz served him as models. Throughout, the
tone is intimate, lyrical, luminous, candidly personal: impossible not to
think of John Corigliano's recent, strident 'Aids' Symphony as a comparison,
and impossible not to think of this Requiem as incomparably finer music.
Just occasionally, the score raises its voice in anger or distress,
fulfilling the dramatic demands of an hour-long piece: in the urgent 'Dies
irae', of course, in the violent 'Rex tremendae' which introduces the
trumpet for the first time, in a 'Tuba mirum' with a grotesque parodistic
march and Latin-American rhythms. But as in all Henze's best chamber music,
ruminative gentleness is the keynote; Paul Crossley - Vyner's successor with
the Sinfonietta - struck it unerringly in the lovely piano-music, and Hakan
Hardenberger too in the speaking trumpet-part (high- flying though it is).
With the 'Sanctus' at the close, shimmering with handbells and dramatised by
a pair of trumpets high up in the balconies, the score attains an elevated
composure. Oliver Knussen conducted with full sympathetic authority. Henze's
particular genius, which sometimes sounds thin-stretched in large-scale
pieces, has never been better served than by the original form and style of
this Requiem.
The evening Prom concert was given by Frans Bruggen and the Orchestra of the
Age of Enlightenment ('period' instruments). A nice pairing: the last
symphonies of Haydn, the 'London', and Beethoven, the 'Choral'. In the
Albert Hall, with these instrumental forces, the Haydn sounded elegant but a
little wan: one wanted to hear it somewhere smaller, or at least to be
standing at the front of the Promenade.
Somehow, nonetheless, Bruggen worked miracles with the 'Choral' Symphony.
His tempi were consistently quick, by ordinary standards, and perfectly
convincing. The dry, rattly timpani made a splendid effect in the Scherzo.
The New Company chorus had a confidence and clarity disproportionate to
their modest numbers, and the soloists - Judith Howarth, Susan Bickley, Hans
Peter Blochwitz and Andreas Schmidt - were as clean and well-matched a
quartet as I have heard in this work for a long time. The audience was
overjoyed, quite rightly.
