FT  12 JAN 93 / Virgin's honour remains intact: Michael Cassell and Paul
Betts track the acrimonious battle between British Airways and its smaller
rival
It was the sort of stunt calculated to get right up the nose of Lord King of
Wartnaby, the gruff, tough chairman of British Airways.
Early morning passengers arriving at London's Heathrow airport on July 1
1991 watched in disbelief as a man dressed in pirate clothes, complete with
cutlass and parrot, led an assault on the sleek model Concorde gracing the
exit tunnel.
Within minutes, its BA livery was swapped for that of Virgin Atlantic,
Britain's precocious long-distance airline which that day began flying from
Heathrow.
The man with the parrot was Richard Branson, the bearded, swashbuckling
chairman of Virgin Atlantic, dubbed a 'pirate' by Lord King after Virgin's
success in winning, at BA's expense, extra flights into Toyko's Narita
airport.
The escapade was pure Branson, one in a series of marketing skirmishes
between the two airlines which included the mystery appearance of Virgin
leaflets in BA first-class cabins and the timely arrival of Virgin staff to
wave off the press corps on BA promotional trips.
As one of the Virgin raiders put it: 'We got them very steamed up and
thoroughly enjoyed doing it.'
But, beyond the jolly skirmishes, Virgin was by the summer of 1991 becoming
convinced it was embroiled in a battle for survival with a goliath. Its
competitor daily carried 20 times more passengers in an aircraft fleet
nearly 30 times larger than its own.
The cheeky 'cherry picker' airline knew it was in BA's firing line. It was
already successfully muscling in on some of BA's most profitable,
long-distance routes and had now won its battle to break out from Gatwick
airport.
Virgin was well aware of BA's reputation for seeing off small-fry
competitors. No one could have envisaged, however, the extraordinary
succession of events ending yesterday with BA's climb-down before Mr Justice
Drake.
As the judge heard, Virgin was to find itself the target of a damaging
campaign. Its customers were to be sent a series of extraordinary offers and
questionable initiatives intended to lure them away.
There would be evidence that BA employees shredded documents relating to
Virgin activities and that the airline retrieved passenger information held
on Virgin computers. According to one Virgin executive: 'They knew our
loading on every flight and even where our passengers lived. They knew
everything before Richard Branson.'
A series of mysterious thefts from the vehicles and homes of senior Virgin
personnel, never in any way directly linked to a 'dirty tricks' campaign,
served to heighten fears that the business was under attack.
Whatever the reality, both camps were to become convinced each was being
spied upon by the other.
Branson, the awkward, consummate self-publicist who has narrowly escaped
death in speed boats and hot-air balloons, had managed to survive longer in
the cut-throat airline business than many others
But he realised just how big a foe BA might be as early as 1987, following
BA's Pounds 250m acquisition just before Christmas of British Caledonian,
the Gatwick-based airline.
Under the deal, BA had to honour agreements between BCal and other airlines
for the servicing of aircraft, including Virgin's two 747 jumbos. Within
weeks, BA said it would not service any additions to Virgin's expanding
fleet. Servicing charges rose from Pounds 153 an hour to Pounds 544.
Throughout 1990, Virgin ran into other problems. The BA night simulator at
Heathrow became almost impossible to book for Virgin pilots. But when Virgin
telephoned pretending to be British Midland, training slots became
available.
By the autumn of 1990, Lord King's irritation with Virgin became clear when
Branson, in a burst of publicity, flew UK hostages out of Iraq before the
Gulf war erupted. BA's chairman had harsh words with the Foreign Office.
Almost at once, Virgin fell victim to a price war in which tens of thousands
of cheap BA economy tickets, targeted on Virgin's transatlantic routes,
flooded bucket shops.
At the start of 1991, Virgin won its extra slots at Tokyo, and was roundly
criticised in a BA press release for its expansionist ambitions. Branson
wrote to Lord King saying he resented the level of personal abuse being used
by BA.
In a rare exchange between the two men, Lord King replied: 'As I said to the
Sunday Times, I run my airline, Richard Branson runs his. Best of luck to
him. I do not wish and do not intend to say anything more on the subject.'
Behind the scenes, BA hammered away at the theme that Virgin was a
whingeing, small-time competitor. 'The image,' said a BA man, 'is supposed
to be big bad British Airways and poor little Virgin.'
By now, Virgin had compiled for the EC Commission a draft file of complaints
about alleged anti-competitive action by BA. Branson would also discover for
himself a BA 'switch-selling' programme.
On board a flight to the US, Virgin's chairman was scanning the log in which
upper-class passengers registered their comments, and was intrigued at one
which ran: 'No wonder BA tried to get me to switch flights.' Branson
introduced himself to the passenger and heard of BA's impressive efforts to
woo his customer. Other cases quickly emerged. Travellers were telephoned in
New York hotels at all hours, offered first-class BA seats, free flights or
Concorde trips in return for their Virgin tickets.
An executive from Procter &amp; Gamble, the US consumer products group, was
approached in the Heathrow lounge, given all the details of his itinerary
and invited to change to BA.
Yvonne Parsons, another regular customer, was telephoned three times to be
told her Virgin flight had problems but that she could fly BA. The names of
genuine Virgin employees, obtained simply by telephoning Virgin offices,
were being used by the mysterious callers.
On both sides of the Atlantic, Virgin upper-class passengers were being
accosted by smartly dressed personnel wearing buttonholes. Virgin dubbed
them BA's 'carnation brigade'.
By the spring of 1991, a former BA marketing department employee disclosed
that documents relating to Virgin, held within BA as part of operation
'Mission Atlantic', had been shredded and dispatched in plastic bin-liners.
Another former BA employee at Gatwick provided evidence that, using BA's own
computer system, specially deputed 'Helpline' staff had systematically
recovered information on Virgin activities and passed it, in plain
envelopes, to superiors.
As information continued to leak out, BA stepped up efforts to find the
'moles' within its own organisation. Virgin claims there were none, with all
its evidence coming from the public or former BA employees.
In March 1991, Branson gave an interview at Gatwick after securing landing
and take-off rights at Heathrow. The breakthrough was bad news for BA,
though Branson emphasised he did not want war with Lord King.
But by the autumn, Virgin had its hands on a copy of a report on Virgin
Atlantic prepared for BA as part of 'Operation Barbara' by Brian Basham, a
City public relations consultant. The document gave a full analysis of BA's
competitor.
It outraged Branson. But Basham has always insisted that the report was a
legitimate study of the airline's strengths and weaknesses. His campaign for
BA had been 'perfectly decent and straightforward'.
As 1991 ended, Virgin received calls from journalists pursuing rumours about
the airline's state of health. Was it true that fuel was having to be paid
for in cash, that the airline was losing Pounds 50m a month? Headlines
asked: 'Will Branson's balloon burst?'
Two weeks before Christmas 1991, Branson wrote to the airline's
non-executive directors, claiming 'black propaganda' was being used to
discredit his airline.
Sir Michael Angus, BA's deputy chairman, replied on behalf of the
non-executives, saying it was inappropriate for him to act. Sir Colin
Marshall, BA deputy chairman and chief executive, said Branson's allegations
were 'wholly without foundation and unjustified'.
Early in 1992, the controversy ignited with the screening of a Thames
Television programme investigating Virgin's 'dirty tricks' claims. Even
before it appeared, BA accused Thames of 'having fallen into the trap of
being used as a vehicle for Richard Branson's propaganda'.
The programme provoked letters of complaint from the public to BA. In
response Lord King again rebutted Virgin's claims, labelling the exercise a
publicity stunt.
An attempt at peace talks between lawyers from both camps collapsed. BA
issued another press release again criticising Virgin.
In March 1992, Branson finalised the sale of his Virgin Music business to
Thorn-EMI for Pounds 560m. Lord King said the Virgin boss was evidently 'too
old to rock and roll and too young to fly'.
But Branson was not too young to sue. On March 14, The Sunday Telegraph
telephoned Virgin to say it might run a story that the airline had hired a
private detective to investigate BA and Lord King.
At the same time, John Thornton, an executive at investment bank Goldman
Sachs who had been involved in the Virgin sale to Thorn-EMI, was asked by
the newspaper if his company had been authorised to hire investigators on
behalf of Virgin.
Enough was enough. Branson believed the avalanche of innuendoes and
falsehoods had gone too far. After a meeting at Branson's Holland Park home,
libel proceedings began, based on written attacks on Virgin's good faith and
integrity in BA News, the airline's staff newspaper, and in a press release.
According to one of those present: 'We couldn't take it any more. It is
tough enough out there but we were convinced BA wanted us out of the
business.'
Though some might believe otherwise, Branson is said not to have enjoyed his
battle with BA and is anxious to concentrate on building the business.
Virgin intends by 1995 to expand its fleet from eight to 18 aircraft and to
be flying into the world's top 12 cities. By then, it wants 30 per cent of
Britain's transatlantic traffic.
As BA tries to put yesterday's unpleasant proceedings behind it, the
airline's management concedes it underestimated Branson's determination and
business cunning and that, surprisingly for an airline with a good
management record, made a series of misjudgments which allowed it to be
outwitted.
Although BA is going to ground in the aftermath of the libel settlement, the
important question remains of how the airline allowed events to spiral out
of control.
Did the top management really know what was happening? Yesterday's court
statement claimed it did not, although an affidavit served on the two
airlines by Basham says he never acted without the knowledge or approval of
the BA board. On occasions, he says he tried to stop the airline spreading
disparaging rumours.
But how were some BA people given freedom to pursue a series of highly
questionable initiatives, placing at risk BA's hard-won reputation? Or was
BA blinded by arrogance, encouraged by the company's commercial success?
In retrospect, BA's tactical error in its tussle with Virgin was to give
Branson the chance to invoke libel proceedings. On any other legal grounds,
Branson could have found it hard to extract retribution.
Although some senior BA managers wanted to fight Branson all the way, Lord
King decided that a prolonged and theatrical libel case would have been a
public relations disaster. BA would pay up.
Damages apart, BA can ill afford to see its reputation further undermined at
a time when it is set upon becoming a global carrier by acquiring stakes in
international airlines.
The fiasco is not expected to claim any immediate victims among the higher
ranks of BA management. 'A few ties may be tightened around a few necks but
heads will not roll,' according to an executive.
In a few months' time, however, BA sees the end of an era when Lord King,
the architect of the airline's success, steps aside to become president. He
will no doubt be hoping that the embarrassing saga will by then have been
largely forgotten.
In the meantime, he has more immediate priorities. With the retirement of
his butler, the 75-year old BA chairman is searching for an attentive,
professional and caring replacement. An experienced, first-class cabin
attendant could fit the bill, though it might be unwise for any Virgin
employee to apply.
