FT  30 JUN 93 / Economist with political nous: Lawrence Summers
IN POLITICS your job is as important as you make it. This, at any rate,
appears to be the modus operandi of Mr Lawrence Summers, the forceful
under-secretary for international affairs at the US Treasury.
Mr Summers is only the third-ranking official at the Treasury; yet this has
not stopped him speaking out authoritatively on a range of issues, some of
which would appear to be the responsibility of other departments.
For example, in a series of speeches - most recently to Japanese businessmen
in Tokyo - Mr Summers has set out the general principles underlying trade
relations between Japan and the US. Mr David Mulford, who held Mr Summers'
job in the Bush administration, tended to focus more narrowly on the
financial services sector and left general trade policy to the US trade
representative or the commerce secretary.
While many appointees of President Bill Clinton are still struggling to find
their feet, Mr Summers is rapidly carving out a position of influence. His
stature in part reflects his having served the perfect apprenticeship for
his job.
As chief economist at the World Bank for two years up to last November's
election, Mr Summers became familiar with nearly all the issues now
confronting him, such as economic reform in Russia, policy co-ordination
between Group of Seven countries and third world development.
He also had a chance to build personal relationships with leading economic
policy makers in Europe and Japan.
As most members of Mr Clinton's economic team have been fully absorbed with
domestic policy - especially the struggle to win congressional support for
the deficit-cutting economic package, Mr Summers has had a relatively free
hand to mould international policy.
He has been instrumental in shaping a two-pronged global strategy consisting
of a 're-invigorated multilateral effort' to strengthen global economic
growth and an 'export-activist' trade policy designed to open markets and
make other countries 'bear a greater responsibility for supporting the
global trading system'.
In both areas Mr Summers has tried to present policy in terms likely to
appeal to Washington's Group of Seven partners.
For example, he encouraged his boss Mr Lloyd Bentsen, to stress that
economic co-operation is a 'two-way street' in which the US will respect the
views of allies.
Viewed from Tokyo, Mr Summers' brand of co-operation looks more like
coercion: Tokyo is being pressed hard to adopt a more expansionary fiscal
policy and to halve its current account surplus as a fraction of national
income.
Mr Summers has been active on many other fronts. He is one of the
administration's strongest proponents of more generous US and international
support for Russian economic reforms and is also showing greater sensitivity
to the needs of developing countries than his Republican predecessors. He
has signalled that the US would join other industrialised countries in
offering more generous debt relief to low-income countries in sub-Saharan
Africa and elsewhere.
He is putting his inside knowledge of flaws in World Bank operational
procedures to good use by pressing it (and other development institutions)
to sharpen their focus on poverty relief and alter the way they conduct
business.
