FT  06 MAY 93 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (12): A measured step
forward - Derivatives / Tracy Corrigan reviews developments in recent years
IN THE past few years, the use of derivatives by UK pension funds has
increased substantially, although fund managers still tend to confine
themselves to a limited number of products, designed to serve a limited
number of purposes.
Several important developments in recent years helped pave the way for
greater use of derivatives.
First, the tax position of derivatives was clarified in the 1990 Finance
Act. A year later, the Securities and Investment Board produced rules on
'efficient portfolio management', outlining when the use of futures and
options was an acceptable practice.
But fund managers agree that the most important landmark was the publication
of guidelines on performance measurement of derivatives last year. The
guidelines, developed by the London International Financial Futures &amp;
Options Exchange (Liffe) and Mercer Fraser, the actuarial consultancy, were
considered particularly important, because they allowed trustees to assess
more easily whether fund managers were using futures and options for
investment or hedging purposes, or for taking more speculative positions.
These standards 'laid down a benchmark,' according to Mr Tony Whalley,
investment director of Scottish Widows. 'The vast majority of pension fund
trustees take the view that if investment managers want to use derivatives,
they should be allowed to do so,' he said. However, certain pension funds
cannot use derivatives without changing their trust deeds.
The fact that these standards were approved by the National Association of
Pension Funds gave further weight to the argument for derivatives.
Last November, the Pensions Research Accountants Group (Prag), an
association of 200 UK pension fund practitioners, published a further
document on the use of derivatives by fund managers. Prag built on the work
by Liffe and Mercer Fraser, but broadened the approach to encompass
reporting and accounting of derivatives, as well as performance measurement.
In addition, Liffe has run regular derivatives courses designed specifically
to suit the needs of trustees, which are credited with fostering a broader
understanding of derivatives among pension fund trustees.
But many pension funds, sometimes in practice and sometimes because of
strict investment guidelines, limit themselves to a specific range of
strategies.
The most common use of derivatives is still for asset allocation. If a fund
manager buys futures on the FT-SE 100 stock index and holds a cash deposit,
he is creating a synthetic equity asset. It is usually cheaper and quicker
to gain exposure to the market by this method than by buying a portfolio of
stocks in the cash market. For example, if it is decided that a fund should
shift some exposure from the UK to the US stock market, two trades executed
in the index futures market could effect this change of strategy.
A shift in exposure between different asset classes, such as bonds and
equities, can also be executed in the futures market.
As there has been a broad shift of focus away from stock picking in favour
of asset allocation, the use of futures for this purpose caught a wave of
interest among fund managers.
Similarly, futures are often used for cash flow manage-ment. For example, a
fund manager faced with a sudden inflow of funds may decide to buy index
futures immediately, creating a breathing space before deciding on which
stocks to buy, or looking for bargains.
Another reason for the use of derivatives for asset allocation is that it is
one of the most straightforward applications of derivatives' technology.
The other most obvious use for derivatives is hedging exposure. If a fund
manager buys equities in the cash market and sells the future, he is hedging
against a fall in the stock market, (since the futures position will gain if
the market falls).
But, because the performance of a pension fund manager is often measured
against other funds, rather than against an index, a fund manager may be
unwilling to pay for such 'insurance', by buying options, or to forfeit some
of his potential gains by taking a position in the futures market. This also
explains the relatively small use of derivatives for 'index-tracking',
compared with other markets such as the US.
According to Mr Trevor Robinson, director, derivatives, at Fidelity
International, trustees are often convinced of the value of hedging, 'but
actuaries are not keen, because from an actuarial point of view, capital
value is less important than dividend payments.'
Generally, futures are far more widely used than options, which are more
complex derivative instruments. Futures are much easier to value, and
therefore more straightforward to use.
A futures contract obliges the holder to buy or sell at a set price at a
future date; an option gives the holder the right, but not the obligation,
to buy or sell at a set price at a set date.
Futures are of particular use in asset allocation, while options can be used
for stock selection.
Options are generally used to modify exposure, and their effect on portfolio
performance is asymmetrical - for example, a fund manager can buy a put
option on a stock to protect against potential losses in the stock, without
losing any potential gains. Because of the asymmetrical movement of options,
the price does not indicate how the option would react to changes in the
underlying market.
Although some pension fund managers sell options against their stock
portfolios, the use of options is still limited.
Similarly, most fund managers prefer to deal on exchanges, rather than in
the over-the-counter market, largely because of liquidity and credit risk.
 -------------------------------------
      FT-SE 100 FUTURES
 -------------------------------------
Year             Average daily
                volume (number
                of contracts)r
1988                1,838
1989                4,079
1990                5,707
1991                6,828
1992               10,310
1993 (Jan-Mar)     12,042
 -------------------------------------
Source: LIFFE
 -------------------------------------
