FT  19 FEB 93 / Survey of Personal and Portable Computers (2): Second fiddle
in the west - The Japanese challenge
IN THE context of global PC markets, Japanese manufacturers have generally
had to play second fiddle.
In contrast to their position in their own domestic market, where Japanese
manufacturers have been able to keep a tight hold on consumers, their
presence overseas has been singularly unimpressive.
'The reason why Japanese manufacturers are not doing so well in the US and
Europe is because US manufacturers are so strong,' admits Mr Takashi
Kuwabara, general manager of the international personal computer product
marketing division at NEC.
In Japan the dominance of NEC's proprietary system and the difficulty of the
Japanese language have made it difficult for foreign manufacturers to
penetrate the market.
In the same way, the predominance of IBM's operating system in the west has
been a big obstacle for Japanese companies trying to break into the US and
European markets.
NEC, for example, which makes IBM-compatible machines, says that it is
always a step behind IBM in bringing out advanced models because it has to
test about 100 important software applications every time it launches a new
machine.
Another difficulty Japanese PC manufacturers face abroad is the need to rely
on sales of stand-alone machines, rather than systems integrated products,
says Dr Shigenori Matsushita, general manager of the planning and
co-ordinating office in Toshiba's information processing and control systems
group.
This is because computer systems are very closely tied to the culture of
each particular country so that it becomes necessary to employ expensive
engineers - a risk which most Japanese companies have not been eager to
take.
Obstacles, such as the above, to Japanese penetration of overseas markets,
leads NEC's Mr Kuwabara to conclude that 'Japanese (PC) manufacturers will
not become a threat to western manufacturers'.
Having failed to make much of an impact in terms of market share, the
Japanese strategy has been to concentrate on high value-added products.
'We are working to maintain high performance and high quality and not get
involved in price wars,' says NEC's Mr Kuwabara.
Mr Kuwabara compares NEC's strategy to that of Mercedes-Benz or Audi in the
car market: both are products which have kept to their own independent
marketing strategies regardless of overall market trends.
That may sound like little more than trying to put a brave face on an
impossible situation but a high value-added strategy may not be such a bad
one for the Japanese, particularly when combined with their strength in PC
components.
'As PC vendors, the Japanese have about as low a profile as you can get in
contrast to what they've managed in other areas,' says Mr Mike Jeremy,
electronics analyst at Baring Securities in Tokyo.
But in terms of the components that go into a PC, the Japanese have a very
high profile. They are leaders in integrated circuits, particularly DRAMs,
in floppy disks and in flat panels.
'If you apply the strategy of the parts to the whole, the Japanese have a
very successful PC strategy,' Mr Jeremy says.
The edge that they have in components, particularly in some of the promising
new technologies such as flat screens and small batteries, could in future
strengthen their overall position in the PC market.
Just as Toshiba was able to capitalise on its early entry into the laptop
and notebook PC market, an early entry into new technology areas could give
the Japanese just the break they need.
Industry experts expect some of these advanced technologies in which the
Japanese excel to become more popular as their prices fall over the next few
years and as the price wars that have been raging in western markets become
less of a determining factor.
'Japanese manufacturers sell high performance machines at high prices but
the market does not want that now,' says Mr Katsushi Shiga, an analyst at
Dataquest, the high-technology market consultancy.
When the environment for such new technologies improves, however, they could
become strong weapons for the Japanese, Mr Shiga believes.
Among the promising new technologies in which Japanese manufacturers have a
leading edge in are thin-film transistor (TFT) colour liquid crystal
displays (LCDs).
In fact, the Japanese dominance of the TFT market is such that US attempts
in the US to impose an anti-dumping duty on Japanese-made TFT-LCDs caused an
uproar among US users which depended on products from Japan.
Unlike passive colour liquid crystal displays, TFT colour LCDs are easy to
read even when viewed from a slight angle.
The problem, however, has been the high price of PCs which use TFT displays
and it will take some more years until prices come down to more acceptable
levels.
This could happen in about five years' time as consumer electronics
manufacturers have been working hard to use TFT colour LCDs in their
products and once the TFT ball starts rolling in the consumer electronics
industry, volumes could rise steeply bringing prices down dramatically.
Japanese manufacturers also have an advantage in their manufacturing
technology, says Dr Matsushita.
Surface mount technology used in notebook PCs, for example, which allows
printing on both surfaces of a printed circuit board and therefore greater
compactness, is a technique perfected by the Japanese.
Meanwhile, as they continue to work on developing these technologies
further, Japanese manufacturers will want to speed up a long overdue review
of their overall marketing strategies for domestic and overseas markets.
Until quite recently, Japanese manufacturers have been able to maintain high
prices in the domestic market. This means that they have not participated in
the price wars that have spread through western markets.
However, in the past few months, US manufacturers such as Compaq and IBM
have begun to present a previously unseen challenge to the domestic
manufacturers' stranglehold on the Japanese PC market.
In a bid to spread the use of its bilingual operating system, DOS-V, IBM set
up the Open Architecture Developers Group (OADG) in Japan two years ago. The
American giant invited other hardware manufacturers, both foreign and
domestic, to back its standard as an alternative to NEC's 9800 PC series.
OADG has so far brought together more than 25 manufacturers, and if it has
not helped the fortunes of all of its members, it has certainly raised the
profile of IBM in Japan.
Then in October last year, Compaq shocked the Japanese market by announcing
a range of desktop PCs priced at about half of what it would cost to buy
comparable machines from a domestic manufacturer.
Compaq's move was soon followed by price cuts from IBM, NEC and most
recently, Fujitsu.
That the spiral of falling prices is unlikely to end just there was
signalled when Compaq announced a further cut in prices this month.
