FT  23 MAR 93 / Whitehall faces paying half cost of Channel rail link
THE GOVERNMENT is likely to have to meet as much as half the Pounds 2.5bn
cost of building the planned Channel tunnel rail link if it is to go forward
as a joint venture with the private sector, it emerged yesterday.
Such a large funding gap will severely test its commitment to the project
and raises questions about how quickly it will be built. The figures emerged
as Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, confirmed the widely-leaked route
of the railway and set in motion a six-month process in which the public
will be consulted over local detail.
Mr MacGregor said the consultation would be followed by legislation enabling
the project to go ahead. 'Provided that we press ahead quickly, it should be
possible for the railway to be completed around the end of the century,' he
said.
Mr MacGregor also confirmed that the project was to be funded jointly by the
public and private sectors and said the government would be prepared to
offer 'substantial' public sector support for construction. However, he
refused to say how much the government was prepared to contribute or when
the money would be paid.
In the Commons, Mr MacGregor was pressed by some Tory MPs about how the
decision to involve public support in the project squared with the
legislation passed in 1987 banning the use of public money for it.
Mr MacGregor insisted it was justified because the project would bring
domestic benefits, especially to commuters in Kent. Originally the
government had been adamant that the whole route had to be financed by the
private sector.
Documents released yesterday by Union Railways, the British Rail subsidiary
in charge of the project, show that the scheme as proposed would produce a
financial return of only 4 per cent, much less than the 12 1/2 per cent
figure suggested by the transport department as the minimum level acceptable
to the private sector.
The documents, however, show how the gap could be filled by government
grants to reflect the social benefits of improved train services,
particularly commuter services, and the regeneration of the east Thames
corridor. It values these at up to Pounds 1.6bn.
The transport department, Union Railways and Samuel Montagu, the
government's merchant bank adviser on the project, are now to start
discussions with the private sector about proceeding with the link as a
joint venture.
There are fears in some parts of Whitehall, however, that in committing
itself so firmly - both yesterday and in the Budget - to the project, the
government has left itself vulnerable in its negotiations with the private
sector about financing the link.
Other points emerging from the announcement were:
The rail link scheme will be taken forward by Union Railways which will
become a government-owned company separate from BR in the autumn. At least
half the line's capacity will be taken up by commuter trains, cutting
journey times between London and Kent.
The line will carry little or no freight. The government has put up Pounds
30m to start work on an international station at Ashford, Kent; but the
planned international station at Stratford, east London, has been downgraded
to a possible option.
BR will only choose the site of the London terminal after further studies.
In a separate development the transport department announced that the M2
will be widened between junctions 1 and 3 to four lanes each way and between
junctions 3 and 4 to three lanes each way.
Rail route to the Channel, Page 13
