FT  16 APR 93 / UK Company News: A scheme designed for better times - Queens
Moat's difficulties relate in part to its incentives plan
QUEENS Moat Houses' share suspension shocked the City last month as details
emerged of the company's financial difficulties, which were partly caused by
a controversial incentive scheme. But according to some managers within the
scheme, problems were apparent nine months ago.
Several managers said their annual renegotiations of incentive fees suddenly
became tense from last summer. The company started pushing for higher fees
even though hotel revenues were falling. In some cases, Queens Moat tried to
impose shorter contracts which would have squeezed hotel profitability
during the quieter winter months.
One manager, who said he was treated 'bloody well' during his 10 years with
the company, was shocked when Queens Moat turned nasty after negotiations on
fees broke down.
'They knew I was away, but they phoned my wife at home late on Sunday to say
the hotel was coming out of the incentive scheme the next morning. It was
not nice, especially since they were usually quite friendly,' he said.
In retrospect, managers like these were shocked but not surprised when
Queens Moat's shares were suspended last month as it emerged that the
company was expected to announce a loss instead of a profit for the year to
December 31.
According to one manager, the incentive schemes were 'fair but unscientific.
No-one really knew the true story of the profits so everything was done on
trust. Queens Moat couldn't have known what was going on in many cases'.
The incentive scheme, which is now being partly blamed for Queens Moat's
financial troubles, had been running for nearly 20 years and is remarkably
simple. At its peak, the scheme covered 65 of the company's 103 British
hotels, although about half have since come out of the scheme and returned
to direct management.
Each manager agrees in advance their incentive fee, often equal to about a
quarter of annual turnover, and signs a promissory note guaranteeing to pay
Queens Moat. The fee is paid in 13 four-weekly instalments. At the end of
the year, the manager keeps any money outstanding as profit or makes up any
shortfall.
The scheme was designed to give managers greater autonomy to improve their
profits, as well as reduce central management overheads.
But the lax financial controls upon which the scheme thrived were to prove
its downfall as recession mounted. Queens Moat appears to have persuaded its
auditors, Bird Luckin, that promissory notes from managers allowed the
company to book profits early. For example, if the company signed an
incentive contract for Pounds 1m in November, the full benefit of that
guaranteed payment was taken in that year's accounts.
'They appear to have been using next year's profits to meet this year's
forecasts,' according to one manager. In order for growth to be maintained,
the company needed to keep increasing incentive fees, or bring in more
incentive managers.
But as the effects of recession escalated following the Gulf War, more and
more managers found they could not meet Queens Moat's fees. 'I just knew I
could not achieve the levels they were asking,' said another manager, who
came out of the scheme last year.
By some estimates, Queens Moat may have to make provisions of up to Pounds
20m to cover incentive fees which have been booked as profits but not been
paid. One manager, who has since left the company, said he knew of six other
managers who owed Queens Moat fees from two years ago yet are continuing to
manage the company's hotels.
Since Queens Moat's suspension, a veil of silence has fallen over the
company pending a report from accountants Grant Thornton, expected next
month. Mr John Bairstow, the company's founder and chairman, has agreed to a
request from Queens Moat's banks not to talk publicly about the situation.
A meeting was held last week for the company's hotel managers at the Elstree
Moat House. It was led by Mr Gerald Bell, group operations director, who
told managers to deny that any meeting took place if asked. Of about 15
managers spoken to by the Financial Times, none was prepared to be
identified.
Despite uncertainty about Queens Moat's financial position, most managers
report that trading and morale have not suffered unduly. A few managers
cancelled holidays because of the crisis, some said suppliers had called to
check all was well and staff have been reassured about the viability of
individual hotels.
Even managers who have since left retain a sense of loyalty to the company
and to Mr Bairstow. 'I made more money and ran a better hotel because of
those incentives. They should have realised things were wrong earlier, but
they were super people to work with,' one former manager said.
'Quite a few hotels are still trading well,' another manager said. 'We had a
successful Easter and May is looking busy. It was Queens Moat's borrowings
and financial side which went wrong, not the hotels,' he said.
