FT  31 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Pressure to switch from appliances - A look
at allegations that power companies subsidise their retail arms
COMPANIES in any other industrial sector would have been tempted to call it
a day.
Year after year UK electricity companies and their pre-privatisation
predecessors have struggled to make significant profits on their retailing
operations, and some have recorded losses. Yet still most of them persevere.
Now their competitors, including Dixons and Kingfisher, are trying to force
a re-think. They say the retail results of the regional electricity
companies and the Scottish power companies have been exaggerated and have
demanded an investigation.
At their prompting, Offer, the electricity industry regulator and the Office
of Fair Trading are looking at whether power companies cross subsidise their
retail operations from other businesses and obstruct fair trade.
If the inquiries confirm this is the case, more electricity companies may
follow the lead of London Electricity and South Wales Electricity which have
ended or are ending their direct involvement in retailing.
Whatever the profitability, power company retailing is big business. With
more than 1,100 shops, electricity groups collectively own the second
largest group of electrical goods outlets in the UK after Dixons, which also
owns the Currys chain. Their market share is about 13 per cent.
Such a presence is not common internationally. In neither France nor the US
do power distributors feel the need to sell goods in high street shops.
The retailing tradition in the UK stems in part from an industry culture
which has promoted increases in electricity volume sales as the main aim of
the power industry.
'The logic is that the more appliances are sold, the more electricity
volumes will rise,' says one power company executive.
Retailing has also grown alongside customer service facilities which
customers use to make complaints and pay their bills. Almost every power
company shop in the UK has a services counter, and they are highly valued by
customers.
That is one source of complaint from rival retailers. They believe that in
many cases the customer services units do not contribute a fair share of the
rent of the showroom they occupy.
More serious, they say, are the cross subsidies from the recs' main
businesses to their retailing arms. 'The problem is that many shops are not
being charged fully for the services they use,' says one rival company
executive.
'Rents are more realistic than they were in the late 1980s when we estimate
the regional boards (electricity companies predecessors before
privatisation) were charged a third of the market rate.
'But most recs are still not charging their retail operations fully, if at
all, for the capital used in special promotions. That is why their shops can
offer so much interest free credit.'
Not so, say the regional companies. Seeboard is typical in its response. 'We
negotiate with electrical manufacturers for supporting promotions just like
any other retailer,' says Mr John Weight, retailing head. 'One hundred per
cent of costs associated with Seeboard's business are charged to the
business.'
If the recs are robust in their defence of the way they apportion costs for
their shops, few are able to declare retail profits with pride. Norweb,
serving the north west of England, is generally considered the most
impressive retailer, and last year made operating profits of Pounds 6m from
the business, on turnover of Pounds 139m, against operating profits in the
company as a whole of Pounds 155m. It is planning significant expansion from
its 88 stores.
Other companies are less bullish. Most declared operating profits for last
year on retailing, in contrast to the previous year when most recorded
losses. But the amounts were small - typical examples were East Midlands'
Pounds 200,000 and Manweb's Pounds 500,000 - and some lost money, including
Sweb which declared losses of Pounds 1.9m.
In addition, several companies made significant provisions for restructuring
which wiped out any profits.
So why persist? One answer is that the companies have taken action aimed at
significantly improving retailing performance.
Since the break-up of national collective bargaining last year, most power
companies have negotiated deals with retailing staff which either freeze or
reduce wages.
Several companies have also merged their retailing business with other recs
and are seeking to improve service and transform the dowdy image of the rec
stores by hiring specialist retailers. The new alliances include East
Midlands and Yorkshire in one unit and Eastern, Southern and Midlands in
another.
Another factor in keeping stores open is the fear of customer reaction to
closure plans. 'If we were starting again we would not go into retailing but
there is more work in closing one shop than there is in re-organising our
entire company,' one power company chief executive says.
He adds: 'Closures get the chambers of commerce and local business up in
arms. We closed one branch four years ago and we are still getting
petitions.
'There is also the complication that you still have to provide some kind of
a high street presence for people who want to pay bills. We do not have the
direct debit culture of the US.'
For these reasons, most recs believe that the decisions of Offer and the OFT
will make only marginal difference to the number of high street stores.
They also point out that if cross subsidisation was found and the regulatory
authorities order change, the effect on the overall businesses of each
company would be minimal since it would simply transfer profitability from
one business arm to another.
Competitors are unconvinced. According to one: 'If the power company
businesses become as transparent as they should be, shareholders will be
able to see what is happening and the pressure to get out of retailing will
intensify.'
