FT  07 MAY 93 / Survey of Canadian Forest Products (3): Attack is best line
of defence
IN THE belief that attack is the best line of defence, Canada's forestry
industry has mounted a vigorous campaign in Europe to dampen rumblings of
protest against its environmental practices
The forestry companies are trying to ensure that they do not suffer the same
fate as Canada's fur trappers. The fur export trade was all but obliterated
in the mid-1980s by a consumer boycott spearheaded by European
conservationists.
Photos of cuddly baby seals being clubbed to death on the ice floes of
Newfoundland had a powerful impact on public opinion abroad. With those
images in mind, the forestry industry was galvanised into action when
pictures started appearing in Europe two years ago of unsightly 'clear-cuts'
across the scenic mountainsides of British Columbia.
Pulp customers, especially in Germany and the UK, reported that buyers of
their paper products were having second thoughts about dealing with
companies whose raw material came from Canada. Threats of a consumer boycott
began to surface.
Europe is important to the Canadian industry in several ways. It is a
sizeable market, buying about 15 per cent of total pulp and paper shipments,
worth about CDollars 2.5bn a year. Moreover, several of the Canadians' chief
competitors are European companies.
The industry's public relations antennae have become much more sensitive
since the boycott scare. In one of several moves to raise the industry's
profile in Europe, the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association opened an office
in Brussels last autumn. The federal government has contributed CDollars
1.5m towards the cost of running the CPPA office.
'There seems to be a need to respond to general questions of an industry
nature,' says Mr Howard Hart, CPPA president. 'The questions relate
increasingly to our products and our environmental practices.'
European journalists, politicians and other opinion-makers have become
frequent visitors to forests and mills in Canada, often at the industry's
expense.
One recent guest of Vancouver-based Canfor Corp was Dr Egon Klepsch,
president of the European parliament. Dr Klepsch said that he would return
to Europe 'as an advocate for Canadian forestry. Canada is a model for all
of us.'
According to Mr Hart, the industry is aiming its message at four main
targets in Europe: customers, the media, outside experts (such as academics)
and government.
European critics' concerns centre on product standards and industrial
processes. The industry is under pressure to prove that its papers either
contain recycled materials or can be re-used or recycled themselves.
Being in the spotlight has undoubtedly nudged the industry towards more
environmentally friendly practices, and intensified pressure on governments
to tighten regulations.
A rising proportion of pulp exports to European customers is chlorine-free.
'There's no scientific evidence to suggest that they need it,' says Mr Peter
Bentley, Canfor's Austrian-born chairman. 'But if they want it, we intend to
make it.' Two of Canfor's three mills now produce chlorine-free pulp.
But whether because of the industry's quick response or because the extent
of the threat was misjudged in the first place, early fears of customer
resistance to Canadian pulp and paper in Europe appear to have been
exaggerated.
Mr Bentley half-jokes that this may be because the forest industry's foes,
unlike critics of the fur trade, 'haven't found a Brigitte Bardot yet'. For
the time being however, the Canadians have no intention of lowering their
guard.
