FT  01 MAY 93 / As They Say in Europe: Morality? Leave God out of it
EUROPE, judging by the newspapers, is plunged in a moral crisis. Sometimes
it is Bosnia, but mostly it is the swamp of crime and corruption that
promotes editorial hand-wringing. The British share the malaise but are
unique in their suggestions for solution.
John Patten, UK education secretary, and some Conservative MPs, such as Lady
Olga Maitland, believe religion has a role to play in securing a moral
revival. But nowhere in western Europe is this approach echoed. This is
largely because other nations realise that religion is about truth, not
morality. Nowhere else is there the same conviction that devotion inspires
good behaviour.
More of that in a moment. Religious education in the European Community
takes diverse forms - or no form at all, as in the state sector in France.
In Spain, the hour a week resembles the old lessons in Marxism-Leninism in
central Europe. In the north German Lander, it consists of philosophical
speculation. In Roman Catholic Bavaria, instruction takes a highly liberal
approach, with liberation theology and meditation to reach the inner self.
In Britain, it can be described generally as multi-cultural.
In Italy, there is a call for an 'ethical revolution,' to take the form of a
'secular' renewal founded on the 'basic rules for civilised co-existence.'
When I suggested to some Italians that the Church could play a role in
schools to help achieve a moral transformation, the idea was regarded as
ludicrous.
Britain, however, offers a cocktail of religions which can be taken
according to personal preference. And so there is a division between those
who believe in the inculcation of the faith indicated by parental persuasion
 -a sectarian approach, in fact - and those who, like Lady Olga, believe in
what seems to be generalised Christian instruction for cultural purposes.
But surely any dedicated approach to achieving renewal through religious
education should be about communicating the truth: that Christ is the Son of
God, or, as the Moslems and Jews would have it, that He most certainly is
not.
Whatever the option, there is still the problem of the relationship with
morality. What might be called official Christian statements reveal a strong
emphasis on the evils of such matters as fornication and adultery and other
sinful but lawful pursuits.
There are those who believe that a moral regeneration of Britain could be
founded on firm action on the fornication and adultery front, but they are
few in number. For the rest, Christianity has taken an off-the-shelf moral
guide from Judaism in the form of the Ten Commandments, and nine of these
could be part of an atheist canon.
Elsewhere, there is no political pressure for strengthening religious
education in schools for two reasons: the general decline in observance and
recognition of the trouble which could ensue. The British should be more
aware of this than most because of Northern Ireland and the bitterest row to
have split any group in this country in the past year: women priests in the
Church of England. The opponents of this innovation do not accept that the
question can be resolved by a vote. One can no more vote on such a matter,
they believe, than one can vote on two plus two equalling three.
If religious education should be strengthened in Anglican schools the
question of women priests would be pursued in the classroom. The Thirty Nine
Articles would have to enter the curriculum. Roman Catholic instruction
could legitimately include the observation that those who resort to condoms
risk eternal damnation. The state would, on grounds of equity, pay for young
Moslems to be brought up in the belief of the primacy of Sharia law.
But there is no reason to think that things are much easier in a more
homogenously religious country. Poland has followed the Patten-Maitland line
as part of the general post-communist 'rechristianisation' of the country
that has involved the banning of abortion.
Today, Poland's religious ombudsman is locked in continuous rows with the
Church and large sections of parliament; the constitutional court has to
define carefully the conditions on which children can be pulled out of
religious classes, and the academic status of religious examinations gives
rise to controversy. Priests infest the broadcast media, the prestige of the
Church has declined sharply, the press is split. And a tidal wave of crime
smashes against the shores of society.
In seeking a social order that operates harmoniously, where crime is not a
daily concern, one needs to look to the Far East and to the secular,
Confucian tradition. The Republic of Singapore, in particular, has
demonstrated that astonishing gains can be achieved by rearing a nation of
Pharisees.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
