FT  15 NOV 93 / Canada ponders separate deal with Mexico
CANADIAN business leaders are urging their government to press ahead with a
bilateral free-trade pact with Mexico if the US Congress rejects the
tripartite North American Free Trade Agreement this week.
The US House of Representatives is due to vote on Nafta on Wednesday. In a
move apparently aimed both at promoting Canada's own interests and at
stepping up pressure on wavering US congressmen, the Business Council on
National Issues, which represents chief executives of Canada's 150 biggest
companies, revealed that its two most senior officers raised the possibility
of a Canada-Mexico pact at a meeting with Mexican President Carlos Salinas
de Gortari in Mexico City this month.
Canada's two-way trade with Mexico, totalling about CDollars 3bn (Pounds
1.4bn) a year, is a fraction of US-Mexico trade. But the prospect of a North
American free trade zone has sparked great interest among Canadian
businesses in raising trade and investment flows.
Proponents of a Canada-Mexico deal say it would give Canadian exporters and
investors a head start on rivals from third countries, and also pave the way
for closer links between Canada and other Latin American countries.
According to local reports, the Canadians have floated the idea of Pemex,
the state-owned Mexican oil company, moving its North American procurement
office from Houston to Calgary. Canadian grain exporters are also eager to
keep US rivals at bay in the fast-growing Mexican market.
The Canadian parliament has already ratified Nafta. All that remains is for
the law to be formally promulgated.
The Liberal government which came to office in last month's general election
has pledged to renegotiate parts of the accord. It wants, among other
things, to include a subsidies and anti-dumping code, and to amend the
energy provisions of the 1989 US-Canada free trade pact.
Mr Jean Chretien, Canada's prime minister, is scheduled to discuss these
concerns with President Bill Clinton this Friday during the summit of
Pacific Rim nations in Seattle.
Diplomats expect that the Americans will agree to set up some form of
working group to examine these issues. This would not alter the present
provisions of Nafta, but would probably be sufficient for Mr Chretien to
implement the agreement as scheduled on January 1 1994.
