FT  16 JUN 93 / Iraq arms inquiry told of Saudi deals
THE GOVERNMENT pressed ahead with important defence deals with Saudi Arabia
in the 1980s in spite of being warned by intelligence and Ministry of
Defence officials that the country was possibly being used to divert
military equipment to Iraq, according to evidence gathered by the Scott
arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, the inquiry counsel, referred to documents
provided by British intelligence yesterday while questioning Sir Stephen
Egerton, a former UK ambassador to Saudi Arabia.
Separately, the Scott inquiry has been provided with evidence that Saudi
Arabia, together with Jordan, was identified in internal Ministry of Defence
briefing notes in 1987 and 1988 as countries 'known or suspected' of
diverting sensitive defence-related goods to Iraq.
'We have evidence of intelligence information that Saudi Arabia was being
used as a diversionary route to Iraq,' Miss Baxendale said.
In 1986 the UK signed the first of a number of major contracts linked to the
multi-billion pound Al-Yamanah defence deal. The deal is still in progress.
No direct link was made yesterday between Iraq and any of the military
equipment in the Al-Yamamah deal. However the intelligence reports raise new
questions about the extent to which the government may have breached its own
guidelines which restrict arms sales to Iraq while trading with other Middle
East countries.
In his evidence, Sir Stephen said that while serving as ambassador he was
made aware that a Saudi port was being 'occasionally used for transport of
equipment to Iraq', but that intelligence had failed to establish conclusive
evidence of defence equipment being rerouted.
'I found Saudi Arabia a very honourable country to deal in and with,' Sir
Stephen said. He added that he had asked for additional intelligence
information from an ally - believed to be the US - but this too had not
confirmed the earlier report.
In further questioning by Miss Baxendale, Sir Stephen referred to a meeting
in 1988 with a 'Saudi prince' who had angrily complained to the ambassador
about the way a contract with Allivane International, a Scottish-based
defence company, had been held up.
Sir Stephen said he knew nothing about the contract and kept away from
further meetings on the subject. 'I did not like the smell of it,' he said,
before handing the name of the Saudi prince on a piece of paper to Lord
Justice Scott.
The inquiry continues on Monday.
