FT  30 MAR 93 / International Bonds: TCV's ADollars 500 offering provides
focus as activity subsides
ACTIVITY in the Eurobond market subsided yesterday as the end of the
Japanese fiscal year on March 31 kept many Japanese investors out of the
market.
The pace of issuance is expected to increase later in the week, although a
heavy calendar of economic data and Thursday's Bundesbank meeting are
expected to cap activity. Generally, the level of activity in the second
quarter is not expected to reach record first-quarter issuance.
The main focus of the day was an ADollars 500m offering for Treasury Corp of
Victoria, the largest in the sector to date. The deal was described as
global by lead-manager Merrill Lynch, although there is no initial placement
in Australia.
The structure of the issue of 10 1/2 year bonds, due to be priced today, ran
into some criticism from competitors. While they accepted that Merrill had
found demand among US investors, European dealers said that there was little
interest in the deal among European investors.
Firstly, the fact that the bonds are registered is a severe deterrent for
many European investors in the Australian dollar market, many of whom are
retail investors and buy only bearer bonds. In addition, the pricing
appeared aggressive to European investors, since the issue is likely to
yield 10 basis points less than TCV's recent 10-year Eurobond.
In addition, the decision to price the deal at 12 basis points below the
yield of the borrower's 10-year debt in the domestic Australian dollar
market provoked concern. Dealers were worried that at the time of the
pricing, on Tuesday afternoon European time, there would be no active
trading in the benchmark.
A government bond would have provided a better benchmark, they argued. The
margin over the comparable government bond is about 60 basis points.
However, Merrill said that there was strong demand for the paper in the US
and in eastern Asia. US investors, in particular, are taking a positive view
on the currency.
Dealers said US investors had been showing some interest in 'exchangeable'
New South Wales and Queensland bonds, which can be sold into the Australian
market.
The Philippines plans to offer another Eurobond issue to tap the capital
market to fund its development projects, according to Mr Ramon del Rosario,
finance secretary, Reuter reports from Manila.
Mr del Rosario said in an interview published by the Manila Chronicle
newspaper, that Manila had given assurances to the International Monetary
Fund that 'we will not go crazy in our buying spree' in the international
credit markets. It will be the country's second offering after the
successful launch earlier this month of a Dollars 150m Eurobond issue in
London.
