FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of Northern Ireland (1): Signs of change are in the
wind - Terrorist violence continues, but the economy is looking up, business
confidence is strong, and cross-border economic co-operation brings hope for
better political relations
'There have been no bombings or sectarian-linked murders in Northern Ireland
now for the past five years.
'The so-called 'permanent ceasefire' by the IRA and Loyalist paramilitaries
has held, and British troop levels in the province have been reduced to only
10 per cent of what they were in 1993.
'Negotiators from the unionist and nationalist camps, together with
representatives of the British and Irish governments, under EC chairmanship,
are now entering their final phase of negotiations for a permanent
settlement of a dispute that has divided the people of the island since
1921.
'The settlement plan is expected to be put to a simultaneous referendum in
both parts of Ireland within six months of the signing of the agreement by
all parties'.
OF course such a scenario is futuristic fiction. But it is not fantasy.
For this vision of a future settlement is central to the only
publicly-acknowledged political dialogue taking place in Northern Ireland
since the round-table talks between the main political parties in the
province broke down with no agreement last November. That dialogue is
between Mr John Hume, the leader of the Social Democratic Labour Party
(SDLP), and Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein - the political wing of
the IRA.
Attacked by the Unionists for what they say is an effort to form a
'pan-nationalist front', Mr Hume says the dialogue is 'about agreeing an
overall strategy for a lasting peace - and an overall strategy includes
everybody.
'It is not a joint strategy as some people have tried to make out . . . what
I want is a complete and utter cessation of violence on all sides . . .
Gerry Adams is very serious, and the people he represents are very serious
about these talks and their objectives'.
So Mr Hume says: 'I have never felt more hopeful in 20 years than I do now.'
There are other grounds for believing that some change might be in the wind.
While the IRA's bombing campaign and the Loyalists' killings of Catholics
show no sign of letting up, the language of Sinn Fein has taken on a
decidedly more moderate and conciliatory tone over the past year. Sinn Fein
spokespersons now talk of 'inclusive dialogue' and 'recognition of the
Unionist identity'. They even say that a united Ireland - their preferred
option - might not necessarily be the end result of a negotiating process.
Presbyterian ministers have been holding secret talks with paramilitary
leaders on both sides over the past year, while the outlawed Loyalist Ulster
Defence Association (UDA) recently announced that it is prepared to meet and
talk to Archbishop Cathal Daly, the Catholic primate.
The Opsahl Commission, an independent body set up in 1992 to sound out a
broad range of public opinion from across the province, concluded earlier
this year that there is a strong desire for political compromise to end the
violence - a message from the constituencies which, apparently, many of the
province's politicians have still not heard.
Intriguing reports have also appeared, over the summer, of secret
negotiations between the army and the IRA on a 60-point military
de-escalation plan. These have been strenuously denied by both the Northern
Ireland Office and Sinn Fein, but they add to a more general impression that
although the mainstream political process has ended up in limbo, nonetheless
intensive efforts are being made behind the scenes to broker a peace.
The key to whether Mr Hume can now succeed in his more public efforts to
achieve a cessation of hostilities, as a means of getting everybody around
the negotiating table, will be whether the British government's stated
position that it has no strategic interest in Northern Ireland, that it is
neutral in the conflict, and has no preferred option for a settlement, will
stand up under the strains of Westminster politics.
Just before the summer recess at Westminster, the Ulster Unionist Party
(UUP) led by Mr James Molyneaux, voted with Mr John Major and his
Conservative party on a finely-balanced Maastricht vote. Mr Molyneaux
announced that the UUP would be giving its support to the Conservatives for
the remaining life of the present parliament, but simultaneously denied that
any deal had been struck with the Tories.
But there now exist high expectations among Unionist politicians in the
province that long sought after changes in the administration of Northern
Ireland will take place over the next two years.
These include the establishment of a parliamentary select committee on
Northern Ireland, and for more powers to be handed over to local councils
from the Northern Ireland Office (NIO). One UUP councillor in Londonderry
says: 'We have discussed and been lobbying for this at Westminster for some
time.'
If such changes were to be implemented unilaterally, the Irish government
has already indicated that it would consider this tantamount to a violation
of the 1985 Anglo-Irish Treaty.
Mr Hume says: 'Any secret agreement between the British government and one
party in Northern Ireland would have no chance of succeeding, particularly
if it is related to restoring power to local authorities before it has been
clearly established that any such power would be exercised fairly . . . To
play party politics of that nature with Northern Ireland in order to stay in
power is utterly irresponsible. Everybody will end up paying a price for it
including the government that enters into such an agreement.'
Abandonment of the talks process, and the adoption of a more unilateralist
approach by the UK government, would deal a severe blow to Anglo-Irish
relations.
Ministers from the two governments meet this week in London to review
whether there is any life remaining in the talks process, and indeed whether
they can still claim to share a bipartisan approach.
The Republic has indicated it might now take a different tack and seek the
appointment of a US special envoy to the province. It is thought that such
an envoy would not be as constrained about talking to Sinn Fein as would the
Irish and British governments.
So while fresh approaches may be imminent on the political front, there is
also optimism emerging on the economic one. The clouds of recession have
already broken up over Northern Ireland and business confidence is now the
strongest in years. Unemployment is beginning to fall and retail sales are
growing.
All these act as spurs to new investment such as that in Londonderry, where
Pounds 65m is being spent on a new shopping and office complex in the city
which will serve an economic hinterland on both sides of the border.
Several important new foreign and local investments have been announced in
the past year, and continuing infrastructural improvements in the roads,
ports and airports are making the province an increasingly attractive
location for both business and tourism. Last year a record number of 1.25m
visitors came to Northern Ireland, and a further 20 per cent increase is
forecast for this year.
Meanwhile, Northern Irish farmers are enjoying rising incomes, despite
reforms to the common agricultural policy. The food processing industry
appears to be adapting well to the cutbacks in intervention buying; instead,
it is successfully exploring new markets within Europe. The continuing
importance of agriculture to the economy can be appreciated from the fact
that about 50 per cent of exports through the busy ro-ro (roll on, roll off)
port of Larne are of agricultural produce.
Economic analysts believe that any sustained recovery must await recovery
elsewhere in the UK and Europe, and that the severe problem of long-term
structural unemployment in the province has still to be adequately
addressed. A regeneration of manufacturing industry is considered
particularly important, to balance the declines in traditional industries
such as shipbuilding, heavy engineering and textiles.
The government insists that it is doing all it can; indeed, its Pounds 3bn
annual subsidy to Northern Ireland has resulted in a housing and
communications infrastructure that is now superior - or at least comparable
 -to many other parts of the UK. Ministers argue that it is the IRA bombing
campaign and the political violence which are holding back economic growth
and the necessary private inward investment.
Evidence for that can be found in the city of Londonderry - once the symbol
of the 'troubles'. Here, local businessmen are brimming with confidence,
'power-sharing' on the local council has got the politicians working
together for the city, and IRA bombs have not been heard for years.
That is the picture of Northern Ireland which Mr Hume would like to see
replicated in the rest of the province. If, indeed, his talks with Mr Adams
are progressing as satisfactorily as he claims, then it need not be so
far-fetched to imagine a very different outlook facing Northern Ireland in
another year's time.
