FT  18 JUN 93 / Suddenly the president appears in charge again: Just when
everything seemed to be going wrong, Clinton can claim real victories
LESS THAN a week after nothing had seemed to be going right President Bill
Clinton could yesterday claim no fewer than three substantial victories on
Capitol Hill.
None of the Wednesday evening triumphs - on the deficit reduction package,
campaign finance reform and the national service corps - is irrevocable,
complete or fully in line with his original proposals. But taken together
with the widely applauded nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the
Supreme Court, a new sense of a president in charge has suddenly pervaded
Washington with its tendency to pass instant judgments.
Clearly inspired by Mr David Gergen, his new counsellor and former aide to
President Ronald Reagan, Mr Clinton sought to capitalise on the momentum
with another press conference last night. Counting an aborted one on Monday,
this was the third this week, complemented by a series of interviews granted
to the heavyweight press, all emphasising, as the president had vigorously
on Tuesday, the substantive accomplishments claimed during his five months
in office.
Simultaneously, the powerful media have been engaging in a mini-orgy of
introspection, asking in print and on the air whether it was too hard on the
president too soon. Typical was a long New York Times analysis yesterday
headlined: 'The Capitol Press vs the President: Fair Coverage or Unreined
Adversity?' Even the Wall Street Journal leader columns, normally
contemptuous, praised his approach to the North American free trade
agreement.
Of the events in Congress, the agreement by the 11 Democrats on the Senate
finance committee over the details of the deficit reduction package was the
most crucial.
Mr Clinton took the tactical view that getting this accord, long in doubt,
was more important than its component parts, so long as the numerical
deficit reduction goal, of about Dollars 500bn over five years calculated by
the administration, was similar to his own. Unlike the budgetary process in
the House of Representatives, where he lobbied hard and personally, he
allowed the senators to work it out for themselves.
Predictably they agreed to drop his broad British thermal unit-based energy
tax, already narrowly passed by the House in favour of a 4.3 cent a gallon
levy on petrol, diesel and most other forms of fuel used in transportation.
This will generate only Dollars 24bn in revenues over the next five years, a
third of that projected for the energy tax. The shortfall is made up by
cutting another Dollars 19bn from Medicare funding, beyond the Dollars 50bn
already sought by Mr Clinton, by trimming his tax breaks for the working
poor and small business, and by other micro-tax measures.
But the core of his revenue proposals, to generate more than Dollars 150bn
in higher taxes on the wealthy, remains in place, strengthened in part by a
2.8 per cent surcharge in the capital gains tax on those with an income of
more than Dollars 250,000 a year. However, the senators proposed that
pensioners could enjoy greater incomes before their social security benefits
were subject to a higher rate of tax.
The corporate tax rate rises to 35 per cent from 34 per cent, retroactive to
January 1, as in the House bill, while the top individual income tax rate
goes up to 39.6 per cent from 31 per cent, to take effect from July 1 rather
than January 1.
The full committee, 11 Democrats and nine Republicans, began debating the
bill yesterday with a view to presenting it to the Senate for a vote next
week. Assuming the Democrats, with a 56-44 edge, hold together and it
passes, it then goes to a tricky conference committee of both chambers to
iron out differences, it is hoped, probably optimistically, before the Group
of Seven summit in Tokyo starting July 7.
The breaking of the Republican filibuster in the Senate on campaign finance
reform, and subsequent passage of the bill by 60-38, also came at a cost to
the original Clinton proposals - the ditching of most public financing for
elections - but the bill still includes a whole array of changes to
candidate fund-raising much in line with his blueprint.
As applied to Senate races (House rules are somewhat different) it would ban
contributions by political action committees (PACs) representing particular
interests, prevent lobbyists from contributing to those whom they lobby, for
or against, and stop the flow of political 'soft money' whereby funds are
directed to parties rather than individuals so as to avoid ceilings on
donations.
The national service corps plan, very close to Mr Clinton's heart, was
endorsed by relevant committees in both House and Senate. Though smaller in
scope than intended, it is designed to re-ignite volunteerism at home and to
reward college graduates who undertake social service jobs by cutting
Dollars 5,000 a year off their education loan indebtedness.
Completing the day for the president, the House easily voted down a
Republican attempt to weaken US financial assistance to Russia. Also the Air
Force planned disciplinary action against a general who had spoken
disparagingly of his commander-in-chief.
There are rocks enough ahead for Mr Clinton not to be able to breathe
easily. But with the Democratic leadership in both houses at last asserting
itself, his prospects look a lot better than they did a week ago.
It may be excessive to talk about a turning point in his presidency but it
is at least suddenly a legitimate talking point.
