FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of IMF World Economy and Finance (14): Hair-raising
rides - International financial institutions / The IMF and the World Bank,
facing new challenges in the former Soviet Union, have had to make cultural
leaps
FOR TWO old ladies approaching their 50th anniversary, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund have had a hair-raising ride over recent
months.
Dealing with new members in the former Soviet Union seeking to make the
transition from central planning to the market economy has posed a challenge
different both in type and in size from the kinds of problems the two
Washington-based institutions have been accustomed to.
At the same time, the rich industrialised countries have all, to varying
degrees, been going through periods of fiscal penury which in the richest of
them, the US, has been acute and lasting. As a result, they have looked
increasingly to the IMF and the World Bank to handle the financing questions
raised by Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
In their different ways, both institutions have made cultural leaps to
adjust to the problem.
For the IMF, the adjustment took the form of the Systemic Transformation
Facility (STF), a temporary loan fund designed to help countries with the
balance of payments difficulties arising from their move to trade at market
prices, enabling them to bridge the gap until they could get their economies
in shape to qualify for funding from a normal IMF standby facility.
Although IMF officials insist that the STF is conditional on a coherent
economic adjustment strategy, and deny that they were simply responding to
pressure from the Group of Seven leading industrial nations, it is clear
that G7 officials had been urging the Fund to loosen its conditionality in
order to help Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president.
'This is not a situation where aid can be delayed until every 'i' is dotted
and every 't' is crossed,' a US Treasury official said earlier this year in
discussing the STF.
For the World Bank, the answer to easing Russia and its neighbouring
republics into the market economy came in the form of the rehabilitation
loan, a Dollars 600m facility designed basically to secure needed imports.
A second Dollars 1.5bn drawing on the IMF's STF is under negotiation, as is
a second rehabilitation loan from the World Bank. Russia's relations with
both institutions, however, have been strained since the Russian central
bank's controversial move in July to cancel all pre-1993 roubles.
In many ways, the rehabilitation loan represents the same sort of leap for
the World Bank as the STF does for the IMF - profound cultural changes in
institutions that are often accused of being culturally hermetic.
In both cases, the institution has had to loosen or alter some of its
traditional lending principles, and runs the risk of criticism from other
customer countries in the developing world that it is giving preferential
treatment to Russia.
Such criticism has, in fact, been curiously muted. In the World Bank's case,
this is at least partly because Russia does not compete for the concessional
funds of the International Development Association, although some of the
poorer republics, along with Balkan countries such as Albania and Macedonia,
may qualify for IDA soft loans.
In addition, the World Bank's finances are strong enough - in spite of
having to make a Dollars 610m loan loss provision last year, mainly to cover
its exposure in Yugoslavia - that it can absorb some additional risk in its
lending to Russia without cutting back on loans elsewhere.
In the case of the IMF, however, some developing countries are starting to
worry that the increased concentration on Russia could hinder the renewal of
the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, a concessional loan fund for
poorer countries, when it expires later this year.
But the IMF escapes the public criticism that awaits its sister institution,
largely because it does not lend for individual projects and so does not
attract the attention of the vocal environmentalist groups who closely
monitor the World Bank's lending for dams and power stations in the
developing world.
Both institutions remain gloriously lacking in cost consciousness, but the
World Bank has at least cracked down on first class air travel, while IMF
staffers complain bitterly that they are now allowed only the cheapest first
class fare on any route - usually obliging them to fly with the national
airline of the country with which they are negotiating - and can no longer
keep the frequent flyer miles they accumulate for their personal use.
The World Bank, meanwhile, has this year undertaken a sincere if still much
criticised effort to improve its effectiveness and increase its
transparency.
Responding in part to prodding from the US Congress, the Bank has agreed new
standards for disclosing its documents to the public and for setting up a
form of appeals process.
At the same time, it has taken a set of initiatives in response to an
internal report showing an alarming decline in the quality of its loan
portfolio; these measures, it is hoped, will shift the culture of the Bank
away from one which rewards managers for generating loan volume and towards
a greater emphasis on following projects through to their completion.
'Central to the plan is the commitment to make the management of projects
under implementation as important as making new loans. Only sound, on the
ground results - the development impact of projects - are true measures of
the bank's contribution to sustainable development,' said Mr Ernest Stern,
one of the World Bank's managing directors.
Outsiders can detect little of such self-scrutiny at the IMF, even though
the organisation has at times seemed to be in search of a role since the
debt crisis faded.
But perhaps the greatest self-scrutiny should be exercised by the richer
shareholders of the IMF and the World Bank, who have increasingly shirked
their own share of the burden of handling the world's economic problems in
countries such as Russia and its fellow republics in the former Soviet
Union.
The demand for the IMF and the World Bank to take up the slack seems likely
to grow for many years to come, in areas such as Vietnam, Palestine and
South Africa.
