FT  18 SEP 93 / Lib Dems focus on full employment
THE LIBERAL Democrats will next week be asked to approve a paper advocating
financial incentives to encourage job-sharing, flexi-time, part-time jobs
and working from home, as the party's economic policy puts a new emphasis on
full employment.
The policy paper, Facing up to the Future, represents a further stage in the
leadership's efforts to establish a distinctive political identity for the
party.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, accepts that spelling out the
Liberal Democrat stance across a range of policies could lead to the loss of
some former Conservative voters, but appears to regard that as a price worth
paying for a sharper image.
'There is no long-term role for a third party - except hitting occasional
peaks here and there - if it is all things to all people,' he said. 'I want
people to take sides about the Lib Dems. I want them to love us and hate
us.'
The document, to be discussed by grassroots party members at the annual
conference in Torquay, which starts on Monday, marks a change of economic
strategy after last year's policy paper was criticised at last year's
conference for being too right wing.
The latest policy document is much more cautious about relying on market
forces to regenerate the economy.
The new emphasis on full employment is a reaction to anger on the subject at
last year's conference and Mr Ashdown's own long-term concern about
structural unemployment. He said that resolving the issue will involve
redistributing existing jobs as well as creating new ones.
Mr Ashdown said he believed that if society is based on the idea that the
citizen must have a job to maintain his or her dignity, then politicians
must consider what the consequences could be if unemployment becomes a
permanent feature of the economy. 'If that's so, then you'd better redefine
employment, otherwise you blow your society apart,' he said.
Mr Ashdown identified housing and the welfare system as the labour market's
two prime rigidities.
If flexible working practices are to be adopted without damaging the
competitiveness of British industry, then the benefits system will need to
be substantially altered to stop it acting as a barrier to jobs, he said.
While this approach to full employment is only one aspect of the framework
paper to be discussed next week, the fact that there will also be separate
debates on workers' rights and structural unemployment underlines the
importance of the issue in defining the party's position.
Mr Ashdown said he believed that the party must seize the opportunity of use
the conference to address its perennial difficulty - that no one knows what
it stands for. 'I'd like people to say . . . the Lib Dems have identified
that as the area in which they must work and they're beginning to map out a
very clear message,' he said. 'That's our task for the year ahead.'
