FT  08 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Inco announces 16% output cut
for next year
INCO, the world's biggest nickel producer, yesterday announced a 16 per cent
cutback in 1994 production to help bring supplies of the metal into line
with demand. The Toronto-based company said output at its operations in
Ontario and Manitoba would be cut by 60m lbs, starting in December, from a
projected 380m lbs this year. Two-thirds of the cuts will take place in the
first three months of 1994.
Nickel prices continued this week's rally at the London Metal Exchange
yesterday as speculation grew about Inco's announcement. The three months
price touched Dollars 4,555 a tonne before being trimmed back by
profit-taking to close at Dollars 4,487.50, up Dollars 170 on the day,
Dollars 375 on the week so far and Dollars 447.50 from the 6 3/4 -year low
reached seven days before. An Inco official said talks begining today with
unions on ways to achieve the output reductions were expected to be
completed next week. Measures under consideration include a four-day working
week, extended Christmas shutdowns and workforce reductions.
Mr Ted Arnold, analyst at the Merrill Lynch group in London, suggested that
such moves might hold the market at present levels but would not be enough
to lift it out of its depression. 'What the market needs is a convincing
cutback announcement,' he said. Mr Wiktor Bielski, at Bain and Company,
agreed. 'These would not be real cuts. They could quickly be reversed if
prices started rising.'
There appears to be some disagreement, moreover, among unions at Thompson,
Manitoba and Sudbury, Ontario, on what form the cuts should take.
'We're going to try and satisfy different people with different things,' the
Inco official said. The 1,700 workers at Thompson last month ratified a new
three-year contract that included a three-year wage freeze.
The nickel market has been suffering over the past two years from persistent
overproduction as demand for the metal has sagged, especially from stainless
steel manufacturers, which account for about 60 per cent of consumption.
This has swollen world stocks to a level equivalent to 22 weeks'
consumption.
The resulting price slide has eliminated profit margins for all but the
lowest-cost production units. 'No western producer is making money at these
levels,' said Mr Bielski. Inco suffered a USDollars 2.2m loss in the second
quarter of this year when the nickel price averaged USDollars 2.93 a lb - 90
cents above the current level.
