FT  01 JUN 93 / Tokyo and Beijing renew security talks
JAPAN and China have agreed to exchanges of military officials to discuss
regional security issues for the first time since 1989, when Tokyo halted
defence exchanges after the crushing of the Chinese democracy movement.
Mr Qian Qichen, the Chinese foreign minister, said in Tokyo his government
supports the resumption of bilateral and multilateral discussions of
regional security issues, but does not yet want to establish a 'fixed
framework' to resolve regional disputes.
Japanese officials see the restart of military exchanges as an opportunity
to engage Beijing in foreign policy debate and to put gentle pressure on
China to limit military spending, which has risen sharply in recent years to
upgrade the technological capability of the People's Liberation Army.
Mr Qian, who returns to China today after a four-day visit, said Japan and
the US should not put too much pressure on North Korea to rescind its
decision to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treat. He suggested
that 'dialogue' will be more useful than sanctions in resolving the issue.
Japanese officials yesterday complained to Mr Qian about repeated attacks on
Japanese fishing boats in the East China Sea, some of them apparently
apparently carried out by the Chinese equivalent of the coastguard and
others by modern day pirates.
The Chinese foreign minister complimented Japan on its participation in the
UN peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, but warned that Beijing is still
concerned about the deployment of Japanese military personnel abroad and
Tokyo should think carefully before making new commitments of troops.
Mr Kabun Muto, Japan's foreign minister, was apparently relatively blunt in
his discussions with Mr Qian, raising the issue of Hong Kong's 'openness',
which few Japanese officials have wanted to discuss in bilateral meetings
for fear of offending Beijing. He also suggested that China stop nuclear
testing, halt the export of weapons to nations which the developed world
deems as hostile, and control its worsening air pollution, which has led to
acid rain in Japan.
Mr Qian said nuclear testing will continue, though the number of tests will
be limited to as few as is necessary to maintain China's preparedness.
