FT  04 JAN 93 / Recession bites for Japanese office workers: How the high
life has gone sour in Tokyo
SWEPT along by a 'boom town' mood, Tokyo office workers once crowded into
dance clubs, reached for their credit cards at fashionable Italian
restaurants and queued for taxis at 3am on a Saturday morning, oblivious to
cost and unaware that the 'bubble' economy was soon to burst.
Those heady days of the late-1980s are over. Now, as office workers return
to their desks today after the new year break, they have more on their mind
than the usual party hangover. This year's celebrations produced long queues
of taxis waiting for customers, some of the fashionable restaurants are up
for sale and the dance clubs offer extended happy hours to keep their
numbers up.
The self-confidence has gone. There are worries about jobs and frugality is
in fashion.
Mr Kunio Yamamoto, a 42-year-old commercial banker, is typical. He has
turned from the boutique to the supermarket for his white shirts, and he
wears cheaper shoes. He used to have Y200,000 (Pounds 1,000) suits tailor
made, but now wears ready-to-wear suits from ROC, a local discount clothing
chain, at a quarter of the price.
Companies are cutting entertainment budgets, which is a blow for office
workers like Mr Yamamoto. Their salaries would usually go straight to their
families but, in the bubble days, handsome company allowances would
subsidise an expensive lunch at an eel restaurant or a night out amid the
neon of the Ginza district.
The decline of business lunches has affected even the Imperial Hotel,
Tokyo's most prestigious. A hush has fallen over the lobby which used to
buzz with businessmen ahead of their midday meetings.
The rows of exclusive nightclubs and hostess bars in Ginza are also feeling
the pinch. Miss Mariko Sugihara, a manageress of Olive, a small hostess club
lined with plush red sofas, says that, even with important clients,
businessmen are keeping entertaining in the evenings simple, going straight
home after a dinner.
The Olive is not alone. According to Teikoku Data Bank, a credit research
agency, entertainment spending at 1,000 leading Japanese companies fell 15.3
per cent in the 1991-92 fiscal year from 1987-88.
Companies are also cutting back on taxi vouchers distributed to employees,
depriving them of the late night company-paid drives back to their cramped
flats in the suburbs. Revenue for taxi drivers has fallen about 13 per cent
from last year. 'Expensive places like Ginza and Akasaka are the worst,'
sighs one driver, who complains it is the worst recession he can remember.
The once popular Italian brand names such as Versace, Armani, and Ferre are
now out, dubbed the 'bubble' designers. At Sabatini di Firenze, once one of
the most popular Italian restaurants in central Tokyo, reservations are no
longer needed three weeks in advance.
Mituskoshi, Japan's oldest department store, is suffering.
'People are even buying cheaper wedding rings,' confides an executive as he
walks around the almost deserted jewellery department.
However, the slowdown has brought its benefits. More office workers are
going home earlier and eating meals with their families. This is pushing up
food sales at local supermarket and convenience store chains. Tokyu Store, a
supermarket chain, says its food sales have risen sharply thanks to an
increase in purchases of staples such as rice and soy sauce.
A series of vicious price wars have broken out as hard-pressed companies
compete to win back reluctant consumers.
Discount coffee chains Pronto and Doutor are matching one another's price
cuts. Akihabara, the shopping area famous for the discount electronics shops
which line its streets, is losing customers to even cheaper areas of Tokyo,
which offer heavier discounts on fridges and televisions.
The gathering recession is forcing people such as Mr Yamamoto to be clear
about priorities. Although Mr Yamamoto has swapped his oil paints for water
colours, he says spending on his two children, especially education costs,
will not be cut.
