FT  13 MAR 93 / Finance and the Family: Budget squeeze on BES? - Speculation
centres on non-recourse and university schemes
COMETH the Budget, cometh the BES speculation. Last year's announcement that
the business expansion scheme would be axed at the end of 1993 might have
put an end to the whispers which are always used to justify a rushed BES
investment on the eve of a Budget. But the whispers will continue, and
speculation centres on two areas: non-recourse loans and university schemes.
Non-recourse loans allow the investor to exit from the BES company after
only six months - not the five years intended originally. The Inland Revenue
could make them harder to operate by deeming a non-recourse loan to be an
effective disposal of the BES shares. This would sacrifice the tax relief.
Gordon Brown, Labour's shadow chancellor, attacked non-recourse schemes this
week, pointing out the huge benefits they provide to top-rate taxpayers for
low risk. This intensified speculation that they will be axed, as even BES
advisers concede that the schemes are 'pure arbitrage.'
The Revenue itself is the source for the speculation surrounding university
schemes, having refused provisionally to allow tax relief for some companies
sponsored by Johnson Fry which bought accommodation for University College,
London. It has forced companies which have a contracted exit after five
years to spend the cash they raise as quickly as possible. Sub-letting to
foreign students or summer conferences will now be more difficult, as
universities must show that there is some financial benefit to the student.
Universities must also take care to show that the accommodation bought by
the BES company really is vacant.
What is likely to happen? The Revenue's dislike of university schemes -
particularly those where accommodation owned already by the university is
sold to the BES company, and no extra housing is built - is plain, but it
might already have been manifested in its clampdown.
Meanwhile, non-recourse loans were allowed only after careful consideration.
The schemes as they operate are almost offensively generous to top-rate
taxpayers while excluding basic rate-payers, and the subsidy for repossessed
housing is sent by an absurdly circuitous route.
But abolishing them now would - in the words of David Toplas, of Terrace
Hill Capital - 'deny the building societies a source of funding literally
weeks after it was first made available to them.'
A more cynical, but probably correct, view comes from Ian Pugh, of the
Allenbridge Group: 'Politically, it still looks dreadful, but it is a
discreet form of government subsidy to banks and building societies. That's
the effect of it.'
For all these reasons, a headlong dive to invest in the BES before the
Budget, if the scheme would not otherwise make sense to you, seems
ill-advised.
More schemes came on to the market this week and supply is now at an
unprecedented level. Competition has pushed up the rates on offer. According
to Pugh, Pounds 509m has been raised by non-recourse loan schemes to date,
with another Pounds 134m available for investment.
The following list, provided by Allenbridge, shows all the companies now on
offer which allow either non-recourse loans after six months, or a
contracted exit after five years, or both. Figures given are per Pounds 1
initially invested.
Accumulus III (76p after six months, Pounds 1.06 after five years).
A Priori (74p after six months, 78.31p after one year, 87.71p after two,
98.24p after three. No five-year guarantee).
Barratt Fixed Growth (115p after five years).
BESSA Bristol and West (73p after six months, 105p after five years).
BNP Flexible (75p loan and 115p).
Cavendish Gleeson (75p loan and 105p).
Cavendish Growth (115p).
Govett IV (115p).
Homes for Littlehampton (117p).
House The Homeless (115p).
Image II (115p).
Lancaster University (74p loan and 108p).
Leeds Flexible (same as A Priori).
Oriel Residences (77p loan and 105p).
N&amp;P Multiple (same as A Priori).
Portman Multiple (same as A Priori).
Prowting Flexible (74p loan and 106.4p).
Residences at Bristol (75p loan and 105p).
Uncapped Growth (125p).
4th University Cash-Backed (73.5p loan and 110p).
WISH II (120p).
Yorkshire Flexible (75p after six months, 79.37p after one year, 88.88p
after two, and 99.54p after three years).
For up-to-date information, contact BES intermediaries such as the
Allenbridge Group (071 409 1111) and BESt Investment (071 936 2037).
