FT  04 MAR 93 / Book Review: Pleasing most people part of the time
The Revolution in Work and Family Life
By Patricia Hewitt
IPPR/Rivers Oram Press, Pounds 9.95, 183 pages
The rapid growth of part-time and flexible work is one of those rare
economic trends that seems to benefit almost everybody. Companies gain more
adaptable, more committed and cheaper workers. Employees gain greater
variety in choosing when and for how long they work, which is especially
useful to the growing number of women workers struggling to combine work and
family responsibilities.
About a quarter of all UK employees are now defined as part-time - meaning
they work fewer than 21 hours a week - and the trend is upwards. The
Institute for Employment Research at Warwick University estimates that by
the year 2000 1.2m full-time jobs in manufacturing and utilities will
disappear and 2m service-sector jobs will be created, about half of which
will be part-time.
The trend may not seem benign to the 3,000 full-time employees at the Burton
and BhS retailing chains who have been told in the past few weeks that their
jobs are being converted into part-time ones. It will be especially bad news
to those workers who are the only breadwinners in a household.
But the large majority of part-time workers are not in that position. They
are most often women (4.6m women compared with 1.1m men) working in
relatively low-paid service-sector jobs and living in households with two
wage-earners - now the most common kind.
It is true that a small number of part-timers would prefer to work
full-time. But, according to surveys by the Equal Opportunities Commission,
most express greater satisfaction with their jobs than full-timers and have
a better record than full-timers on absenteeism and staff turnover. Reduced
costs are an additional attraction for employers. According to one recent
employers' study, part-time workers cost companies 12 per cent less an hour,
on average, than full-time workers.
So where is the catch? According to About Time, the latest work from the
Institute for Public Policy Research by Patricia Hewitt, former press
secretary to Neil Kinnock, the problem is that while only about one in three
employees now works a 40-hour, five-day week, most of the UK's employment
laws and welfare regulations are based on that standard week.
As a result, about half of part-time women workers do not qualify for
employment safeguards such as protection from unfair dismissal. About
one-third of all part-timers earn less than the national insurance threshold
of Pounds 54 a week which means that employees are excluded from
unemployment benefit, sick pay, and maternity pay. Many part-timers are also
excluded from company pension funds and redundancy pay.
Despite these problems, Hewitt approves of the emergence of the part-time
economy because it provides user-friendly working time - especially for
working mothers and people nearing retirement.
She argues in her well-organised, if rather dense, book, for 'fair
flexibility' - keeping the varied hours and greater productivity of
part-timers but giving them the same rights and pay, pro rata, as
full-timers. She does not believe that making part-timers more expensive
would curtail the supply of part-time jobs, and cites managers who say that
flexible labour is more important than cheap labour.
That may be wishful thinking. Feminists might also take issue with the claim
that part-time work resolves the family/career dilemma for women, preferring
instead better childcare provision and a fairer division of domestic labour
between women and men.
The domestic burden has been spread more evenly in recent years, but only a
little, and Hewitt's assumption that men will be happy to give up full-time
work to share both the paid work and the domestic labour with women may be
premature. As long as the majority of part-time jobs remain poorly paid and
of low status many men will not find such employment an attractive
proposition.
There are, however, some signs that part-time work is now gaining in status
to reach managerial and professional jobs. Less than 3 per cent of employees
in that category are now part-timers and it has traditionally been regarded
as impossible to combine part-time work with a successful career. But given
that the head of personnel at the Department of Social Security can
successfully work part-time, a lot of other senior managers, at least in
large organisations, ought to be able to follow suit. Better-paid
professionals might also seek to trade pay for time off.
About Time does not claim that part-time work is a panacea for unemployment
 -rightly so, as many part-time jobs go to women who would not otherwise be
active in the labour market.
But Hewitt does believe that part of the solution to Britain's unemployment
problem lies in the redistribution of incomes and working time, through
flexible and shorter hours, to those out of work. She also wants to see the
benefit system reformed to make it financially worthwhile for people on
income support to take part-time work.
Britain, along with Denmark and the Netherlands, is likely to remain a world
leader in the creation of part-time jobs in the 1990s. For that reason,
Hewitt's proposal of 'fair flexibility', something that the best employers
are already implementing, deserves a higher position on the political
agenda.
