FT  31 DEC 93 / Rome reins in runaway state pension scheme: Government
efforts to ease a growing burden on the public purse
No other industrialised country has devised a state-run pension scheme so
generous, so abused and now so unaffordable as Italy's. If reforms had not
been introduced this year, it would have threatened to consume the entire
national budget within 20 years. As it is, the reforms have arguably been
too timid, and further changes will be necessary to reduce the flow of
public funds.
The aim of the reforms, devised by Mr Giuliano Amato's government in 1992,
was to reduce pressure on the budget by tackling the rapidly accelerating
gap between state receipts from pension contributions and annual pay-outs by
the pension institute, INPS.
An increase in contributions from either employees or employers was ruled
out as these are already high. It was estimated that it would require close
to a 50 per cent contribution from salaries to balance contributions and
payments within 30 years.
The alternative was to reduce the scope of the benefits, tailoring them to
the needs of a debt-burdened treasury. At the same time the reforms prepared
to shift the burden of pension payments away from the state and more towards
pension funds with greater individual choice for prospective pensioners.
Less than 10 per cent of pensions are currently paid outside the INPS, and
the state itself has no special system for financing pensions. Quite simply,
each year the treasury fills the gap between contributions and payments.
The changes introduced have reduced the generosity of the system in three
main ways:
By raising retirement age.
By increasing the minimum contribution period.
By extending the period for computing pensionable earnings.
Steps have also been taken to cut down on fraud, the most notable area being
disability pensions. Almost a quarter of the 16.5m state pensioners are
receiving such pensions. This is a percentage out of all proportion to the
experience of other European Union countries, and the explanation, accepted
by INPS officials, is widespread fraud.
The retirement age for men is being raised gradually from 60 to 65 years and
that for women from 55 to 60 years. The only exception will be some
categories of workers in arduous jobs like mining. At present, the process
will be completed by 2003. But it is possible that the timescale will be
accelerated to cut costs.
Retirement benefits are also being harmonised to eliminate the excessive
privileges enjoyed by public sector employers. Until now, they have had
access to so-called 'baby pensions'. This has enabled them to draw
retirement pensions irrespective of age, after short periods of work. In the
case of women, this is often less than 20 years, and a recent study showed
85 per cent of all civil servants retire early.
The reforms are gradually bringing public sector employees into line with
the private sector requirement. This envisages a minimum of 35 years of
contributions to draw a pension before the usual retirement age. On an
equally gradual basis, the minimum requirement for contributions towards
pension entitlement will be raised from 15 to 20 years. This is expected to
increase the level of contributions.
The third area of reduced generosity concerns a new definition of
pensionable earnings. Until now, Italians have been able to compute
pensionable earnings on average adjusted earnings over the five years
previous to the retirement date. This will now be gradually raised to cover
the previous 10 years' earnings as in France, and for those with under 15
years' contributions their earnings average will be computed over their
entire working period.
However, for the time being Italians will still be able to obtain state
pensions that pay up to 80 per cent of pensionable earnings, compared to 50
per cent in France.
These changes have been strongly resisted by an increasingly articulate and
militant pensioners' lobby. However, the burden on the treasury is such that
it would surprising if more changes were not introduced.
In this year's budget the government has been obliged to pay L60,000bn
(Pounds 6.7bn) to bridge the gap between contributions and payments. In
1994, the figure will rise to L72,000bn, well above projected inflation.
With the pension population increasing, the savings from the reforms will
not provide sufficient budgetary relief.
The biggest new burden is the large number of deals being struck, mainly
with state-run industries, for early retirement to shed labour peacefully.
Some 25,000 have been covered by early retirement deals this year.
This is the tenth article on welfare states around the world. Previous
articles appeared on October 25, November 3, 8, 17, 19, 24, 30, December 10,
15
