FT  19 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Newmont finds glittering prize
in Peru - A gold project that is attracting the interest of other foreign
miners
A GROUP of big-name international mining concerns is hard on the heels of
Denver-based Newmont Mining's hugely successful new gold venture in the
north-central Peruvian Andes. RTZ, Placer Dome, American Barrack and Genmin
are among the overseas companies reported to be eager to snap up similar
bargains among still-available concessions.
Minera Yanacocha poured its first gold on August 7 and is on target to repay
the Dollars 36.6m capital investment in a staggeringly short seven months.
Yanacocha is a joint venture between Newmont, the Peruvian mining group
Buenaventura and Mine Or of France, a subsidiary of BRGM. The World Bank's
International Finance Corporation came in at a late stage to take up 5 per
cent of the shareholding.
'Nowhere in the world have we seen ore like this,' says Mr Len Harris,
Newmont's general manager in Peru. 'And nowhere else have we received more
co-operation from a government.'
The disseminated low-grade deposit, some 45km from the Andean town of
Cajamarca, has been documented for well over a century. The original claim
was staked by Cedimin, a company formed by BRGM and Buenaventura. Newmont
entered into an exploration agreement with Cedimin in 1984 and has directed
operations ever since.
What has finally made exploitation of the Yanacocha deposit feasible is the
development of leaching techniques during the past decade. Newmont, now the
largest gold producer in the US, pioneered the process. Yanacocha is one of
Peru's earliest experiences of the technique, already widely used in
neighbouring Chile.
The ore at Yanacocha is exceptionally porous. After a little blasting it can
be scooped up by loaders and trucked straight to the leach-pads. There it is
simply flattened by bulldozers prior to leaching. No crushing is required,
which reduces costs considerably.
'It was always obvious that, technically, this was a marvellous deposit,'
says Mr Harris. 'Security has been Newmont's prime concern, but it's just
another risk in a risky business - and you resolve it by getting good people
to protect you.'
Now, in and around the site, a contract company provides probably the
tightest security ever seen in Peruvian mining. The ratio of guards to
workers is almost one to one.
Transport and air-freight of the end-product - dore bullion ingots
containing 60 per cent gold and 40 per cent silver - is handled by Johnson
Matthey, the UK-based refiner, which is purchasing all Yanacocha's present
output.
Newmont officials say output from the three mines in the Carachugo deposit,
where work is at present concentrated, should top 250,000 troy ounces next
year. That would almost double Peru's official gold output level, according
to Mr Daniel Hokama, the mines minister.
For 1995, prospects are even more glittering. Another deposit in the same
concession area as Carachugo, known as Maqui Maqui, 'looks to be a bigger
and higher grade orebody', says Mr Harris. Feasibility studies are now being
completed by Kilborn of Canada and it is hoped that the Newmont board will
give the go-ahead this month.
Carachugo's mineable reserves are reckoned to total 28.7m tonnes, giving the
deposit a life of between five and six years. Average gold content is 1.38
grams a tonne - high for the leaching technique. Newmont profitably leaches
gold with as little as 0.6 grams a tonne in its US mining operations.
Maqui Maqui could bump up total output from the Yanacocha concession to well
in excess of 6m tonnes, say Newmont officials. And there are still more
promising anomalies within the 25,000-hectare concession site.
Local groups have expressed fears of environmental damage from a possible
escape of the cyanide solution used to leach the ore. Newmont officials say,
however, that they are applying 'the same stringent precautions in Peru as
we would in the state of Nevada'.
All pipes carrying the cyanide solution from leach-pads to plant run through
plastic-coated channels; there are sophisticated monitoring devices to
detect leaks; a large pond has been built to catch overflow in case of
exceptionally heavy rainfall; and Dollars 250,000 has been spent on the
Canadian 'Inco' process to neutralise the cyanide solution to drinking water
standards if it ever became necessary to discharge the solution.
'We're doing more here than the law calls for,' says Mr Harris. 'That's
right - it's also good business.'
