FT  18 MAR 93 / After the Budget: Institutions scramble to clarify ACT
THE CHANCELLOR'S budget address on Tuesday has sent institutional investors
scrambling for copies of the Inland Revenue bulletins spelling out the fine
print of corporate tax changes.
The bulletins clarify questions about whether professional investors need to
re-think the way they have structured their portfolios, whether equity
weightings should be pared or increased, or whether overseas holdings look
more attractive.
Fund managers at Legal and General Asset Management, one of the UK's largest
life insurers, yesterday concluded that there was little in the budget to
suggest that restructuring was necessary.
Among the chief issues for Legal and General, and others managing pension
fund assets, is the effect on investment decisions of lowering the
percentage of advance corporation tax payable on corporate dividends that
pension funds can reclaim. From April 5, pension funds will only be able to
reclaim 20 per cent of ACT paid on UK corporate dividends, down from 25 per
cent.
Mr David Rough, investment director at Legal and General, noted that while
there would be a cut in cashflow to pension fund investors, corporations
might increase dividend payments to compensate for it.
The chancellor's Budget also exempted non-domestic profits from ACT, a bone
of contention among companies with export-driven earnings or overseas
operations.
The resulting cut in tax charges might be passed on to shareholders in the
form of higher dividends, Mr Rough said.
He added that when the rebateable ACT rate for pension schemes was cut from
30 per cent to 25 per cent during a period of several years beginning in
1984-85, several UK corporations did precisely that.
The effective cut in dividend yields for pension funds is too small to
justify a shift into UK gilts, Mr Rough added. The yield on the FT-A
All-Share Index had fallen marginally by about 0.25 per cent to just below 4
per cent but equities were still likely to out-perform gilts, albeit by a
smaller margin.
Mr Paul Whitney, chief executive at CIN Management, the in-house manager of
the Pounds 13.5bn British Coal pension schemes, said that institutions would
have to wait to see how corporations responded.
Mr Whitney noted dividend cover for many corporations had fallen below the
two-times cover considered prudent. Many would wish to rebuild that before
raising dividends.
