FT  06 OCT 93 / The Conservative Party Conference: With friends like this .
. . - Conference Notebook
WE ARE all friends again. Well, maybe. All right then, not really. But we
are making an effort.
So the 110th Conservative conference opened in Blackpool in a desperate
quest for public unity which did not last long. The colourful coverage in
the Daily Mirror of the sentiments expressed in Lady Thatcher's forthcoming
memoirs provided an awkward reminder of a harsher reality.
It did not matter how accurate the published details were - nor that one of
the few people who had actually read them insisted that, if her memoirs were
less than flattering, they were not damning.
Everyone knows what Lady Thatcher says in private about her successor. She
believes Mr John Major to be weak and indecisive. She frequently says as
much at her court-in-exile. She has attacked him publicly over Maastricht
and Bosnia. In private the charge sheet includes the European exchange rate
mechanism, public spending and taxation and, more generally, lack of
purpose. Everyone else knew back in 1990 that Mr Major was never really 'one
of us'. But she cannot forgive him.
Between the lines of her public statement of support last night was the
truth that Lady Thatcher does not want a challenge for the leadership
because she believes the ideologically-sound but inconveniently youthful Mr
Michael Portillo needs more time to emerge as heir apparent. And, as she
told the voters of Sir Teddy Taylor's Southend recently, 'Granny will always
be there'.
She admires Mr Kenneth Clarke as a politician cast in her own pugnacious
mould. But she knows that, more than any other potential leader, Mr Clarke -
when given the keys to 10 Downing Street - would erase the memory of her
revolution. Lady Thatcher's entrance to the Empress Ballroom on Thursday
will be the signal for public reconciliation. If the Conservatives are lucky
it will last until the weekend when the Sunday Times begins to serialise her
memoirs.
So it is a transparent truce. From the platform, ministers have decided to
emphasise the continuity between Thatcherism and Majorism. Then, chatting on
the edge of the ballroom, they speak bitterly of her refusal to shut up.
'She is a star', one commented. 'But why on earth cannot she retire
gracefully?'
Much of this goes over the heads of the conference delegates who yesterday
cheered Sir Norman Fowler's attacks on the BBC and stood to applaud his
calls for party unity. Many of them still adore Lady Thatcher and are loyal
to Mr Major. Most of them do not see the contradiction.
But they know something has gone wrong. There were echoes in Sir Norman's
oratory of the great 'fighting' speeches delivered by Mr Kenneth Baker in
the last months of the Thatcher era.
The wounds left by Maastricht have not healed. Mr Douglas Hurd offered an
eloquent exposition of the opportunity open to the Conservatives to unite
behind the common ambition of a wider, open and decentralised Europe.
He was promptly attacked from both sides. Lord Tebbit, said to regret still
that he did not stand against Mr Major three years ago, damned with faint
praise the prime minister's apparent conversion to the cause of
Euro-scepticism.
From the other side of the ditch, friends of Brussels warned that after the
battles of Maastricht they were not about to accept meekly
lowest-common-denominator Europeanism. Mr Major should take note. These are
people on whom his future depends.
So why the frantic bridge-building with the Tory right, the pretence that
Thatcher and Major are still good friends?
On one level it is an obvious tactic. Mr Major needs the support of the
party activists who still adore his predecessor. He is not sure that the
rift can ever be closed. But in that case, she rather than he must be seen
by the faithful as the antagonist - the great leader turned embittered
exile.
There is a more important objective. Mr Major needs desperately a window of
opportunity to rebuild his premiership. If the right does not challenge for
the leadership this year, he has a chance to recover.
He does not have much time. Loyal cabinet colleagues are becoming restless
with his preoccupation with what the papers say. They are urging him to
behave in a more prime ministerial fashion. They lament his inability to
stamp his authority on the government. They want him to concentrate on three
or four strategic objectives - rebuilding Britain's competitiveness,
restoring a grip on law and order, delivering and effective education
policy.
They fear the most damning label that can be pinned on any politician - not
up to the job - is sticking to Mr Major.
If the prime minister were strong, Lady Thatcher would be an irritating
irrelevance. So too would Lord Tebbit and the so-called barmies on the Tory
back benches.
But Mr Major can only confront them if he rekindles faith in his leadership
among his own supporters.
