FT  02 JUN 93 / Business and the Environment: All for the birds - Mining
groups are anxious to protect wildlife
Birds in Nevada now have new homes courtesy of Coeur d'Alene Mines. The
company is attaching lightweight nesting boxes to its claim posts - the
posts used to mark boundaries when mining companies stake their claims.
The idea was developed by Rob Berry, senior landsman with Coeur d'Alene's
exploration subsidiary. He noticed that the hollow plastic boundary posts
often claimed more than mining land. Birds slipped into the open ends of the
posts, sometimes to nest in them, and could not always escape.
Rather than simply capping the posts, Berry developed the bird boxes, which
are folded together from one piece of corrugated cardboard and attached with
some simple hardware. The boxes are light enough for mineral exploration
teams - who frequently hike many miles into remote areas - to carry several
at a time.
Berry called on experts at the Nevada Department of Wildlife to help design
the nesting boxes, which were first tested last year at the group's
Rochester mine in Nevada, the largest primary silver mine in the US. Now
schools and Scout groups are also using them.
Berry's boxes are suitable for small birds, bluebirds and wrens, but larger
ones have been designed to accommodate kestrels, a species of owl and wood
ducks.
This, however, is not just a simple story about a nature-lover and a good
idea. Dead birds are a very big issue at open-pit mines in the US. Mining
companies are spending millions of dollars to make sure that they do not
fall foul of legislation such as the US Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The act
makes it illegal for any company or mine to kill migrating water fowl and
every death has to be reported.
The mining method that causes difficulties is called heap leaching. Ore is
placed in a heap on an impermeable plastic pad and a weak cyanide solution
is sprinkled over it. The solution collects at the bottom after percolating
through the ore and dissolving much of the metal.
This very low-cost process has enabled gold and silver to be won from rock
containing very little of the precious metals - typically well under one
ounce of gold in every tonne of ore - and it contributed to the tremendous
upsurge of gold mining activity in Australia as well as North America in the
1980s.
But tailings (waste), discharged into ponds after the gold has been
separated from the solution, still contains cyanide which takes some time to
lose its toxicity in the sunlight. Many of the US gold mines using heap
leaching are in desert areas, and when birds in the desert see a patch of
blue water there is little that can be done to stop them if they want to
drop in for a drink.
Most of the ponds are too large to be satisfactorily covered by netting  -
heavy winter snows tend to tear it. But at the Rochester mine Coeur d'Alene
tried this and various other methods to keep birds away from the cyanide
solution. To scare the birds away, strips of polished aluminium were
employed as well as propane cannons that exploded compressed gas with a loud
bang at intervals. None of these strategies worked perfectly.
Now the company is pioneering a 'closed loop' leaching system that does away
with the open ponds. Instead, the cyanide solution circulates without seeing
the light of day, and the 'pregnant' or metal-bearing solution is held in a
closed tank before processing. Even the drip-irrigation facility is buried
below the surface of the heap of ore on the leach pad.
All this obviously helps to protect birds and other wildlife. But it has
also reduced Rochester's costs by enabling leaching to go on year-round
without the heap freezing and by reducing the amount of cyanide and water
used.
Coeur d'Alene is now leaching out the same amount of metal with 4,000
gallons of solution, against the previous 7,000 gallons.
Dennis Wheeler, Coeur d'Alene's president, says the system helped to reduce
the cash costs of production at Rochester from Dollars 3.76 a troy ounce in
1991 to Dollars 3.22 last year - or by more than 14 per cent.
He says: 'Environmental protection is a key element in the mining industry
and it will remain so.' So he encourages a positive approach throughout the
company - an approach that led Berry to come forward with his bird house
initiative and resulted in Coeur d'Alene winning several environmental
awards in the past five years.
This helps create a positive image for the mining industry in its battles
with environmentalists. Wheeler suggests: 'Mining is a compatible use of the
land and fully in keeping with the US tradition of multiple use of our
lands.'
He also insists that his shareholders recognise that money spent on
environmental actions is well-spent. 'Our shareholders want to be part of an
organisation that recognises a responsibility to the environment.'
