FT  21 DEC 93 / Gatt concessions spark disputes in UK and Germany
High-level divisions exist within the UK and German governments over
last-minute concessions made to France last week to win final agreement for
the world trade deal.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, is understood to have
complained to Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, on the eve of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deal about British support for
measures which will make it easier for the European Commission to retaliate
against unfair trading.
German reservations also surfaced at a meeting of EU foreign ministers in
Brussels yesterday. A senior Bonn government official complained that new
European trade defence mechanisms agreed last week could harm economic and
political reform in central and eastern Europe.
Although London and Bonn accept that the Gatt deal is done, the arguments
point to further trade tensions within the EU. They also suggest a degree of
dissent at the highest level with the direction of policy set out by Mr John
Major, the prime minister, and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany.
The doubts underline the dilemma facing the German government as it balances
the interests of its closest western ally, France, with those of neighbours
to the east. But they also mirror divisions within the British cabinet. Mr
Clarke is understood to have wanted Mr Major to lobby Chancellor Kohl to
resist French demands because they risked compromising the principle of free
trade in the EU.
Mr Hurd declined to intervene on the grounds that Mr Kohl was likely to meet
most of France's demands, according to informed officials. He also said that
the commission would show restraint on trade retaliation because
responsibility lay primarily with Sir Leon Brittan, the senior UK
commissioner and a free-trader by instinct, the officials said.
The measures agreed by EU foreign ministers last Wednesday mean that the
commission can take action more easily against dumping and subsidised
exports.
In Brussels yesterday, Mrs Ursula Seiler-Albring, German minister of state
for foreign affairs, pressed for tougher wording in the minutes agreed last
Wednesday which removed the final European hurdle to the Gatt accord.
According to Belgian and German officials, she identified the agreement on
'safeguard' measures as the most troublesome.
The reason is that it overturned the long-standing principle that
retaliation could be blocked by a minority of free-trading countries led by
the UK and Germany and could harm the east Europeans, diplomats said.
The UK last week supported measures to allow the commission's preliminary
decisions to use anti-dumping or anti-subsidies to become definitive by a
simple majority vote.
France was widely seen as a big winner in last week's Gatt deal because it
won EU support for revisions in the 1991 Blair House agreement with the US
limiting subsidised food exports. It also resisted US demands for wider
access to Europe's television and broadcasting markets.
Madrid move upsets EU growth talks, Page 2
