FT  22 DEC 93 / Survey of Environmental Management (9): California sets the
agenda - Car makers are not yet persuaded that 'green' is good for business
Volkswagen, the car maker, keeps goldfish. They live, apparently healthy and
content, in a big tank at Wolfsburg, one of Europe's largest car
manufacturing plants. The water they swim in has been used in the paint
plant, or in umpteen other processes before being recycled  - 'in-house' -
back to cleanliness.
The fish represent one of the giant German car maker's favourite
illustrations of how it is managing its business with due regard for
environmental considerations. Short of forming a subsidiary to sell goldfish
and chips, VW in this case is nevertheless hard pushed to see the business
opportunity and increased profitability which, legislators insist, should
arise from sound environmental management.
It is not all bad news. For example, the complex and expensive equipment
which VW, General Motors and others in the motor industry have installed to
collect gaseous solvents from a number of processes, and which in the past
would have merely escaped into the atmosphere, does have some commercial
payback.
The gases can be used as a feedstock in on-site electricity generating
plants, thus marginally reducing fuel bills. But in most aspects, and for
the motor industry as a whole, environmental management means cost - and a
lot of it.
Few industries are exposed to environmental legislation and 'green' social
pressures in so many forms. It is easy to see why. The motor industry is the
world's single largest manufacturing activity, producing about 50m units a
year of products, each containing at least 5,000 individual pieces of widely
varying materials. It is a huge consumer of energy and raw materials in its
production processes - and a prodigious generator, through those processes,
of waste.
But the products, too, are the target of environmental regulation and
concern. The drive to curb exhaust emissions builds in cost and complexity
from first concept on the computer to final assembly, as designers seek to
accommodate increasingly more intricate catalytic converter systems and the
plumbing and electronic management that goes with them.
For companies such as Johnson Matthey (JM), involved in the supply of the
precious metals-coated catalyst itself, there has indeed been a business
opportunity as a result of Europe following North America into making 'cats'
mandatory on all new cars from the start of 1993. It has meant the opening
up of a whole new European market sector, for which JM fought vigorously in
the 1980s propaganda wars between advocates of 'cats' and those of the
seemingly rival 'lean-burn' technology (until it was realised that the
technologies were in fact complementary).
But for vehicle makers 'cats' have meant a significant on-cost which, though
justified in environmental terms, has inevitably squeezed their profit
margins in terms of how much can be passed on as higher prices to the
public. Emissions-linked costs appear poised to escalate further.
In North America, traditionally the leader in tightening the exhaust
emissions screw, standards for 1994 will require a further 40 per cent cut
in hydrocarbon emissions and a 60 per cent reduction in oxides of nitrogen
compared with the previous standards.
However, such big percentage cuts do not mean another big leap forward in
reducing the amount of pollutants emitted compared with a car fitted with no
catalyst at all. Even the relatively simple cats of five or more years ago
removed 90 per cent of exhaust pollutants compared with a 'non-cat' car.
The new standards are thus acting on the remaining few per cent - at what
the motor industry insists, because of the technology now involved, is a
similar cost to removing the initial 90 per cent.
Again, the manufacturers know they cannot pass on these costs in full - or
that if they did so collectively (quite apart from anti-trust
considerations), higher absolute prices would reduce the size of new car
markets and lead to an older - and 'dirtier' - car population as motorists
hung on to their vehicles for longer.
Not surprisingly, the industry's own, fruitless urging has been that the
biggest immediate impact on exhaust pollution could be made by government
sweeping the older car population from the streets, and perhaps providing
fiscal incentives for the purchase of new ones.
Instead, California has pointed the way towards yet more draconian emissions
standards - and thrown another huge burden on the world's motor industry -
by insisting that 2 per cent of a car maker's sales in the state must be of
'zero emission vehicles' (ZEVs) starting in 1998, rising to 10 per cent in
the early 21st century, as well as requiring populations of ULEVs (ultra-low
emission vehicles).
Given the propensity for other US states and, eventually, other continents
such as Europe to emulate California, the intended California standards are
being taken seriously - not least because state legislators say
non-complying manufacturers would be excluded from the Californian market
altogether.
Most manufacturers have interpreted the ZEV as necessarily being powered
electrically - by batteries - with the exception of a few exploring hydrogen
power.
Thus a huge research effort into viable electric cars has been going on for
the past several years. In one example of the effort, the North American
'big three' car makers, GM, Ford and Chrysler, are participants in a federal
government-backed consortium spending Dollars 1.2bn in search of new
batteries which might overcome the power and mileage limitations of existing
types.
GM is building a fleet of 50 prototypes of a car called the Impact, made
mainly out of aluminium, in the hope that an electric car can be made at
least faintly competitive with a petrol counterpart. But deep scepticism
exists. And in terms of business opportunity the prize is not the creation
of an important new market, but at best a partial substitute for the old.
