FT  19 FEB 93 / Environmental groups torn by divisions on pits battle: The
'green' organisations in a quandary over the issue of closures
IN the conflict over the future of Britain's coal industry, the
environmental movement has not had a good war. The leading pressure groups
have been unable to present a united policy and have appeared ambivalent
about whether coal mines should close.
They have not been short of targets - the Commons environment committee last
week accused Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, of ignoring
environmental issues in his October announcement that he planned to close 31
pits.
It is surprising that the environmental case has not been put more
forcefully in a country where 'green' pressure groups command wide support.
Moreover, the issue of energy use had a high profile last year, with the
risk of global warming from burning fossil fuels at the top of the Rio Earth
Summit's agenda.
Policy differences prevented the environmentalists making a joint response
to the pit closure announcement. The debate over the closures put them on
the spot because it forced them to choose between competing goals.
The environmentalists' instincts have been anti-coal because of the carbon
dioxide produced by burning it. The government committed itself last year to
stabilising levels of carbon dioxide at 1990 levels by the year 2000, and
the pit closures appeared to make those targets easier to reach.
The two leading environmental groups, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth,
want the use of fossil fuels such as coal, gas and oil cut sharply 'in the
long term'. But they also want the government's white paper on coal,
expected in the next few weeks, to preserve some of the 31 pits for a few
years.
Greenpeace, which has 400,000-plus supporters, argues that 'the immediate
priority must be the closure of nuclear power, not the coal mines'. It wants
a larger share for coal in the electricity generation market to be created
at the expense of nuclear power. It maintains this opposition to nuclear
power - one of its most passionately held policies - even though nuclear
power does not emit carbon dioxide, and a nuclear accident would affect many
fewer people than global warming.
Mr Clive Bates, Greenpeace's energy campaigner, defends its priorities. 'The
probability may be low, but there just isn't a socially acceptable nuclear
accident,' he says.
Friends of the Earth, with about 250,000 supporters, also opposes nuclear
power. But its desire to see pits spared is prompted largely by concern for
the mining communities.
Greenpeace says pointedly: 'We don't have a view on mining jobs - we stick
to environmental questions.' But Mr Simon Roberts, FoE energy campaigner,
argues that 'the impact of changes to improve the environment should be
spread more evenly across society - yes, that is a political point we're
making'.
The long-term solution favoured by both groups is investment in energy
efficiency and 'renewables' - wind, solar and wave power. Here there is some
common ground with the government, which is running a campaign to persuade
households to save electricity. The Department of Trade and Industry has
also suggested a growing though small role for renewables.
FoE says the energy-efficiency schemes it favours could save nearly half the
UK's use of energy, apart from in transport, by 2005.
The groups are optimistic about renewables in spite of the trade and
industry department's estimate that the cost of power is generally two to
three times that generated by present sources. Both groups hope costs might
fall with more research, but suggest that even if renewables are not
competitive the extra cost should simply be paid.
Other parts of the 'green' movement are less certain about renewables. The
Campaign for the Protection of Rural England has expressed unease about
wind-turbine towers on hillsides or tidal barrages changing the shape of
estuaries.
