FT  10 JUL 93 / Gardening: Where hefty buyers lurk
THE SKY has been as blue as the best delphiniums; the cut-price pottery is
out in force; and today and tomorrow, starting at 10 am, you can combine two
of England's favourite weekend pastimes by trying to head for the Hampton
Court flower show.
This event is in only its fourth year but already it is a popular hit and,
if you can reach it, it allows you to look at flowers and shop
simultaneously. But shopping and flower-gazing depend on two major hazards:
the M25 and British Rail's Network SouthEast. On press day, I escaped both,
but I must warn you that the overflow car parks were well filled all down
the Twickenham road.
For the first time, the show has come under the management of the Royal
Horticultural Society. So have the prices: entry costs Pounds 14 an adult
and Pounds 7 a child between five and 15. An average family must allow
Pounds 42 for entrance with another Pounds 6 for the car park - or at least
Pounds 20 for the journey on British Rail from central London.
There is also a champagne tent to negotiate. It all made me wonder: by the
time He had bought a new accessory and She had bought something in straw
from the craft village, how were the vendors of good garden plants in the
main marquees going to sell anything in quantity.
I soon stopped wondering. Since Wednesday, active planters have been
scrambling to hand over fivers for clematis from such exhibitors as the
Valley Nurseries, Lincoln, or perennials from Hardy's Cottage Plants,
Hampshire.
Like the show itself, Hardy's is a recent arrival which I noted at Chelsea.
Its space there was limited by the RHS committee, but Hampton Court has
given it room to spread. It is showing anything from white verbascums to the
best white-and-red spotted phlox called Omega and a catmint (its idea but
not quite mine) of Nepeta Six Hills Giant. The planty people are loving it -
after all, there are not so many exhibits based on gardening rather than
florestry.
Hampton Court is certainly no Chelsea; nor should it ever become one. Where
plants are shown, there are fewer, and the staging has none of Chelsea's
scale or massive impression. The atmosphere is more like a county show with
country extras. The supreme difference is that almost anything is for sale
at Hampton Court.
As I look round my garden this weekend, I realise what good things have come
back to it from the past two Hampton Courts. Everything is pot-grown and
will transplant easily as soon as it rains: the great advantage is that you
can see it and buy it on the spot.
Nonetheless, this is England and gardening is part of the countryside. At a
summer show, the countryside means heritage and, in this, the English have
no rivals at enlarging the definition. At an English summer horse show, you
can buy sheepskin coats, fudge, Range Rovers, barbecues and almost anything
except a horse. A few people watch the dressage but many more want the right
sort of quilted under-garments.
At Hampton Court, a few people may share my interest in the fine erodiums
from the NCCPG collection - but many more want pots from Spain, mohair
fashion knitware, and the right sort of hat from Tony Conner, of Eton. He
sells 'Hats for the Gentry'; his 'Old Etonian' is a straw number from
Ecuador.
Without the shopping, I am not sure I would enjoy it enough to spend a day
with the crowds. The best value among the cheap pottery seemed to me to be
Earlfarm in section C17: you can almost recoup the cost of the entry ticket
on the difference between its oriental pots and those in retail shops.
If price is no object, head for the conservatories where there is something
to suit almost nobody's pocket. One corner of the showground is dominated by
a huge, Gothic conservatory, custom-made by the staff at Oak Leaf, of York
(tel. 0904-690 401).
The kind young man with the press kit explained that the cost price - not
the retail - was Pounds 100,000 complete with blinds, tiled flooring from
Paris, ceramics at Pounds 60 a metre and curved glass. The price, however,
was merely for the record as the entire thing had been pre-sold.
Next door, Amdega of Darlington (0325-468 522) can do you a simpler model
for Pounds 30,000 - excluding blinds, flooring and installation. I think I
prefer it to the Gothic - but did not the two exhibits look familiar? Their
exhibitors confessed that both had been given a pre-run at Chelsea, where
Oak Leaf had found its buyer.
Gardeners who look at glasshouses should not be the people to throw stones;
but while you cope with the success of Hampton Court, and negotiate stalls
with names like Doughcraft, remember that among the knitwear with floral
influence and the hand-painted buttons, there will be at least one hefty
buyer at work.
