FT  11 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Mirror hangs on to its image - Raymond
Snoddy on how the tabloid price war influences investors
YESTERDAY'S 48-page Daily Mirror was a model of the art of popular
journalism.
The main front page story was an emotional piece on the reason why the wife
of pop star Georgie Fame committed suicide alongside the Blackpool landlady
explaining why she had rented a bed to Nicola Rogers, the 13 year old
runaway.
There was also of course details on the Pounds 500,000 Bono Bingo and the
winner of the Pounds 50,000 mortgage competition. On page two there was a
modest story on Israeli Peace Deal With PLO.
To potential investors in Mirror Group Newspapers, which is now emerging
from the long shadow of Robert Maxwell, the most interesting item on the
front page appeared in very restrained type - the 27p cover price. Since
July 12 the Daily Mirror has been 7p more expensive than its main opposition
The Sun and the differential appears to have made very little difference.
The Sun's price-cutting activity, and marketing ploys such as giving the
paper away at Shell garages, has generated a degree of excitement which has
pushed the popular tabloid market up by about 2.5 per cent overall.
The Sun is up by 300,000 to 3.83m, the Daily Star is up with the help of its
Pot of Gold promotion but perhaps the most remarkable thing is that the
readership of the Daily Mirror has stayed loyal.
Indeed the August circulation was 63,000 up on July.
The fact that the full frontal attack by The Sun has not dented the
circulation of the Daily Mirror removed another in a long line of
uncertainties that could have delayed the sale of the 54.8 per cent of MGN
now effectively owned by a range of banks owed money by the later Mr
Maxwell.
The last big hurdle was finally cleared earlier this week when the newspaper
group, whose publications also include The Sunday Mirror, People and Daily
Record in Scotland, agreed to settle a series of disputes with the private
companies in the Maxwell empire.
The deal, which will save MGN nearly Pounds 70m in tax and costs, involves
waiving potential net claims of at least Pounds 130m and in turn having
legal claims against the newspaper group waived.
The extent to which MGN has recovered from the financial and editorial
depredations of its former proprietor will become apparent on Wednesday when
MGN announces its interim results. Analysts are forecasting pre-tax profits
of between Pounds 28m and Pounds 30m compared with Pounds 16m. Mr Derek
Terrington, media analyst at stockbrokers Kleinwort Benson, is going for
Pounds 31m and it is likely that the results will be at the upper end of
analyst's expectations.
. The prospect of a single buyer for the stake has now been all but ruled
out on the grounds that there are no obvious candidates around - or at least
candidates who would not become immediately entangled in monopolies
legislation.
All the signs now are that a private placing among a wide range of
institutions is being planned.
This will please the existing management of MGN, under Mr David Montgomery,
the chief executive, who see a wide range of City investors as the best
guarantee of the newspaper group's independence.
No final date, it is believed, has been set for a disposal, but unless
market conditions deteriorate unexpectedly MGN could be a publicly quoted
newspaper with conventional shareholders within two months.
With the present MGN share price at 178p, even with an appreciable discount
banks such as the National Westminster, holding MGN shares as security for
Maxwell debt should do well out of the disposal. Terms vary but most will
make something on their deals that would have looked implausible in the days
when horrific revelations followed each other on the state of the Maxwell
finances.
Mr John Talbot of Arthur Andersen, joint administrator to the Maxwell
private interests, should also be able to make a little extra from the sale
to distribute to other Maxwell creditors.
Despite intense competition in the popular newspaper market and a worrying
downward trend in face of growing competition from the electronic media the
outlook for MGN looks strong. Printing in Oldham is already making 64-page
papers possible for the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail on Friday, Saturday
and Sunday.
The first of the new printing presses being installed on the outskirts of
Glasgow will come on stream in July further strengthening the Scottish paper
in the battle with The Sun.
Many of the Mirror's most distinctive voices have been either sacked or have
left the paper but 50 new journalists are being hired and the paper has not
joined the ranks of the Tory press as many feared.
Yesterday's political comment may have been restrained by historic
standards. But it still reminded readers how overall tax has risen under the
governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major and advised the Prime
Minister to 'scrap the heating tax now.'
