FT  17 FEB 93 / Leading Article: Help on migrants
THE UPHEAVALS causing flows of uprooted migrants into the rich countries of
western Europe show little sign of abating. While war rages in former
Yugoslavia, economic and political dislocation in other hard-hit parts of
eastern Europe and the developing world has become a seemingly permanent
source of instability.
The west should prepare itself for immigration pressures to persist at least
until the end of the decade. To cope with the challenge Europe needs a
strategy. Unfortunately, though not surprisingly, European interior
ministers meeting in Budapest this week failed to come up with it.
The ministers agreed to toughen measures against the criminal organisations
which charge exorbitant fees for transporting refugees illegally across
western borders. They will set up mobile police units, and intensify
information exchanges. But pleas led by the Bonn government for the rest of
Europe to pool resources in providing funds and accommodation for refugee
resettlement fell on deaf ears.
Five countries - Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Sweden and Hungary - have
between them accommodated about 85 per cent of the more than 500,000
refugees displaced from ex-Yugoslavia since mid-1991, with roughly 250,000
of these people in Germany. In effect, these countries have now been told
that it is up to them to find solutions to difficulties posed by the
inflows.
This lack of European solidarity is short-sighted. Such a response fails to
address a problem which is growing larger, in terms of both numbers and
geographical complexity. Roughly 670,000 refugees sought political asylum
last year in western Europe, up 24 per cent from 1991, of whom 440,000
entered Germany (against 27,500 for France, 24,600 for the UK, 11,700 for
Spain and 2,500 for Italy). Hungary has turned back 1m people at its borders
since October 1991.
European countries are following a policy of trying to minimise their
exposure to refugee inflows, pushing would-be migrants back to adjacent
countries. This was the approach in the resolution on 'host third countries'
adopted by EC ministers at the end of last year, which put the onus on
dealing with refugees from Bosnia and Serbia on neighbours such as Hungary,
Croatia and Slovenia.
It is also the policy adopted, for understandable reasons, by Germany, which
is tightening its previously liberal asylum regulations through a change in
its constitution. This, inevitably, will increase strains on Poland and the
Czech Republic.
A policy which ends up concentrating refugees in countries least equipped to
accommodate them is misguided. Europe at present is unable to check the
pressures which are forcing refugees to flee from the east. But unless the
west enacts a policy which seeks to spread the burdens of assisting and
integrating them, it will share part of the blame if the potential for
disorder spreads.
