FT  28 OCT 93 / Arts: Variations on an enigma - Theatre
The first act of Elgar's Rondo has such a stirring end that a great deal
else can be forgiven. In comes the band of the Worcestershire Regiment
playing Land of Hope and Glory with all the pomp and circumstance that can
be fitted into the RSC's Swan Theatre.
The band plays again in the second act in the presence of King George V, who
goes to sleep. There is other music, notably the movement from Elgar's
Second Symphony, which gives its title to the piece.
David Pownall has written a middlingly good middlebrow play which leaves a
lot of loose ends. Experts on Elgar may be just as confused as those who
know little about him.
There is general consent that he was the first English composer of
international standing since Henry Purcell two centuries before. He took his
inspiration from the Germans. He was very much a man of the Midlands, which
is an excellent reason for this play being premiered in Stratford. After his
wife died in 1920 he wrote little more original music, although he lived
until 1934.
As a young man he was the bandmaster at the Worcestershire County lunatic
asylum, his father having been unable to afford to send him to the Leipzig
Conservatory. He was admired by George Bernard Shaw, and was the first major
composer to realise the possibilities of the gramophone.
Pownall picks up some of the facts and tries to develop a thesis of his own.
This is that Elgar was hurt by his lighter pieces going down well in England
while his more ambitious work was admired mainly on the Continent. At the
same time, the early years of the 20th century were not a good period for an
English composer who loved Germany. Elgar began to dry up and the Third
Symphony was never completed.
It is quite fun in parts. Alec McCowen is a wonderful broody Elgar and there
is an outstanding performance by Ian Hughes as a young Catholic priest. But
it does not fit together. Characters such as George V and GBS wander in and
out. Elgar's wife Alice, played by Sheila Ballantine, is so repetitively
snobbish as not to be credible. Nothing about her is developed.
There are moments of knockabout music hall comedy - 'watch your back,
Dvorak, don't be so juicy, Debussy' - also a curiously embittered gardener
who pees in the cider. Some facts, such as Elgar's period as bandmaster in
the mental home, are unjustifiably taken for granted.
The direction is by Di Trevis. She could have had a more ordered text.
Still, there is always Land of Hope and Glory to look back on.
The Royal Shakespeare Company has bucked the trend of declining theatre
audiences and reported attendances of 90 per cent of capacity at Stratford
on Avon and the Barbican in 1992-93, writes Antony Thorncroft. This was a 2
per cent rise on the previous year. The RSC reduced its dependency on
subsidy per paid admission from Pounds 10.16 to Pounds 9.54.
