FT  05 MAY 93 / Personal View: The year of the great opportunity - Curing
Italy's economic ills
In recent months, Italy has been under the spotlight for all the wrong
reasons: Mafia killings of judges; political scandals involving senior
politicians and business leaders; growing political instability. And yet,
1993 is for Italy 'the year of the great opportunity'. Not only is the
political system finally being reformed, but there is a rare coincidence of
circumstances which makes it possible for Italy to cure the four chronic
diseases of its economy: high inflation, unemployment, horrendous government
deficits and imbalances in its external trade accounts. But this will happen
provided the incoming government sticks to two prescriptions - extending the
1992 wage agreement and remaining outside the European exchange rate
mechanism until conditions are right to re-enter.
The first exceptional circumstance is that Italy is now enjoying the
benefits of the July 1992 agreement among the government, trade unions and
employers, which abolished the country's wage indexation system. The pact
virtually froze nominal wages until the end of 1993. As long as 15 years ago
I identified indexation as the leading cause (together with excessive wage
demands) of the inescapable swing of the Italian pendulum between the high
inflation of the 1970s, and the low growth, rising unemployment, high
external deficit and disinflation of the 1980s, after Italy joined the
European Monetary System.
The second extraordinary circumstance is represented by the free floating of
the lira following the turbulence on the foreign exchange markets of
September 1992. The overvaluation of the lira, caused by the fixed exchange
rate and the persisting inflation differential, eventually led to the
abandoning of the fixed parity. What happened afterwards vindicates the view
expressed last November by Rudi Dornbusch, the MIT economist. He maintained,
in contrast with conventional wisdom, that by floating the lira, Italy had
finally freed itself from the yoke of the Bundesbank and the high interest
rates imposed by it. He said that Italy should use that freedom for a sharp
cut in interest rates and a deep devaluation of up to 30 per cent. A
devaluation of such proportions was needed to balance the current account,
restore growth and job creation, and compensate for the effect of a
reduction of the public deficit of the order of 2 to 3 per cent of GDP.
What actually took place pretty much matches Dornbusch's prescription.
Interest rates on Treasury bills have come down from more than 15 per cent
last summer to about 10 per cent; devaluation reached 30 per cent (though it
has been reduced a bit lately).
The third favourable circumstance is that the devaluation happened at a time
of extremely weak demand, which has helped to bear down on imported
inflation. The moderation of inflation, which in March fell to a six-year
low of 4.2 per cent, is also a consequence of the virtual freeze on nominal
wages.
What Italy is now undergoing is an export-led recovery, with a dramatic
turnround in the current account. The upturn reflects competitiveness gains
which have resulted from devaluation and the wage freeze. As things now
stand, I expect growth to pick up in the second quarter. Italy is likely to
experience a higher rate of growth in 1993 than most European economies.
Is Italy out of the dire straits in which it found itself last September?
Unfortunately, the answer is no. A crucial stage will arrive when the wage
agreement expires at the end of the year. At that point the choice is the
unions'. They could choose to revert to their old ways and attempt to
recover the purchasing power lost since last July, and then some. The result
would be a return to the dilemma between high inflation and a recessionary
tightening.
The other possibility is that the unions will realise the enormous
advantages of extending the agreement. These include:
continued reduction in inflation;
the creation of more secure jobs for present and future generations;
a sharp decline in interest payments.
In spite of the recent reduction, Italian short-term interest rates are
still several percentage points higher than those in the other European
countries. If the markets were reassured that the benefits of the 1992
agreement would be extended to 1994 the conditions are there to take
advantage of high Italian returns. The inflow of capital, a more credible
government (and therefore a reduction of the political risk premium) and the
downward trend of international interest rates should all contribute to a
fall in Italian rates. By year-end, short-term rates could be 5 points lower
than in recent years. Such a reduction would have a significant effect on
the budget. With a debt of L1,600 trillion (million million) I estimate that
a reduction in short-term interest rates by 5 points would bring about a net
saving of L80 trillion by the end of 1994.
Over the same period a further deficit reduction of L50 trillion should come
from:
cuts in public expenditure along the lines pursued by the Amato government;
new measures to curb tax evasion by the self-employed;
higher tax revenues as the economy continues to recover;
privatisation proceeds;
savings from the elimination of corruption on public contracts.
All this would bring the government deficit to 3.3 per cent of GDP, almost
in line with the Maastricht requirements. The fall in interest rates should
also contribute to an increase in investment and, together with the improved
current account, to an expansion in income and employment.
This is what Italy would gain from the extension of the wage agreement. But
union leaders are bound to ask themselves what their members would lose.
With fixed nominal wages, the only possible loss for workers is an increase
in prices. Figures available for the first nine months of the agreement show
a loss of purchasing power only of about 1 per cent. As for the future, even
in the pessimistic assumption that inflation jumps to 6 per cent for the
rest of the year as a consequence of devaluation, the overall loss of
purchasing power would not go beyond 2 per cent. This loss could be easily
compensated by allowing for a rise linked to productivity increases.
Moreover, in 1994, the effect of devaluation on prices will have all but
disappeared.
In exchange for wage moderation, the unions should ask the government for
institutional changes which could contribute to bearing down on price
levels. One of the most urgent is the deregulation of the distribution
sector, whose inefficiency and high profit margins have kept workers from
benefiting fully from productivity gains.
If the unions can be persuaded to make the rational choice and extend the
wage agreement to the end of 1994, I challenge them to announce it right
now. This would bring forward the benefits of the extension, providing the
government and business a stable framework on which to plan. The impact on
job creation would be significant.
What about Italy's return to fixed parities and the monetary union process?
The answer, and here I come to my second prescription, is yes, but only
under the proper conditions.
The question must be seen in a broader context. One might think that the
expansion which Italy is now enjoying is only the result of the fall in the
value of the lira - that is, simply a repetition of the old game of
competitive devaluations. But in fact Italy is now engaged in a rebellion
against the Bundesbank's suicidal policy of high interest rates - acting
like a David against a mighty Goliath. Italy would most definitely welcome
sharing the fight for lower interest rates with other countries with similar
problems, especially in terms of high unemployment, including Spain,
Ireland, Belgium and France. (The UK has already joined the fray.) They too
would have to free themselves from the shackles of the Bundesbank by
floating and pursue a policy of lower interest rates, and possibly tighter
fiscal policies.
The effect of such policies must be favourable to the world economy, because
of the resulting expansion of employment and output. The only possible
exception is Germany, at least until it joins most of the industrialised
world in a policy of lower interest rates, which the Bundesbank has recently
begun to introduce. Once it has been persuaded to correct past errors, the
EMS can quickly get back to the task of economic and monetary union, with
new and better-founded parities, and a healthier distribution of power and
duties.
Indeed, for Italy, and perhaps much of the world, this is the year of the
great opportunity. Let's not miss it.
The author is Institute professor emeritus at MIT and winner of the Nobel
Prize for Economics in 1985
