FT  16 NOV 93 / If the dunce's cap fits . . .
England is a nation of thickheads, dunces, ignoramuses, feather-brains,
numbsenkulls, duffers, dimwits and know-nothings. I do not, of course, refer
to you or me, but to those other folk over there. Her and him and them.
Where else would football hooligans breed so profusely? Who else would buy
British tabloids? Who else would watch Jeremy Beadle? Who else would elect
our politicians?
We know the answer. It could only be the great semi-educated, half-literate
core of England. 'In Germany,' it was noted by a Royal Commission on
Technical Instruction in a report delivered in 1884, 'the dense ignorance so
common among workmen in England is unknown . . .' Wait a minute. That was,
er, let me see . . . 1993 take away 1884 . . . where's my calculator . . .
109 years ago. No comfort there. The story is not very much more encouraging
today. Take some statistics from 1990. In that year about 68 per cent of
young Germans obtained an upper secondary school qualification at age
18-plus. The comparable figure for Japan was 80 per cent, and for France 48
per cent. Hold your breath. The British score was 29 per cent.
These statistics are reproduced in a table in the report of the National
Commission on Education, published yesterday. We must digress for a moment
on the origin of this commission. Sir Claus Moser, born in Berlin and
recently retired as warden of Wadham College, Oxford, is a distinguished
statistician who has spent half a century in British public life. In 1991,
as president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, he
called for a royal commission of inquiry into the lamentable state of
education and training. The government turned his idea down flat.
Undeterred, Sir Claus encouraged the British Association to set up its own
study. The British Academy, the Royal Society, and the Royal Academy of
Engineering lent support. The Paul Hamlyn Foundation picked up the tab. In
consequence, the privatisation of royal commissions may have been
established. A fresh source of material for British political debate has
been opened up. Mr David Sainsbury and other creators of cash-rich
foundations will doubtless be presented with ingenious new ways of spending
their money. The lesson is well-learned from the Fords, Rockefellers and
other American benefactors.
That is a fringe benefit. We must all be grateful to Sir Claus and the names
in his contact-book for the report itself. Published as a paperback by
Heinemann at Pounds 4.99 it is serious stuff. It presents a convincing case
for shifting another billion or three into education, on the ground that the
present level of expenditure, even allowing for the improvements implicit in
the government's reforms, is not adequate in a global market in which
competitive advantage will accrue to the countries with the best-educated
workforces.
Before anyone has apoplexy, let me dispose of those few billions. The report
suggests that the extra spending might be phased in, reaching a rate of
Pounds 3.2bn a year by the year 2000. About a quarter of it would finance
pre-primary schools, making Britain, which offers publicly-funded places to
less than half its toddlers, competitive with France and Belgium (95 per
cent), Denmark (85 per cent) and Germany (77 per cent). Most of the rest
would go into primary schools. The commission suggests 'improved efficiency'
savings of Pounds 500m and the payment by students and private patrons of
Pounds 1.3bn towards higher education. Net addition to public spending at
the end of the century: Pounds 1.4bn.
Impossible, says the education secretary, Mr John Patten. That is helpful.
If Mr Patten opposes something, we can be sure that it is an excellent
suggestion. His principal achievement since joining the cabinet in April
1992 has been to stop the reform of education in its tracks. He managed this
all alone. The prime minister, in a tightish spot himself, is keeping Mr
Patten on a while to see if he can preside over the undoing of the damage.
If he fails, it will make nonsense of the government's protestations that
rigorous education is one of the basics it intends to get back to.
Let me say at once that, as the Moser commission acknowledges, the reform
process initiated by the Conservatives two years before they booted out Lady
Thatcher is the most encouraging event in Britain's educational history
since the Butler education act of 1944. More structured teaching, a national
curriculum and regular testing are all necessary components of any sustained
effort to improve British state education. It has always been evident that
this is a quiet revolution which will not have completed its task for a
generation.
Alas, the reforms have become bogged down by Mr Patten's pride, the
consequent recalcitrance of the teaching unions, the Treasury's
unwillingness to finance change, and the Conservatives' obsession with their
campaign to obliterate local authorities. The process will surely recover
from all of these ailments. The logic of Mr John Major's focus on education
reform should see to that. What the government should now take on board is
the extra push, the freshly radical look, that Sir Claus's report provides.
The money, even in the febrile atmosphere of a Pounds 50bn budget deficit,
is a bagatelle. A few miles a year off the roads programme would take care
of it. That way, less of England would be paved over, and more English minds
would be opened. Anyhow, there are many sensible suggestions that would cost
little or nothing. One is the proposed merger of education and training at
all levels of government, starting at the top and reaching down to local
education and training boards. Another is a broader school-leaving
qualification, to replace A-levels, which are too academically focused. The
new General Education Diploma would recognise vocational achievements.
Teachers should be graduates, professionally-trained, and, in due course,
properly paid.
The report is not only about education for employment. It addresses the
breakdown in society, the 'family' and 'crime' and 'inner city' matters
about which there has been so much Tory hand-wringing in recent weeks. Its
proposals go to the heart of these problems. Watch our politicians for a few
days. Mark as dummkopf any who ignore the thrust of the National
Commission's report.
