FT  07 JAN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Slide in coffee prices
continues as 'squeeze' ends
WORLD COFFEE prices continued to fall sharply yesterday, decisively ending
the rally which had boosted the New York market by more than 70 per cent
between August and Christmas.
In London the March robusta contract closed at Dollars 930 a tonne, down
Dollars 44 on the day following a fall of Dollars 38 on Tuesday. New York's
nearby arabica contract, which went from 48.10 cents a lb in late August to
touch 83.55 cents in Christmas week, was hovering above 70 cents in late
trading yesterday after falling 3 cents on Monday.
Mr Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI, the London futures broker, said the
retracement in a market that was 'not rational' marked the end of a classic
squeeze. He believes that some roasters who were caught short as the market
soared are now fully covered.
However, Mr Peter Kettle, analyst with ED &amp; F. Man, said that the retreat
was mainly technical, following a sharp reduction in the long position held
by commodity funds and speculators in New York. Last week they were reported
to be holding 12,000 lots, equivalent to 3.5m bags (60 kg each).
London traders said the robusta market had followed New York down. 'I may be
over-simplifying, but it looks like New York is trying to find a foothold at
70 cents,' said one, adding that market confidence had 'taken a severe
bashing'.
Ms Judy Ganes, analyst with Merrill Lynch in New York, said prices had been
hit by speculative liquidation, but she was convinced that the fall did not
mark the end of the recent bull run, which had been underpinned by good
fundamentals, especially an expected fall in Brazilian production.
Recent figures from Landell Mills Commodities Studies show world production
down to 87.04m bags last year from 1991's 93.87m bags. Consumption in
importing countries edged ahead to 73.73m bags from 73.5m bags the previous
year.
However, producer stocks at 46.65m bags and consumer stocks of 19.2m bags
add up to nearly a year's consumption in importing countries.
