FT  29 JAN 93 / World Stock Markets: Athens regains confidence on EC funding
package / A new mood among investors
While Greek politicians still argue about which projects to include in an
infrastructure programme made possible by EC funding, the prospect of
Ecu20bn (Dollars 16bn) flowing in from Brussels over the next seven years is
already contributing to a recovery on the Athens Stock Exchange.
Cement and construction issues have shown sharp gains and a small
engineering group, for instance, whose shares were rarely traded, suddenly
found itself accounting for more than 1 per cent of daily orders fed into
the bourse's new electronic trading system.
As a result the general index has gained momentum, closing yesterday at
741.35, up nearly 8 per cent from the start of the year. Volume has also
climbed steadily over the past few weeks, reaching Dr1.7bn (Dollars 8m) at a
number of sessions.
Mr John Markopoulos, managing director of Sigma Securities, says: 'It is a
cautious sort of recovery; but it is clear that confidence is returning
after a rather long gap. Investors have woken up to the fact that
price-earnings ratios are low, around seven to eight on average.' This
compares with a p/e of between 10 to 11 times at the start of 1992.
The announcement in December of the second EC package, with its guarantee of
sustained public investment, could not have come at a better time. . A
prolonged slide during most of 1992 took the general index to a 32-month low
in November. Even after a 27 per cent jump in just four weeks, the index
showed a loss of 17 per cent on the year.
The year-end figures revealed a depressing picture, with market
capitalisation declining in 1992 by 11 per cent to Dr2,042bn. The total
value of share transactions plunged by 31 per cent to Dr306bn, with average
trading volume down to around Dr1.2bn.
Even listed companies shunned the market as a source of capital, with
several leading industrial groups preferring to raise fresh funds through
issues of corporate bonds. Only two small investment companies joined the
bourse in 1992, compared with 17 entrants the previous year.
To a large extent, the small investors who are normally responsible for a
high percentage of turnover on the Athens exchange were tempted away by
attractive interest rates offered on government paper.
Although inflation was at 14.4 per cent in December, the need to finance the
bloated public deficit kept this month's rate for one-year Treasury bills,
by far the most popular investment instrument, as high as 22.5 per cent.
Nevertheless, as the government's economic stabilisation programme enters
its third year, inflation is forecast to decline faster, dropping to 9 per
cent by the end of the year. A fall in interest rates, currently standing at
about 27 per cent, is also expected, gathering speed after the summer.
Mr Dimitri Verropoulos, an investment consultant at Alpha Brokerage, says:
'The economy is starting to get back into shape and the outlook for growth
is encouraging. Institutional investors from abroad are looking at Athens
again.'
The real test for the market this year will come when the government
launches a series of privatisations through the stock market.
Housing Bank and Bank of Central Greece, both subsidiaries of large
state-controlled banks which are already listed, are to be sold through
public tender offers on the exchange. This method has already proved
successful in the sale earlier this month of Bank of Athens, a subsidiary of
National Bank, to a Korean-owned investment group.
However, these listings will be small by comparison with the projected
offering this summer of a 14 per cent stake in OTE, the state
telecommunications group. The flotation is set to follow the planned direct
sale of another 35 per cent of the company to an international telecoms
operator.
The government hopes to raise about Dr100bn from the partial flotation of
OTE. But concern is already being voiced over whether the market can absorb
such a large issue. Analysts point out that the country's largest public
offering to date, launched when the market was riding high in 1991, raised a
total of Dr20bn.
