FT  30 APR 93 / Survey of Executive Cars (1): Thinking the unthinkable -
Upheavals in the industry come at a time when, as recession grips much of
continental Europe, the flamboyance of the 1980s is being replaced by a more
low-key, sober approach to motoring. This is affecting both design and
engineering
THE map of the world's executive and luxury car industry is being re-drawn.
In the process, and sometimes to the dismay of die-hard traditionalist
customers, some of the taboos which have determined parts of the industry's
structure for many years are being dismantled.
The re-drawing is most apparent in North America, the world's biggest single
executive and luxury car market, where Japanese manufacturers have captured
nearly one third of the sector in less than six years with marques such as
Toyota's Lexus, Nissan's Infiniti and Honda's Acura.
The European executive specialist manufacturers such as Mercedes, BMW and
Jaguar, who once dominated this part of the market, now control only one
fifth.
The competitiveness of the German manufacturers, in particular, has been hit
hard by the strength of the D-Mark and spiralling wage and social costs
which have left Germany by far the most expensive country in which to
produce cars in Europe.
So, in moves which might have been unthinkable to many industry observers in
the car industry boom years of the late 1980s, German manufacturers are
moving out of Germany. Last year, BMW announced that its next new production
facility would be in South Carolina, to build a new sporty car at a volume
of up to 90,000 a year.
At the beginning of April, Mercedes-Benz announced that it intended to build
a Dollars 300m plant, also in the US, to produce a four-wheel-drive sports
utility vehicle at a rate of up to 60,000 vehicles a year, beginning in
1997.
Such moves are the German makers' main hope of narrowing what they
acknowledge to be the big production costs gap between them and Japanese
rivals, even allowing for the occasional accusation against the Japanese of
dumping.
According to Mr Helmut Werner, Mercedes' vice-chairman, the US plant's
production costs should be 30 per cent lower than those of its European
facilities - and will also reduce the impact of currency fluctuations. Not
least, the learning experience should help prepare it for the time when - as
is regarded as inevitable - the Japanese manufacturers move into the
European luxury car market in earnest.
However, in Mercedes' case the re-drawn map includes much more than plant
locations. The company, says Mr Werner, is to transform itself from luxury
carmaker into 'an exclusive full-line manufacturer offering high-quality
vehicles in all segments of the market'. Thus, before this decade is out,
there is to be a 'people carrier' or multi-purpose vehicle, the US
four-wheel-drive machine and even a small 'city' car as well as its current
three-model conventional car line-up.
In an astonishing admission, he asserts that the current cars are
'over-engineered' - a practice which, if continued, would price Mercedes out
of its markets.
The breaking of old taboos is not confined to the German industry: Jaguar,
the loss-making luxury car subsidiary of Ford, has been helped by sterling
devaluation since Britain's ERM withdrawal. But Jaguar, too, faces possibly
substantial change which is fundamentally cost-driven.
The old idea that a 'proper' Jaguar could never be built anywhere but
Coventry is already being eroded by the prospect of future engines coming
from Ford's Bridgend plant in Wales. Yet more trauma-inducing for the
traditionalists, the smaller Jaguar planned for the late 1990s is expected
to share the floor pan of Ford's 'world car' replacement for the current
Granada.
These upheavals come at a time when, as recession has tightened its grip on
large swathes of continental Europe, the flamboyance of the 1980s is
disappearing, replaced by a more low-key, sober approach to motoring which
is affecting both design and engineering.
Greater concern with economy and the environment is reflected in surging
sales of diesel cars. They are both 'cleaner' in terms of their exhaust
gases and much more economical than petrol engines of similar power.
Hitherto regarded in markets such as the UK as appropriate more to
high-mileage utilitarian than executive cars, the picture is about to change
with the launch in the summer of BMW's first diesel cars in Britain.
The old axiom that 'safety does not sell' is also under challenge as never
before.
An increasing proportion of manufacturers' promotion of their products is
being allocated to safety features rather than performance or styling. One
of the main planks of Ford's advertising for its new Mondeo 'world car' is
the standard fitting of driver airbags to all models.
Mercedes and other manufacturers are now in a race to develop the first
commercial airbags to protect passengers in side collisions.
German manufacturers of executive cars, in particular, believe they must
broaden their market presence to survive - thus Audi is planning a new
'entry level' Audi, the 50, which will be little more expensive than a
well-equipped Golf. As well as the Mercedes small car, BMW has been
investigating the production of a 'city car', a concept for which, the Z13,
was shown at the Geneva motor show.
At the other extreme, Audi will take the industry into a new era of
technology from next year when it launches a new V8-engined flagship with
its main body structures made from aluminium, not steel.
The car will mark the first use of aluminium body assembly systems which, in
future, may lend themselves to high-volume production of lightweight,
energy-efficient and easily recyclable cars.
Old customer allegiances are fading; replaced by a greater willingness to
sample a variety of manufacturers' wares.
Audi is considering joining BMW and Mercedes in production on the American
continent although it may opt not to set up in the US but to extend its
existing assembly facilities in Mexico. Not to do so could leave Audi at a
significant disadvantage vis-a-vis other manufacturers, particularly
Japanese, who have already opted for sites within the North American Free
Trade Area (Nafta).
'To be successful in the world a company has to be successful in the US,'
declared Mr Eberhard von Kuenheim, chairman of BMW, when he broke ground
late last year for the company's new Dollars 400m plant in South Carolina.
Increased competition is not just coming from the Japanese, however. General
Motors, Ford and Chrysler have also begun to enjoy a product revival in the
executive and luxury sectors, while the UK's own competitive position is
being increased through the long-standing collaboration between Honda and
Rover bearing increasing fruit. This month, Rover unveiled its long-awaited
Rover 600 range, the Cowley-built version of Honda's Swindon-built Accord,
with which both are making a significant assault on the middle-range
executive car market.
The cars look different but have the same engines and gearboxes and mostly
shared components.
For Rover, they represent the biggest step yet in its drive to transform
itself into a producer of premium upmarket models capable of competing with
the likes of BMW and Audi and with a similar production level of about
500,000 units a year.
The benefits of the relationship with Honda go beyond technology and
resources. 'We have acquired an insight into Japanese best practice and
processes,' says Mr George Simpson, Rover's chairman, who maintains that it
opens the way to significant cost reductions in every area of the business.
In continental Europe, where Rover has started a dealership expansion
programme despite recession, the 600 is being promoted as a head-on rival to
BMW's 3-Series and Audi's 80 and Mercedes' 190 models.
A side-effect of the cold climate for the German industry is increasing
collaboration between its manufacturers.
For example, towards the end of this year Audi will launch an Audi-badged
sports model built in collaboration with Porsche, the deeply-troubled luxury
sports car maker. The deal, inspired by Mr Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen group
chief executive who is also a member of the family which controls Porsche,
is aimed at helping underpin loss-making Porsche's finances while giving
Audi an image lift.
Even Mercedes-Benz and BMW have been discussing possible collaboration on
parts manufacture, according to Mr Werner. Hitherto, each has remained among
the most determinedly independent and vertically integrated of all the
world's car companies.
Audi exemplifies some of the troubles of the German industry. It fell into
loss in this year's first quarter and slashed production by more than 40 per
cent in order to reduce its backlog of unsold vehicles. Total sales in the
period were down by about one third. Volkswagen, which includes also SEAT of
Spain and Skoda of Czechoslovakia, made a net loss of DM1.25bn (Pounds 515m)
in its most recent quarter.
However, with costs being cut extensively - about 12 per cent of the 37,000
workforce is expected to go by the end of this year - Mr Piech maintains
that Audi should be profitable for the year as a whole.
The effects of achieving this goal are likely to be felt throughout
Germany's extensive motor components supply industry. Suppliers are being
asked to cut their prices by 5 per cent on average this year, with cuts of
up to 10 per cent being required in some cases.
German suppliers, who contribute about 90 per cent of Audi's parts, do not
only face price cuts, however. They are also exposed to loss of business as
a matter of policy by Audi, which is embarking on a programme of global
component sourcing to help it escape German manufacturing costs.
Helping it along the way is the group's new purchasing director, Mr Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, former head of purchasing at General Motors, who
revolutionised GM Europe's supply chain to give it the most competitive
purchasing cost base of any European producer - and who was doing the same
thing for GM in North America when he was poached by VW after a bizarre
tug-of-war between the two big manufacturers.
But Audi's subdued outlook is of the kind that Porsche might envy. Riven by
management disputes last year which saw the departure of Mr Arno Bohn, chief
executive, Porsche plunged into a DM120m loss in the first half of its
financial year and has warned that sales and profits will be down
significantly for the full year ending July.
It is a measure of the extent of Porsche's decline that this year it expects
to produce only 15,000-17,000 cars, less than one third of its mid-1980s
levels. Mr Wendelin Wiedeking, appointed chief executive in September,
insists, however, that new models due to be launched over the next two years
will see demand for its products back up to 30,000-plus a year from 1996
onwards.
He also maintains that widely-expressed doubts about whether Porsche can
retain its independence are unjustified.
He has a point: Porsche is privately owned by two extremely wealthy
families, the Porsches and the Piechs, and the company was debt-free and
harbouring net cash of DM600m at last financial year's end. It can soldier
on for several more years yet, either to a new model-led revival or until
the families feel the competitive pressures are such that the game is no
longer worth the candle.
Not only the German industry is suffering. Saab, the Swedish car maker
jointly owned by Saab-Scania and General Motors, is receiving its second
capital injection in two years against a background of four years of
consecutive losses. Its fate will depend heavily on the successor to its 900
model, to be launched later this year. Saab-Scania has hinted that it will
be reluctant to provide further finance.
