FT  16 SEP 93 / Arts: Pianists play it out in Leeds
There has been torrential rain for the 30th anniversary of the great
triennial Leeds contest: or to give it its full title, The Harveys Leeds
International Pianoforte Competition. (Since the halfway mark, 1978, Harveys
of Bristol have been the principal sponsors.) Founded by Fanny Waterman -
who remains its Chairman - and Marion Thorpe, it has become one of the five
or six leading piano competitions in the world. Despite, it must be said,
having to hold its later rounds in one of the least suitable venues in the
country: for the live audience, the lofty vault of the Town Hall can turn
piano-sound into queasy mush.
Many of the 76 young contenders this year are prizewinners from other
contests. Their number has already been whittled down, to 25 after a first
round of 40-minute recitals ('The Jury reserves the right to stop a
performance at any time'); and then, after a second round of 55-minute ones,
to 12 semi-finalists. Most of the 15-strong jury are distinguished pianists
and/or teachers; inevitably some of the contestants, from 23 countries, are
or have been pupils of one or another of them, which must require a lot of
tact in the jury-room.
Among the semi-finalists heard so far in their 75-minute recitals have been
two Italians, of whom the bearded 24-year-old Filippo Gamba stood out. He
was strong and thoughtful, if not very warm, in Schumann's Humoreske, and
unfolded rich textures in two Debussy preludes. In Prokofiev's grandly
morose Sonata no. 8, however, he displayed mature power and insight of the
first order.
It was the hard luck of Luca Ballerini (28), a cool and careful pianist, to
have chosen that sonata for his own recital the previous day: a spidery
pencil-sketch, against Gamba's full oil-canvas. (They are both students of
Maria Tipo, who might have had a word with Ballerini some time ago: 'Luca,
you do realise that Filippo has chosen the Prokofiev for his programme too .
. . ?')
Another 28-year-old Tipo pupil, the Brazilian Ricardo Castro, was admirably
sound and cultivated in Schumann's Etudes symphoniques, in Debussy and in
Liszt's 'Dante' Sonata, his piece de resistance. Musically and technically
he was fully equal to that glorious showpiece, but I missed anything much
like magic in the actual sound: a 'Dante' that doesn't occasionally make
one's hair stand is only half a 'Dante'.
In his quirky way, Richard Ormrod (19) came closer to that kind of
inspiration in the 'other' Liszt sonata, the great B minor. There were some
odd tempi, and much heavy underlining where none was needed; his best
passages, however, struck persuasively to the heart of the music. So he did
too, sometimes, in the great Schubert B-flat, despite proceeding headlong
through it - not fast, but with hardly a pause for breath.
He and Leon McCawley (20) were the youngest semi-finalists, and the only
British ones. McCawley's deliciously sprightly, beautifully graded Haydn
sonata (H. XVI 50) was a winner, and the Beethoven C minor Variations
matched it. Schumann's gentle Waldszenen struck me as brittly over-pointed,
though interesting, and the strenuous Samuel Barber sonata brave but
lightweight. This is nonetheless a pianist with a gleaming future.
