FT  14 AUG 93 / Perils of being a good guy: Kohl's commitment to Europe is
not in doubt, but fears have arisen that German interests may come first
For years Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl has liked to quote Sir Winston
Churchill to describe his vision of a 'United States of Europe'.
In recent months, he has stopped doing so.
'I no longer use that expression,' he says, 'because too many people
misunderstand it. They think we are trying to build a single country like
the United States of America.'
Now he stresses the need for every member state of the European Community to
maintain its own identity under a 'common European roof'.
The question arises: is he watering down the whole content of European
union, or simply changing the terminology? And is he talking about identity
alone, or is he beginning to talk about a revival of national interests?
The latest crisis in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary
System certainly raised fears in other parts of the EC (notably France) that
a unified Germany would put its own interests above its European
commitments. And when Mr Kohl declared in a television interview this week
that EC economic and monetary union might be delayed 'by a year or two',
Euro-sceptics across the Community began to chant: 'We told you so.'
In Germany the response has been one more of sorrow than of anger to the
charges. Few have questioned the wisdom or justice of the Bundesbank in
maintaining its firm path of slow but steady interest rate reductions -
refusing to respond to the massive currency speculation. The man in the
street is content that his D-Mark remains strong, even if German exporters
are worried at the effects of revaluation on their competitiveness.
'The more or less explicit accusation is that Germany has put its national
interest before that of Europe,' according to Mr Rainer Nahrendorf, joint
editor of Handelsblatt, the business newspaper. 'That is a hard charge for
Germans to accept. They have always seen European union as the flip-side of
German unification.'
In spite of its huge net budget contributions to the EC, Germany has
received little back to help it with the costs of unification, he says. On
top of that, the Bundesbank paid out billions of D-Marks to support the
French franc in the latest currency crisis.
'That is why statements which suggest that Germany sought to destroy the EMS
are quite absurd.'
Nobody in Germany doubts that Mr Kohl himself remains passionately committed
to European integration - to a federal Europe in the decentralised, German
sense. A recent poll of top business managers and civil servants agreed that
his European ambitions were his highest priority - even above winning the
next elections in 1994, or successfully completing the unification of
Germany.
It is the presentation therefore, not the substance, which has been adapted
to a changing political reality. For Mr Kohl now knows that the events of
the past few years, with the end of the cold war, the fall of the Berlin
Wall and German unification, and the signing of the Maastricht treaty with
its commitment to a single European currency, have raised new doubts about
European union.
In Germany, a complex range of issues has coincided to complicate the
European equation, and call into question old certainties.
The popular doubts about Maastricht concern, above all, the creation of a
single European currency to replace the D-Mark. They also relate to new
priorities in the post-cold war world: to the economic challenge of
realising German unification without bankrupting western Germany, and the
strategic challenge of stabilising the upheaval in eastern Europe.
'The whole debate on Maastricht coincided with the fear that 'they want to
take our D-Mark away,' ' says Dr Angelika Volle, editor of the foreign
affairs magazine Europa Archiv. 'The D-Mark was the foremost link of German
unity: it was what the east Germans wanted, and what we gave them. The
suggestion that now it will be somehow watered down by the Greeks or the
Italians is met with a simple: no way.
'Immediately afterwards came the conflict within the EC over Yugoslavia:
suddenly we discovered that the others thought differently to ourselves.
'For years we believed that what was good for Europe was good for Germany.
That is no longer seen as necessarily true,' said Angelika Volle.
Hard on the heels of those inner-German doubts came the furious debates in
other member states of the EC. In France, Denmark and Britain, the 'German
bogey' became a big issue in the arguments for and against the Maastricht
treaty.
At the heart of the Danish doubts over Maastricht was a fear that Denmark
might be reduced to the status of 'another German land'. In France, the
anti-Maastricht campaigners feared German domination, and the pro-Maastricht
campaigners also used that fear to argue for the treaty to 'bind Germany
in'. Nobody argued that Germany was nice. As for Britain, anti-German
xenophobia was obvious in the highest levels of the Thatcher government
(spelled out in public by the late Lord Ridley, although it cost him his
job), and fuelled the whole anti-Maastricht debate.
'It all came together with Germany having its own identity crisis,' says Ms
Volle. 'It is no longer just western Europe that is our fate, but eastern
Europe too. We do know more about what is going on there, and we are more
concerned than our west European partners.'
Again and again, Germany urged its partners to get more involved in the
east, with aid and trade and technical assistance. 'They simply cannot see
the dangers as dramatically as we do,' according to a senior German
diplomat. 'They are not sitting on top of the cooker.'
German officials maintain that it is not they who are putting national
interests first. It is their partners, like Britain and France. They see a
revival of old balance-of-power calculations in the machinations of London
and Paris in the Balkans, where they are both tempted to back Serbia, to
counteract Bonn's sympathy for Croatia.
The economic recession does not help. 'At the moment it is the time of
national interests, because it is a time of recession,' says Ms Volle. 'The
Germans are behaving a bit like Mrs Thatcher with her handbag. We say we
have got a very good record on Europe. Now we really have a German interest:
to try and weld the two Germanys together. That is our top priority.'
The process of defining Germany's national interests is clearly beginning.
Professor Karl-Heinz Hornhues, deputy leader of the Christian Democratic
Union in the Bundestag, announced last weekend a meeting of the
parliamentary leadership, scheduled for the near future in Berlin, to
redefine the party's foreign policy.
'National interests must be more clearly articulated in government policy,'
he said. 'We must state more clearly what we aim at. Up to now, Germany has
always formulated its interests quietly and cautiously. Now it is time to
speak frankly about our foreign policy aims.'
It is not necessarily an easy process. At a recent meeting in the
chancellor's office, some of Germany's top foreign policy analysts were
asked to define what they understood by 'national interests'. One confessed:
'We have never asked ourselves that question before.'
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the foreign minister, has launched his own exercise to
sharpen the focus of foreign policy. The foreign policy institutes have been
invited to a meeting in Bonn in September, to be followed by a top-level
forum of his own Free Democrats. Mr Douglas Hurd, the British Foreign
Secretary, and Mr Alain Juppe, the French foreign minister, have agreed to
attend.
Although the exercise is under way to define national interests, no one
seriously doubts that a commitment to closer European integration, based on
the European Community, will remain at their heart.
Europe will be a central element in the chancellor's election campaign next
year,' according to one close observer. 'The theme has to be: 'Look what the
EC has brought us. Peace and stability. Now we have to move on from here,
and monetary union is an essential part of it.'
'It is imperative for the chancellor that the process does not lose impetus.
An outbreak of triumphalism by the anti-Maastricht faction would severely
damage his credibility.'
Some observers believe Mr Kohl must be leaving himself open to an overtly
nationalist campaign by the opposition Social Democrats - at least on
economic policy. Yet, so far, there is no sign of it. Mr Rudolf Scharping,
the new SPD leader, is a supporter of the Maastricht treaty.
I am very much in favour of the Maastricht treaty being carried out,' he
says. But he does openly question the timescale. 'No one in Europe should be
the slave of a fixed timetable,' he says.
Mr Edmund Stoiber, the new prime minister of Bavaria, a leading member of
the Christian Social Union in the ruling coalition, and one of the most
articulate conservative politicians in Germany, is also a clear supporter of
the direction of European integration.
'We no longer want Germany to be the odd one out in Europe,' he says. 'I do
not want nationalism to raise its head again. If I ask my daughters: 'Could
we have a war with England?', they laugh, and say: 'Don't be silly, daddy.'
Seventy years ago it looked quite different. That is a fantastic
achievement.'
Yet Mr Stoiber doubts the Maastricht timetable, too. 'We have a huge road to
travel to reach monetary union. We have much more to do than the creators of
Maastricht believe . . . I do not believe that monetary union will happen
this century.'
When Mr Kohl questioned the Maastricht timetable this week, he was - say his
officials - only doubting that a single currency would happen by 1997: he
still maintains it will come about by 1999. 'Nobody will shed any tears if
it does not happen in '97,' an official admitted.
So Mr Kohl stands firm on his course. Yet some foreign observers are
worried. 'My greatest concern is if Britain and France continue to doubt the
hand of European friendship which the chancellor is offering,' says one
diplomat in Bonn. 'Eventually the Germans will get fed up trying to be the
good guys.'
