FT  07 APR 93 / Business and the Environment: An unhealthy drink for a
nation - Leyla Boulton samples Russia's contaminated supplies / Worldwide
water
With three-fourths of its surface water unfit to drink, and a third of the
underground water supplies contaminated, water is a prime victim of decades
of abuse of Russia's environment. There is no shortage of horror stories
about what the leading western expert on ecology and health of the former
Soviet Union, Murray Feshbach, has termed 'water torture'. For example, Lake
Baikal, a natural wonder, is under threat from industrial plants set up
under the Soviet system of putting output targets before the quality of
life.
The latest horror to surface is described in an official report published
last week which says that the navy has for the past 30 years dumped
radioactive submarines and waste into Russia's northern seas - with untold
consequences for the ecosystem.
But today it is the more mundane problems of industrial pollution and ageing
water treatment systems that pose a direct threat to the health of Russians.
In Siberian oil fields, oil from leaky pipes is seeping into the ground and
rivers. The Kuzbass mining region is pouring coal-mining waste into the Tom
River, poisoning water for cities downstream.
In most Russian cities, sewage systems are decades old and are mended on a
haphazard basis. Poisons such as phenol, dioxins and DDT, strictly policed
in the west, are found in abundance in the rivers of the former Soviet
Union.
Economic and political crises are forcing important environmental and health
issues such as the state of the nation's water supplies to take a back seat.
Priorities such as economic reform, shoring up industrial output and paying
for grain imports mean there are simply neither the resources nor the
political will to clean up the country's water.
'When enterprises are being privatised and people are worrying about
production, they are not concerned about water treatment systems,' complains
Alexei Yablokov, a leading Russian environmentalist and adviser to President
Boris Yeltsin.
He notes that although air pollution fell by 12 to 15 per cent last year,
with a 20 per cent drop in industrial production, water pollution increased.
The country's first annual survey on health and the environment found that,
in 1991, a quarter of water pipes connected to Russian homes and a third of
those to institutions delivered water that were 'insufficiently cleaned'.
Yablokov says a direct consequence of poor water supplies is an increase in
intestinal illnesses. Even cholera has made a guest-appearance in recent
years. Victims of the last outbreak in 1990, in Stavropol and then Rostov in
southern Russia, drank river water without boiling it.
A federation treaty, sharing previously central government responsibility
for health and environment with local authorities, has yet to be
implemented. But no matter whose control they are under, tax revenues are
likely to be directed to more short-term problems in the future.
'This is not a federal problem,' says Yablokov. 'This is a regional problem
to which attention needs to be attracted . . . We need to introduce payment
for water and enforce payment for pollution.'
But there is no likelihood of authorities making people pay for clean water
in the near future. When market reforms have caused living standards to
plunge, most people cannot afford to pay more than the presently symbolic
water charges. Nor would the politicians try to make them do so.
The former Soviet Union already has a system of fines for pollution, but
many enterprises still find it more profitable to pay the fines than to
operate expensive filters and acquire clean technology.
Alain Dangeard, the former head of France's waste disposal agency and now an
international consultant on water and mining, says the west should be ready
for 'imaginative co-operation' with local authorities on overhauling water
and sewage systems.
'It is not just a question of money, but of technology transfers, and
institution-building. There is a need to multiply model successes of
co-operation to set an example,' he says. But an immediate priority is to
ensure that new industrial projects do not add to existing problems.
'One needs to clean up sources of pollution but one cannot clean up water
quickly. The main priority is that any new industrial contracts should
involve clean technology. Allowing new investment which pollutes would be
suicidal.'
Many of the problems are taking place outside Russia's borders, aggravated
by the break-up of the Soviet Union. Ten days ago the five Central Asian
states and Russia met to draw up a programme to join efforts in combatting
the Aral Sea disaster. The sea is drying up because it has been used to
irrigate the cotton monoculture imposed on Central Asia by Soviet industrial
planners. But Russia, having abandoned a Soviet-era project to divert
Siberian rivers towards Central Asia, is unlikely to put a nightmare which
is taking place beyond its borders near the top of its list of spending
priorities.
