FT  13 MAY 93 / Russians warned state funding will be tied to reform
STATE support in Russia will in future concentrate on those companies,
farms, and even regions which showed themselves willing and able to reform,
Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister, told parliament
yesterday.
This strategy of 'picking winners' would be combined with 'strengthened
state regulations' to aid reform, he said. The prime minister added,
however, that the government would not take 'the fatal step' of substituting
state action for market reforms.
Mr Chernomyrdin said the government would stop issuing general credits to
agriculture, and would instead support those farms which had proved
themselves best able to produce. It would back regions which had introduced
reform plans and which were willing to use their resources to further
reforms. It would also intervene more actively in the management of
companies which remained in state hands, identify those which would benefit
from investment, and create 'financial and industrial groups'.
He was careful to strike a note of optimism, saying that the 'people are now
slowly re-establishing their previous consumption levels'. He claimed that
inflation had fallen sharply in April, from a weekly rate of 6 per cent in
the first week to 2.5 per cent in the last - while the drop in output was
now levelling off.
'We have,' said Mr Chernomyrdin, 'a shaky balance. But we cannot take on
ourselves economic burdens which we cannot carry.' As evidence of the
latter, the prime minister referred to the difficulties in paying for what
he delicately called the 'April measures - promises made to increase pay and
benefits by President Boris Yeltsin in his referendum campaign.
Mr Chernomyrdin's ray of hope was further brightened by Mr Oleg Soskovets,
one of the two newly appointed first deputy prime ministers, who said
yesterday that a number of Russian companies could be made competitive on
the world market. He said that his Russian industry portfolio contained a
number of potentially world-class corporations and that attention would
focus on these as a means of reviving the economy.
