FT  15 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Pittencrieff launches bid for Aberdeen
Petroleum
PITTENCRIEFF, the acquisitive Edinburgh-based oil and gas group, has
launched a conditional Pounds 7.5m all-paper offer for Aberdeen Petroleum
which is itself embroiled in a hostile takeover bid for fellow energy
explorer, Brabant Resources.
The company said its offer is conditional upon Aberdeen's bid for Brabant
not succeeding.
Under the terms of the bid Pittencrieff would swap two of its shares for
every 49 Aberdeen shares. Pittencrieff's stock closed at 356p on Friday and
the company claimed its offer values Aberdeen's shares at just over 14 1/2 p
each. Aberdeen's stock was unchanged at 15 3/4 p ahead of the announcement.
Pittencrieff said it was making the offer in order to further expand its oil
and gas development and production activities in the US and Canada where
Aberdeen's assets are mostly sited.
The bid was immediately rejected as 'totally inadequate' by Aberdeen, which
successfully fought off a takeover bid worth Pounds 5.5m from US rival
Bellwether Exploration in January before launching its own hostile all-paper
bid for Brabant last month.
Aberdeen claimed that the Pittencrieff bid represents a 47 per cent discount
to its net assets, and that its combined reserves with Brabant would be 2.5
times those of Pittencrieff. Mr David Hooker, Aberdeen's managing director
said: 'We remain convinced that the oil and gas sector should be
consolidated in order to add value for shareholders. However, Pittencrieff's
current offer completely fails to realise the full value of Aberdeen's
assets.'
Pittencrieff's move had been widely expected since the company acquired a
16.6 per cent equity stake in Aberdeen at the end of January - a stake which
has since grown to 19.1 per cent. The market has been expecting a
rationalisation of the smaller UK oil 'minnows'.
In support of its bid Pittencrieff claimed that its offer represented a 73
per cent premium over Aberdeen's closing price on January 8, the day before
Bellwether announced its abortive bid.
