FT  07 JUN 93 / Survey of Uruguay (1): Reforming the welfare state -
Uruguay's quality of life is close to the levels of some western European
countries.  Uruguay also has the oldest welfare state in the world - a heavy
burden on the economy. But how long can it be sustained?
URUGUAYANS have long enjoyed a higher quality of life than the rest of Latin
America. According to the United Nations Development Programme, they still
do.
The programme's Human Development Index - which brings together of economic
and social indicators such as life expectancy, adult literacy and income -
rates Uruguay's quality of life higher than any other Latin American country
and close to the levels of some western European countries.
Not surprisingly, Uruguayans are keen to preserve this. They see as the key
to their living standards the privileges they enjoy under their welfare
state - the oldest in the world, dating back to 1903 and the administration
of President Jose Batlle y Ordonez.
As a result, they have proved deeply resistant to the forces of economic
reform and modernisation which have swept the rest of Latin America.
Uruguayans' deeply embedded conservatism has conspired against change.
Attempts to join the regional reform movement by the government of President
Luis Alberto Lacalle, which took office in March 1990, have, by and large,
failed.
Yet the current social welfare system represents an increasingly heavy
burden on the state which sooner or later will become unsustainable. The
question is not whether the welfare state can survive in its current form,
but when and how will it be changed.
The central problem is the high ratio of those who depend on or work for the
state compared with the rest of the active population.
The country has a workforce of about 1.1m, of which about 270,000 work for
the state, including 60,000 who work for state enterprises. A further
450,000 people are drawing an estimated 600,000 pensions.
'We have a ratio of passive to active population of 1.4 or 1.5. No social
security system in the world can work on a ratio of below three,' says Mr
Ignacio de Posadas, Uruguay's minister of finance.
The pension fund is bankrupt and relies on continual injections from the
treasury. The civil service and state companies are overstaffed, suffer low
productivity and are in general poorly managed.
Mr Michele Santo, a columnist for the weekly Busqueda newspaper, says that
80,000 of the 270,000 public employees are surplus to requirements  - this
is a hidden unemployment subsidy which has led to the 'hypocrisy that they
pretend to work and we pretend to pay them'.
But, although politicians from all parts of the political spectrum admit
that the reform of the state and the welfare system are serious problems
which will have to be confronted, they prefer that they should be confronted
in the future.
Efforts to reform the pensions system are foundering in the face of
determined opposition by pensioners, who in Uruguay are highly organised.
But the inability to move ahead with reform is not only a result of grey
power, but also of a deeply factionalised political system that makes strong
policy action difficult.
This vicious factionalism - President Lacalle's Partido Nacional is split
into four factions which are as often as hostile to each other as to
opposing parties - is in part a result of an electoral system which combines
primary and presidential elections.
The Partido Nacional won less than 50 per cent of the vote in the November
1989 election and the Herreristas (the faction supporting Mr Lacalle) got
half his party's vote. The result was that Mr Lacalle - the second civilian
president after 12 years of military rule which ended in 1985 - was elected
by 22 per cent of the population. Mr Lacalle has therefore been unable to
count on a solid majority in Congress. Only the 24 Herreristas and a handful
of deputies from another faction support him.
ALTHOUGH Mr Lacalle managed to squeeze through Congress a proposal aimed at
a modest privatisation of some state enterprises, including selling a stake
in the telephone monoply, he suffered a crushing defeat in a privatisation
referendum in December.
The December referendum - plebiscites are another feature of Uruguay's
political system which makes decisive policy action difficult (only 10,000
signatures are needed to call one) - damaged Mr Lacalle's standing, possibly
irreversibly. His popularity is also low - his approval rating in some cases
has fallen to 20 oer cents.
Mr Lacalle's critics say he lacks the political skills to negotiate and has
needlessly alienated Congress. His opponents, led by former president Mr
Mario Sanguinetti, have withdrawn support for measures they would probably
have to adopt if in office.
The government has been described as a lame duck, although elections are
only due in November 1994 and Mr Lacalle hands over power in March 1995.
Mr Lacalle says: 'We still have executive power and we do what we can. For
example we were able to renegotiate the external debt. As soon as it
requires a change in the law, then it is more difficult.'
Mr Carlos Cat, the planning and budget minister and president of the Blanco
party committee, comments: 'We failed by not getting important structural
reforms that were fundamental to modernise the country, stabilise the
economy and get reasonable inflation.'
Unlike Argentina, the Uruguayan head of state can do little by decree - 'we
have to do it all by law,' says Mr Cat.
He is deeply frustrated by the silliness of Congress: he recalls that a
government plan to close a finance ministry office and sending its 200-plus
employees home on full pay was vetoed in congress, which ordered the
goverment to reinstate the bureacrats.
A former cabinet minister argues that, slowly but surely, economic reality
is pressing in on Uruguay.
He adds that the economy's performance is sound: although still low, the
investment rate has increased 20 per cent a year every year. The growth in
employment (150,000 new jobs since 1983) has come exclusively from the
private sector.
He says Lacalle's opposition is acting tactically: it opposes his policies
virulently as a vote-catching gimmick, but shrinks from halting them - as
illustrated in the failure of the vote of censure last month against Mr de
Posadas.
In other words, the opposition wants President Lacalle to do the dirty work
 -'gradually people are recognising that things need to change, but the
people do not accept radical solutions.' A sign of changing attitudes is
that 'breadwinners no longer want to work in the public sector.'
An example of the convergence of political attitudes is Mr Tabare Vazquez,
the charismatic left wing mayor of Montevideo, elected in 1989 on the left
wing coalition ticket of Frente Amplio. Initially raising wages and
subsidising public transport, he is now adopting more conventional policies.
Mr Vazquez has ideas of political decentralisation and equity in social
policies that would fit into - for example - the mainstream of the British
Labour Party or even the Tories' wet fringe. He is likely to become the
Frente Amplio's candidate in next year's elections, although he denies he's
interested in the presidency. However, he is clearly moving to the right and
trying to broaden his appeal:
'I believe in a model state that gives the possibility of participation to
all, without distinction, including private investment and even foreign
investment and that the right to profit will condition that investment.'
The labour unions however remain a power in the land - a series of general
strikes against the government have not helped Mr Lacalle's popularity - and
are still dominated by largely unreconstructed leftists with few new ideas.
Mr Jose D'Elia, head of the PIT-CNT labour confederation, says President
Lacalle's policies are being 'dictated from the financial and political
centres of power,' threatening democracy and employment.
That does not mean change is not taking place. The Lacalle government has
taken the country into Mercosur, the southern cone customs union which also
groups Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay and is scheduled to come into force at
the start of 1995.
The country is less dependent on agriculture than it was half a century ago,
but it is still a trading nation. Trade accounts for nearly two-fifths of
gross domestic product, meaning it is remains highly susceptible to
protectionist policies in Europe and elsewhere and to low commodities
prices.
Despite the relatively high standard of living in Uruguay, the country's
20th century economic history has been one of gentle decline. It remains
apart from most of the rest of Latin America. Its problems of an ageing
population are more akin to those of Europe or Japan than most of the
countries around it.
