FT  28 JUL 93 / A close nuclear family: West must extend security or expect
proliferation
'I suppose,' wrote the Queen to Harold Macmillan on his retirement in
October 1963, 'that the success which may give you the greatest satisfaction
is the recent signature of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty for which you and
your colleagues have worked so long and so patiently and which has given new
hope to people all over the world.' Next week sees the 30th anniversary of
that treaty, which put an end to tests in the atmosphere by the three
leading nuclear powers - the US, UK and Soviet Union.
Macmillan had indeed 'passionately fought' for a test ban, as the late Lord
Zuckerman, then chief scientific adviser at the UK defence ministry,
testified in an article published shortly before his death - in Nature on
February 4. But the ultimate bargain was struck between the two superpowers
and fell well short of what Macmillan had wanted - 'the discontinuance of
all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time'. Those words were left
in the preamble of the treaty, expressing a long-term objective. That is why
it is called the 'partial' test ban treaty (PTBT), as opposed to the holy
grail of a 'comprehensive' one (CTBT), for which the quest continues.
It continues more hopefully of late, particularly since last October when
Congress forced then-President George Bush to sign an act imposing a
moratorium on US nuclear tests until mid-1993 and ending them completely by
September 1996. On July 3 his successor, Bill Clinton, extended the
moratorium until September 1994 'as long as no other nation tests', and
called on 'the other nuclear powers to do the same'. Russia, and more
surprisingly France, promised to do so and declared their support for a
CTBT, 'on condition (in France's case) that it is universal and verifiable'.
Britain has no choice in the matter, since it uses US testing facilities and
has none of its own. But sadly (or at least it would have saddened
Macmillan) British representatives were prominent among those lobbying in
Washington for continued testing in the run-up to the July 3 announcement.
Mr Clinton's decision, soon to be complemented by the appointment of an
ambassador to revive the CTBT negotiations, is part of his strategy for
containing nuclear proliferation. In 1990 the review conference on the 1968
Nuclear Proliferation Treaty (NPT) broke up without agreement because the
non-nuclear states, led by Mexico, insisted on a CTBT as the yardstick for
nuclear states' sincerity in pursuing disarmament. At the next conference,
in 1995, the stakes will be higher because it has to decide whether to
extend the treaty indefinitely or for a fixed period.
Also, with the break-up of the Soviet Union, proliferation has become an
even more complex and worrying issue. The western powers have tried to deal
with it by recognising only Russia as a successor to the Soviet Union's
nuclear power status. Both the strategic arms reduction treaties (Start I
and Start II) are based on that assumption.
Other ex-Soviet republics were not involved in those negotiations, but last
year the three that have strategic weapons on their territory - Belarus,
Kazakhstan and Ukraine - were bullied or cajoled into signing an agreement
(the Lisbon protocol) which provides for those weapons to be dismantled or
transferred to Russian territory and for the republics concerned to join the
NPT as non-nuclear states.
Belarus is implementing that agreement, but Ukraine has been dragging its
feet and seems less and less inclined to do so, while Kazakhstan is biding
its time. Kazakhstan has the main ex-Soviet nuclear test sites, but both
they and the weapons themselves are mainly controlled and administered by
ethnic Russians. This is not the case with Ukraine, which increasingly sees
itself as under threat from Russia. Only this month, for instance, the
Russian parliament laid claim to Sebastopol, a Black Sea port in Ukraine.
Not surprisingly, Ukrainian leaders - especially, perhaps, prime minister
Leonid Kuchma, whose previous career was spent manufacturing nuclear
missiles - believe they can obtain operational control of the strategic
weapons on their territory without too much difficulty. They are
increasingly tempted to regard them as the ultimate deterrent against
Russian aggression.
British and French leaders, who for years have proclaimed the vital
importance for their national security of an independent nuclear deterrent,
though living at the opposite end of Europe from Russia and enjoying the
security of Nato, are hardly well placed to dissuade Ukraine from adopting a
similar doctrine.
In the latest issue of Foreign Affairs, the house magazine of the US foreign
policy establishment, the Chicago political scientist John J Mearsheimer -
well-known exponent of the cold-blooded 'realist' view of international
relations - argues that a Ukrainian nuclear deterrent would be good for both
Ukrainian and broader European security. The opposite case - that a nuclear
Ukraine would be bankrupt, isolated and vulnerable to a pre-emptive strike -
is put by Steven E Miller of Harvard. To my mind it is the more persuasive,
but I am not the one that needs persuading.
Ukrainians will not be impressed by fine words from western powers which
have failed to come to the aid of Bosnia. Probably little short of an offer
of full Nato membership would sway Ukraine now. That suggestion would be
instantly rejected in all western capitals as destabilising and provocative.
But it is time we decided which is more destabilising and, long term, more
dangerous: to extend the western collective security system eastwards, or to
wait for proliferation to spread eastern insecurity westwards.
