FT  27 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Principled taxation
In March of this year, in what turned out to be his last Budget, Norman
Lamont surreptitiously introduced a significant change in the tax treatment
of pension funds. This is not how the change was presented. It was presented
as a change in the treatment of advance corporation tax that would, as luck
would have it, raise Pounds 900m in 1995-96. Without warning, the chancellor
chose to undermine long-standing assumptions about the tax treatment of
pensions. He did so because he thought a raid on pension funds would attract
minimal obloquy. Alas, he was right.
This decision may not have been the most important in the Budget. But it was
particularly revealing. Mr Lamont decided to lower the rate of advance
corporation tax, which is advance income tax on dividend income, to 20 per
cent, while lowering the rate of tax credit to the same level.
For most ordinary shareholders the change was neutral. It was not, however,
for tax-exempt shareholders, such as pension funds. The sudden increase in
the gap between the rate of corporation tax, on the one hand, and the rate
of ACT, on the other, has made them significantly worse off. To cut a long
and complex story short, the government had decided to raid pension fund
surpluses to fill part of the yawning fiscal gap.
What, apart from the technical obscurity of the measure, was so wrong with
that? One thing wrong with it is precisely the technicality of the change.
That obscurity is what made it possible to present a plan whose effect was
to raise almost Pounds 1bn from companies, via their pension funds, as a way
of providing companies with 'cash flow benefits of about Pounds 2bn over the
next two years'.
Fiscal pickle
How clever] But how deceitful] The chancellor could, instead, have admitted
that the fiscal pickle into which profligacy and an incorrectly forecast
recession had led the government meant greater taxation of pension funds. He
did not. His failure to do so, while no more than could be expected, was
unprincipled in two significant respects.
The first concerns the proper treatment of income and expenditure. In 1984,
the then-chancellor, Nigel Lawson, indicated a desire to reinforce the
system of income taxation. The notion was mistaken, but it was at least
coherent. Subsequently, however, changes were made in the direction of
taxation of expenditure. The case for expenditure taxation is strong in
itself. While the government never articulated its view of the matter, it
looked as though this was also the direc-tion in which it intended to go.
That is no longer true. The sudden change last March in the tax treatment of
the most important financial assets held, albeit indirectly, by the UK
personal sector has thrown everything into the air. This matters. It matters
partly because the tax treatment of savings is among the most important
single features of any fiscal system. It matters also because at the end of
1992 the gross value of UK pension funds was close to Pounds 400bn, and
represented 29 per cent of the gross and 43 per cent of the net financial
assets of the personal sector.
Political convenience
The second concern is still more fundamental. People have to plan their
lives on assumptions about how their savings will be allowed to accumulate.
In precisely the same way, they need to know what services and benefits the
state will provide. This is why continuity of approach and clarity of
principle are so important, points that should be obvious to Conservatives.
When the state spends 46 per cent of gross national income and raises 37 per
cent of it in taxation, it must do more than tack and trim, as the winds of
political convenience suggest. How can citizens hope to make sensible plans
of their own if the government is either unwilling or unable to clarify its
own?
When chancellor, Lord Lawson showed he understood the need. In his Budget
statement of 1985, for example, he argued there was 'a case for changing the
tax treatment of pension funds, as part of thorough-going reform of the tax
treatment of personal savings generally. Any fundamental reform of this kind
would . . . need to be preceded by the publication of a Green Paper.' The UK
is still waiting for that paper.
The fiscal treatment of savings is important in itself. But the
inconsistencies in its current treatment are also an indication of what is
wrong with British government. What is needed is a stable and transparent
fiscal system, based on clear and defensible principles. In recent years,
the UK appears to have been moving further away from that objective. The
sudden introduction of a third rate of income tax when Lord Lawson had
reduced the number to two is another egregious example.
The unified Budget has offered an opportunity to do better. Up to now
nothing suggests it is being seized. Tuesday will reveal once and for all
how far Mr Clarke, too, is addicted to clever wheezes. The omens are
inauspicious. If they prove correct, this failing may matter far more than
any, inevitably uncertain, 'Budget judgment' he may have reached.
