FT  20 OCT 93 / Rice offer splits Japan's people and politics: Tokyo
politicians are beginning to face up to the inevitable
JAPANESE rice farmers took to the streets of Tokyo last week in protest at
the government's offer in Gatt negotiations to phase out the country's ban
on rice imports.
Japan, seeking to avoid being blamed for delaying the Uruguay Round world
trade talks, said informally it would open its rice market after a six-year
moratorium.
But while many farmers are angered by the government's move, most are aware
that an eventual opening of the Japanese rice market is would be inevitable.
Only last year, the then prime minister Mr Kiichi Miyazawa called for
'flexibility' on the rice issue, while members of his cabinet moved to build
public opinion for the opening of the rice market.
The government started to prepare a package to liberalise the rice market
following rising prospects of an early agreement of the Uruguay Round.
However, Mr Miyazawa managed to escape making the big decision to open the
market, as the government shelved plans to lift the import ban earlier this
year after the US and EC failed to agree on farm subsidies.
The prime minister, Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, and his cabinet are making the
ritual protests against rice liberalisation.
However, before becoming prime minister, Mr Hosokawa was in favour of an
open rice market. Furthermore, he is supported by the back room power
broker, Mr Ichiro Ozawa of the Japan Renewal Party, and the posts of
agriculture minister, foreign minister, and minister of international trade,
are all held by leading JRP members.
Japan's controversial offer, leaked to the press last week, includes a
six-year grace period of tariffication on rice, during which it will accept
imports equal to three to five per cent of domestic rice consumption. US
officials point out that while it remains to be seen if other countries will
accept the plan, Japan's move was a 'big step forward'.
But even if other Gatt members accept Japan's plan, Mr Hosokawa will need to
convince coalition members which staunchly oppose rice imports.
The socialists, who rely on the rural vote, have generally opposed lifting
the import ban. Some are threatening to leave the coalition if the ban is
lifted.
The Liberal Democratic Party, strong in rural constituencies, also oppose
liberalisation. The LDP, however, risks being split over the rice issue,
since some LDP members, including young urban MPs, support liberalisation.
In order to avoid a rift within the coalition disrupting the debate over
political reform, the coalition is considering a parliamentary vote over
rice imports. In 1988, parliament unanimously voted against opening the rice
market.
But having lost its support base due to its failure to change its image from
the rigid left, the socialist party does not seem to have much choice than
to eventually side with Mr Hosokawa. Many of the younger members feel the
party will not have much to gain by leaving the coalition government, and
are calling for the party to accept liberalisation.
Mr Jeff Young, political analyst at brokers Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, says:
'The only chance for the socialists' survival is to cling to the coalition'.
There is a high possibility they will opt for concessions likely to be
offered by Mr Hosokawa, such as income support for farmers, instead of
abandoning the coalition.
Mr Hosokawa is also trying to weaken the strong rice lobby by electoral
reform, which will ease the disparity between the rural and urban vote. By
redefining the constituencies, he wants to weaken the clout of the rural
vote, which can be worth up to three urban votes.
It is likely that Japan will officially make its offer after the EC and US
settle their disagreement over agricultural trade, thus placing Japan at the
centre of the negotiations and allowing the government to say it has
defended farmers' interests in the face of international pressure.
