FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (10): Deficit through the decade -
Stephen Fidler checks the country's current account
ARGENTINA ran a trade deficit last year for the first time since 1981, the
year before the start of Latin America's debt crisis. Even using the
government's own - perhaps optimistic - estimates, the country will be
running a deficit in trade of goods and services until 1998 and will not
again achieve a surplus on the current account of the balance of payments
until 2000.
Forecasts by both government and private sector analysts suggest the current
account deficit should fall slightly this year. If that happens it will be
to the relief of those in the international financial markets worried less
by the absolute size of the deficit than by its rate of growth.
The government's own estimates of the current account deficit are usually
significantly lower than private sector estimates because of differences in
the treatment of earnings on assets held by Argentines outside the country.
Private sector estimates usually put the 1992 deficit between Dollars 8bn
and Dollars 8.7bn - less than 4 per cent of gross domestic product - against
under Dollars 3bn in 1991. The government's own figure suggest a shortfall
of Dollars 6.2bn.
Despite an exchange rate fixed against the dollar since April 1991, exports
have remained steady at just over Dollars 12bn. On the other hand, imports
have surged - encouraged by the strong exchange rate and Argentina's
unilateral lowering of tariffs that have kept the prices of imports down.
After a decade of recession too, there was significant pent-up demand, and
imports more than trebled in three years from Dollars 4.1bn in 1990 to
Dollars 15.1bn in 1992.
A breakdown of the import figures suggests sharp growth not only in consumer
goods, but also in intermediate goods to provide raw materials for booming
sectors of Argentine industry and in capital goods. According to Ministry of
Economy figures, imports of capital goods rose to Dollars 5.6bn last year,
38 per cent of all imports, compared with Dollars 1.3bn and 32 per cent in
1990.
If that is encouraging, there is no hiding the pain being caused by
government policy in some sectors of the economy. Paper, petrochemicals and
textiles and some parts of the steel and farming industry have been hit hard
by the opening of the economy to international competition.
From the Argentine perspective, one of the villains of the piece has been
neighbouring Brazil. Although imports from the US jumped to Dollars 3bn last
year from Dollars 1.1bn in 1990, Argentines are more concerned about the
flood of Brazilian goods into the country. Imports from Brazil last year
totalled about Dollars 3.3bn compared with Dollars 718m in 1990.
The problem is seen in part as a consequence of Brazil's recession. In a bid
to keep up production levels, Brazilian industry is pushing aggressively
priced goods into Argentina.
But it is also a consequence of the two governments pursuing diametrically
opposed exchange rate policies. While Brazil is keeping its exchange rate
highly competitive to keep exports up, Argentina's fixing of its nominal
exchange rate to the dollar makes for a high real exchange rate.
In an attempt to slow the growth in imports Argentina raised last October
its so-called statistics tax on imports from 3 to 10 per cent. The move took
place in the absence of a developed system of anti-dumping regulations but
was viewed as protectionist and probably against the rules of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The tax was subsequently lifted on about 60 products imported from Paraguay,
Argentina's partner along with Brazil and Uruguay in the proposed Mercosur
common market. And on May 1 it was removed from imports of capital goods.
(Capital goods manufacturers were also given a 15 per cent rebate on their
sales.)
The problem of import surges may be ameliorated if Brazil, as most forecasts
suggest, resumes growth this year. Nonetheless, Brazilian economic
instability seems set to remain of concern to the Argentine government.
Argentine officials privately do not see much economic progress in Brazil
until after a new administration takes office in January 1995. At the start
of that month Mercosur's internal tariffs will have fallen to zero and a
common external tariff is scheduled to be in place.
Mr Guido di Tella, Argentina's foreign minister, says it is now clear that
the common external tariff will not apply to all goods, but instead to
between 70 and 80 per cent of imports. This is because Brazil has shown
itself unwilling to lower its higher tariffs on computers and capital
equipment imports to the likely common tariff level of a maximum 20 per
cent.
'There is a problem but not a tragic one. It is anyway to our advantage:
they will be less competitive because their industry will have to buy more
expensive computers and capital equipment,' says Mr di Tella.
It is early days to talk of expanding Mercosur although Bolivia - itself a
member of the Andean Pact trade grouping - has expressed an interest. Chile
is thought to be awaiting, first, some stability in the Brazilian economy
and, second, the certainty that the next government in Argentina remains
faithful to the cause of regional integration.
The other big trade integration issue for Argentina is the North American
Free Trade Agreement, awaiting ratification this year by the legislatures of
Mexico, Canada and the US. Clinton administration officials have spoken of
extending the pact to Chile, Venezuela and Argentina. Yet Argentina is
committed to talk to the US with its Mercosur partners; and Brazil is likely
to remain a restraining influence on the extension of Mercosur for some time
to come. The question may therefore arise of where Argentina sees its
priorities. That, however, is a question for the future, if it is a question
at all.
'The US proposal to incorporate Chile, Venezuela and Argentina into a free
trade zone is one thing and Mercosur another,' said President Carlos Menem.
'Nonetheless, to the extent that we advance in the process of integration,
it is possible that in the not too distant future it will be possible to
incorporate all four countries of Mercosur into a free trade zone.'
