FT  07 MAY 93 / Technology: Printers' colourful future
The black-only computer printer is going to fade into obscurity, in common
with the black-and-white television set, according to market data gathered
by Hewlett-Packard, the leading manufacturer of laser and ink-jet printers.
Until recently, most computer users regarded colour printers as an expensive
luxury that they were hard pressed to justify. A serious drawback was that
most colour printers could not produce high-quality black print.
That is changing rapidly, however, with the advent of low-cost colour
printers that offer the same print quality and speed as their black
predecessors.
Colour printing provides a means of producing documents on plain paper that
include, for example, a company's logo. It is also increasingly used as a
means of highlighting text or printing out paper copies of colour slides.
Colour printers represented about 11 per cent of the total 21 million
computer printers sold last year worldwide, up from slightly more than five
per cent in 1991.
The fastest growing segment of the printer market is personal computer
colour ink-jet printers, with sales of 1.2m units last year, up 235 per cent
from 1991.
By 1997, HP, which dominates this segment, predicts that black printers will
account for only about 12 per cent of its ink-jet printer business, compared
with about 64 per cent today.
The market is being driven, HP says, by the appeal of colour printing at
only a modest premium over conventional black printers.
The latest addition to HP's range is a colour office printer. The 1200C,
available initially in Europe, produces colour printed pages at a rage of
seven per minute. It is priced at Dollars 1,389 (Pounds 926).
A version incorporating the Postscript print language is available for
Dollars 1,939.
In an unusual move for the US-based company, HP has launched its new printer
in Europe first, where it sees stronger demand for colour printers than in
the US.
Other companies that have introduced colour printers this year include Apple
Computer, Seiko, Laser Master and Nikon.
