FT  05 FEB 93 / Yeltsin accuses central bank of adventurism
RUSSIAN President Boris Yeltsin yesterday assailed his central bank chairman
and economics minister, accusing them of pursuing reckless policies. Mr
Boris Fyodorov, the deputy prime minister and new financial overlord, joined
the attack with a warning that the country was 'at the gates of
hyperinflation'.
Mr Fyodorov is planning a public showdown if he fails to obtain the
agreement of Mr Viktor Gerashchenko, the central bank chairman, on a tough
stabilisation policy to stave off hyperinflation. Accusing his predecessor,
Mr Yegor Gaidar, of not having a financial policy, he is also trying to get
the government to focus on reining in spending and restructuring the
economy.
In an apparent show of support for his deputy prime minister, Mr Yeltsin
accused the central bank of 'a most crude mistake, adventurism' in issuing
Rbs3 trillion in cheap credit to state-owned enterprises.
'The consequences of this financial injection will be felt through the
currency year,' he was quoted as saying.
After a stormy cabinet meeting at which Mr Yeltsin accused Mr Andrei
Nechayev, the economics minister, of doing nothing about industrial
restructuring, the minister promised the government would now take tough
action on all fronts.
'We understand the situation better. The lessons (of the past year) have not
been lost on us,' Mr Nechayev said, stating that many of the Gaidar
government's radical policies had only been 'words' or had been buried by
subsequent compromises. He also said people now 'understood that inflation
can be really dangerous. It's like radiation, its's not immediately visible
but extremely destructive'.
With inflation at 30 per cent in January (compared to the 50 per cent
monthly benchmark for hyperinflation), he said the government also had to
'restrain itself' and take the blame for at least Rbs1 trillion in credits
issued to agriculture.
Pending implementation of a bankruptcy law, the government would also
publish embarrassing studies of 'potentially bankrupt' enterprises as a
warning to others. He said that the most spheres most vulnerable to closure
or reorganisation were the coal industry, agriculture, and machine-building,
which he described as 'uncompetitive'.
To increase government revenues and preserve the country's economic
integrity, he said the government would be reviewing special tax and other
benefits given to individual regions and enterprises.
