FT  19 OCT 93 / Technology: Long on vision, short on substance - Technically
Speaking
THE Japan Electronics Show, which has just taken place in the appropriately
futuristic surroundings of Makuhari Messe, the exhibition centre on the
outskirts of Tokyo, should have been a perfect occasion for Japan's consumer
electronics makers to let the world know that despite taking a beating for
the past three and a half years, they are back on their feet.
Instead, the show seemed to confirm suspicions that the industry is still
some way away from living up to its vision of a grand new world of
electronics that would add an extra dimension to the role these gadgets play
in our everyday lives.
It is true that Sony was there with its flashy new MiniDisc players in all
shapes and sizes, competing for attention with various models of digital
compact cassette player.
Matsushita proudly displayed a TV set that is much thinner than conventional
sets, while Pioneer sought to take karaoke entertainment to new heights.
But when it came to bright ideas for innovative uses of electronics, the
show was long on vision but still somewhat short on substance.
Take three-dimensional displays, for example - one of the features of the
show which attracted long queues. Sanyo and Toshiba both displayed
three-dimensional, high-definition projection systems.
The attraction of three-dimensional film should be irresistible, given that
the industry has tried to develop this since the 1950s.
Technically, even the Sanyo system, which requires special glasses, provides
fairly impressive three-dimensional video. Sanyo has also developed a system
with NHK, the public broadcasting corporation, which does not require
glasses, although it would require special broadcasts.
Sanyo says its system still needs work, but it would like to develop a
system for home entertainment. Toshiba explains that as soon as 2000, TV
viewers could be watching three-dimensional programmes either in packaged
form or on one of the substantial number of satellite channels that are
expected to be operating by then.
The question is, given the failure of high-definition TV to take off in its
current form, is there room, even 10 years from now, for another
entertainment format that would require special programmes to be produced
for broadcasts or video?
Another promising highlight of the show was digital video, which takes
visual media into the digital age. Here, the immediate benefits are more
obvious, in that digital video will allow films and entertainment footage to
be recorded on an easy-to-use compact disc that allows random access. But
again, video disc requires the creation of a new library of entertainment
software which competes with the countless video footage that already
exists, not only in the studios but in video rental shops worldwide.
The Electronics Show was also an occasion for companies to exhibit their
personal computing and communicating tools, from Sharp's Expert Pad Personal
Digital Assistant, which was co-developed with Apple Computer, to Toshiba's
Personal Information Tool, XTEND.
As far as these much-heralded personal devices go, the technology has some
way to develop. Neither Sharp's nor Toshiba's handy gadgets on display were
very good at recognising handwriting. Unless these tools can do more than
replace a personal organiser, it would be hard to justify the considerable
trouble of learning how to use them.
The Electronics Show left the impression of an industry with bright ideas
but still needing to do a lot of work in making those ideas a reality for
the consumer.
Without the right software available, not only to the technically attuned
but to the ordinary consumer, and without the necessary infrastructure in
place to deliver that software, it is difficult to escape an uneasy feeling
that the message has been left behind by the messenger.
