FT  19 JUN 93 / Miti reluctant to brake harder on car exports
JAPAN is prepared to talk to the European Community about the level of its
car exports to the EC, but has made clear it believes the deterioration in
the European market this year does not necessarily call for a cut in
Japanese exports.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry has drafted a letter to Mr
Martin Bangemann, EC industry commissioner, agreeing to discuss the Japanese
monitoring of car exports to the EC this year.
But the Japanese side signalled it was not yet prepared to lower the level
of car exports to the EC. Neither do Japanese authorities intend to change
the status of cars manufactured in the EC by Japanese vehicle makers.
Japanese officials accept that the European market situation has
deteriorated more than was expected when the 1993 export level was agreed in
March.
'But it is difficult to tell what will happen in the second half of the
year,' a Miti official said. 'If the situation is looked at objectively, it
may well be that the first half of 1993 was the bottom of the downturn and
that the market will pick up in the second half.'
There is strong opposition in the trade ministry and industry to recent
suggestions from EC car makers that cars manufactured at Japanese transplant
factories, which are not covered by the EC-Japan deal but are 'taken into
consideration' under it, should be included in the monitored figures.
'Cars manufactured locally by Japanese companies are EC cars,' the Miti
official said. 'It is absolutely clear that that was what was agreed in the
EC-Japan agreement on the monitoring of motor vehicle exports from Japan to
the EC.'
Earlier this month, Mr Bangemann wrote to Mr Yoshiro Mori, the trade and
industry minister, asking for urgent talks aimed at revising a deal reached
in April in which Japan agreed to reduce exports of cars and light
commercial vehicles by 9.4 per cent to roughly 113,000 vehicles.
The agreement in April was based on an EC forecast that car sales in the
Community would decline by 6.5 per cent this year. But new vehicle
registrations in the first four months of the year dropped by as much as
17.8 per cent and the industry estimates that the figure could be 15 per
cent for the year as a whole.
