FT  25 MAY 93 / Railway renews Germany's links to East Prussian past:
'Nostalgia' tours are set to revive sensitive ties to a former heartland
If it were not for the red ribbon across the railway line, and the bright
blue paint liberally splashed on the new steel sleepers, nobody need have
noticed the occasion.
A handful of speeches on the platform, a couple of anthems from the local
navy band, an inaudible press conference in the station waiting room, and it
was all over. The rest of Kaliningrad railway station was bustling with
Russian commuters going about their normal business.
And yet it was a sort of moment of history: when the ribbon was cut, it
meant the railway line from Kaliningrad, the former East Prussian capital of
Konigsberg, to Berlin, the German capital, was back in business for the
first time since the second world war.
The 'Konigsberg Express' will run once a week from Berlin's Hauptbahnhof,
through Poland, carrying German 'nostalgia-tourists' back to their former
home town, or the home of their ancestors. It is already listed in the new
German railway timetable.
The inauguration this weekend was a half-hearted affair. The main
dignitaries stayed away: there were no ministers of transport from Germany
or Russia, no chief executives of the railways.
The celebration was left to the German private sector, which launched the
initiative of rebuilding the 2km gap in the railway line where the Russians
tore it up in 1947; and to the local administration of Kaliningrad, which is
desperate to open links to the outside world. Moscow, Warsaw and the German
government in Bonn were represented by lowly transport officials.
The truth is that the subject of Germany's links to its former Prussian
heartland is acutely sensitive, and potentially embarrassing. The collapse
of the Soviet Union has left the entire Kaliningrad region in limbo, a no
man's land caught between its neighbouring states of Poland, Lithuania and
Belarus, with no direct links to Russia, and its only real historical ties
to Germany.
With 900,000 inhabitants, 400,000 of them in the city itself, the region is
little more than a glorified military garrison, the main base for the
Russian Baltic fleet, and a point of return for Russian troops based in
eastern Europe. Agriculture, which once supported vast estates of the
aristocratic Prussian Junker families, has been all but abandoned, and the
region has little to offer economically apart from a modest fishing industry
and an equally modest tourist potential.
Kaliningrad itself is a Soviet-style eyesore, with only a handful of ruins
to mark its history. About 40 per cent of the city was destroyed by British
bombers in 1944, and the rest was effectively levelled by Stalin's tanks and
subsequent town planning.
Pauline, one-time Intourist-trained guide retrained in devastating
frankness, admits that the city has been rebuilt in a style 'both primitive
and tasteless'. Her German tourists are horrified that all that is left are
the devastated ruins of the city cathedral, a hideous neo-classical tomb of
the philosopher, Immanuel Kant, and a couple of gates from the old city
walls.
The German government is sensitive about any sign that it might be
acquiescing in the 're-Germanisation' of what was Konigsberg. Mr Helmut
Schafer, the minister of state at the foreign ministry in Bonn, was supposed
to deliver a speech in the city last week. He sent his apologies, and a
diplomat read the text.
For Germany, he said: 'There is no question of this territory belonging to
the federal republic. The borders of united Germany are those of the
previous federal republic, and the GDR. Germany is making no territorial
claims of anyone.'
The problem is that behind Germany's back, and behind Russia's back, a
German-speaking population is returning. An estimated 10,000-15,000 Volga
Germans, deported from their homeland by Stalin, have settled in the
countryside around the city in the past four years.
So the Bonn government, with backing from Moscow, has opened a
'German-Russian house' to give them a meeting point. It plans to open a
consulate next year. But it is adamant that it has no ulterior motives.
Mr Yuri Matochkin, the head of the Kaliningrad regional administration, is
clearly hedging his bets. Asked which would be most important in the region
in 10 years' time, Moscow or Berlin, he would still opt for Moscow. Asked
which it might be in 20 years, he replied: 'I think you had better come back
and ask your question again then.'
