FT  19 FEB 93 / President's search for the perfect wave: Jurek Martin
examines Clinton's big political gamble
The most successful peacetime politicians catch the wave before it crests.
Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan managed it at the beginning of their
administrations, with very different policies at very different times. But
it was an instinct not possessed by Jimmy Carter, whose declaration in 1977
of the 'moral equivalent of war' on profligate energy use caught his nation
in a pacifist mode, and George Bush, who, lacking 'the vision thing', never
saw what swamped him.
Bill Clinton, just one month in office, thinks he has seen the wave forming.
Contrary to all the political evidence of the past 12 years, he is convinced
that Americans are ready to reverse the self-indulgence of the 1980s by
paying higher taxes in the greater cause of reducing the federal budget
deficit and the national debt. He is also offering short-term stimulus,
longer-term investment and bigger, if phased, cuts in spending than ever
proposed by Mr Bush. But the headlines yesterday are all about where the
average American's wallet is going to be hit.
It is a big gamble and a larger political presumption. Mr Bush lost last
November in good measure because he promised never to raise taxes and two
years later changed his mind. Across the country those politicians who have
trodden the same path have generally suffered.
In New Jersey, a good national microcosm, the Democrats lost control of the
legislature because of opposition to the tax increases advanced by Governor
Jim Florio. Even Senator Bill Bradley, the most popular politician in the
state, nearly lost to a nobody in 1990 because of his association with Mr
Florio. Out in California, where the tax revolt was born in the 1970s, Mr
Pete Wilson, the Republican governor and reasonable presidential aspirant,
has seen his stock plummet as a result of his determination to put the
state's fiscal house in order.
And yet last November, 62 per cent of the American public explicitly
rejected the policies advanced by President Bush, which were that there was
nothing chronically wrong with the nation that a naturally recovering
economy, still lower taxes and a few gimmicks such as a balanced budget
amendment could not cure.
In last year's campaign, Ross Perot, free of standard political constraints,
had no compunction in demanding sacrifices by all, including higher taxes
and more expensive energy. Mr Clinton, in pursuit of victory, may have
fudged on the tax front but he talked tough on the budget. Both put forward
cases for change on a serious scale.
Conventional political wisdom is that politicians rarely practise in office
what they preach in campaigns. Thus the dictum of Russell Long, the former
senator from Louisiana - 'don't tax you, don't tax me, tax that fellow,
behind the tree' - was for Washington a safe recourse. The reflex political
criticism is that Mr Clinton, in taking it out of 'you and me', has bought
himself big trouble.
But political reflexes, even from Republicans, may be questioned in this
strange era where public opinion is so influential but so subject to
persuasion and manipulation. Knowing this, and sensibly trying to co-opt Mr
Perot in advance, the Clinton team is giving his programme the hard sell in
every corner of the country.
Like any good populist pitch, this campaign will have its villains.
Borrowing again from Mr Reagan, who blamed his predecessor at every turn, Mr
Clinton will constantly disparage Mr Bush's 'failed' policies. He will copy
Mr Perot and portray a Washington stuffed with high-paid lobbyists, all
conspiring to preserve the status quo known as gridlock. He will
conveniently forget that some of the most effective of them represent
America's least affluent.
Just as 10 years ago Mr Reagan seduced the 'boll weevil' southern Democrats,
so Mr Clinton will target key Republicans, because, if he cannot hold all
his own party in line, he may need them. There are a fistful of senior
moderate senators - John Chafee, William Cohen, James Jeffords, John
Danforth, Nancy Kassebaum, Richard Lugar, even Robert Dole - who do not
necessarily dance to the music of Newt Gingrich, Jesse Helms and the rest of
the conservative band. These moderates prefer to influence policy rather
than denounce it and they just might cut some deals, especially on deficit
reduction.
But it will be hard. Neither Washington nor the country at large has yet
measured Mr Clinton's resolution. Some suspect he talks a better game - and
on Wednesday he was very fine - than he plays and can fold under pressure.
There are so many parts to his programme that he could well lose a couple of
battles early and suddenly lose control of the war. The reverse may also be
true. He is not only making waves, he may just have caught the big one.
