FT  17 NOV 93 / International Bonds: German states make most of buoyancy in
long DM sector
THREE German states jumped on the long-dated D-Mark Eurobond bandwagon
yesterday, encouraged by the successful launch of the Republic of Austria's
30-year Eurobond issue on Monday.
The state of Baden-Wurttemberg launched a DM750m 30-year Eurobond issue,
while the states of Hesse and Sachsen-Anhalt raised DM500m and DM600m
respectively through issues of 20-year Eurobonds, puttable at par after 10
years.
Hesse's bonds also featured a step-up coupon, which will rise from 6 per
cent to 6 7/8 per cent in years 11 to 20.
Syndicate managers said that, so far, long-dated D-Mark bonds were being
taken up quickly by investors. However, they warned that this evolving
sector of the Eurobond market could become saturated quickly due to the lack
of benchmark 30-year German government bonds.
'This market needs to be treated sensibly,' said one syndicate manager. In
general, the pricing of yesterday's long-dated D-Mark Eurobond offerings was
judged to be fair.
In the Eurodollar sector, Instituto Nacional de Industria (Ini), the Spanish
state industrial holding company, reaped the rewards of a thorough
international roadshow, to increase the size of its inaugural five-year
Eurobond issue from Dollars 500m to Dollars 650m.
The increase in Ini's offering surprised some syndicate managers, who were
under the impression the bonds were selling slowly. However, Mr Hector Lopez
Vilaseco, Ini's finance director, said the increase came in response to
strong investor demand.
He said about 30 per cent of the bonds were placed in eastern Asia, a
considerable achievement given that very few Spanish issuers had tapped that
region's large pool of investors in the past.
The rest of Ini's bonds were placed with European investors, in the UK and
Switzerland in particular.
Demand from investors was such that Ini's bonds were priced to yield 38
basis points over underlying US Treasuries, at the lower end of Ini's target
yield spread of 37 to 42 basis points.
This represented a yield differential of between five and 10 basis points
over outstanding dollar Eurobonds issued by the Kingdom of Spain. When Ini's
bonds were freed to trade, the spread remained intact.
Mr Lopez said about half of the proceeds of the issue would be swapped into
pesetas, and that the remainder would be swapped into several European
currencies, including Ecus.
National Power, the UK's largest electricity generator, made its first
appearance in the Eurodollar sector with a Dollars 300m issue of 10-year
Eurobonds. They were priced to yield 70 basis points over US Treasuries,
also at the lower end of the indicated range of 70 to 72 basis points.
