FT  01 SEP 93 / The Middle East: Hussein and Assad hide their misgivings
KING HUSSEIN of Jordan yesterday flew unexpectedly to Damascus for urgent
talks with President Hafez al-Assad, the Syrian leader, in the hope of
co-ordinating the two countries' response to the proposed Palestinian deal
with Israel - which took both leaders by surprise.
Neither Jordan nor Syria has yet ventured any formal reaction to the deal
apart, as one diplomat put it, for 'King Hussein's eloquent departure to
Damascus'. After yesterday's talks, a spokesman for President Assad would
say only that the leaders had been 'surprised' by the PLO-Israeli agreement,
and that there had been 'no co-ordination between the Arab parties'.
However, politicians and diplomats in Amman said that both leaders had been
displeased by the absence of consultation before the agreement, and that
King Hussein in particular feared that Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the
Palestinian Liberation Organisation, had conceded too much to Israel too
soon.
In Egypt, Mr Arafat denied there were any misgivings in Amman or Damascus
and said before talks yesterday with President Hosni Mubarak, the Egyptian
leader, that it was 'completely incorrect that they (Syria and Jordan) are
not happy with the accord'.
But senior Jordanian officials said that the king first heard of the deal
over the telephone and was angered that Mr Arafat should have reached in
secret an agreement which bears directly on Jordan's national interests. 'If
governments are not aware of what neighbours are doing, they are not going
to be happy,' said one prominent Jordanian. 'The lack of co-ordination has
left everyone with questions to ask, and answers to expect.'
Both Jordan and Syria are understood to feel that the separate Palestinian
agreement will place both countries under greater pressure from Israel to
conclude their own bilateral peace agreements with Tel Aviv, while
compromising elements of their bargaining positions. King Hussein is also
understood to be concerned that the agreement has failed to win sufficient
Israeli concessions on the questions of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories and on the status of Jerusalem - a city with deep significance
to the king's Hashemite monarchy.
Diplomats said King Hussein's talks in Damascus will have been aimed at
cementing a united response with Syria to the agreement. Both countries have
maintained they would not conclude separate peace deals with Israel without
the Palestinians having first won a satisfactory agreement of their own. The
king will now be anxious Jordan does not become exposed by any immediate
Syrian move to advance its own track of the Arab-Israeli negotiations on the
back of the PLO-Israeli deal.
Diplomats said neither country was likely to hurry declarations of
principles towards a full peace with Israel - the next stage in each
country's negotiations - without first fully digesting the detail of the new
agreement.
King Hussein in particular will also be anxious to gauge the degree of
opposition to the deal both within Jordan's majority Palestinian population
and in Jordan's teeming Palestinian camps.
However, Syrian negotiators in Washington said that progress in the
Palestinian talks with Israel would prompt progress in the Syrian-Israeli
track of the negotiations.
Mr Itamar Rabinovich, Israel's chief negotiator, also said he believed Syria
and Israel would agree on a declaration of principles 'during this round or
next' of the talks.
