FT  26 AUG 93 / Keidanren chief to head structural reform panel
MR MORIHIRO Hosokawa, Japan's new prime minister, yesterday appointed Mr
Gaishi Hiraiwa, chairman of the Keidanren, the country's leading business
grouping, to head a panel which will seek ways to restructure the economy.
An emergency meeting of economic ministers last Thursday decided to set up
the advisory committee, which is to report by the end of the year. It is
charged with identifying structural reforms to deal with the yen's recent
surge, which is hurting exporters.
The appointment of Mr Hiraiwa helps cement relations between the seven-party
ruling coalition and the influential Keidanren, which was a traditional ally
of the Liberal Democratic party, ousted this month following a general
election.
The Keidanren has long sought moves to deregulate the economy, which Mr
Hosokawa said last week would be a main thrust of an autumn policy
initiative.
Official data indicate that the domestic economy remains depressed. Figures
for July department store sales yesterday showed a 6.2 per cent fall from
the same month of 1992, their 17th successive monthly decline.
Banks cut their prime rates by 0.2 points to 4.8 per cent in response to a
recent easing of money market rates, but Mr Hosokawa told MPs a further cut
in the official discount rate from the current 2.5 per cent was difficult.
He was responding to questioning by Mr Yohei Kono, new LDP leader. Mr Kono
also extracted a pledge from Mr Hosokawa that the premier's recent
acknowledgement of Japan's wartime aggression did not imply that Asian
countries were entitled to compensation. The opposition leader also attacked
his vagueness on political reform, the government's main aim. The coalition
has not yet been able to settle on which electoral mechanism should replace
the current scandal-tainted system.
Difficulties within the coalition were underlined yesterday when it emerged
it also could not agree on a gubernatorial candidate for Ibaraki prefecture
north-east of Tokyo. Mr Hosokawa's Japan New party and the allied Japan
Renewal party will side with the LDP against a candidate backed by the
Social Democratic party, the largest and most left-wing member of the
coalition.
