FT  04 FEB 93 / Technology: You'll never be alone again - Satellite phones
could transform communications once prices come down to earth
On a desert island, a man stretches out his hand and picks up a telephone
receiver. He dials his access code, and his voice is soon beaming up to a
satellite, then back down to earth, allowing him to talk to anyone, anywhere
in the world.
This is the sort of image that satellite telephone companies are trying to
sell to international investors and regulators. Information brochures for
these companies are strewn with exotic images of potential users  - from
desert nomads to dark-suited businessmen. So far, however, their best-known
role has been in the desert sands of the Middle East during the Gulf War,
when journalists on the move used them to get the news out.
Satellite telephones could revolutionise communications in much the same way
that cellular phones did a few years ago. Since cellular telephones send
their signals through earthbound transmitters, they are limited in their
reach.
With satellite communications, however, phone calls could be placed and
received anywhere on earth, from the North Pole to Tahiti, or from the top
of Mount Everest to a boat in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
Before this dream becomes a reality, though, companies will have to overcome
two hurdles. First, they will have to win a battle against exorbitant costs,
and second, they will have to win over concerned regulators.
Six US companies have already committed themselves to the creation of
satellite telephone systems: Constellation Communications; Ellipsat (a unit
of Mobile Communications holding company); Loral Qualcomm satellite
services, part of Loral; Iridium, a unit of Motorola; TRW Space and
Electronics Group; and American Mobile Satellite (AMS), owned by McCaw,
Hughes and MTEL.
In addition to telephone services, most of these companies plan to use the
satellite communication system to provide data services, inter-computer
communication and radio tracking. AMS already has a satellite system in
operation. However, it only has a few hundred subscribers and covers US
territory. The other companies, with more ambitious plans for world-wide
service, hope to be in full operation by 1996-98.
The estimated costs of setting up shop, though, are high. Each group will
spend a minimum of between Dollars 500m (Pounds 331m) and Dollars 4bn for
the installation of their systems. 'This is an extremely expensive and risky
business,' one satellite telephone executive explained. 'A lot of these
plans exist only on the drawing board, and when you're just in the
development stage it's hard to have a full understanding of your cost
structure.'
The most expensive items are the satellites themselves. The telephone
satellite companies have put forth proposals for a mind-boggling array of
systems, or 'constellations' as they are referred to in the industry jargon.
One of the few points of agreement seems to be that the low earth orbiting
satellites (Leos), which orbit at a range of 450 to 6,000 nautical miles,
are generally preferable to the higher orbit geo-stationary satellites
(Geos), which orbit at a height of about 12,000 nautical miles. Only AMS
uses a geo-stationary system, mainly because it applied for a licence while
the technology for Leos was not fully developed.
'The development of lower orbit satellites is exciting and has made the
proposals for telephone satellite systems more viable,' said Bruce Franca,
deputy chief engineer with the Federal Communications Commission, the main
US governmental body regulating the new companies.
Leos do carry some disadvantages. They have a relatively short life span,
often four to five years, compared with 10 to 12 years for Geos. They are
also far less powerful, so many more of them are needed to do the job. While
AMS operates with a single, rented geo-stationary satellite, Motorola, for
instance, has applied for a 66-satellite constellation system. Although more
Leos are required to do the job, they do offer economies of scale.
'As the satellites are churned out in an assembly line-like process, the
cost goes down,' said John Windolph, a Motorola spokesman. Because they are
smaller and lighter, Leos are also cheaper to make and cheaper to launch.
Analysts say Leos may also help to lessen the telephone voice delay which
can occur if the transmission has to travel too far from earth.
Because the signals have to travel less distance, Leos also render
land-based booster systems unnecessary, and allow users to carry lighter and
cheaper portable equipment. But the telephone satellite groups have very
different ideas about how far out they want to go, while still operating in
the Leos range. TRW, for instance, plans to operate its satellites towards
the outer limit of Leos orbits.
According to Edward Nowacki, vice president and general manager of the TRW
Federal Systems Division, satellites orbiting closer to earth spend more
time in the earth's shadow. Because the satellites are solar-powered, this
shortens their life span. 'Another problem is that they get cold without the
sun's rays and this applies additional stress,' says Nowacki.
Constellation, on the other hand, chose an extremely low-range orbit of 550
miles, which it says is a low-density height. 'The higher the density, the
more particles floating around and the more radiation shielding you have to
put on the satellite,' says Ron Lepkowski, consultant to the group. Ellipsat
rejected the idea of a steady, circular orbit altogether.
'With a circular orbit, you tend to get significant amounts of
communications capability where you can't use it, like at the North Pole,'
said John Naughton, vice-president in charge of engineering at the company.
'With an elliptical orbit, we can pull the satellite in closer to the places
which would have the heaviest traffic, and let the satellite spin out in
other, low-demand spots.'
One other important advantage of the Leos is that they require a smaller
spectrum range. With governments around the world worried about overcrowded
radio space, this may give the lower-orbiting constellations a strong hand
with regulators.
To operate fully world-wide, the telephone satellite companies will have to
obtain approval from local governments, as well as international regulatory
bodies such as the International Telecommunications Union. To facilitate
their application for spectrum space, most of the companies have accepted
the idea of a multiple access system, which would allow all the companies to
operate along the same spectrum band.
The companies would share the band by providing their users with different
access codes. 'With multiple access, all of us could operate on such a wide
band that we would become almost invisible to each other,' said Douglas
Dwyre, president of Global Star, which is a division of Loral. 'By sharing
the same band, it throws the question of spectrum share back on the market,
since whoever has the most business occupies most of spectrum.'
Motorola, however, is pushing to be allocated its own individual band. 'If
we're all sharing the same spectrum, the chance for interference is too
great,' said Windolph. Many regulators, including the FCC, say they are
anxious to co-operate with the telephone satellite groups, which could
provide an important consumer service.
The companies themselves are busy negotiating joint ventures with telephone
operators around the world in an effort to win local rights to satellite
usage. Despite the problems, these groups are determined to have their
constellations up and running in the next few years.
If they continue to attract the necessary investment funds, they will
probably succeed. Industry estimates are for a possible 10m satellite
telephone subscribers by the year 2005, and usage costs for satellite
communications are anticipated as being just slightly above current cellular
rates.
