FT  15 JUL 93 / Italy told to recall commander in Somalia
THE ROW between the United Nations and Italy over Somalia deepened last
night after the UN demanded the recall to Rome of the commander of Italian
troops there and signalled that it may request the removal of the country's
entire contingent.
Mr Beniamino Andreatta, the Italian foreign minister, told parliament he was
'outraged' at the decision that General Bruno Loi, who is alleged to have
defied the orders of the overall UN commander in Somalia, would soon be
rotated home.
The move, ordered by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary general, was
announced at a press conference in New York by Mr Kofi Annan, who is in
charge of UN peacekeeping operations.
Alluding to Gen Loi's reported defiance of orders from General Civek Bir,
the Turkish commander of UN troops in Somalia, Mr Annan said the option of
removing a national contingent altogether might have to be considered when
it placed an entire enterprise in jeopardy and other contingents at risk.
Italian soldiers serving with the UN would probably be redeployed north of
Mogadishu, away from the scene of recent clashes, he added.
Yesterday's exchange between Rome and New York deepened the sense of
disarray surrounding the UN military intervention in Somalia, as Somali
militants stepped up their campaign against the international force in the
capital, Mogadishu. Mr Annan warned other governments that had dictated to
their troops over the heads of Gen Bir and former US Admiral Jonathan Howe,
the secretary-general's special envoy, that this behaviour was unacceptable.
One contingent had even refused to accept assignments for a month, placing
an extra burden on other troops who were not so well equipped, he said
without identifying the recalcitrant unit.
He denied the UN refused to negotiate with General Mohamed Farah Aideed, the
fugitive Somali warlord, or that the warlord, whose arrest and detention
have been ordered, was singled out as a special villain. The UN was prepared
to deal similarly with any other rebel faction, if necessary.
He said governments that had committed troops to UN command knew what they
were getting into and that it was an enforcement operation, not a
traditional peacekeeping mission. Much of Somalia including the northern
part of the capital was co-operating with the UN.
Somali militants yesterday distributed leaflets in the streets of south
Mogadishu in which they vowed to kill all US troops serving with the UN
mission and called on Moslems worldwide to kill Americans in their
countries.
The fatwa, a Moslem death warrant, was a clear sign that Gen Aideed's
militias are steeling themselves for a protracted struggle against the
14,000 UN troops stationed in the capital. It also appeared to be an attempt
to drive a wedge between the 4,000 American soldiers and other national
contingents fighting under the UN flag.
Somali forces later launched an attack on the airport, in the south of the
city, firing rocket-propelled grenades and small arms.
UN military headquarters said Somali snipers also fired on Tunisian troops
at the headquarters compound, while Italian forces were also reported to
have come under attack at a checkpoint to the north of the city.
There were no reports on casualties.
Italy shocked, Page 4
