FT  15 FEB 93 / Maternity changes nurture fears / Opposition to extending
leave to 14 weeks
 which will, for the first time, give all pregnant employees a right to at
least 14 weeks off work - threaten to cause confusion, extra costs to
companies, and could even undermine women's job prospects, employers'
organisations say.
The changes in maternity rights are contained in the Trade Union Reform and
Employment Rights Bill, which is due to reach report stage in parliament
this week. The legislation springs from a European Community directive that
lays down minimum leave entitlement and levels of maternity pay across
member states.
Mr Robbie Gilbert, director of employment affairs at the Confederation of
British Industry, said companies would face the prospect of a female
employee 'appearing on day one, and on day two saying 'I now wish to claim
maternity leave'.' At present, a woman has to have worked for the same
employer for two years full-time, or five years part-time, before she is
entitled to time off.
As well as opposing the content of the original EC directive, the CBI also
objected to the way the new rules were being built into UK legislation. Mr
Gilbert said: 'It's becoming increasingly clear that it would have been
better to have taken more time and dealt with it more thoroughly.'
The bill now going through parliament implements only part of the directive
 - entitlement to maternity leave -  but leaves the question of levels of
payment until further social security legislation later this year. The CBI
says the issues of leave and pay 'march together' and should therefore have
been decided at the same time.
Opposition to the way the bill has been framed has also come from groups
seeking to improve maternity provision for women. The Maternity Alliance,
which includes among its membership the Equal Opportunities Commission,
children's charities and unions, argues that the government's 'attempt to
fuse the minimum provisions in the EC directive with the current maternity
schemes has been ill-thought-out and will produce an excessively complicated
system'.
The CBI and the Maternity Alliance say they would have preferred a thorough
overhaul and simplification of the rules on maternity leave and pay. It is
generally agreed that the present system, which has different rules
depending on whether an employee is full or part-time, is often confusing,
particularly for smaller businesses. A recent report from the National Audit
Office, the government spending watchdog, concluded that a 'small but not
inconsiderable minority of women appeared not have received statutory
maternity pay to which they were entitled'.
Ms Jill Andrew, a director of the London Chamber of Commerce and a partner
with Masons, the City solicitors, said the new maternity rules would have a
'counter-productive effect on women's employment'. In times of recession
small businesses in particular were finding there was 'no capacity to carry
pregnant women', she said.
Mr Paul Sheffrin, director of personnel policy development with accountants
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, said the firm was keen on women who intended to make
long-term careers with the company, but anyone wanting maternity leave very
shortly after joining would 'create real difficulties, add to our costs, and
frustrate the whole way we organise our work'.
J Sainsbury, the food retailers, which has 100,000 employees in the UK, two
thirds of them women, said the new rules would 'obviously add to our costs'.
It said that there were some concerns about the burden on companies of
administrating the new rules. But, overall, improved maternity provision
helped to 'level the playing field' for female employees, said Mr John
Adshead, personnel director.
The Equal Opportunities Commission said it was concerned some employers
appeared to be taking a 'backward attitude' by arguing that women's
employment prospects could be damaged by increasing their maternity rights.
'The same arguments were used when sex discrimination and equal pay
legislation was introduced and there has been a great increase in women's
employment since then,' said the commission.
The Department of Employment said the UK had succeeded in negotiating a
final EC directive that gave important new rights to women 'without imposing
unacceptable burdens on employers'. The employment bill was likely to be the
only opportunity for legislating before the directive had to be implemented
in October 1994, the department added.
Separately, the CBI yesterday denied press reports that employers were
preparing to abandon support for equal opportunities policies because of
rising unemployment. It was an 'outrageous misrepresentation' to suggest the
CBI was no longer interested in the issue, it said.
