FT  24 MAR 93 / US president weighs which court card to play first: Jurek
Martin fans the pack of Supreme Court candidates
LAST October Mr Bill Clinton, who has a law degree from Yale, allowed
himself the luxury of a little pre-election fancy. 'I'd give every penny
I've got in the bank for a ringside seat at the first argument between Mario
Cuomo and Justice (Antonin) Scalia.'
Now president, Mr Clinton does not have to dig into his own pocket for the
privilege. Following the announcement last Friday that Justice Byron White
is to retire from the Supreme Court, he can, if so moved, actually promote
the confrontation between the two Italian Catholics from Queens - one a
leading liberal intellectual who happens to be governor of New York, the
other the court's dominant conservative thinker.
That court watchers would love to see the sparks fly does not mean that it
will happen. Mr Cuomo, as ever enigmatic about his own future, flatly
refuses to say if he would accept a nomination to the highest US court.
He would certainly be a controversial choice, attracting the fire of an
American right wing determined to dig into a background which, shaped as it
has been by the snake pit of New York politics, is full of public and
private controversy. Even Mr Clinton once scathingly referred to suggestions
Mr Cuomo might have Mafia connections, and was obliged later to apologise.
Still, the fact remains that Mr Cuomo is the only individual ever mentioned
by Mr Clinton as the sort of person who should be on the Supreme Court. Even
Mr Clinton's most recent comments - that the new justice should have 'a big
heart' - can also be said to apply to the New York governor.
With the prospect of Justices Harry Blackmun and John Paul Stevens also
retiring in the not-too-distant future, Mr Clinton could wait a while,
perhaps to allow Mr Cuomo, who is up for re-election next year, to sort out
his domestic political landscape.
The president may also conclude that there are safer options for his first
choice to the court. Distinguished federal judges Patricia Wald, who took
herself out of consideration to be attorney general, and Amalya Kearse, who
is black and a Republican appointee, would satisfy both the need for
judicial quality and, as women, for diversity, so much a criterion in
appointments to this administration. So would an Hispanic American, Mr Jose
Cabranes, the chief federal judge in Connecticut.
The right of first refusal, based on a close relationship with both the
president and first lady, might lie with Mrs Marian Wright Edelman, director
of the Children's Defence Fund, on which Mrs Hillary Rodham Clinton has
served. A black woman with impeccable liberal credentials, she is reported,
however, not to want to move to the court.
Other balancing considerations may also apply, including, perhaps, the
desirability of restoring 'the Jewish seat' on the court, a constant from
1916 to 1969 when Justice Abe Fortas retired. There are also plenty of
liberal law professors around with intellectual pretensions comparable to Mr
Cuomo's (Mr Laurence Tribe of Harvard, for example).
Whoever does make the move will join a court now possessed of a fine
political balance but lacking - Justice Scalia apart - a distinctive
juridical mind. His last real intellectual counterweight was Justice William
Brennan, who retired in 1990 and is now 84 and physically frail, though
still eminently capable of exerting influence behind the scenes.
The current composition finds a conservative wing (Chief Justice William
Rehnquist, Mr Scalia and Justice Clarence Thomas, the black judge whose
nomination by President George Bush attracted so much controversy). On the
relative left stand Justices Blackmun and Stevens, and in the middle
Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony Kennedy and David Souter. Justice
White, the only Democratic appointment, often voted with the conservatives
on issues like abortion and prayer in schools.
The middle, disappointing their Republican political patrons, has just about
held the line in frustrating the conservative social agenda, above all the
determination to reverse Roe vs Wade, the landmark 1992 abortion ruling.
Presidents Reagan and Bush had sought to make opposition to abortion the
litmus test for judicial appointments. Mr Clinton has said he dislikes such
explicit criteria but that justices should believe in the constitutional
right to privacy, including freedom of reproductive choice.
More than that, however, Mr Clinton is himself a social activist in the
sense that he thinks, unlike his predecessors, that a government's role does
not have to be minimalist. The current court has, in the main, tended to
take a relatively narrow view of its own role, in sharp contrast to its
interventionist civil rights heyday under Chief Justice Earl Warren in the
1950s and 1960s.
Mr Warren, it should be noted, was neither a legal scholar nor a Democrat,
but an experienced politician, a former Republican governor of California
and vice presidential candidate in 1948. His political 'feel' provided an
added dimension to a court filled with considerable intellects.
President Clinton would doubtless like to find such a heavyweight to succeed
Justice White, who retires at the end of the summer term. If such a nominee
could at the same time engage Justice Scalia in philosophical battle, so
much the better for the fans of legalistic debate.
But there are nine members of the court, each with an equal vote, and, in
the last analysis, it is the majority which counts.
The late Justice Thurgood Marshall was proud to have been known as 'the
great dissenter' but would have preferred in the 1980s to have been on the
winning side more often.
