FT  17 JUL 93 / UN aid agency warns of Bosnia'catastrophe'
INTERNATIONAL aid officials warned yesterday of 'impending catastrophe' in
Bosnia-Hercegovina this winter and of a new wave of refugees seeking asylum
in western Europe.
Mrs Sadako Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, told a
meeting of donor countries in Geneva that intensified fighting and
deliberate obstruction by all three warring parties were making the agency's
relief work impossible in many areas. Less than half the targeted tonnage
was getting through.
'If we are unable to alleviate the plight of thousands of victims now, I
fear the worst for the months to come, particularly when the autumn and
winter set in,' she said, warning of 'impending catastrophe if we have to go
through another winter of war'.
UNHCR officials point out that last year the death of up to 400,000 people
was averted by a massive international aid effort and an unexpectedly mild
winter. This year many more are without food reserves, fuel or shelter.
It was announced yesterday that the international mediators for
ex-Yugoslavia, Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, would meet Serbian
President Slobodan Milosevic and Croatian President Franjo Tudjman today in
Geneva to discuss solutions to the conflict, ahead of talks next week
involving all the parties.
However, Lord Owen said yesterday that even if there was a peace settlement
in the next two to six weeks all possible resources would be needed to avoid
'a humanitarian nightmare' that threatened hundreds of thousands in Bosnia
this winter.
The UNHCR called yesterday's meeting after coming dangerously close to
running out of funds, at a time when the agency must plan the purchase,
stockpiling and delivery of essential winter supplies before snow and ice
make roads impassable. Some 3.6m people, 2.3m of them in Bosnia, depend on
UN aid for survival.
Donors yesterday promised Dollars 113m (Pounds 75.3m) of fresh funds for the
UN assistance programme, including Dollars 63m for the UNHCR. The EC, which
has been under pressure to contribute more cash, pledged Dollars 41m. The
refugee agency still has a Dollars 137m shortfall on its estimated Dollars
420m cash needs for 1993, but Mrs Ogata said it now had enough to start
planning for the winter.
Earlier this week the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies appealed
for more than Dollars 110m to continue their work in ex-Yugoslavia.
The UNHCR has also warned of a 'dramatic' increase in refugees seeking
shelter in western Europe because of lack of funds for assisting displaced
people within the region.
Mrs Ogata again called on European nations, most of which have now
introduced visa requirements for Bosnian nationals, to uphold the right of
asylum and offer temporary protection to those escaping war and persecution.
Mr Warren Zimmermann, head of refugee programmes in the US State Department,
said any easing of the fighting in Bosnia could spark a 'massive outpouring
of people to near and distant countries throughout Europe' as those now
trapped tried to flee.
