FT  15 FEB 93 / Australian opposition given a boost: Hewson unscathed in
pre-election debate with hesitant Keating
THE ELECTORAL prospects of Australia's conservative coalition strengthened
yesterday when Mr John Hewson, the opposition leader, emerged unscathed from
a televised debate with Mr Paul Keating, the Labor prime minister.
Mr Hewson's robust performance, at the end of the first week's campaigning
for the March 13 federal election, will give renewed confidence to the
conservative Liberal/National Party coalition, which is up to 12 points
ahead in opinion polls.
Mr Keating appeared hesitant when challenged on the credibility of his
economic forecasts and floundered when asked to produce a timetable for
Labor's promised constitutional changes.
Labor's election strategists had hoped for a repeat of the 1990 election
campaign, when Mr Bob Hawke, the former prime minister, decisively won a
debate with Mr Andrew Peacock, the then opposition leader.
But Mr Keating's aggressive debating style appeared to be blunted by the
format, which required the two leaders to give short answers to questions
from a panel of journalists.
As expected, the prime minister claimed that the economy was poised for a
strong recovery and forecast that unemployment was 'on its way down' from
the current level of 10.9 per cent.
Mr Keating attacked the coalition's 'divisive' plans to abolish the
centralised industrial relations system, reform the national health care
system and introduce a 15 per cent goods and service tax.
Mr Hewson focused on the government's patchy economic record and the
unreliability of official forecasts, which have repeatedly over-estimated
growth prospects.
The debate confirmed that the government has the most ground to make up for
polling day, especially in the light of figures released last week showing
that 1m Australians are out of work for the first time since the second
world war.
A second televised debate is scheduled to take place in three weeks.
But the outcome of the election may turn on the next batch of unemployment
figures, which are due to be released just two days before the vote.
