FT  09 SEP 93 / Campbell kicks off campaign: Canadian Tories pledge overhaul
of social security programmes
MS Kim Campbell, Canada's prime minister, kicked off a seven-week election
campaign yesterday by pledging an era of less government intervention, an
overhaul of social security programmes and a tougher justice system.
She was speaking in Ottawa after asking the governor-general to dissolve
parliament and call an election for October 25. Ms Campbell and Mr Jean
Chretien, leader of the opposition Liberal party, immediately set off on
their chartered buses for what is likely to be a gruelling and close-fought
campaign.
Both headed first for the province of Ontario which, together with Quebec,
contains more than half the country's 295 constituencies and will be the
focus of the big parties' drive for votes.
The Conservatives hold 153 seats in the House of Commons, followed by the
Liberals with 79 and the left-of-centre New Democrats with 43.
The Liberals are the present front-runners, thanks partly to a collapse in
support for the NDP and to the strength of the separatist Bloc Quebecois in
Quebec.
The Conservatives were able to rely on strong backing from Quebec
nationalists for their back-to-back election victories in 1984 and 1988.
But observers also agree that the coming election is one of the most fluid
and unpredictable in many years. Support for the traditional big three
parties will be fragmented by the Bloc Quebecois and, in western Canada, by
the populist Reform party.
Ms Campbell indicated yesterday that she would portray herself as a fresh
face for the 1990s, compared to the 60-year old Mr Chretien, who has been in
politics for over 30 years, including many years as a cabinet minister under
Mr Pierre Trudeau.
The main thrust of the Liberals' campaign will be to portray Ms Campbell as
a clone of her unpopular predecessor, Mr Brian Mulroney. The Liberals are
due to release their detailed policy platform within the next week or so.
Ms Campbell was cautious yesterday to avoid the extravagant promises which
marked the 1984 and 1988 campaigns. She said that 'we live in tough times
and Canadians have some tough questions for governments.'
She pledged 'a new leadership that respects the bottom line, and the basic
needs of Canadians.'
