FT  06 FEB 93 / Books: Cinderellas of the trade - Short Stories
IT IS tempting to believe that the British short story is enjoying a
renaissance. An enthusiastic audience gathered yesterday evening for
readings at the Purcell Room, and another will assemble tonight to hear Rose
Tremain, Joyce Carol Oates and Barbara Kingsolver. A season of readings is
planned at the Voice Box. Competitions are popping up all over the place.
And bookshops are dedicating shelves to anthologies - Latin American, South
African, Russian, women's and more are due this year.
But much of this is froth. Literary awards favour the novel, and short story
writers are the Cinderellas of the publishing industry.
There are three broad categories of anthology: foreign, mixed, and
single-author collections. The latter are typically bought by readers who
are addicted to the novels of a particular writer, and who would happily
read a car-maintenance manual if it had the right name on the cover. They
lead a poor field. Anthologies of foreign fiction are used by adventurous
readers to sample new writers before shelling-out for a novel.
Bringing up the rear are the indigenous breeds: Malcolm Bradbury's Modern
British Short Stories is a sturdy contender among these because students
have to buy it for courses; anthologies targeted at specific readerships
(women or gays) follow closely behind; thematic anthologies, like the
Serpent's Tail series, make up the numbers as do showcases for new writing,
like the Faber and Heinemann/Minerva series. Lumbering in last are
anthologies of competition winners. Novels romp home, clear winners, every
time.
Reputations sell literary fiction, and reputations are built on novels.
Those few writers who specialise in short stories, like VS Pritchett and
William Trevor, are denied the acclaim heaped on novelists. And the
publishing industry compounds the problem by treating the short story as a
suitable medium for beginners, or failed poets.
American attitudes are, and always have been, more enlightened. The editor
of Granta, Bill Buford, is familiar with approaches on both sides of the
Atlantic: 'Stories here tend to be commission-generated, and generally as
inspiring as the commissions: Spring, First Love. The respect is missing.'
The form is invigorated in the US by a plethora of publications. Preeminent
among these is the New Yorker, which publishes at least one story each week
and performs three vital functions: it attracts a wide, varied readership;
it introduces new writers; and it funds them to continue writing (it pays
Dollars 1 per word, with higher rates for pieces under 2500 words).
There is no equivalent British vehicle. With a payment rate of between
Pounds 500 and Pounds 2000, Granta is the most generous magazine here. Its
circulation is 100,000, but unlike the New Yorker most of its readers are
academics, writers or journalists. Other specialist literary magazines have
small circulations; and the London Review of Books now rarely publishes
short fiction, Womens magazines choose fiction which blends with their tone,
so no publication exists to promote the literary short story.
Radio 4 is the largest patron, but there are severe constraints on writing
for radio. Duncan Minshull, who produces the daily short story, receives
between 100 and 150 manuscripts each week, few of which suit the specific
requirements of his 15-minute programme: pieces must be 2100 words long,
with a simple plot and fast narrative pace, tales rather than sketches.
However, the most debilitating restriction on writing for that format is the
impossibility of allowing pieces to develop organically to the right length.
Minshull increasingly commissions from writers whom he knows will produce
good material, so the outlet bears an uncomfortable resemblance to
journalism. Yet he still manages to find excellent pieces, good enough to
publish a selection, Telling Stories.
Telling Stories sold extremely well for a short story anthology - around
10,000 copies demonstrates the existence of a market for short fiction.
The other main outlet is the leading publisher of thematic anthologies,
Serpent's Tail. Its trade paperbacks comprise a handful of pieces from
established authors, together with about 15 contributions from less
well-known writers whom they hope to introduce to a wider readership. Yet
sales of these may only reach a few thousand copies: the New Yorker's
circulation is 600,000.
Competitions bring new talent to light, and some publish winners. They are
scanned, together with magazines, by those literary agents who are keen to
advocate the form. Giles Gordon of Shell Land constantly watches for gifted
new writers, many of whom find their way into the Heinemann/Minerva
anthology which he edits.
The Ian St. James awards created a buzz when they were initiated in 1979.
The prizes are dizzying: Pounds 7000 and Pounds 3000 for winners of the
longer and shorter categories respectively, with awards last year totalling
Pounds 64,300. The competition is a fine incentive to unpublished writers,
for whom it was created, but because prize money is dispersed over several
individuals, no single prize is sufficiently large to capture media interest
for a sustained period to elevate awareness of the form.
Giles Gordon believes that while sales of hardback fiction have decreased -
a new novel will only sell around 400 copies - single-author collections of
stories have held their own. This seems quite likely; British cultural
habits are becoming more American, and, cliched though it might seem, short
fiction is more suited to urban life-styles. Yet there remains a powerful,
and irrational, public resistance to the short story, and no number of
dedicated writers, publishers, editors or agents seem likely to dent it.
Despite derisory rates of payment, and the lack of outlets like the New
Yorker, exciting short fiction is emerging. Ian McEwan, Adam Mars-Jones and
Georgina Hammick are among the few who achieved prominence firstly through
their short fiction, though McEwan abandoned the form to concentrate on
novels. James Kelman's Not Not While The Giro was a dazzling display, but
Kelman was only really celebrated when he had also written novels. And John
Fuller, Mars-Jones and others are experimenting, linking pieces together
into coherent, novel length works.
Mars-Jones prefers the short form because it does not invite readers to
immerse themselves in a fictional world; they are 'always aware of the
outside edges', as he puts it. Yet the publishing machine exerts
considerable pressure on him to grow up and write proper books - novels. He
wrote one, which is published by Faber this June, and now worries that it
will be reviewed as 'short stories in drag'. He sums up the British practice
neatly: 'The short story is a bouquet given by publishers to successful
authors'.
Tonight's audience at the South Bank may emerge satisfied, but unless
British complacency is redressed, the short story will never flourish here
like its American cousin. An award attracting the same status and media
attention as the Booker Prize but targetted at story collections would be
one boost. Another would be a decision by the Sunday supplements to publish
good - really good - short fiction.
