FT  28 OCT 93 / Tourism hit by shootings in Cairo
WHATEVER the motives of the lone gunman who shot dead three foreigners as
they dined late on Tuesday in the Cairo Semiramis Hotel, those in Egypt's
demoralised tourist trade are resigned to the fact that they may not matter
a jot.
Whether the 28-year-old man arrested over the shooting was an Islamic
fundamentalist or mentally disturbed, the effect is the same - to offer
further evidence that Egypt is not a safe place for foreign visitors.
Mr Andrew Quinlan, the shaken manager of the Semiramis, scarcely needed to
tell reporters yesterday morning that he thought the attack would hurt
already weak bookings. In the lobby, one Greek tour operator was already
pulling his clients out of the hotel, and out of Egypt. 'We've already
postponed two trips because of violence,' he said. 'This is enough.'
There is no hard evidence that the accused man was part of an 18-month
campaign waged by Islamic extremists to undermine the government by
attacking targets in the previously flourishing tourist industry. Some
witnesses claim he called out Islamic slogans as he fired on the two tables
of foreign diners, leaving another three men seriously injured. The slain
men, two Americans and a Frenchman, were lawyers attending a conference.
Interior ministry officials said the gunman was simply mentally disturbed.
But there is little doubt that for whatever motive, he had singled out
foreigners in the restaurant, where staff said there was the usual mix of
tourists and locals, and that the attack is the gravest against visitors to
Egypt in recent years. There is also no doubt that it has dealt a
potentially catastrophic blow to the tourist trade, already reeling from the
effects of previous attacks.
Tourist nights for the first eight months of the year are a third down on
last year. Revenue figures from tourism - officially calculated by
multiplying tourist nights by an estimated average spend of Dollars 125 per
visitor - are barely likely to clear Dollars 2bn this year after a record
Dollars 3bn in 1991-92. This in itself is vital, given that tourism vies
with Suez canal receipts, oil exports and remittances as the country's main
foreign exchange earner.
But more worrying is the longer-term effect of the industry's decline. Of
those hard currency earners, tourism is the only one that western economists
considered capable of significant growth in the next few years. From the
mid-1980s to the present, the sector had grown at an average 17.5 per cent a
year - far outstripping the economy's average growth of about 6 per cent
over the period.
More important to an economy with at least 20 per cent unemployment and
which needs to add a minimum of 400,000 to 500,000 jobs a year to keep pace
with labour force growth, tourism has long been the country's biggest job
creator. The tourism ministry and western economists reckon about one in 15
jobs across the economy depends directly on tourism.
The job factor is particularly significant in Upper Egypt, both the
country's poorest region and that most severely wracked by Islamic extremist
violence - two facts most observers in Egypt consider directly related. And
it is there, rather than in the newly developed resorts of Sinai and the Red
Sea, that the tourist slump is deepest. The Nile cruise business, Upper
Egypt's mainstay, is, according to one economist, 'in outright collapse'.
Hoteliers and cruise operators have already slashed prices, a trend many
worry may lead to an irrevocable drop in standards and facilities. But more
important is the effect of the slump on future investment and private sector
confidence.
The government makes no hard figures available on what proportion of total
investment, local and foreign, has been dedicated to tourism recently, but
it is commonly accepted to be the most flourishing sector outside the
capital-intensive oil industry.
'Tourism has very effectively mobilised savings in the private sector - it
is a real symbol of the private sector here. That might now be under
threat,' says one economist.
Several big tourism investment schemes are under way, particularly in the
Red Sea and Sinai where there have been no attacks and where tourist
arrivals remain healthy. Last week the International Finance Corporation,
the World Bank's private sector arm, approved financing for two local
companies in a Dollars 100m project to develop Ras Abu Soma, now a bare spit
of the Red Sea coast, into a multi-hotel golfing and diving resort.
But investment agencies in Cairo say all the schemes were entered into
before the present troubles, and fresh projects have dried up. 'What we have
noticed is a very sharp drop in the number of feasibility studies being
presented - almost to zero,' says one agency director.
In the short term there is little the industry can do but tighten security a
notch further, by installing X-ray checks on bags, and hope. The Semiramis
was widely regarded as Cairo's safest hotel - it is where US secretaries of
state usually stay.
In the meantime, the editors of the Egyptian Gazette can only rue yesterday
morning's banner headline. 'Egypt safest place on earth,' it read,
paraphrasing remarks made in Washington on Tuesday by President Hosni
Mubarak.
By and large Mr Mubarak is correct. The streets of Egypt's towns are far
safer than those of Washington or even parts of London. Attacks against
tourists are, as the government never tires of repeating, far fewer and less
lethal than in Turkey or Miami. But try telling that to the tour operators.
