FT  06 JAN 93 / Receiverships down by 10%
THE NUMBER of companies passing into receivership or administration fell by
more than 10 per cent last year, figures released yesterday disclosed.
Receivership appointments and administration orders under UK insolvency law
fell to 5,151 in 1992 from 5,734 in the previous year.
The figures, which have shown a downward monthly trend for most of the year,
were analysed by accountants Touche Ross from the official London and
Edinburgh Gazettes. Only in January, November and December last year were
the figures higher than in the same month during 1991.
The figures provide a different picture from those recently released by Dun
&amp; Bradstreet, but are compiled on a different basis and do not include
personal bankruptcies and corporate liquidations.
Mr Christopher Morris, head of corporate special services at Touche Ross,
said he believed receivership and administration appointments provided a
more accurate representation of the status of businesses by excluding the
one-person companies. Mr Morris said he believed the decline reflected the
fact that remaining companies were a 'strong core', likely to weather the
recession.
He warned that appointments were likely to increase again with economic
recovery, as the value of assets grew and banks called in receivers to
recover their loans.
The greatest number of appointments were in London and the south-east, at
2,177, followed by the north-west with 641 and the west Midlands with 463.
Manufacturing appointments accounted for 27 per cent of the total during the
year, while the rate of failure increased among retailers and wholesalers.
Cork Gully, the insolvency arm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, was the most commonly
appointed firm, with 902 jobs during the year. KPMG Peat Marwick was second
at 623 and Touche Ross third at 559.
National Westminster bank was the debenture-holder that most commonly called
in receivers, making 1,104 appointments during the year, reflecting its
substantial small business portfolio.
