FT  17 SEP 93 / Technology: Gaining the upper hand - Continuing a series on
drug discoveries, Clive Cookson considers developments for the treatment of
diabetes
THE pharmaceutical industry is beginning to give diabetes the attention it
deserves as one of the western world's most serious - and fastest growing -
chronic diseases. Diabetes and its complications already kill 160,000 people
a year in the US.
Prospects for the immediate future include easier ways to administer insulin
than the traditional self-injection, a new hormone to enhance the effects of
insulin, and the first drugs designed to treat the medical complications of
diabetes. Further ahead lies the possibility of curing or preventing
diabetes by intervening in the disease process at the molecular level.
Diabetes is ultimately an auto-immune disease, triggered by a combination of
genetic and environmental factors. The body's immune system destroys the
cells in the pancreas that make insulin, the hormone controlling blood
glucose (sugar) levels.
Until the isolation of insulin by Frederick Banting and Charles Best in
1921, anyone with the most severe form of the disease, known as Type 1 or
juvenile-onset diabetes, soon fell into a coma and died.
During the 1920s and 1930s two companies that still dominate international
insulin production today, Eli Lilly of the US and Novo Nordisk of Denmark,
set up plants to extract the hormone from pigs' and cows' pancreases.
Diabetics could then stop themselves falling into a fatal coma with regular
injections of insulin. But these were no cure; diabetes became instead a
chronic degenerative disease with a multitude of life-shortening
complications including poor blood flow, blindness, kidney failure and
severe nerve damage (neuropathy).
Worldwide sales of diabetic drugs were worth about Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds
1.6bn) in 1992 and are growing at about 10 per cent a year, according to
Lehman Brothers, the international securities company. Insulin has about 60
per cent of the market. The remainder is for 'oral hypoglycaemics' - drugs
taken by people with Type 2 or adult-onset diabetes, a less severe form of
the disease.
The most important development during the 1980s was the genetic engineering
of bacteria or yeast to make insulin identical to the hormone produced in
the human pancreas.
This 'human insulin' has the advantage that, unlike animal insulin, it does
not stimulate unwanted antibodies in patients. About two-thirds of diabetics
have now switched from animal to human insulin. Some were put off by reports
that patients on human insulin were more likely to suffer from acute
hypoglycaemia - a sudden and potentially fatal fall in blood sugar levels -
because it gave them fewer warning signs of an impending attack, such as
sweating and tremor. But the Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin, published by
the UK Consumers' Association, concluded this year after reviewing all the
clinical data that human insulin was just as safe as the animal version.
At the same time, the insulin manufacturers are making it easier for
diabetics to inject themselves. In the 1920s, patients used a ground glass
syringe that had to be sterilised in alcohol every time it was used. The
minimum standard now is a throw-away plastic syringe with an ultra-thin
needle that causes little pain or skin damage. And more and more diabetics
are using convenient pre-filled injection 'pens'.
An alternative hi-tech delivery system is the insulin pump, which infuses
insulin slowly and steadily into the patient's bloodstream. Its advantage is
that it reproduces the hormone flow of a real pancreas more accurately than
injections. The disadvantages include cost (about Dollars 4,000) and the
inconvenience of always having a device about the size of a cigarette pack
strapped to one's body.
This year Novo Nordisk agreed to promote pumps manufactured by Minimed of
the US for its insulin preparations. But the Danish company estimates that
only 25,000 diabetics worldwide are on pumps while 750,000 are using its
Novopen injection systems.
Research aimed at removing the need for injections or pumps altogether, by
developing forms of insulin that could be taken by mouth or as a nasal
spray, has given generally disappointing results.
Several groups have come up with experimental forms of oral insulin. The
hormone is given a coating, such as gelatin and/or biodegradable plastic,
which protects it from digestive juices in the stomach and then releases it
into the bloodstream through the intestine walls. But none so far gives
sufficiently reliable doses of insulin.
Novo Nordisk spent a lot of time and money developing a nasal insulin
preparation, only to abandon the project last year after clinical trials
showed that it was not sufficiently effective at reducing glucose levels in
the blood.
The benefits of controlling blood sugar as tightly as possible were shown in
the results of a nine-year study sponsored by the US National Institutes of
Health, which were released in June. Type 1 diabetics who injected
themselves three or more times a day or used an insulin pump reduced the
risk of complications by more than half in comparison with those who had
only one or two insulin shots per day.
The study is likely to stimulate sales not only of pumps and injection pens
but also of glucose monitoring devices and disposable test strips, produced
by companies such as MediSense.
A quite different approach to better control of blood sugar is based on
another pancreatic hormone, amylin, discovered in 1987 by a Medical Research
Council group at Oxford University. It appears that Type 1 diabetics are
short of amylin as well as insulin, whereas Type 2 diabetics make too much
amylin.
A company set up in California to exploit the Oxford discovery, Amylin
Pharmaceuticals, is carrying out a clinical trial of AC137, a synthetic
version of the hormone. Preliminary results announced this month suggest
that AC137 injected with insulin helps to 'smooth out' the rise and fall in
blood sugar levels.
Amylin is also working with Glaxo, the largest UK pharmaceutical company, to
develop amylin blockers as drugs for Type 2 diabetics. Two candidates are
due to start clinical trials next year.
Drugs available today for Type 2 diabetics are 'oral hypoglycaemics' which
stimulate insulin production; the leading manufacturers are Hoechst of
Germany and Upjohn and Pfizer of the US.
Other companies are trying to tackle diabetes on a more fundamental level by
blocking the auto-immune reactions before they destroy all the patient's
insulin-producing cells. Drugs that suppress the immune system, such as
cyclosporin, delay the onset of the disease but their side-effects rule them
out as routine therapy. The hunt is on for more specific treatments; one
candidate is a 'fusion toxin' produced by Seragen in the US.
For a diabetic who has already lost all capacity to make insulin, the best
long-term prospect may be some form of artificial pancreas. Two US
companies, CytoTherapeutics and BioHybrids, have developed technology to
transplant insulin-producing islet cells into diabetics; the cells are
encapsulated with a semi-permeable polymer membrane to protect them against
destruction by the patient's immune system. Both systems work in diabetic
animals and are now beginning clinical trials, although they are unlikely to
be available commercially for several years.
One of the most active areas of diabetes research is in the treatment of
diabetic complications. The first drugs designed to protect kidney, nerve
and eye cells from the toxic by-products of abnormal sugar metabolism are
beginning to reach the market. 'Aldose reductase inhibitors' are one
category, pioneered by American Home Products.
Scotia of the UK is carrying out clinical trials of EF4, a mixture of fatty
acids extracted from evening primrose oil. It appears to protect nerve
fibres by increasing blood flow in the legs, feet, arms and hands.
David Tomlinson, professor of pharmacology at Queen Mary's College, London,
outlined a more radical approach to diabetic neuropathy at a meeting of the
British Pharmacological Society this month. He proposes to repair the damage
with neurotrophic factors, recently discovered compounds that stimulate the
growth of nerve cells.
The series will continue next month with an article on anaesthetics.
Articles in this series over the last six months have looked at
pharmaceutical advances in the following areas:
Epilepsy                      27 August
Arthritis                     27 July
Menopause                     25 June
Alzheimer's                   24 May
Allergies                     29 April
High blood pressure           18 March
