FT  04 OCT 93 / Portuguese Bonds: Rich pickings for yield-hungry investors
HIGH YIELDS and the prospect of further market liberalisation are luring
foreign investors into the Portuguese government bond market.
Compared with most of their European counterparts, Portuguese bonds offer
yield-hungry investors particularly good returns.
The 10 5/8 per cent government bond - or Obrigacoe do Tresouro (OT) - due
2003 currently yields 9.70 per cent, 65 basis points over its Spanish
counterpart and 360 basis points over the benchmark German bond.
Portugal has undertaken extensive reforms to create a liquid and transparent
bond market.
The Treasury now holds regular auctions of bonds with maturities between
three and 10 years, with a recent emphasis on seven to 10-year bonds; 14
primary dealers make a market at relatively tight bid-offer spreads; debt
management has been centralised at the Treasury; and capital controls were
lifted in December 1992.
The country is gearing up for further innovations. 'It is definitely our
intention to make the market more efficient, that is, deregulated,' said Mr
Manuel Pinho, director general of the Treasury. 'This could permit a greater
presence of non-resident investors.'
Overseas involvement is 'abnormally low' compared with other bond markets,
he said. Foreigners own some 5 per cent of Portuguese bonds, but the
Treasury is believed to want to lift this to some 30 per cent.
Foreigners have been big players in warrants on Portuguese bonds, hedged in
D-Marks, which are traded in Frankfurt.
But Mr Pinho stresses he welcomes non-resident investment through 'official
channels', explaining that 'we would like non-residents to come in through
the door, rather than the window.'
Attracting heavier foreign involvement will require further changes. For the
primary market, the Treasury is mulling ways of speeding up settlements
through a more efficient delivery-versus-payment system.
In the secondary market, it is considering regulating bond lending and
repos, and is thinking of creating a screen-based over-the-counter market.
Meanwhile, investors hope the 20 per cent withholding tax for non-residents
will soon be abolished. This would benefit US and Japanese investors most
since their countries have no double-taxation treaty with Portugal. But even
where such agreements exist, the reclaim procedure can be cumbersome.
Since 'the Treasury receives very little income from withholding tax, it
defies logic for the current system to continue,' argues Mr Steven Major,
senior bond analyst at Credit Lyonnais.
'There is a strong argument to consider buying now with a view to taking
advantage of withholding tax abolition,' he recommends.
According to Mr Major, other liberalising measures are likely to include
lower transaction costs, new settlement procedures conforming with
international standards, and an automated link between the Portuguese
Central Securities Depository to the Euroclear and Cedel clearing agencies.
He expects the measures to be announced in October to coincide with the
publication of the 1994 budget.
Portugal's economic fundamentals are encouraging, with forecasts for a
debt-to-GDP ratio of less than 60 per cent and a budget deficit of below 5
per cent of gross domestic product in 1994.
Its tough fiscal policy earned it an upgrading of its credit rating by
Standard &amp; Poor's from A plus to double A minus. This has helped its smooth
return to the Eurobond markets where it has issued DM1.5bn of 10-year bonds,
Y75bn of five-year bonds and Dollars 1bn of 10-year bonds this year.
Wage moderation and the depressed economy are limiting cost pressures so
that average inflation will be close to 6 per cent at year-end, falling
further in 1994, predicts Mr Major. Meanwhile, he expects GDP to grow by 0.2
per cent this year and 1.2 per cent in 1994.
The currency remains a risk, however. The escudo has depreciated by some 18
per cent against the D-Mark since it joined the European exchange rate
mechanism in April 1992, though it has stabilised within a notional 6 per
cent trading range since the widening of ERM trading bands in August.
