FT  24 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tory Euro-sceptics respond to calls
for unity
TORY Euro-rebels responded to appeals for party unity in the Commons
yesterday to ensure a majority of 40 (339-299) for the vote of confidence
demanded by Mr John Major, the prime minister.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, forecast that the vote, which
cleared the way for the ratification of the Maastricht treaty without the
controversial social chapter, would prove to be a 'turning point' for the
government.
A Labour amendment calling for the acceptance of the social chapter was
defeated by a majority of 38 (339-301).
Mr Major, when he opened the debate, repeatedly warned the Tory Euro-rebels
 -who just over 12 hours earlier had joined with opposition MPs to inflict a
humiliating defeat on the government - that their continued defection would
result in a general election.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, bluntly told the prime minister that his
'credibility and authority' had been destroyed on Thursday night when MPs
refused to endorse the government's decision to opt out of the treaty's
social chapter.
Mr Smith said the flawed arguments against the social chapter had been
abandoned as the prime minister, with his back to the wall, had been forced
to 'threaten his own party with electoral suicide'.
Government supporters reacted angrily when a shout of 'this is
assassination' came from the Labour benches as Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, intervened to support the prime minister's argument that the
social chapter would increase unemployment.
Ministers joined in the protests when Mr Smith indicated that he, too,
viewed Mr Clarke as Mr Major's most likely successor, and added that the
chancellor had spoken with more confidence than the prime minister.
Mr Major insisted that the 'stalemate' caused by the block on ratification
of the Maastricht treaty imposed by the government's defeat could not be
allowed to continue.
He emphasised the backing accorded by leading industrialists - including Sir
Denys Henderson, chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries  - to the
government's view that the social chapter would add to company costs and
cause job losses. Mr Major warned that having to comply with the social
chapter would put at risk the 'significant sustained growth with low
inflation' now in prospect.
Mr Tony Marlow, MP for Northampton North and a leading Tory opponent of the
Maastricht treaty, contended that many businessmen believed that it would
result in them having to bear higher costs, whether or not Britain accepted
the social chapter.
The prime minister retorted that Mr Marlow was 'talking nonsense'.
Throughout the debate Labour MPs refused to accept that the government had
secured the support of the Ulster Unionists without entering into a 'deal'.
The prime minister assured the House: 'Nothing was asked for, nothing was
offered and nothing was given.'
Mr Smith said ordinary people could not understand why the government wanted
to deny them the social rights, social opportunities and social advantages
which were available to the other 11 members of the European Community.
He taunted the prime minister with having lost the argument over the social
chapter and of treating his party in a way which must have made Conservative
leaders 'turn in their graves'.
Mr Smith said Mr Major had threatened to press 'the self-destruct button' of
a general election in order to force Conservative MPs into the government
lobby at the end of the debate.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democtrat leader, questioned the Conservative
party's ability to continue governing. The party was 'so riven by civil war,
so infected by its own internal enmity, that frankly they cannot provide any
longer the effective united government that this country needs'.
Mr Ashdown accused Mr Major of 'ducking the issues'. The social chapter 'did
not have to come up now', he said. But the prime minister was now forced to
stake his own personal authority and the government's capacity to survive in
order to enable him to 'get his way'.
Clashing with Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, Mr Ashdown denied the
Liberal Democrats were merely using Maastricht to embarrass the government.
Mr Bill Cash, MP for Stafford and another leading critic of the Maastricht
treaty, said he would vote for the confidence motion because if a general
election were to result in a Labour or Liberal Democrat government it would
be '10 times worse'.
