FT  17 APR 93 / Restructuring at Lloyd's to follow record loss of Pounds 2bn
LLOYD'S of London hopes to soften the shock of another record loss totalling
more than Pounds 2bn by announcing plans within the next few weeks for a
radical restructuring of the insurance market's operations.
The Lloyd's 'business plan', however, will not provide for an immediate
settlement to the legal actions dogging the market.
Negotiations to settle out of court will continue, but Lloyd's appears to be
resigned to a continuation of more than a dozen legal actions between Names
 -the individuals whose assets support the market - and the agents who
organise their affairs.
The market's governing council hopes its new business plan will re-establish
confidence in the market by paving the way for a substantial injection of
corporate capital as early as January 1994. It is understood that Lloyd's
council has agreed in principle that corporate investors would be
'ring-fenced' from the heavy potential losses that are emerging from
liability business underwritten in the past.
The price for such 'ring-fencing' would be a higher contribution by the new
participants into Lloyd's central reserve, which meets claims when Names are
unable to fulfil their obligations. Corporate investors might also be asked
to pay an entrance fee.
Senior members of the board now acknowledge that the losses in 1990 - the
latest under the Lloyd's three-year accounting system - will total more than
the Pounds 2.06bn in 1989.
Mr David Rowland, chairman, and Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive, want
the business plan to be presented before June to a meeting of all the
market's participants.
The market has suffered a sharp decline in its capital base in recent years,
but with insurance rates rising and the prospect of profits returning,
informal contacts are understood to have shown up a substantial interest
among potential corporate investors.
The plan is also understood to include a reinsurance scheme allowing
syndicates to reduce the uncertainty arising from old liability policies,
from which claims are continuing to emerge.
Lex, Page 22
