FT  23 APR 93 / Castro keeps observers guessing over successor: The last
months have offered insights
WITH the Cuban economy in a state of collapse following the end of economic
support from the Soviet Union, many observers believe the subject of Fidel
Castro's successor is out of the president's hands.
But for those who believe Mr Castro will be able to hand over power
peacefully, the last few months have provided some interesting material.
First, Mr Castro indicated he might step down in five years' time. Then he
appointed as foreign minister last month the inexperienced Mr Roberto
Robaina, a possible sign that the 37-year-old former leader of the Union of
Young Communists is being groomed for leadership.
Mr Castro, recently re-elected as president of Cuba's council of state for a
further five years, indicated he had made no decision on his retirement,
only that he hoped it would not be necessary for him to be president after
his new term. These public musings to foreign journalists have, however,
been played down in Cuba's domestic media.
The Cuban leader, now 66, has spoken repeatedly of the need to
'reinvigorate' the revolution, suggesting that younger leaders are needed.
Mr Robaina, who will be 42 at the end of the president's current term, fits
the bill.
Although he has flirted with cosmetic changes to policy, Mr Robaina's public
ideology is almost identical to Mr Castro's. He has, however, attempted to
modernise the image of the party, for example by organising pop concerts in
an attempt to keep young Cubans faithful.
Should the foreign minister falter in the race or fall out of favour, Mr
Castro has several options. One is Mr Carlos Lage, architect of the economic
policies with which the government has been fighting the setbacks of the
last two years. Mr Lage, 42, has hinted at some moderation in economic
policy, and has been pushing foreign investment in the Cuban economy.
The losers now appear to be Mr Raul Castro, the president's brother who is
the first vice-president and the armed forces minister, and Mr Ricardo
Alarcon, former foreign minister who is now president of the National
Assembly. If President Castro favours youth, both of these men are likely to
be overlooked. Mr Alarcon will be 60 in five years, while the younger Castro
will be 66.
President Castro may also be concerned that, were he to leave office without
identifying a successor, pretenders to the presidency or the army could be
drawn into a fight, defeating his hopes for a seamless transition.
Although Cuba's campaign to attract foreign investment represents a big
about-turn in economic policy, Mr Castro's ideological rhetoric remains much
the same. He continues to argue that Cuba will not abandon the socialism of
the revolution despite heavy foreign economic pressure.
He has said, however, that if his departure from office would lead the US to
lift its crippling 30-year embargo, he would go immediately.
US government officials say that barring a reversal of policy by President
Bill Clinton, the dismantling of the embargo and normalisation of relations
between Washington and Havana would depend on more than Mr Castro's stepping
aside.
Loosening the Cuban Communist party's grip on the country and the
installation of a popularly elected government through multi-party voting is
the required minimum.
While some observers argue that the worst of Cuba's economic problems
following the end of Soviet support are over and that the economy is showing
signs of a modest recovery, the country still faces shortages of food and
other basic supplies which have been compounded by damage from the recent
storms.
Despite all the setbacks, Mr Castro remains truculent - Cuba, he says, will
successfully battle its political enemies and natural disasters, in order to
protect socialism.
