FT  07 JUL 93 / Dear David: shall I stay on at school? / Examining a
shake-up in the careers guidance offered to young people in the UK
Mr George Astbury, training and development manager at British Gas Northern,
has strong views on the career guidance offered young people. He thinks much
of it is poor and anti - industry.
'Most of the officers from the Careers Service seem to have little
understanding of our industry, or industry in general,' he says. 'I think
they believe working for British Gas involves donning a pair of overalls and
walking around with a spanner. But we have a huge range of jobs on offer.'
Mr Astbury, like many fellow employers in the Confederation of British
Industry - where he sits on the education policy panel - has lobbied for
reform of careers education and guidance, currently provided partly by
schools and partly by the 6,000-strong Careers Service. The latter has an
annual budget of Pounds 135m and several client groups, including
schoolchildren, 16-to-19-year-olds on government training courses, and
employers.
The service will undergo a thorough overhaul over the next few years
following legislation last week which stripped local education authorities
of their statutory supervisory role. Responsibility for running career's
guidance will shift to the department of employment, which will introduce
competitive tenders for a franchised service. Instead of 116 Careers
Services run solely by LEAs, the government wants various local
organisations to provide a new patchwork of services for local communities.
Funding will still come from central government though the figure is not yet
fixed.
Interested observers, including the CBI and the Institute of Careers
Guidance, which represents careers officers, say the reform addresses some,
but not all, of their concerns about the quality of advice. A particular
worry is that guidance in school will not be improved by the changes because
it is not part of the new national curriculum which concentrates on core
academic subjects. They argue improvements in careers advice should span
both schools and the Careers Service.
What is clear, however, is that the service has moved from being a neglected
Cinderalla of local government to near the top of the political agenda as
employers have grown more concerned about the skill levels of UK workers.
Renewed interest in careers advice stems in significant part from a CBI
report, Towards a Skills Revolution, published in 1989. It argued skill
levels could be improved only if individuals were motivated to make the
fullest use of their talents. But the training and vocational system had
never put individuals first - the needs of providers had enjoyed higher
priority.
General recommendations on lifelong learning included specific calls for the
introduction of a system of credits which would give individuals a
publicly-funded right to post - 16 education or training. Critical to the
success of this scheme was high-quality careers guidance so that young
people received help in deciding whether to stay at school or take up a job
with training.
The influence of the CBI's ideas was evident in the government's 1991 white
paper, Education and Training for the 21st Century, which outlined its plans
for all 16 to 19-year-olds. By 1996, the paper announced, a watered-down
version of the CBI proposals. Training credits for those leaving full-time
education would be introduced.
The white paper contained proposals for raising the overall quality of the
Careers Service, drawing it closer to employers and forging new links with
employer-led Training and Enterprise Councils. Tecs were set up to
administer the government's publicly funded training programmes and increase
employers' commitment to training.
In tandem, the government also conducted an internal review of the Careers
Service though no report was published. Careers officers who saw the
findings say the government failed to make a case for reforming the service.
'It is difficult to judge whether the government was concerned to strip the
powers of LEAs or make a genuine privatisation,' said one.
The then-employment secretary, Mr Michael Howard, wrote to interested
parties asking for comments on options for the service, saying: 'The
introduction of market disciplines is needed to sharpen management practice,
which in some areas is below an acceptable standard.'
The result has been a wide-ranging reform, under which the employment
secretary, now Mr David Hunt, will choose how careers services should be
provided at the local level. For instance, he could decide to include local
education authority Careers Services working in partnership with other
organisations, such as Tecs, or he could exclude them entirely.
There are no prescribed models, although it is understood that the
government will look favourably at partnership arrangements that demonstrate
broad community support, particularly from employers. Services to the core
client groups will still be free but there could be a charge for 'bolt-on'
services, such as adult counselling.
Tecs, responsible for providing Youth Training places for young people, and
which also do pioneering work on adult guidance, are understood to be
lobbying hard for such partnerships. Many have already built voluntary
partnerships, with varying degrees of success, with their local LEAs.
The CBI, however, objects to Tecs being involved in franchise bids. Mr
Howard Davies, director-general of the CBI, argues that they should not be
directly involved in providing careers' guidance; rather, they should be
strategic overseers of the setting up of local markets for advice.
This controversial suggestion has drawn criticism from several careers
officers, who would prefer to see the Tecs involved directly in the new
services. 'If there is a local market, who would advise the individual on
which provider of advice to go to?' asks Mr Allister McGowan, head of the
Careers Service in Hertfordshire.
Apart from specific worries about how the reforms will be implemented, many
careers officers are concerned about the threat to jobs. In Greater London,
for example, there is scope for a rationalisation of the 32 borough-led
careers services.
Mr McGowan said there was both uncertainty among careers' officers about
future employment prospects and concern over the quality of new providers.
However, the changes might enable the Careers Service to move more
effectively into new markets, particularly guidance to all age groups, he
said.
Local business people, he added, had a role to play - his LEA is setting up
a voluntary partnership with Hertfordshire Tec. If Hertfordshire is chosen
as one of 14 pilot schemes, from April next year, he said the arrangement
would probably be put on a more formal footing and a joint bid made for the
local franchise.
'We need to explore how we actually get employers involved in the delivery
of education and training,' he said. 'Teaching young people about work is
more than an employer offering to give a talk on spot-welding. It has to be
deeper and more sustained than that.'
A sustained commitment to careers' guidance might help young people make
better and more informed decisions about their working lives. A recent Audit
Commission report with the Office for Standards in Education found that more
than a third of 16 to 19-year-olds in full-time further education did not
complete their studies or attain the intended qualifications. The government
hopes its reforms will put an end to such discrepancies. If a period of
administrative chaos is necessary to enable young people to decide on which
skills they need to acquire, then the disruption will be worth it.
Mr Davies, of the CBI, said: 'We need higher skill levels in this country,
and an enhanced system of careers advice and guidance is central both to
achieving that objective and to ensuring that those skills match up with
appropriate labour market opportunities.'
