FT  30 APR 93 / Talks 'have built a bridge' between China and Taiwan
CHINA and Taiwan, bitter enemies for more than 40 years, yesterday signed
agreements in Singapore which could mark the first tentative steps towards
the resolution of one of the world's more intractable conflicts.
The agreements themselves were limited in nature. The talks were described
as unofficial and were not supposed to involve any discussion of political
matters.
But, as the two delegations posed for the world's media, clinked champagne
glasses and repeatedly shook hands, it was hard to escape the feeling that
something important had been set in train.
The delegates seemed to agree. Mr Koo Chen Fu, a multi-millionaire
businessman and leader of Taiwan's delegation, said the meeting had been
historic. Mr Wang Daohan, a former mayor of Shanghai and leader of the China
side, said the discussions had been momentous.
'We have built a bridge between us,' said Mr Koo. 'No one can say we have
not achieved results . . . both sides have won.'
The agreements cover mostly technical matters. These include joint efforts
to combat crime, the resolution of fishing disputes, judicial co-operation
and cultural and scientific exchanges.
Most importantly a formal structure for future exchanges between the two
sides was also established. With the opening up of China's economy and
growing business and social ties between Taiwan and the mainland such lines
of communication are urgently needed.
Both sides also talked of the deep differences between them.
Taiwan businesses have an estimated Dollars 9bn investments in China. Taiwan
had come to the Singapore meeting wanting assurances from China that it
would develop a legal framework for the protection of these investments. The
Chinese side refused, saying existing laws were adequate. Disagreements on
this issue, still unresolved, forced the meeting into a third unscheduled
day.
Taiwan also became angry when China raised the question of direct shipping
and air links. All contact between China and Taiwan, politically separated
since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, is indirect.
Taiwan said any discussion of direct links was political and as such,
outside the scope of the meeting.
The word reunification was hardly mentioned.
