FT  05 MAY 93 / Guidelines on defence sales kept from MPs for a year
OFFICIAL guidelines governing the export of defence-related equipment to
Iran and Iraq were kept from parliament for almost a year, it emerged
yesterday.
The arms-for-Iraq inquiry heard that ministers decided in 1984 that details
of new guidelines should only be allowed to 'trickle out' to parliament to
minimise any disruption to trade with Iraq and relations generally with the
Arab world.
That decision was revealed on the first day of public hearings in the
inquiry which was prompted by the collapse of the Matrix-Churchill case in
which three former directors of the company were accused of illegally trying
to export arms-making equipment to Iraq. The inquiry was set up to
investigate whether official guidelines were breached with the knowledge or
complicity of the government.
In a forceful exchange, Lord Justice Scott, who is heading the inquiry,
asked a former senior Foreign Office official whether he thought it right
that official guidelines governing defence-related sales to Iraq and Iran
should have been kept from parliament for nearly a year.
Mr Stephen Day, a former head of the Foreign Office's Middle East desk,
denied that he had received any instructions that policy should be kept
secret.
But he confirmed that a decision had been taken by ministers in November
1984 that new guidelines governing exports to Iran and Iraq should be
revealed only incrementally to parliament.
The guidelines, which restricted the export of defence equipment that might
significantly enhance or exacerbate the Iran-Iraq war, were drawn up after
the foreign office expressed concern about the amount of defence-related UK
material reaching the Gulf.
The inquiry heard that a recommendation by Sir Richard Luce, then foreign
office minister of state, that the new guidelines should be announced
'robustly and positively' to the House of Commons and in briefings to the
media was never adopted.
Instead, the guidelines were announced in stages in response to
parliamentary questions between April and October 1985.
Earlier, Sir Richard said his department had found it increasingly difficult
to defend an unannounced policy in the early 1980s that only 'non-lethal
equipment' could be sold to Iran and Iraq.
His view was that the guidelines needed to be made more restrictive as they
were open to abuse. 'We found this a grey area . . . different ministers
could form different opinions about what was lethal and what was not
lethal,' he said.
Without being drawn on specific examples, Sir Richard said that if policy
differences were not resolved between departments, it was the then prime
minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, who took the final decision.
