FT  28 MAY 93 / Generator holds back on coal deal
PROSPECTS FOR the 12 coal mines reprieved by the government last March
deteriorated yesterday when National Power, the largest electricity
generator, ruled out signing contracts with them before the autumn.
Separately, British Coal announced plans to offer four deep mines to the
private sector. Advertisements offering them for licence appear in the
Financial Times and other newspapers today. Another 16 pits will be offered
in the next few weeks.
The long-term threat to coal's future was underlined yesterday when the
government gave National Power consent to build a 1,500MW combined-cycle
turbine power station - running on gas and steam - in Staythorpe,
Nottinghamshire. The company said it had still to decide on whether to
commission that station or another at Didcot, Oxfordshire, but would not do
so until the summer of 1997.
National Power's decision to wait until autumn to sign new contracts with
British Coal means that the 1m tonnes a month produced by the 12 reprieved
pits is destined, at least temporarily, for British Coal's stockpiles.
PowerGen, the corporations's other main customer, is thought to be adopting
an even tougher stance.
Coal industry analysts say the longer the generators delay the contracts for
additional coal - which are essential for the survival of the 12 pits - the
harder the bargain they will drive on prices and volume.
British Coal has offered to supply at between 90p and 95p per gigajoule,
less than two-thirds of the price in existing contracts.
Mr John Baker, chief executive of National Power, speaking yesterday at his
company's annual financial results presentation, said British Coal's offer
was designed to be 'in the competitive ball park'.
The company did not want to test the market until the autumn, however,
partly to comply with fair trading constraints - a reference to the need to
conclude deals with private-sector mines that will emerge from British
Coal's licensing exercise.
The pits being offered immediately to the private sector by British Coal are
Easington, in Durham; Bolsover, in Derbyshire; and Cotgrave and Silverhill
in Nottinghamshire.
Mr Neil Clarke, corporation chairman, said some pits could be reopened under
new management in the autumn. All pits would be subject to competitive
tender, to be evaluated by independent consultants.
Tender selection will be based on 18 sets of criteria, including financial
returns to British Coal, proposals for restoring a site after production
ends, and 'tenderer's commitment to long-term development of a mine'.
Applicants will be able to visit a mine after payment of a Pounds 10,000
bond and to bid after paying a further Pounds 50,000 bond. Both sums will be
returnable.
Mr Richard Budge, chief executive of RJB Mining, which is due to be floated
on the stock exchange next month, said his company would consider each
licensing opportunity on its merits. 'There is considerable market potential
out there,' he said.
