FT  14 JUN 93 / US Money and Credit: Wall Street relaxes inflation watch
JUDGING by the recently released May producer prices index, it looks as if
the inflation scare may be over. At least it should be by tomorrow, when the
second half of the monthly inflation data - the consumer prices index - is
released.
If the CPI numbers are as reassuring as the PPI numbers were (wholesale
prices were unchanged in May, and the core rate, which excludes the volatile
food and energy components, was up only 0.2 per cent), then the bond market
faces relatively plain sailing over the next few weeks.
After a month of navigating choppy waters whipped up by fears that rising
inflation would lead to higher interest rates (it was a month in which the
yield on the 30-year bond rose from just under 6.8 per cent to over 7 per
cent), fixed-income investors must be looking forward to a little
tranquility.
First, however, they will have to get past the final hurdle of tomorrow's
consumer prices report. Analysts are forecasting that both the headline and
core CPI numbers will show an advance of 0.2 per cent for May. This would be
a significant improvement from the average 0.4 per cent growth registered
over the first four months of the year.
If the CPI numbers come in substantially above forecast, then the Federal
Reserve could choose to tighten monetary policy, the weak May PPI numbers
notwithstanding. Such a tightening would probably take the form of a
25-basis point rise in the federal funds rate, to 3.25 per cent, rather than
a fully-fledged increase in the discount rate, which has been at 3 per cent
all year.
Overall, however, Wall Street has relaxed its inflation watch. Most analysts
estimate that inflation will top out at the 3 to 3.5 per cent range for
1993. There is growing belief that the 4 per cent-plus inflation rates seen
earlier this year were a short-term hangover from the unexpectedly strong
economic growth registered at the end of 1992. It was growth that encouraged
some producers and retailers to raise their prices. The subsequent slowdown
since then should see prices come back from the early-year highs.
Amid all the fuss over inflation, the Clinton administration and the Fed
have continued to dance a delicate two-step.
Last week President Clinton met with Fed chairman Mr Alan Greenspan and
reiterated the administration's strongly-held view that the economy was not
strong enough to withstand an interest rate rise. The chorus of politicians
warning the Fed not to put up rates got even louder after the favourable PPI
numbers were released.
At the same time, Fed governors, led by Mr Lawrence Lindsay, were warning
that the Fed was prepared to raise interest rates if inflation looked as if
it might get out of hand. Mr Greenspan himself, however, said in a letter to
a senior Congressman last week that he was disappointed by the poor rate of
economic growth in the first quarter, and that promoting sustainable
economic expansion remained a 'crucial objective' of monetary policy.
Although the bond market was not quite sure what to make of all this, its
attention this week should switch quickly to more overtly political matters
 -such as the progress, or otherwise, of the President's deficit-reduction
package, currently making its way through Congress.
In the past week, the chances of the package being passed by the Senate have
improved, although at the cost of the energy tax, which analysts say will
probably be dumped by the administration in favour of a combination of some
kind of transportation or petrol tax and fresh cuts in spending.
The market has so far taken the horse-trading over the economic package in
its stride. As Ms Kathleen Stephansen of securities house Donaldson, Lufkin
&amp; Jenrette says: 'At this stage of the dialogue the composition of
deficit-cutting measures is less important than achieving the cuts.'
