FT  30 JAN 93 / International Company News: US mobile phone companies hit by
brain cancer scare
SHARES IN US companies involved in the cellular telephone industry have
fallen sharply this week as America has been gripped by a scare linking use
of mobile phones to brain cancer.
Among companies hardest hit have been Motorola, the world's largest
manufacturer of cellular telephones, and McCaw Cellular, the biggest US
operator of a cellular telephone service. Both companies insist the phones
are safe.
The drop accelerated yesterday as Motorola's shares lost Dollars 4 7/8 to
close at Dollars 51, down 9 per cent on the day and 17 per cent on the week.
McCaw closed at Dollars 32 1/2 , down Dollars 3 3/8 for a loss of 9 per cent
on the day and 11 per cent on the week.
Whether the alleged health threats are real or not, the public anxiety
sweeping the US could slow the industry's remarkably rapid growth, which in
recent years has been averaging 30 to 40 per cent a year. There are now some
10m cellular customers in the US.
The scare began late last week on the popular television phone-in programme
Larry King Live.
Mr David Reynard, a resident of Florida, claimed on the programme that his
wife had been killed by her heavy use of a cellular phone.
He said a cancerous brain tumour had developed near the point where the
telephone's antenna would have been positioned when the instrument was used.
Mr Reynard is suing NEC, the Japanese electronics group which made the
telephone, and a subsidiary of GTE, the telecommunications group which
provided the local service.
Public anxiety was intensified by the coincidental fact that Mr Reynard's
announcement came just days after two leading US business chairmen, Mr
Michael Walsh of Tenneco and the late Mr Reginald Lewis of TLC Beatrice,
were revealed to have brain cancer. It was not clear, however, that either
man was a particularly heavy user of cellular telephones.
As health worries escalated this week, the cellular industry tried
strenuously, but with limited success, to dispel fears of the
electro-magnetic radio waves emitted by the phones.
Motorola insisted the safety of its phone was 'rooted in scientific fact',
and produced several papers on the effects of radio waves on human and
animal.
But critics were quick to point out that the evidence advanced by Motorola
included only one study - and that incomplete - of the effects on human
cells in the radio frequency spectrum specifically used for cellular
communications.
By the end of the week, the consensus on Wall Street was that while there is
no firm evidence that cellular phones cause brain cancer, nor has the
industry yet been able to produce conclusive evidence that they do not. In
the absence of that reassurance, public anxieties could persist for months.
This explains why Mr Thomas Wheeler, president of the Cellular
Communications Industry Association, announced yesterday afternoon that it
would fund research to 're-validate the findings of existing studies, which
have found that the radio waves from cellular phones are safe.' The
association asked the federal government to appoint a blue-ribbon panel to
review the methodology of this research.
' We cannot permit this revolution in productivity, personal convenience and
economic growth to be derailed by an unfounded scare, triggered by a
lawsuit,' he declared.
Nevertheless, phone dealers across the US yesterday reported orders which
had been stalled or cancelled because of the scare. Even hard-headed Wall
Street analysts were thinking twice about relying quite so heavily on this
symbol of yuppiedom.
