FT  25 MAY 93 / Cambodian Elections: Cambodia shatters myth of Japanese
warrior - Timidity among Tokyo's UN contingent has embarrassed the
government
FEW of the foreign contingents working for the United Nations in Cambodia
can have been as pleased as the Japanese that the first two days of the
UN-organised election this week passed off much more peacefully than
expected. Japan's attempt to forge a new and more prominent role for itself
on the international stage - symbolised by the choice of the Japanese
diplomat Mr Yasushi Akashi as chief of UN operations in Cambodia - has been
afflicted by both tragedy and ignominy.
The killing of two Japanese peacekeepers in separate attacks in April and
May prompted anxious Japanese at home and fearful Japanese policemen in
Cambodia to ask the Tokyo government to withdraw its nationals and thus end
its first use of ground forces abroad since the second world war.
Such a move would probably have put an insurmountable obstacle in the way of
Japan's efforts to earn a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
For the time being Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, Japan's prime minister, has held
firm, reiterating his country's commitment to the UN Transitional Authority
in Cambodia (Untac) while sending senior officials to Phnom Penh to plead
for improved security for Japanese and other forces.
Japan, whose contributions to Cambodia included 600 members of an
engineering battalion and 75 unarmed policemen, has had an unhappy record in
the country, although there is so far no evidence that its nationals are
being targeted by Khmer Rouge guerrillas as the 'soft underbelly' of Untac's
22,000 peacekeepers.
Atsuhito Nakata, an idealistic and dedicated 25-year-old civilian volunteer
working as a district electoral supervisor, was ambushed and murdered with a
Cambodian assistant in Kompong Thom province in April. It is not clear
whether he was killed by the Khmer Rouge or by frustrated job seekers denied
lucrative employment with the UN.
Haruyuki Takada, a 33-year-old policeman, was killed in north-western
Cambodia earlier this month in a Khmer Rouge attack on a UN convoy.
After the second killing, several Japanese policemen deserted their posts
and sought the safety of the capital, to the intense embarrassment of the
Japanese government and Mr Akashi. Mr Hiroto Yamazaki, head of the Japanese
police in Cambodia, asked for his men to be withdrawn from the country.
'It's absurd,' said one diplomat from another nation contributing forces to
Untac. 'You can't have countries taking that sort of unilateral action.'
At least four of the policemen are still in Phnom Penh, although Untac and
Japan have found a solution of sorts by declaring them to be ill. Japanese
journalists say they are suffering from 'mental exhaustion'. Brig-Gen Klaas
Roos, the Dutch chief of Untac police, says they have medical certificates
and will be sent home.
The humiliation of the Japanese contingent was compounded when two prisoners
linked to the Cambodian government and suspected of murdering an opposition
politician escaped in a jailbreak in Prey Veng; two Japanese policemen were
supposed to be guarding them 24 hours a day precisely because Untac did not
trust the prison authorities to keep the suspects behind bars.
Outdated western images of the 'warrior' Japanese dating back to the second
world war have quickly been dispelled by the reality in Cambodia, and
replaced with a sense of resentment that the Japanese appear to be receiving
special treatment.
The Japanese engineers, and the 40 newly-arrived Japanese international
polling station officers, have been posted to Takeo province near Phnom
Penh, which is regarded as one of the safest areas of Cambodia.
In Takeo the engineers live in a luxurious camp which boasts everything from
air-conditioning and video games to herbal baths, karaoke machines and cold
Sapporo beer. All polling station officers were allowed to receive a light
flak jacket but some non-Japanese complained that their Japanese colleagues
had been issued with full bullet-proof vests by Tokyo.
Part of the problem for the Japanese policemen and soldiers is that their
government, in its eagerness to play an international role, deliberately
painted too rosy a picture of the situation in Cambodia.
Among the principles laid down by the government for Japanese participation
in peacekeeping operations - to conform with Japan's pacifist post-war
constitution - was that there should be a ceasefire agreement in place.
However the Cambodian ceasefire has been more honoured in the breach than
the observance.
'We are interpreting (our constitution) to the maximum possible so that our
government can contribute to international peacekeeping operations,' admits
one Japanese diplomat in Phnom Penh.
This stretching of the rules is confirmed by Japanese officers from the
engineer battalion in Takeo. Faced with the threat of Khmer Rouge attempts
to disrupt the election, the Japanese are mounting armed patrols around
their camp, but they have to say publicly that they are just driving around
and having a look. 'In the Japanese area, it's not called a patrol, but it
is a patrol,' says one officer.
Japan has learned the hard way from Cambodia - where the Khmer Rouge has
flouted a 1991 peace agreement - that peacekeeping is an unpredictable and
dangerous business which demands flexibility rather than a set of rules
insisting blindly on real peace as a condition for participation.
'I received a message from the secretary-general of the ruling (Japanese)
Liberal Democratic party reminding me that the Japanese peacekeepers in
Cambodia are still at the kindergarten stage,' Mr Akashi, the Untac chief,
told reporters recently.
'Even though they may seem to you very cowardly and timid, you have to give
them time and experience,' he said. 'I am sure that in the future they can
contribute very positively to peace in the world.'
