FT  17 NOV 93 / League tables boost exam performance: Scores up 8% this
year; Strong results from single-sex schools; Only 58 of top 200 performers
from state sector
A YEAR after publication of the first league tables there can be no doubt
that the publication of exam results has changed the performance of
Britain's schools. But it is not clear whether the quality of education has
been improved.
This year's tables demonstrate that with the publication of exam scores
schools are forced to focus more closely on improving results. More
precisely, it focuses them on achieving the targets which are set by the
league table compilers.
Last year 38.1 per cent of the 15-16-year-olds in England gained five GCSE
passes at grades A to C, the equivalent of the old O-level pass. This year
the figure has risen to 41.1 per cent - an 8 per cent increase.
The number of children achieving five passes at grades A to G, the
equivalent of an old CSE pass, has also risen this year, from 82.0 per cent
to 84.3 per cent. Even the number passing just one GCSE at these grades has
risen from 91.3 per cent to 93 per cent.
Last year's headlines on the league tables dwelt at length on the disparity
of performance between different local education authorities. That disparity
is no less this year. More than half the pupils in Kingston-upon-Thames, the
leafy borough in south-west London, scored five or more GCSEs at grades A to
C. In the Merseyside borough of Knowsley, just one in six pupils achieved
this target.
But there are even bigger disparities between state schools in the same
authorities. In Oxfordshire, for example, 44.7 per cent of pupils scored
five or more GCSEs at grades A to C this year. The scores in the county's 35
comprehensive schools vary from 65 per cent at Wheatley Park School, Holtham
to 18 per cent at Oxford School in Oxford.
Analysis of the results by the FT shows significant variations between
different types of schools and between the sexes.
Grant-maintained schools, which have opted out of local authority control,
perform significantly better than average with 47.1 per cent achieving
five-plus GCSEs at grades A to C. This may, however, reflect nothing more
than the disproportionate share of selective schools which have opted out.
The strong performance of single sex schools - already noted in the FT 1,000
A-level league tables - is also demonstrated by this year's results. In
mixed schools 35 per cent of pupils gained five or more GCSEs at grades A to
C, compared with 48 per cent in boys' schools and 55 per cent in girls'
schools.
Such figures are bound to increase the pressure from parents for single-sex
education for girls which led Shenfield High School in Essex to announce
that from next year boys and girls would be separated for classes.
There remains a strong link between the performance of LEAs and their social
environment. The Department of the Environment uses its 'Additional
Educational Needs' index as a measure of social deprivation when
distributing grant to local authorities. This reflects three factors:
The percentage of children whose parents claim social security benefits
The percentage of children from lone-parent families
The proportion of children born outside the UK.
Six of the 10 worst performing education authorities are also in the bottom
10 in terms of this social deprivation index. Four of the top 10 performers
are the four least deprived authorities on the government's index.
This year for the first time the league tables show information on truancy
rates. Although the value of the measure is under dispute it shows the
reassuringly low level of 1 per cent of sessions missed through unauthorised
absence from school. Just less than one in eight pupils has missed one or
more half days.
However, there is again considerable variation between schools, with up to a
fifth of school days missed in the schools with the worst truancy rates.
Has anyone acted on the tables. Governors, even more than parents, seem to
be doing so. One boarding school headmaster was presented with a copy of the
FT's last survey of A-levels by a governor over breakfast and told he would
have to do better. A grammar school head is facing a move for his dismissal
from a governor after his school fell about a dozen places.
Some local education authorities, such as Hertfordshire, have announced and
advertised their own league tables ahead of the government. Others have
opposed the tables or produced their own 'value-added' analyses which show
how schools have improved children's performances.
Those which see their performance slip may have some explaining to do. The
London Borough of Harrow finds itself in that uncomfortable position this
year, having fallen to 16th place from second last year. The percentage of
pupils with five or more GCSEs at A to C has fallen from 49.7 to 44.5.
A spokesman for the borough yesterday chose to highlight an increase in the
numbers achieving at least one grade A to C pass. The fall in scores on A to
C grades in five or more subjects was blamed on the poor performance of an
opted-out school.
The spokesman said: 'If you take account of the grant-maintained school, we
were exactly the same as last year. There's very little variation in the
percentages in other schools.'
The Centre for the Study of Comprehensive Schools at the University of
Leicester is more critical of league tables. It summarised the reaction of
league table high flyers as 'nothing to worry about', while those at the
bottom typically pointed towards poor resources.
