FT  18 JUN 93 / Survey of Chemicals and the Environment (3): The need for a
culture shock - The problems of implementing Responsible Care
The rhetoric behind Responsible Care is all very laudable, but actually
implementing the programme is far from easy. Implementation involves far
more than just investing in technology and plant. Rather, it requires a
change in an organisation's very culture.
'Top-down edicts have a place. But if people believe you are serious, things
happen far more quickly,' argues Mr Nicholas Reding, vice-chairman of
Monsanto.
Changing an organisation's culture is not always easy, however. Many
companies experience resistance from their own employees.
Mr Roger Papp, head of safety and environment at Elf-Atochem, admits: 'It's
difficult to convince all employees that you are serious about the
environment. One of our most fundamental roles is to convince people that
the issue is important.'
Researchers are most difficult to convince because they are most confident
about their work, he argues. For many years, chemical engineers were
primarily concerned about reducing costs and increasing volume. Now they
must also consider the environment.
'One of the problems is that the heads of business units tend to be more
worried about costs than the environment,' says Mr Jacques Salamitou,
director of environment at Rhone-Poulenc. 'Site managers are fine, because
they have to deal with the local communities. The problem is business
managers because they are not so exposed to the public.'
To counter this problem, health, safety and environment must be the
responsibility of line management, insists Mr Jurgen Muller, an executive
director at Sandoz.
At Ciba, Mr Kasper Eigenmann, head of corporate unit safety and environment,
says that the environment has changed from a specialised discipline whose
role was essentially defensive, to a more integrated approach in which every
member of the company is involved.
Mr Muller agrees: 'It must not be the province of experts, with the line
manager responsible for maximising production and another responsible for
safety and environment. That is sub-optimal and dangerous because it leads
to mixed priorities within the organisation.'
In most companies, progress in reducing emissions has come in a number of
stages. 'We started with end of pipe solutions,' says Mr Hans Kunzi,
director, corporate safety and environmental protection, at Roche. 'That was
important because it was direct and effective. We built incinerators and
effluent plants to treat the waste we produced.'
Some groups have been forced to close plants because investing in the
necessary environmental protection would not generate a return on capital.
In France, Elf-Atochem stopped production of some fine chemicals in the
department of the Lande because it was impossible to achieve a return given
the additional investment required. Similarly, Monsanto closed its phosphate
plant at Colombia, Tennessee, because of environmental costs.
Now companies are moving towards waste minimisation, improving processes so
less waste is created during manufacturing.
'The next step will be to integrate environmental controls into production.
This is difficult. If you take a pharmaceutical product, it can take 20
steps to manufacture it. If only 90 per cent is converted each time, it
leads to enormous waste. We try to reduce the steps and the waste each
time,' says Mr Kunzi.
'We have to make sure we manufacture in a decent way,' he says. 'What was
good enough 20 years ago is not good enough now. Development goes on all the
time. We have to integrate environmental control into production. We have a
long way to go.'
Mr Papp at Atochem points to the example of the group's plant at Lavera near
Marseille, where the process to manufacture vinyl-chloride was modified to
carry out the reactions at high pressure. A system for photo-chlorination
using glass lamps capable of operating at high pressure had to be developed.
By investing in the process, the waste stream was minimised, and the excess
hydrochloric acid could be recycled for use in a neighbouring plant.
Waste minimisation can, on occasions, quickly pay back the investment. At
Rhone-Poulenc's site at Pont-de-Claix in the Rhone-Alpes, waste minimisation
and plant closures meant a new FFr150m hazardous waste incinerator was being
used only at half its 30,000 tonnes capacity. This meant the company was
able to use the incinerator for commercial uses.
Although waste minimisation normally increases yields, the costs can be
considerable and the financial benefits are not always demonstrable. 'It
would be naive to say that reducing pollution always pays. Not all
investments for the environment are productive,' says Mr Jean-Jacques
Salzmann, senior vice-president, corporate safety and environment, at
Sandoz.
'If waste minimisation is not cost-effective, we simply won't do it,' says
Mr Salamitou at Rhone-Poulenc. 'We have closed plants in the US because
there was no point in investing to bring them up to standard.'
Mr Papp says: 'Waste minimisation is cost- effective when it improves total
efficiency. But it isn't always easy. If there hadn't been a plant at Lavera
capable of using hydrochloric acid, there would have been no point in
investing. Just because something is clean doesn't mean it's always
cost-effective.'
Improving environmental practice involves reducing not only emissions, but
also energy consumption, argues Dr Hans Jorg Henne, president for
environmental industrial safety and energy at BASF. At Ciba, energy
consumption per tonne has fallen by 50 per cent over the last 20 years,
although the group admits it has risen over the last two or three years.
While historic performances have improved at most groups, there are
divergences between companies about the usefulness of setting future targets
for emissions. Some targets are impressive.
However, as a programme for action, such targets can be misleading, says Mr
Eigenmann at Ciba. 'There's no point in announcing a 10 per cent target and
then asking every plant to cut by 10 per cent. You have to look where the
worst performance is and improve that - the reduction in emissions could be,
say, 50 per cent of a large figure, and cost far less than cutting 5 per
cent of very little small amount at another plant. That way the group can
tackle the problem in an efficient way.'
In spite of past improvements, there is still some way to go, warns Mr
Thomas Riggert, director of European chemical activities at Arthur Andersen,
the consultants. He points out that process control systems are not well
integrated in many companies which often have little idea of implications of
a potential accident at any one time.
Meanwhile, companies are moving towards environmentally friendly products.
'Frankly, looking at the total product life-cycle has a lot of merit,' says
Mr Reding at Monsanto. He argues that companies must look at their
suppliers' waste streams as well as its downstream use. Groups are talking
about 'product stewardship'.
Roche set up a special section to look at the ecological compatibility of
products and processes in 1978 with one person. Since then it has expanded
significantly, and has checked out the 40 largest volume products at the
company.
'Sometimes you have to eliminate products,' says Mr Salzmann at Sandoz. For
example, the company has cut out all products containing mercury at its
Basle site. Similarly, Ciba has cut products. The company ceased production
of Galicrom insecticide during the mid-1980s because it could not be
produced in an environmentally-friendly way.
