FT  26 JAN 93 / Czechs and Slovaks hurry towards currency split: Economic
strains have forced the two republics to hasten plans for a monetary divorce
LESS than a month after the peaceful break-up of the former Czechoslovakia
the two newly independent states are preparing for a currency split which
will underline their economic differences.
The original plan worked out between Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime
minister, and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak counterpart, imagined that the
two countries would be able to keep a common currency until early summer.
Only then would they split, with the new Czech and Slovak crowns
interchangeable and equally valuable until such time as market forces
determined their future parities.
In practice, expectations that the Slovak crown would be worth less than the
Czech crown have resulted in increasing strain on the joint currency
arrangement. This led to a recent run on the banks as individuals and
companies in both republics exchanged crowns for foreign currencies.
The net result has been a decision to bring forward the currency split,
which is now expected within the next few days. In anticipation of the split
the monetary authorities have begun marking their own banknotes, prompting
anxious savers to deposit all their spare cash in the banks while foreign
institutions have stopped buying crowns in an attempt to reduce stockpiles
of old notes.
According to a study by PlanEcon, the US-based research and consultancy
group, the Slovak crown may need a 25 per cent devaluation against the Czech
crown to remain competitive. This will be a hard pill to swallow for the
Slovak government, for political as well as economic reasons.
But it is not only the currency which is feeling the strain. Businessmen are
complaining of growing bureaucracy while the introduction of value-added tax
has caused a public outcry over unexpectedly high price increases. Later
this year a new bankruptcy law is expected to lead to widespread closures
and higher unemployment.
Businessmen claim trading between the two countries has become much more
difficult and costly because of extra bureaucracy and customs regulations.
Companies which import goods produced in the other republic have to go
through a cumbersome process to cover VAT rules and customs' clearance.
Some Czech exporters complain of endless delay and problems with shipments
sent back to Prague by over-zealous customs officers.
Both governments are also finding that keeping inflation under control will
be more difficult than expected as the introduction of VAT on January 1 will
add 6-8 percentage points on prices this year.
VAT was introduced as part of a broad tax reform to modernise the economy
but led to sharper than expected price rises. According to the Czech
statistical office the average price of food rose 8 per cent over the first
two weeks of the year while the price of coal and cement for industry rose
22 per cent and 27 per cent respectively. This will have a knock-on effect
throughout the economy.
The Czech government expects inflation of 15-17 per cent this year, though
some economists say it will be closer to 25 per cent. Slovakia has seen
similar price rises. Both governments say they will not reintroduce price
controls, though neither has completely ruled this out.
Unemployment is also expected to rise as restructuring of industry deepens
and mass privatisation, at least in the Czech republic, accelerates the
labour shake-out. Until now the Czech republic, with unemployment of 2.57
per cent, claims the lowest rate in Europe. But trade unions expect
joblessness to rise to between 6 and 8 per cent in the Czech republic and
from more than 11 to 14 per cent in Slovakia.
