FT  15 SEP 93 / Florida cancels tourism campaign after murder
FLORIDA'S state tourism office yesterday cancelled its domestic and
international advertising campaigns in the wake of the killing of a British
tourist - the ninth foreign visitor to be murdered in the state in the past
year.
Florida police said Mr Gary Colley, aged 34, was killed and his friend Ms
Margaret Jagger wounded when they were attacked in a lay-by near
Tallahassee, the state capital, in the early hours. Ms Jagger was later
released from hospital.
Governor Lawton Chiles announced a Dollars 10,000 (Pounds 6,500) reward for
information leading to Mr Colley's killers, and he asked the federal
government for help in the effort to crack down on crime. He also announced
plans to enlist up to 500 game wardens, agriculture inspectors and marine
officers to strengthen patrols on major roads.
Mr Colley's death follows the killing last week of Mr Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand,
a German tourist, in a highway shooting in Miami.
Holidaymakers are cancelling trips to Florida because of the attacks. Mr
Greg Farmer, the Florida state secretary of commerce, said cancellations at
hotels and resorts were running at around 20 per cent after Mr Rakebrand's
killing, and the latest attack would probably inflict more damage on the
state's Dollars 31bn a year tourism industry.
'It is going to be just catastrophic. This is going to have a very, very
negative impact,' Mr Farmer said.
Mr Ken Fortune, the county sheriff, said he believed the couple had been
chosen at random, and not targeted as foreigners.
The British and German governments already issue warnings to tourists about
the dangers of travelling in Florida, but travel agents in Europe have
generally distinguished Miami from the rest of the state, and advised their
customers to pick destinations such as Orlando or St Petersburg.
Six of the foreign visitors who have fallen victim to Florida's violence in
the past year were attacked in the Miami area, but yesterday's shooting took
place in the state's quieter northern panhandle. Tallahassee is a quiet town
festooned in Spanish moss, more akin to neighbouring Georgia or Alabama than
to the brasher Miami coast.
Florida's murder rate of 10.7 per 100,000 population, however, is lower than
Georgia's and well below the rate in states such as Louisiana, New York and
Texas.
Mr Colley and Ms Jagger, from Wilsden, near Bradford, in West Yorkshire,
were sleeping in their car in a rest area about 25 miles from Tallahassee
when two teenagers approached their car and banged on the windows. The two
assailants opened fire when the pair tried to drive away.
An attendant at the rest area gave police a description of the attackers.
About 40m tourists visit Florida every year, and some 17 per cent are
foreigners, including an estimated 800,000 from the UK.
