FT  26 JUN 93 / Rightwing whites storm SA conference centre
SCORES of armed South African rightwing whites yesterday stormed the
country's constitutional conference centre outside Johannesburg with an
armoured car in an attempt to halt negotiations on the country's democratic
future.
About 1,000 heavily armed police took little action against the members of
the Afrikaner Volksfront who beat up black women delegates and journalists,
and daubed the walls of the negotiation chamber with slogans demanding an
Afrikaner homeland and accusing the ruling National party of treason.
Terrified delegates fled, leaving about 100 men and women, - all toting
weapons  - occupying the chamber where South Africa's first multiracial
constitution is being written. About 3,000 more waited outside.
President FW de Klerk vowed to make quick arrests, while Mr Nelson Mandela,
president of the African National Congress, called for the immediate
detention of rightwing leaders, saying the arrest of junior people would not
be sufficient.
'The first arrests will take place maybe tonight, tomorrow. Immediate action
is being planned,' Mr de Klerk said after supporters of the Afrikaner
Volksfront had smashed through the glass doors of the centre with the
vehicle and stormed the chamber where negotiators were debating an end to
white minority rule.
Mr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, Inkatha Freedom party leader, condemned the raid as
'totally and utterly reprehensible'.
Many protesters cited the fact that, on the eve of the assault,
constitutional negotiators had voted by an overwhelming majority to deny the
demand of the rightwing Conservative party (which represents ultra-radical
whites) for Afrikaner 'self-determination' in a separate white state.
Every protester had his own justification for the attack.
Young Johan Cronje, carrying a flag of the old Boer republic of the
Transvaal, insisted that 'all we're asking for is land. If you don't have
land, how can you live?' while Fred Rundell, a member of the Volksfront
executive, drew a parallel with the liberation of eastern Europe. 'What
happened here today was a spontaneous uprising of the people like what
happened in Romania,' he argued.
Within hours, the 26-party negotiating forum was back in business, with the
chamber walls repainted and even the Conservative party (which helped lead
the attack) seated at its accustomed place.
