FT  14 DEC 93 / Clark fuels Iraq arms exports controversy
A change to the government's guidelines on defence exports should have been
announced to parliament, Mr Alan Clark, former minister of trade and
defence, said yesterday.
In evidence to the Scott arms to Iraq inquiry, Mr Clark said the change,
secretly agreed by ministers in late 1988, was used by officials to approve
additional exports of defence equipment to Iraq.
His statement will further fuel the arms for Iraq controversy and represents
the first serious crack in an otherwise solid ministerial defence of the
government's role in the affair.
Mr Clark said he was in favour of announcing the change in the guidelines to
MPs, but allowed himself to be overruled by the Foreign Office.
'I think (had we announced it there would have been a row that would have
flared and blown over . . . you would have needed a blow torch to get it
alight again,' Mr Clark said.
His comment contradicted the position taken by his former ministerial
colleague at the Foreign Office, Mr William Waldegrave, who justified
withholding the change from parliament and the media because it served the
'overriding public interest'.
Mr Clark compared Mr Waldegrave's attitude to an 'Alice in Wonderland
situation where because something hadn't been announced it hadn't happened'.
It was Mr Clark's admission to an Old Bailey judge last year that he had
misled customs officials about the extent to which he had encouraged British
exporters to Iraq that contributed to the collapse of the trial of three
executives of the Midlands machine tools company, Matrix-Churchill, who were
accused of illegally exporting arms to Iraq.
The trial was abandoned after ministers had attempted to suppress classified
documents showing the extent Whitehall had circumvented export controls.
Mr Clark said there was an understandable reluctance within Whitehall to
stir up parliament.
He described the government's use of the guidelines as 'improper' and
'tiresome' and Foreign Office use of intelligence as 'confused and
alarmist'.
Mr Clark also cast doubt on Lady Thatcher's evidence at the Scott inquiry
last week.
Lady Thatcher said that as prime minister she had not been made aware of the
change to the guidelines. But Mr Clark said that ministerial decisions had
been copied to Downing Street and circulated to Lady Thatcher's personal
foreign affairs adviser, Sir Charles Powell.
Mr Clark said Lady Thatcher's parliamentary answers on the subject of arms
to Iraq indicated that she had been informed of the change to the
guidelines.
