FT  02 JUL 93 / Developing a more worldly bank: Plans at the World Bank for
improving its project management
THE World Bank will next week hold three days of discussions on reforms that
could radically alter the way the Washington-based development institution
operates.
Executive directors representing the shareholder countries will discuss
working papers proposing steps to halt the decline in the quality of the
bank's loan portfolio, policies for disclosure of information, and the
establishment of an inspection panel to review complaints from the public
about bank-funded projects.
Some of the changes result from several months of argument and
soul-searching among managers and directors of the bank, provoked by a
report last year from Mr Willi Wapenhans, a former senior bank official, on
the deterioration in the quality of the bank's portfolio.
The Wapenhans report said that more than 75 per cent of World Bank projects
showed acceptable performance, but warned that the proportion of projects
with big problems had risen from 11 per cent in 1981 to 20 per cent in 1991.
Bank managers and directors have also been acutely anxious to avoid any
repetition of their debacle over the Narmada dam project in India. Sustained
criticism of the project from local activists and environmental groups
around the world forced the bank to appoint an independent commission whose
damning findings eventually led India to withdraw its request for bank
funding.
'The summary point is simple: neither the board nor the president want more
surprises about problems with on-going projects,' says the draft paper on
the establishment of an inspection panel circulated within the bank.
But the internal debate has been sharpened and greatly accelerated by the
prodding of the US Congress, in the person of Mr Barney Frank, the
Massachusetts Democrat who chairs the House subcommittee which oversees
international development issues.
Mr Frank's lever is that he controls the legislation to authorise
Washington's Dollars 3.75bn (Pounds 2.5bn) contribution to the International
Development Association, the World Bank affiliate which provides
concessional interest rate loans to the poorest countries.
In negotiations with the World Bank and the US Treasury, Mr Frank has
implicitly, although not publicly, made the IDA contribution conditional on
improvements in the bank's disclosure and appeals procedures.
The documents produced for next week's board discussions are still viewed as
inadequate by the environmental groups that have been at the forefront of
demands for greater transparency in World Bank operations.
They also fall short in some respects of the understanding US officials
thought they had reached in their negotiations with the bank. Nevertheless,
they go much further than before in meeting demands from environmentalists
and shareholder governments for greater transparency.
The draft papers propose two options for the setting up of an inspection
process.
One idea, raised by the Dutch and German executive directors, is for a
single inspector who would not only investigate outside complaints but also
review a random sample of bank projects.
A second proposal would involve three independent inspectors, reviewing only
projects about which complaints had been received.
While there are still questions about details such as budgets and the
publication of inspection reports, the second proposal seems likely to prove
broadly satisfactory to the US Congress.
The draft paper on disclosure, however, raises more problems. Although the
bank proposes publishing final staff appraisal reports on projects and final
country reports, early information on projects would be available only in
specially prepared Project Information Briefs. Critics led by the
Environmental Defence Fund have circulated comments insisting on the
publication of early project documents, 'not fairy-tale versions of them'.
The third paper, 'Next Steps', is designed to follow up the Wapenhans report
with measures to improve portfolio performance. An earlier version was
dismissed by shareholder countries as inadequate, and the new document
attempts to offer stronger measures to shift the bank's corporate culture
away from one in which employees are rewarded for approving ever greater
volumes of loans, towards one which focuses on implementation.
'Next Steps' introduces portfolio performance reviews for each borrower
country, but also promises changes in personnel practices to increase the
importance attached to portfolio management in staff reviews and promotions.
'It is hardly possible to over-emphasise the importance of these incentives
to reinforce the change in culture towards implementation,' says the
document.
It argues that reversing the decline in the quality of the portfolio must be
given the highest priority in the bank's agenda.
