FT  04 SEP 93 / Finance and the Family: Breaking down the costs of divorce -
The financial effects and legal implications of the decision to end a
marriage
TWO in five marriages today end in divorce. One in five women and one in
eight men are divorced by the age of 33, according to a survey released this
week by the Economic and Social Research Council.
Those facing a marriage breakdown have to cope not only with the emotional
distress but also with financial disruption and increased costs.
One of the hard tasks facing a couple on the verge of divorce is the
division of assets and, in situations where one is financially dependent on
the other, deciding how much maintenance should be paid.
The Legal Position
Going to court can be a lengthy and expensive business but if an amicable
settlement cannot be worked out some people may feel there is no
alternative.
Unlike some American states and several countries, the law in England and
Wales does not stipulate precise redistribution of assets but is
discretionary.
'The law used to be that the parties had to be put back in the position they
were before marriage,' said Douglas Alexiou, senior partner and head of
family law at Gordon Dadds solicitors, which specialises in divorce cases.
'But that was impractical and now, the function of a court is not to punish
or to compensate but to redistribute fairly.'
The court will decide on apportioning the assets according to the length of
the marriage, the earning power of the husband and wife and the needs of the
parties. If a couple have children under 18, the court's main concern will
be with their welfare but it no longer decides on levels of child
maintenance.
The couple has to provide detailed information about their income and
assets, backed if necessary by documentation. Although wealthier spouses may
be tempted to shift their assets to a relative or friend in order to
disguise how much they own, Alexiou warns that this is not a good idea. If
the lawyers find out, the court will disregard the transfer and treat the
asset as the spouse's own.
Couples who have a pre-nuptial agreement are probably aware that these are
not enforceable legally.
Child maintenance
Levels of child maintenance used to be decided by the courts, but varied
widely as there were no standards to follow. Since April, a new system has
been operated by the Child Support Agency. It is designed for separated
parents claiming state benefits, but parents at all income levels can come
under its jurisdiction.
The agency uses a formula to work out how much the absent parent should pay
as a contribution to the child or children's upkeep, depending on both
parents' incomes and essential living expenses. The figure should be more
consistent than formerly. High-earning absent parents can still be taken to
court for maintenance above the agency's maximum assessment, to cope with
expenses such as school fees.
The child maintenance formula automatically includes an amount of money for
the carer. That could mean that even when a couple has made a 'clean break'
agreement, the spouse looking after the children could claim some
maintenance.
So far the agency is only taking on new cases, where there is no existing
child maintenance arrangement, but it will gradually take responsibility for
existing cases during the next few years. The agency is entitled to trace
missing parents using national insurance and Inland Revenue records, and
have maintenance payments deducted from their salaries if they will not pay
voluntarily. It can charge for its assessment and collection services. Legal
Aid
There are two main types of assistance for people seeking a divorce in
England and Wales: Legal Advice, also known as the green form scheme, which
provides what its name suggests, and Civil Legal Aid, for those preparing to
go to court. If your disposable income is Pounds 6,800 or less and your
disposable capital is Pounds 6,750 or less, you qualify for Legal Aid on
financial grounds but you must also show that you have reasonable grounds
for taking or defending a court action. The financial qualifying limits for
Legal Advice are lower.
The most common misconception about Legal Aid, according to Lyn Graham of
the Legal Aid Board, is that it is a gift when in fact it is a loan. If your
disposable income is more than Pounds 2,294, you will pay monthly
contributions towards the cost of your claim. If you are awarded money or
property as a result of the divorce, but your ex-spouse does not pay your
costs in full, you will have to pay what is known as the statutory charge -
an amount determined by the Legal Aid office to cover your costs.
If a home is recovered, payment of the statutory charge can be postponed but
it will incur simple interest, currently of 8 per cent per annum. If you
lose, the court will take into account your financial means in deciding the
level of costs awarded against you.
Financial planning
If you anticipate being worse off after the divorce, you should try to
assess your income needs. In most cases, it is the woman who is likely to
find it harder to adjust if she has been financially dependent on her
husband.
Fiona Price of Fiona Price &amp; Partners, London-based independent financial
advisers, says it is all too common for women to underestimate how much they
will need to live on.
'One woman was being paid Pounds 150 a month by her ex-husband with no
provision for inflation and though she had Pounds 60,000-70,000 in the
building society and felt well-off, she was spending more than she was
earning in interest. She had settled for something which she thought was
reasonable without realising that it was not enough.'
Price advises writing down how much you spend and what you spend it on in
order to be able to make a realistic claim and to make informed investment
decisions.
You should also close as quickly as possible joint accounts and destroy
joint credit cards, if you suspect your spouse may make use of them.
However, Price advises maintaining insurance policies until a settlement has
been agreed.
If you are covered for medical expenses or life insurance as part of your
spouse's employees benefits, you will lose these on divorce and will need to
take out policies under your own name.
A wife loses rights to any benefits from her husband's pension scheme on
divorce.
The courts in England and Wales have no power to transfer pensions rights
from husbands to wives but in Scotland pensions are regarded as part of
'matrimonial property' which should be shared fairly on divorce.
The Pensions Management Institute has recommended that courts divide pension
rights between a divorcing couple but the government has yet to respond to
its recommendations. Until it does, women should try to make savings
arrangements of their own during the marriage and try to get a divorce
settlement adequate to provide for their old age.
