FT  04 JUN 93 / Hard look at soft option: Japan's big computer makers face a
difficult road back to profitability
Fujitsu of Japan last year lost money for the first time since 1949. NEC has
joined it in the red, while Hitachi has already reported stagnant sales and
sharply reduced taxable profits.
The three companies hand-picked by the Japanese government 40 years ago to
lead the country's attack on the world's large computer market are reeling
from the same blows that have had western computer companies on the ropes
for the past three years.
Recession and economic instability have persuaded customers to trim capital
spending. Rapid technological change has sown uncertainty and caution.
Through the 1980s, Japanese mainframe manufacturers were sustained and
protected by a buoyant home market. Large Japanese companies, some steps
behind the west in data processing sophistication, were locked into the
concept of centralised mainframes housed in data centres, a business model
created and perpetuated by International Business Machines of the US.
Fujitsu, the spearhead of Japan's computer industry and the world's number
two information technology company, saw IBM as both its chief competitor and
its principal role model. Its computers were functionally similar to IBM's
and ran the same software. Its aim was to be the world leader in information
technology through a 'family' of companies in which it took equity stakes.
Since 1990, that family has included ICL of the UK, in which it has an 80
per cent share.
Many saw Fujitsu's takeover of ICL as an opportunistic move which would make
the UK company a Trojan horse for Japanese ambitions in the European
computer market.
While the rationale for the takeover was ICL's need for a well-heeled
partner, Fujitsu's stake may prove to be its own salvation in a rapidly
changing world.
Today, the mainframe market is dwindling worldwide. The larger manufacturers
are talking of a 40 per cent decline over the past four years. The market
will not return; neither will yesterday's profitability.
For companies such as IBM and Fujitsu there is an obvious path back to the
black. They have to shed staff to match overheads to likely levels of
profitability. They have to shift their emphasis from mainframes to smaller
computers and open systems, and they have to derive an increasingly larger
share of their revenues from software and computing services rather than
hardware.
Japanese companies have an indifferent track record here. Lifetime
employment may be withering, but they still find it difficult to shed staff.
They have little experience of open systems, and their expertise in software
and services is limited to Japan. A Japanese company would find it difficult
to overcome the cultural problems in managing a large computer project
abroad.
Fujitsu, however, the only Japanese mainframe maker with a majority stake in
a western computer company, has in ICL a rich source of technical and
managerial knowhow about the new shape of the computer industry. A cash
crisis in the early 1980s forced the UK company to make early cuts in staff
numbers. It has widely acknowledged expertise in open systems. More than
half its revenues are now derived from software and services. And it is
profitable, making Pounds 38.6m pre-tax on sales of Pounds 2.48bn last year.
It could be argued that ICL is massaging figures that are barely better than
break-even, but it is better than the losses most computer companies are
suffering.
Fujitsu is not optimistic about the outlook for the current year, and unless
its restructuring and cost-cutting programme is effective, it has little
reason to be.
ICL, on the other hand, should hold its own and, indeed, grow if and when
Europe's economies improve. Fujitsu speaks of ICL as an elite member of its
global family.
Given the tenfold difference in their revenues, it would be ridiculous to
talk of reverse takeovers; but if Fujitsu looks to its UK subsidiary for
guidance through the computing jungle, then ICL's influence with its
Japanese parent should grow out of all proportion to its size. Fujitsu,
after all, has already entrusted its operations in the US and Europe to
ICL's management.
When it bought ICL in 1990, Fujitsu said it would float the company on the
London market within five years, giving it a value of at least Pounds 1.2bn.
To date, the economy has not favoured flotation, but merchant bankers and
advisers have been appointed and the company is gearing itself up to go
public. Investors could find that, far from backing a Japanese Trojan horse,
designed to invade the European computer industry, they will be investing in
a European company ready to play a fundamental role in the restructuring of
Japan's leading computer company.
