FT  10 JUL 93 / Money Markets: French rates soar
FRENCH franc money market interest rates rose sharply yesterday as the
currency fell below the FFr3.40 level against the D-Mark, writes James
Blitz.
As pressure on the franc intensified on the foreign exchanges, French
interest rates rose above their German counterparts for the first time in
several months.
This was seen as the clearest indication this week that investors are once
again treating the franc as a possible candidate for devaluation.
At the same time, there was a slightly more optimistic outlook for German
interest rate reductions because dealers believed that the Bundesbank would
have to ease policy soon if the franc fort policy was to hold.
Three month French franc interest rates rose by nearly 100 basis points on
the bid side in the European morning, from 7.52 per cent to 8.48 per cent.
After lunchtime, they fell back to around 7.75 per cent, even though the
currency remained firmly below the FFr3.40 level against the D-Mark.
This left French franc interest rates some 50 basis points higher than
Germany's, which closed at around 7.25 per cent. Only a few weeks ago,
French franc interest rates were some 80 basis points below Germany's. The
turn-around is an important indication that investors feel they need an
interest rate premium to hold the French currency once again.
The response in interest rate futures markets was similar. The September
Pibor contract plunged another 23 basis points, to close at 93.04. The
spread between the September and December contracts has now widened to 100
basis points, suggesting that investors think French rates will be at 6 per
cent by the winter, whether the country is in the exchange rate mechanism or
not.
Euromark futures enjoyed a rise, however, amid speculation that the
Bundesbank will be forced by this new development to ease rates next week.
The September Euromark contract rose 6 basis points to close at 93.26. At
least one dealer speculated yesterday that the Bundesbank might lower both
the repo rate and the Lombard rate.
Sterling markets were sidelined. Most of a Pounds 1.1bn shortage was
despatched in the early round of discount market dealing, and 3-month money
remained unchanged at around 5 15/16 per cent.
