FT  07 AUG 93 / Where to find the wild things: If you want to see a whale,
pine marten or osprey, Michael J Woods knows the place
THE HIGHLAND midges were biting with fury on the evening I saw my first pine
marten. But the rain held off and I sat quietly, smothered in insect
repellent and with only my eyes peeping from my anorak hood, until a
delicate, red-haired creature, the size of a small cat, picked its way among
the mossy rocks and lichen-encrusted pine trunks to a bouldery den.
The animal soon disappeared but I was well satisfied, for the pine marten is
one of Britain's rarest native mammals.
Scotland is certainly the place to see many of the scarcest species. Even if
some are found elsewhere in Britain, they are often so uncommon that setting
eyes on them is about as likely as seeing the Loch Ness monster.
Take otters. Now absent from most of England and many parts of Wales, they
are so widespread on the Shetland Islands that, during a week's stay, I
enjoyed daily sightings and even spotted one playing in the wake of an
inter-island ferry.
The Forestry Commission has an otter-watching hide on Skye, at Kylerhea,
though the locals claim that they are no more common there than elsewhere on
the island, and any sheltered sea loch on the west coast of the mainland or
the islands should reward the patient watcher with good sightings.
When swimming, otters may be confused with seals, which also hang around
coastal waters. There are boat trips to see colonies of seals basking on the
rocks from several Scottish locations including Ullapool and Oban, and you
may also be lucky enough to see whales and dolphins.
If it is whales you want, you can take a special trip from Mull to look for
minke whales or spend some time on one of the many headlands or islands
along the coast, especially those overlooking the Minches, keeping an eye
open on a calm day for the broken water which may divulge the location of a
pod of cetaceans.
It can be a frustrating business, for you know full well that somewhere
beneath the surface groups of these great mammals are gliding past. If you
want to see dolphins, you can shorten the odds by looking out for the
resident schools off the Cromarty cliffs or from headlands in the Moray
Firth.
On land, Britain's largest mammal is the red deer. While they occur in
England and Wales, many conservationists feel they have reached plague
proportions in Scotland. Although they are stalked, shot and killed, these
deer can be surprisingly confiding, especially if you come at them with the
wind in your face and use the lie of the land to mask your approach. Two
prime times for deer-watching are June, when the calves are born, and during
the rut in October.
Red deer are so widespread they are usually visible from the A9 road between
Perth and Inverness; failing that they are common in the Cairngorms, with a
deer reserve in Glen Muick near Ballater. There is also a well-researched
herd on the Isle of Rhum where some scientists believe that the only pure
British red deer herd may soon exist (mainland reds are increasingly
breeding with introduced Japanese sika deer).
Apart from the reindeer, brought in in 1952, the Cairngorm area is a good
place to look for mountain hares, notable in the winter when their coats
becomes white, and also wild cats, though seeing a wild cat is a matter of
chance. If you are lucky you may spot one on a quiet walk in lonely
countryside or perhaps see a thick-tailed tabby dash across a country lane
in the beam of your headlights.
Birds are much more predictable than most mammals, especially in the nesting
season, and dramatic sea bird stacks and islands are found all round the
Scottish coasts, with large colonies of various species. There are
spectacular gannetries on Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth, on St Kilda and
on Unst; nocturnal shearwaters have nesting burrows on Rhum and the Shetland
Islands; and noisy kittiwakes, guillemots and razorbills crowd the ledges in
many places.
Scotland is probably best known for its raptors, especially golden eagles
and ospreys. The former frequent remote mountains and cover huge
territories, so seeing one is a matter of luck. Recognising many of these
birds of prey can be difficult as they are often seen as silhouettes against
a bright sky at indeterminate height, so that judging size becomes a
problem.
A large bird with white underparts plucking trout from a loch is a different
matter, and very obviously an osprey. These have been a conservation success
story since the mid-1950s. It is still possible to see them from the special
hide at their nest at Loch Garten, while the Scottish Wildlife Trust has an
osprey site at Loch of Lowes near Dunkeld.
Apart from the sheets of purple heather which flower in August and
September, there are a number of specialities to delight the botanist. The
shell sand machair of the Outer Hebrides is a distinctive habitat which
supports a variety of orchids and other lime-loving species while, for the
mountain plant enthusiast, Ben Lawers, in particular, has Arctic-Alpine
flowers such as gentians and saxifrages.
The native pine forests of Scotland, of which only fragments remain, are a
sight still sought by many. As a centre for the mountains, the Aviemore
area, with its pine forests, reindeer and ospreys, together with the chance
of seeing eagles and red deer, is hard to beat. But if it is otters and
seals you want, with the possibility of cetaceans, too, then Shetland, Skye
or Ardnamurchan and Sunart can be good.
Perhaps, instead of suffering the midges, it would have been better to have
encouraged my pine marten to visit me in some well-located self-catering
accommodation. A fortnight might just be enough. These animals have a sweet
tooth, and small squares of bread and jam left out for them are said to work
well. Others, though, swear by chocolate blancmange: the animals cannot
carry it away, so they have to eat it on the spot.
Busta House Hotel, Shetland (tel: 080-622 506) has otters almost at the
front door. Skyes Charters, Skye (047-032 413) offers weeks of sailing
classic boats with plenty of wildlife included. Whale-watching trips from
Mull with Richard and Judy Fairbairns can be organised on 06884-223. Rhum
Castle, Isle of Rhum, is a good place for red deer, otters and re-introduced
sea eagles (0687 2037).
In Edinburgh, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds is at 17 Regent
Terrace (Edinburgh EH7 5BN). The Scottish Wildlife Trust is at Cramond
House, Cramond Glebe Road, Edinburgh EH4 6NS. Where to Watch Mammals in
Britain is available from the Mammal Society, Zoology Department, University
of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol, Pounds 3.
