FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (4): A model from Frankfurt -
The banks have been organised at top speed
THE creation of viable banking and financial institutions has emerged as a
top priority throughout the former communist world. But in Slovakia this has
entailed the additional burden of creating a new central bank at the apex of
the system which unexpectedly had to assume the additional task of
introducing and managing an independent national currency.
Finding staff at all levels with the necessary experience and knowledge of
modern central banking principles, including the vital supervisory
functions, has been complicated by the fact that before the divorce central
bank functions were concentrated in Prague.
'The federal state had its administration in Prague. The whole of the state
machinery stayed in Bohemia after the split. Very few Slovaks worked in
important positions in Prague, and most of them stayed there. We had to
start from scratch and this inevitably had an impact. That is the price we
had to pay for independence,' says Mr Jozef Magula, head of the finance
ministry's financial and economic policy department.
What is more, the new central bank had to be established and personnel had
to be found for a wide range of state institutions including the finance
ministry in competition with the banks and a new stock exchange, not to
mention private companies.
Before the divorce on January 1 the central bank's presence in Slovakia was
limited to a small branch of the State Bank of Czechoslovakia in Bratislava.
The newly founded Slovak National Bank (SNB) struggled to get organised in
the weeks following the breakup of the federation. It received help from the
British know-how fund and the Austrian National Bank which provided training
courses for staff, many of whom had little experience. Only one of 10 senior
employees working in the federal bank came back to Bratislava - and became
head of the SNB's dealing department.
As if these handicaps were not enough, the bank was soon put through its
paces with the collapse of the currency union with the Czech Republic in
February, accompanied by a run on reserves. As originally conceived, the two
countries planned to run a joint currency for at least six months after the
divorce. But the precipitate drop in bilateral trade as the frontiers were
established accelerated the need to establish a new independent currency
under strong pressure from the markets, and the IMF, to devalue. These
pressures were resisted until July.
As the first year of independence draws to a close the dust is beginning to
settle, and the central bank is looking forward to a more stable
environment. But Mr Marian Jusko, deputy governor, says that only five of
eight positions on the bank's ruling council have been filled. The total
number of employees, however, has doubled from the initial 200 to more than
400.
In principle the central bank enjoys an independent status modelled on the
German Bundesbank. This is enshrined in its founding statutes and last
July's devaluation was formally decided by the central bank rather than the
finance ministry which had taken the lead in resisting devaluation pressures
for seven months.
The bank's principal tasks are to maintain control over monetary policy and
inflation, to ensure currency stability, and to supervise the banking
system.
For their part, the commercial banks are having to learn to live with tight
supervision and growing competition. They have had more time to adapt than
the central bank during three years of radical reforms that began in 1990.
As in the Czech Republic, the pace of change has been dramatic, transforming
the banking system beyond recognition from its former role as a conduit for
money distributed under a central plan into a western style financial
sector.
The number of commercial banks has grown from two in 1991 to 26 today, with
new specialised financial institutions including 17 universal banks - six of
which have foreign currency licences - and nine foreign bank branches.
Foreign institutions represented in Slovakia include the Credit Lyonnais,
and Banque Paribas of France, Creditanstalt and Oesterreichische Volksbanken
of Austria, and the Internationale Nederlanden Bank of the Netherlands, as
well as banks from Germany, the Czech republic and Russia. At the end of
June total subscribed bank capital was SK11.8bn with foreign participation
of SK1.6bn.
Although legislation has been brought into line with western practice,
Slovak banks continue to face difficulties in modernising their operations
and introducing new technology and services.
There are other problems. The concentration of deposits with savings banks
exacerbates a general liquidity shortage throughout the banking system and
the economy. At the same time, doubtful loans to military and other state
industries made under the communists are forcing the banks to sharply raise
their bad debt provisions.
Mr Jan Jansta, senior deputy chairman of Vseobecna Uverova Banka (VUB), the
largest commercial bank, says: 'The problem is that no institutional
investor or company is depositing money with any bank for a period of more
than one year.'
VUB was established on January 1, 1990, when the Czechoslovak State Bank was
broken up to form new commercial banks. At the time it had 30 branches and
about 85 per cent of the Slovak credit market. Since then the VUB network
has expanded to 40 branches including one in Prague, and 180 small retail
outlets serving more than 800,000 customers. Initially its customers were
mainly state institutions. Now they represent less than 70 per cent of its
portfolio and VUB, like other Slovak banks, must raise provisions for bad
debts from both the state and the often shaky private sector.
Like a giant jigsaw puzzle, the pieces are slowly falling into place for
Slovakia's young banking sector, but as the country moves towards a market
economy, it faces a more urgent problem, Mr Jansta says. 'The greatest need
is for new capital, not more banks.'
