FT  07 SEP 93 / Toshiba to swing axe at 5,000 jobs: Electronics giant
follows lead on staff cuts by other groups
TOSHIBA, the electronics group, yesterday became the latest large Japanese
industrial company to take an axe to its costs, by announcing it would shed
5,000 staff.
The job losses are to take place over the next three to five years through
natural wastage, as Toshiba hires fewer graduates and continues to make
older staff retire at the same rate.
Like many other Japanese companies, Toshiba has seen its earnings fall for
the past three years, in line with the decline in most of its main markets.
This follows last week's announcement of 10,000 job losses at NTT, the
telecommunications group which is Japan's biggest industrial employer.
That set an important precedent for other companies believed to be keen to
cut their workforces in response to the economic slowdown, but which had
hesitated because of the social unacceptability of making job cuts in Japan.
Toyota and Nissan, the carmakers, earlier this year announced smaller
workforce reductions, also through natural wastage. Japanese industrial
companies have so far avoided making heavy redundancies, unlike US and
European competitors, though the pressure on costs continues.
Further evidence of manufacturing industry's problems came yesterday when
the Japan Society of Industrial Machinery Manufacturers reported a 6.2 per
cent decline in orders for industrial machinery in July, compared with the
same month the previous year.
Domestic orders were stagnant, in line with Japanese companies'
unwillingness to commit themselves to new investment. Foreign orders fell
36.4 per cent, a mark of the impact on export markets of the strong yen.
Separately, the Japan Machine Tool Builders' Association reported that
year-on-year machine tool orders fell 27 per cent in July, continuing a
decline that started in December 1990. The association blamed this latest
fall on poor orders from consumer electronics and general machinery
producers.
Another industrial bellwether, energy consumption, recorded a mere 0.5 per
cent rise, the smallest for six years, in the 12 months to March, the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry said yesterday. The main factor
in this was a 2 per cent decline in energy consumption by industrial users,
the first fall since the last economic slowdown in 1986.
