FT  11 JUN 93 / Andreotti and the murder case witness: The latest
allegations against the former Italian premier
MR Giulio Andreotti, Italy's former prime minister, was said yesterday to
have sought to put pressure on a witness in order to protect himself,
according to Rome magistrates investigating his alleged involvement in the
1979 murder of journalist Mino Pecorelli.
The magistrates said Mr Andreotti's alleged action had led them to request
that parliament speed up the waiving of his immunity so that he could face
charges of involvement in Mr Pecorelli's killing.
Mr Andreotti yesterday repeated his protestation of innocence and said he
had agreed to waive his immunity. He had already agreed to waive immunity to
answer allegations by Palermo magistrates of being associated with the
Mafia.
The magistrates' request was filed on Wednesday in a 92-page document that
contained serious differences in testimony on key issues between Mr
Andreotti and an array of witnesses testifying against him.
One of the witnesses contradicting the veteran Christian Democrat was Mr
Franco Evangelisti, a Christian Democrat senator and a long-time close
colleague.
The issues included the 1978 kidnap and murder by the Red Brigades of Mr
Aldo Moro, the former prime minister, links between politicians and the
Mafia, and the financing of Mr Andreotti's faction of the Christian Democrat
party.
As the contents of the Rome magistrates' investigations began to emerge,
there appeared to be clear links with those of their colleagues in Palermo.
They are both relying in part on the same source of information - Mr
Tommasso Buscetta, the former Mafia boss turned supergrass since 1984.
The two inquiries also focus on Mr Andreotti's relationship with the Salvo
cousins, two prominent members of Cosa Nostra, the umbrella organisation of
the Sicilian Mafia.
The Rome magistrates quote Mr Buscetta as claiming that the Pecorelli
killing was ordered by the Salvo cousins as a favour to Mr Andreotti. Both
the Salvo cousins are dead and Mr Andreotti has denied knowing them.
Mr Pecorelli was a journalist linked to the secret masonic lodge P2 and the
extreme right. He ran a small magazine, OP, which specialised in peddling
inside information on politics and the security services in a highly cryptic
style. His enemies regarded him as a blackmailer.
In reopening the case after it had been closed last year following ten
years' fruitless investigation, Rome magistrates have focused on the curious
circumstances of the last OP edition before Mr Pecorelli was killed. This
had a cover on Mr Andreotti headlined 'The President's cheques', which was
substituted at the last minute. The change appears not entirely unconnected
with a dinner organised the night before attended by top Christian Democrat
figures and members of the security forces belonging to P2 and during which
Mr Pecorelli was given L30m (Pounds 13,320) to help OP's finances.
The 'president' referred to Mr Andreotti's position as prime minister
(president of the council of ministers). The cheques referred to Mr
Andreotti's alleged involvement and control over financing - at least to the
tune of L1.4bn - which came from illicit funds of Italcasse, the state
banking institution, the now defunct chemical group SIR of the late Mr Nino
Rovelli and the Caltagirone building group.
The magistrates allege Mr Andreotti had direct use of these cheques. When
questioned on May 25 about these cheques, his testimony conflicted with that
subsequently given by Milan financier Mr Ezio Radaelli. The latter claimed
he received L170m from Mr Andreotti and that an emissary from the former
premier had attempted to persuade him he had obtained the money from another
source.
'It has been proved that after Senator Andreotti had been interrogated on
May 25, he exerted pressure via a colleague on a witness to tell a different
story,' the magistrates' report alleges. Mr Evangelisti also claimed he
received money from Mr Andreotti.
Equally damaging in the magistrates' request is a detailed examination of
the Moro kidnap and allegations of Mr Andreotti's knowledge about this.
Mr Evangelisti revealed that during the Moro kidnap he frequently met
General Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa, who headed the police inquiries, and
acted as an intermediary for Mr Andreotti in late night sessions by-passing
the normal channels of the then premier's private secretary.
Gen Dalla Chiesa, who was murdered by the Mafia in 1982, knew all the
secrets of the Moro kidnap, as apparently did Mr Pecorelli. Magistrates
believe Mr Andreotti has been economical with the truth on the Moro
kidnapping. In particular, they want to discover how much he knew about
suspicions that Mr Moro was killed with the complicity of the political
establishment, the Mafia and the security services.
