FT  08 MAY 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Yum yum, chop chop, busy busy - The authentic
street food of Bangkok
IN THAILAND the standing joke is that in Bangkok people eat only one meal a
day: it starts at 8 am and ends at 8 pm. Thai food is so beguiling to the
palate. The cuisine is an amalgamation mainly of southern Chinese and Indian
influences, with a dash of inspiration from Indonesia, Portugal and France.
The resulting hot and spicy, subtle and distinctive blend is pure Thai.
Under the expert tutelage of Charlie Arnatyakul, a leading Thai food
authority, I have experienced the broad spectrum of marvellous foods
available in the street and market stalls.
Nowhere in the world are street foods a more important part of peoples'
lives than in Bangkok. The crowded streets, narrow alleys and shops bustle
with pedestrians, pushcart vendors and hawkers of all sorts of goods but
roughly every fifth stall sells some ready-to-eat treat.
Among the most popular are Bow Mun Gai (Steamed Capon and Rice), Pad Se iew
(Stir-fried noodles in soy sauce with meat and vegetables), Pad Tliai
(Stir-fried rice noodles with tofu and chillies). Sauces play an important
role too.
The main ingredients that are most often used include garlic, Chinese
chives, fish sauce, spring onion, ginger, soy sauce and pickled preserved
beans. Clearly, the mixing of these ingredients - and others such as
lemongrass - results in tangy, stimulating, and even spicy sauces and
flavourings which elevate the prosaic nature of the staple food items.
Street foods are also a necessary adjunct of life in the city. But what a
virtue the Thais have made of their necessity, and at prices that range from
10 to 40 Baht (about 20-80 pence, depending on the size of the portions).
A strong Chinese influence is apparent in the popular Chiu Chow-style
noodles (call Gum Tiaw in Thai), and in combinations of egg noodles and
fish, seafood or meats cooked with Chiu Chow seasonings.
Chinese cooks were among the early pioneers of street cooking and, but for
the distinctive Thai seasonings, many of the street stall noodle soup
offerings could be right out of the street stalls of Canton or Hong Kong:
roast pork, fish balls, fish sausage, deep-fried dumplings, minced pork,
bean sprouts, and chives are some of the ingredients added to the noodles.
They are, indeed, a very satisfying quick bite.
Authentic Thai specialties include Khai Ping (grilled eggs with plain or
sticky rice) and Pneg Gai, chicken wings or feet marinated in fish sauce,
garlic, fresh coriander root, peppercorn. Another very popular offering is
laab, a salad that includes beef, chicken or pork. The recipe originated in
north-eastern Thailand and uses spices favoured in that region.
The meats are grilled and mixed with paste composed of dried chillies,
shallots, garlic, shrimp paste, grilled galangal (an aromatic root akin to
ginger). Other pastes are made from tamarind, water, fish sauce and roasted
rice powder. The aromas of all of these pastes and sauces fill the air in
the streets of Bangkok.
Many of the street stall proprietors are gifted cooks of great local repute.
They have their prized family recipes and are always on the alert for a new
way of doing things.
Wealthier patrons often hire them to cater for private parties. However, as
traditional as they are, the street stalls are not immune to the pressures
of Thailand's entry into the global economy. As Dr Narumol Iotivej, a native
of Bangkok, informed me, things have changed rather quickly in the last 20
years.
The original heat of the street food scene in Bangkok is an area called
Pratunam (or 'watergate'). It is still there but, she notes, it has lost
much of its former glory.
The earliest street vendors, a century ago, were from China. Today some
vendors - many of Chinese descent - have prospered and developed thriving
businesses. Since large numbers were from southern China, they were
accustomed to the long, late hours of snacking. Some of their children,
however, were reluctant to stay in the trade. The most successful have moved
indoors to new shopping centres where the recipes may be the same but the
atmosphere seems less authentic.
Meanwhile, there is still much to enjoy among street food stalls, for
example Khao Tom, a rice porridge, which the Cantonese call 'jook' or
'congee.' Other popular dishes are Kui Tia Rad Na Yod Phak, wide rice
noodles stir-fried and serve with lots of sauce, Chiu Chow style and Yum,
which encompasses all kinds of salad, cold and warm, including a real
winner, the surprisingly good Yum Hoo Moo or pig's ears salad with lime,
sugar, fish sauce, chilli or lemongrass, onion, chives and mint leaves.
I have also sampled Yum seafood, in which you tell the vendor what you would
like in the salad and it is custom made for you while you wait. Satays are a
great favourite with bits of pork, beef or chicken barbecued on bamboo
skewers.
They illustrate the Indonesian and Indian influence on Thai cookery. A
'must' is Kai Yang, in which a whole small chicken is marinated in mounds of
white peppercorns, coriander roots, garlic, fish sauce, soy sauce, sugar and
oil; then flattened and grilled.
Sugar is included in many Thai recipes, adding a sweet balance to the
generally spicy cuisine. If the food kindles your thirst there are food
stalls that specialise in orange and exotic fruit juices.
If you are not familiar with Thai cuisine and do not have a Thai- speaking
friend, you could sample street and market food in a different type of
atmosphere. For example, I recommend Lord Jim's restaurant at The Oriental
Hotel. There you may enjoy a luncheon buffet with a trolley devoted to
street food specialties. The Verandah (also at the Oriental) offers such
choices as Lad Nah Sen Gai, Ghoong, Moo Rue Varng (traditional Thai beef
salad), and a great favourite of mine Keuy Tiew Look Chin Neau - a rich beef
broth with rice noodles and meat balls.
But, wherever you try, I am certain you will enjoy the delicious experience
of Thai street food as much as I have.
