FT  19 APR 93 / Evacuation of Srebrenica under way
UNITED NATIONS peacekeeping troops last night entered Srebrenica, the fallen
enclave in eastern Bosnia, and evacuation of the first of tens of thousands
of trapped Moslems began.
General Philippe Morillon, commander of the UN Protection Force (Unprofor)
in Bosnia, said in Sarajevo that Srebrenica was under world guard following
the arrival of 145 Canadian UN soldiers. 'We can now guarantee the survival
of Srebrenica.'
The Canadians will monitor a ceasefire, collect arms from the Moslem
defenders and help demilitarise the area under a plan for the Serb forces
besieging the eastern Bosnian town to withdraw from positions around it.
The Canadians entered the town to a hero's welcome just hours after Serbs
and the Moslem-led Bosnian forces signed a UN-brokered truce, said ham radio
operators.
French and British helicopters then began ferrying sick and wounded to
Tuzla, 70km northwest, under an agreement permitting airborne evacuation of
the 500 most desperate cases before an overland evacuation starts for all
those who want to leave the town. UN officials said 133 people were
evacuated by nightfall.
But it is unlikely the mass evacuation will get fully under way before an
agreement is reached on the fate of the defeated defenders of Srebrenica.
Shattered refugees who earlier managed to escape to Tuzla, the biggest
government stronghold, described 'unbearable' conditions after a year under
Serb siege in the town, set in the foothills of the Drina River valley.
'Everyone wants to leave. There's no food. The Chetniks (Serb forces) were
constantly shooting at us,' said Ms Azreta Habibovic, who was fortunate to
escape before the Serb bombardment which on April 12 claimed 56 lives and
wounded scores more.
French prime minister Edouard Balladur said yesterday Gen Morillon's mission
had been extended and there were no plans to recall him, Reuter reports.
This appeared to contradict defence minister Francois Leotard, who said last
week Gen Morillon was unlikely to be in his post by next month.
