FT  08 OCT 93 / International Capital Markets: US/German legal gap bridged
by World Bank offer
THE WORLD BANK's forthcoming D-Mark global offering represents a triumph
over the seemingly irreconcilable legal and fiscal differences between
Germany and the US.
The main difference between the two is that in Germany, securities are
issued in bearer form, whereas in the US they are issued in registered form.
Mr Kenneth Lay, director of financial operations at the World Bank, said
that it was important to find a way to bridge these two legal traditions so
that the bonds could trade freely in US but also be eligible to act as
collateral for loans by the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank.
The World Bank found a startlingly simple solution but one which took more
than a year to gain approval by the US and German authorities.
This is how the structure works. The bonds will be represented by two
permanent global certificates which will not be exchangeable for individual
bond certificates.
One certificate, to be held by the Deutsche Kassenverein (DKV), the
Frankfurt-based clearing and settlement agency for German securities, will
be issued in bearer form. This certificate will represent the bonds held by
investors through institutions which are participants in DKV. Bonds held
through Euroclear and Cedel will be included in the DKV certificate.
The other certificate, issued in registered form, will be held by the
Frankfurt branch of Citibank as custodian for the Depository Trust Company
(DTC), the central depository for securities in the US. This certificate
will represent the bonds held by investors through institutions that
participate in DTC.
When the bonds start trading in the secondary market, any sales will be
reflected by respective increases and decreases in the two certificates.
Therefore, the bonds represented by the two certificates will equal the
total amount of the bonds outstanding at any time.
Mr Lay said that this structure would enable the bonds to trade freely
across the world, thus fulfilling one of the main aims of the global bond
concept. In addition, transaction costs would be significantly reduced.
The World Bank will raise DM3bn later this month through its first D-Mark
global bond offering, which will be jointly lead-managed by Deutsche Bank
and Salomon Brothers.
The bonds will have a maturity of five or 10 years and the spread over the
yield on underlying German government bonds will be in single digits.
The World Bank intends to make two D-Mark global offerings a year and the
next issue is likely to come early next year. 'This will allow us to freshen
up the coupon and allow investors to trade into the new bonds,' Mr Lay said.
The World Bank pioneered this form of capital-raising in 1989. Since then it
has issued 13 global bond offerings in dollars and yen with maturities
ranging from five to 30 years.
Mr Lay said that a large part of the bank's annual borrowing programme of
Dollars 10bn to Dollars 12bn would be funded through global bond offerings
in these three currencies.
Several sovereign and provincial borrowers have also started issuing global
bond offerings, culminating with the Republic of Italy's record Dollars
5.5bn offering in mid-September.
Mr Lay, who was in London yesterday to market the DM global bond offering to
investors, said that the World Bank's global bonds had achieved the high
level of liquidity he had hoped for.
The World Bank's dollar global bonds were among the 10 most actively traded
bonds in Euroclear some 20 months after their launch and its yen global
bonds currently accounted for 70 per cent of the turnover in the yen sector
of the international bond market.
The Bank's next aim is to encourage Japanese investors to use its yen global
bonds as a tool for increasing their total returns.
