FT  12 JAN 93 / International Company News: Sandoz awakens from slumber to
rejoin global chemical leaders - The group is closing the gap with its
rivals
MENTION the name Sandoz, and those who recognise it are likely to remember
the large escape in 1986 of toxic chemicals into the Rhine at Basle.
The pharmaceutical and chemicals group was responsible for that ecological
disaster, and its directors remain deeply scarred by the experience.
However, Sandoz, formerly known as the slowest and most inward-looking of
the big three Swiss pharmaceutical groups, is suddenly beginning to look
like one of the more dynamic international players.
In the past decade, it has slashed large sales and profit gaps with its
Basle neighbours, Ciba-Geigy and Roche, and put together an impressive
portfolio of innovative drugs.
Its biggest-selling product, Sandimmun, or cyclosporin A, is the drug of
choice to suppress immune reactions to transplanted organs; its Clozaril, or
clozapine, has achieved success in treating schizophrenics. Analysts agree
that it has an impressive list of new products in the pipeline.
Sandoz, the world's eighth-largest pharmaceutical group, is at the forefront
of the new trend to tie up with leading edge research institutes and
companies to sharpen their research efforts.
Last month, it announced a collaboration with Scripps Research Institute, a
leading US medical research organisation, under which it would spend more
than Dollars 300m over 10 years on jointly-agreed projects. In 1991, it
splashed out Dollars 392m for a 60 per cent stake in a biotechnology
start-up company in California, and another Dollars 100m for a research
tie-up with the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
To top things off, it is deliberately moving away from its Swiss base. 'We
are, of course, a Swiss multinational, but we are above all citizens of the
world,' Mr Marc Moret, the group's 69-year-old chairman said in an
interview. 'We have 4 per cent of our sales in Switzerland, 96 per cent
abroad. That is a good mirror of our priorities.'
Mr Moret, a craggy, shy Swiss industrialist with a reputation for being
autocratic, is the man most identified with these transformations, and he
does not suffer from false modesty about it.
The turning point was when he was promoted from finance director to chief
executive in 1981.
Even though the group was healthy, he demanded the authority to cut out fat.
'This was not a common thing to do in continental Europe at that time. But
it was the beginning of a phase of rapid expansion, and you can see the
results.'
A more radical shake-up two years ago put all the main Sandoz divisions into
incorporated subsidiaries. The idea was not only to decentralise
responsibility but also to make it easier to divest a laggard division if an
opportunity arose.
'We now say to the division heads, 'You are part of this Sandoz club. You
must prove that you have the people, the organisation and the results that
make you worthy of continuing among Sandoz activities',' Mr Moret says.
Sandoz long lagged behind its neighbours in moving production out of Basle
and in appealing to foreign managers and investors.
Until recently, more than 90 per cent of its chemicals for drugs were made
in the city. Its goal is to bring that down to 50 per cent as soon as
possible.
And the first non-Swiss has just been appointed to the group managing board.
'In the group management, we have too few foreigners. The difficulty is
language. We speak German and sometimes French.
'Thank God, more and more British - more British than Americans - are
beginning to take up languages.'
The group no longer restricts foreign ownership of its shares. 'We cannot on
the one hand be multinational and on the other remain little egotistical and
jealous Swiss,' Mr Moret says. Foreign ownership has soared to more than
one-third in the past two years.
But probably the most important changes are in the group's research and
development policy. Whereas the entire R&amp;D effort used to be carried out
in-house in Basle, the group has recently set up several centres outside
Switzerland and formed alliances with external research institutes, such as
Scripps.
These deals are aimed at getting closer to the leading edge of technologies
than is likely in-house. 'We multiply the potential for success by a
considerable margin,' Mr Moret believes.
He does not deny that the company gives up some control by handing fistfuls
of money to thrusting young scientists, although the amounts are still
modest relative to its SFr1.4bn (Dollars 0.97bn) annual R&amp;D budget. 'Perhaps
we lose in precise and efficient management, but it is more important to let
some researchers have their freedom,' he says.
He cites the discovery and development of Sandimmun, a story book tale of a
Sandoz scientist, Jean-Francois Borel, toiling in an almost clandestine way
in the mid-1970s after the company had officially given up immunology
research. The product now accounts for about one-third of Sandoz
pharmaceutical revenues.
Other big pharmaceutical companies are following the same route. Roche two
years ago bought a 60 per cent stake in the US biotechnology group,
Genentech, and in 1991 Glaxo, the leading UK pharmaceutical group, set up a
joint research programme into diabetes and obesity treatment with Amylin, a
California biotechnology company.
'It is an increasing trend in the industry,' says Mr Peter Smith, a
pharmaceuticals analyst at brokers James Capel in London.
'It is like a day at the races. You back a number of 10 to one shots, and
probably one of them is going to come in.'
It is thus a strategy that lessens the risk of being left without any good
new products coming to market, although if that did happen, Sandoz has the
financial power for a larger acquisition.
Mr Moret said last year that he could put together 'a few billion Swiss
francs' in a hurry if he wanted to.
'Who says we will not do a big thing some day,' he said in the interview.
There was no urgent need, but things moved quickly in the pharmaceutical
field these days. 'Scripps was not on the programme nine months ago,' he
said.
 --------------------------------------------------
       SANDOZ: CONSOLIDATED SALES - SFr (m)
 --------------------------------------------------
                                   1990       1991
 --------------------------------------------------
Pharmaceuticals                   5,680      6,368
Chemicals                         2,280      2,355
Nutrition                         1,340      1,543
Agro-chemicals                    1,150      1,157
Construction and Environment      1,000      1,066
Seeds                               920        955
Total                            12,370     13,444
 --------------------------------------------------
Net profit                          967      1,114
 --------------------------------------------------
