FT  08 APR 93 / Industrial rescuers proposed for Russia
JAPAN is to suggest sending teams of industrial 'troubleshooters' to
transform selected former Soviet enterprises into model factories. Tokyo
will raise this idea when it hosts a meeting of trade and industry ministers
from east and west this month.
The troubleshooters would be at the heart of a five-point action programme
to include enterprise reform, conversion of defence industries, trade
promotion, encouragement of foreign investment, and technology transfer,
said Mr Kunio Moriyaki, director-general of the Japanese ministry of
international trade and industry's international trade policy bureau, in
London yesterday.
He is preparing a summit in Tokyo on April 24-25 of trade, industry and
economy ministers from the Group of Seven industrial countries and eight
east European and former Soviet states, together with multilateral lending
agencies. This gathering is to follow the meeting next week of G7 foreign
and finance ministers, also in Tokyo, and will focus on 'micro-level
aspects' of the problems faced by the former Soviet states in transition to
market economies, Mr Moriyaki emphasised.
This emphasis reflects concern that, without a clear strategy for tackling
the economic problems of Russia and neighbouring states at the grass roots,
macro-level aid packages like the Dollars 10bn-Dollars 20bn one expected to
be approved by G7 ministers in Tokyo next week might achieve little.
'Without a clear cut micro-level approach, pouring money into the region
will not ensure successful enhancement of economic benefit,' Mr Moriyaki
said. 'Setting broad goals is of course very important, but the question is
how do governments reach their goals, while minimising adverse side-effects
 -like growing income differences both between people and between regions,
and the growing unemployed labour force,' he added. It was essential to
break down monopolies and encourage industrial competition, he added.
The Japanese side will propose that troubleshooting teams from western
companies and consultants work in selected enterprises for several months.
They would help to establish comprehensive corporate strategies, identify
equipment and skill needs, instil higher standards of cost-consciousness and
efficiency, and pinpoint the factory's most marketable and exportable
product mix, he said.
Robert Thomson adds from Tokyo: Mr Kabun Muto, Japan's newly appointed
foreign minister, said yesterday he felt a heavy responsibility as G7 summit
host next week, and would work for a fresh package of aid for Russia.
However, Tokyo would continue to link help for Russian reforms to the
Soviet-Japanese dispute over the Kurile Islands.
