FT  23 JUN 93 / Estonia proudly wears its kroon of thorns: The first
ex-Soviet republic to dump the rouble and beat inflation - but at a price
AFTER a turbulent year when a handful of former Soviet republics has
followed Estonia's lead, the small Baltic country has just marked the first
anniversary of the introduction of its own currency, the kroon.
Estonia, less than twelve months after achieving its independence, became
the first state emerging from the Soviet empire to dump the plummeting
rouble and issue its own money on June 20 1992.
The Ukrainian coupon has lost its value even faster than the Russian rouble,
but Estonia has succeeded in curbing inflation from more than 500 per cent a
year last June to less than 30 per cent now.
A World Bank report on Estonia predicts that inflation will stabilise at
that level for the rest of 1993 and the International Monetary Fund is
optimistic about prospects for future growth.
The kroon has also maintained its peg of eight to the German D-Mark despite
a doubling in prices since its introduction.
This is not as remarkable an achievement as it might first appear: Estonia
operates a currency board system, whereby every kroon in circulation is
backed by foreign currency reserves, swollen by loans and aid from the west,
and 11.3 tonnes of gold, retrieved from the pre-war independent republic's
deposits in foreign central banks.
Although state companies still receive large subsidies to delay the
inevitable labour shake-out, the budget is in broad balance. The money
supply is further limited by a healthy distrust among business and ordinary
people of banks (three of the largest banks failed last November) so that
the banking system plays only a small role in money creation.
Inflation persists, however, as the money supply has been boosted by foreign
aid and investment and because gross national product slumped by more than
20 per cent last year to about Dollars 1bn (Pounds 665m). With more money
chasing fewer goods, prices have risen.
The kroon's 'hard currency' status - viewed as a symbol akin to manhood by
Estonia's inexperienced central bankers - comes at a price, however. Shops
in the capital, Tallinn, stocked full of overpriced Scandinavian luxuries,
testify to an import binge the economy can ill afford.
Although trade has been redirected from east to west, with Finland
overtaking Russia as Estonia's main trading partner last September, exports,
which had grown explosively after the introduction of the convertible kroon,
have recently fallen back. The trade account slid into a deficit of EKr83m
(Pounds 4.2m) in April, even without counting the substantial natural gas
imports through pipelines from Russia, which are difficult to measure.
Estonia is also increasingly uncompetitive for foreign investment, on which
its future development depends. Its main attraction, a relatively cheap,
skilled workforce, has faded following a doubling in wages in dollar terms
over the past year.
The privatisation programme proceeds in fits and starts. An initial
international tender of 38 large companies last November was aborted after
allegations of incompetence at the privatisation agency.
A second offer of 56 enterprises was made in May. Vouchers to be used in the
purchase of smaller companies have been distributed. But only Dollars 8.6m
of an estimated total of Dollars 500m of state assets due to be sold off
have been transferred to the private sector, and the sale of land to
foreigners is severely restricted.
