FT  24 FEB 93 / Poland poised to be a post-communist success story: But
eastern Europe's beacon of stability is showing signs of strain
POST-COMMUNIST Europe needs a success story. It is beginning to look as
though Poland, which was the first to shake off the communist yoke and the
first to embark on 'shock therapy' economic reforms, might provide one.
After three years of industrial decline when production slumped 40 per cent
and unemployment climbed from zero to 13 per cent of the workforce, the
economy stabilised last year. Strong export growth to western markets, a
fast growing private sector and signs of greater efficiency in the public
sector have combined to produce sharp productivity gains and the basis of an
export-led economy. Poland appears poised for sustained economic growth
which the government hopes will double GDP over the next decade.
But the pain is far from over. Officially, more than 40 per cent of Polish
families survived at minimum income levels last year, according to central
planning office figures. These underestimate the extent of moon-lighting and
the under-reporting of real wage and profit levels for tax evasion purposes.
But there are also clear signs of social strain. Last year the birth rate
was the lowest in 50 years and the death rate was at its highest since the
second world war. A third of the population, around 13m people, live in
ecologically risky areas. Official unemployment, while slackening in pace,
is still rising; it will exceed 3m, or 16 per cent of the work force, before
hopefully peaking later this year, provided the slowdown in Germany and the
rest of EC markets does not curb export-led job creation.
There is a sense that the worst is over and that a period of economic and
social development lies ahead.
Production is rising at the new foreign and Polish-owned plants that are
mushrooming. State-owned enterprises are also responding to market
disciplines introduced over the last three years.
It is not only central Warsaw that gives the impression of a boom-town, with
aircraft and hotels full of western businessmen, streets crowded with
imported cars and increasingly sophisticated shops. Economic activity and
change in neighbouring countries - such as Ukraine and Germany - are
fuelling Poland's entrepreneurial activity. The eastern border has become,
in effect, the new border between east and west, although as the recent
35-nation interior ministers meeting in Budapest revealed, this is not a
status with which Warsaw is happy. Poland as seen from the east now looks
like a beacon of stability and modest prosperity. The fear is that the
country will attract economic refugees like moths to a light if the economic
and political situation to the east deteriorates, as looks probable.
Warsaw has its own problems. It has to keep the budget deficit within the 5
per cent of GDP level agreed with the International Monetary Fund. This
means a tight rein on spending, the introduction of VAT and measures to
broaden its tax base and improve tax collection.
Next month the IMF is expected to approve a Dollars 660m standby loan whose
symbolic importance far exceeds its financial value. A new agreement will be
seen as a vote of confidence in Poland's ability to maintain stable
government and pursue structural reforms.
The three years of deep recession which followed the 'shock therapy' imposed
by Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, the then finance minister, killed hyper-inflation
and forced Polish companies to seek new export markets in the west. This
process was re-inforced by the subsequent collapse in trade with the former
Soviet Union. Since the middle of last year, however, the first tentative
signs of an upturn in industrial production and economic growth have
multiplied.
Until now Poland, the most populous of the former Soviet satellites with an
internal market of 39m people, has received far less foreign investment than
Hungary or the Czech Republic. but has the most entrepreneurial private
sector. But unlike its neighbours it is spared the ethnic tensions which
have split Czechoslovakia, complicated Hungary's relations with its
neighbours and led to civil war in Yugoslavia and along the southern borders
of Russia.
The growth potential of Poland is attracting attention from strategic
investors, including US and European pension funds and other institutions.
Next month's expected IMF agreement will unlock more than Dollars 1bn in
structural adjustment loans from the World Bank, permit completion of the
second stage of the Paris Club agreement on a 50 per cent reduction in
Poland's Dollars 33bn official debt, and facilitate negotiations with the
London Club for a similar reduction in more than Dollars 12bn of commercial
debt.
The IMF agreement is also expected to facilitate redeployment of the
untouched Dollars 1bn zloty stabilisation fund created by donations and
loans from the US and other western governments in 1990 to underpin zloty
convertibility. It was not needed but now Warsaw is trying to persuade
donors that the fund should be converted to clean up bank balance sheets
prior to privatisation.
The climate for private investment is also expected to improve. The largest
single project to date is Fiat's Dollars 2bn commitment to build small cars
in Poland. This has attracted matching investments from Fiat's traditional
suppliers, including Dollars 200m from Lucchini which is modernising the
Huta Warszawa steel plant, and smaller machine tool and component companies
attracted by Poland's low wage costs and high skill levels.
More than 50 per cent of output now comes from the private sector which
employs 56 per cent of the labour force. International Paper, Pilkington and
Unilever are three of the lengthening list of multinational investors. while
increasingly Poland is attracting smaller investors such as a Danish shoe
company which is setting up three plants there. They employ 150 people each
at wages comparable to the Far East and the company is also buying cheap,
high quality Polish hides. As with other EC producers the Danish company
finds it cheaper and more efficient to sew leather uppers to soles in Poland
and ship the finished goods by truck than spend a fortune on air-freight.
