FT  14 DEC 93 / World Trade News: Tokyo's defensive policy gives way to
reality - Weakening traditions and hard-nosed politics
As the Japanese government agonised yesterday before announcing the symbolic
opening of the rice market, the country's department stores and supermarkets
were clearing their shelves for the annual displays of ceremonial rice cakes
for the New Year festivities.
Rice cultivation is still the basis of traditional events in Japan. Each
year the emperor plants rice seedlings in his private rice paddy behind the
palace walls and offers the crop to the deities in an imperial thanksgiving
ritual. White rice cakes and sake, a rice wine, are symbols of purity, often
used as offerings in Shinto and Buddhist ceremonies.
Japan's roots in rice farming are also given as a reason for its cultural
differences with the west. Japanese are said to be cultivators, who plant
and harvest a rice crop as a group and share the fruits of their labour.
Westerners, the myth goes, are hunter-gatherers, more individualistic and
more compulsive in that they eat what they kill.
However, the spiritual links between ordinary Japanese and the imperial
family and the farming culture are weakening and young people are becoming
ignorant of the symbolism of rice rituals. Farmers have had to lure
consumers with 'brand name' rice in garish packages.
In the past years, farmers' groups reached deep into Japan's past to conjure
images of the sacred importance of rice and of their role as the custodians
of the culture. But the inevitability of imports, and the fading of rice's
spiritual significance among ordinary Japanese, have encouraged farmers to
flex their muscles in search of a settlement of a material kind.
For the rice farmers who drove their tractors around Tokyo last week the
interest was more in the amount of compensation than the protection of a
tradition.
The argument against rice imports has also been supported by some
environmentalists who claim that the change in landscape that would result
from a reduction in the number of rice paddies would cause flooding during
the mid-year rainy period. Consumer groups, who oppose post-harvest
fungicide and pesticide treatment, believe foreign rice is unsafe.
For politicians dependent on the rural vote, compensation for farmers is
crucial if they are to maintain their appeal to the electorate. The size of
the imports - 4 to 8 per cent of domestic consumption over the six years
from 1995 - is so little that the rural landscape is more likely to be
affected by the modern civic centres and car parks demanded by politicians
as compensation for their areas.
Theatricals for domestic consumption have also played their part in Japan's
agonising over the rice issue. Mr Tsutomu Hata, foreign minister, flew to
Geneva last weekend in a last-minute protest. He followed a group of MPs
belonging to the Liberal Democratic party and Social Democratic party from
rice farming regions.
The government waited until almost the very last moment before the Uruguay
Round trade talks deadline to reveal its decision. Until then most officials
avoided a public debate and hoped to win public approval by simply stressing
Japan had to avoid being blamed for failure of the talks.
The enduring sanctity of rice in modern Japan has been a result of the
strength of the rural vote, a legacy of the 38-year rule by the LDP.
Uneven representation, where one rural vote is worth three votes in the
cities, supported the LDP's majority in spite of a declining farming
population. However, this is about to be changed by electoral reform, which
Mr Hosokawa hopes to implement during the current session of parliament.
The lifting of the symbolic ban will be good news for Japan's manufacturers,
who have faced international criticism for the country's trade surplus.
Business leaders, who hope that an opening of the rice market will take the
heat off export-oriented companies, have applauded Mr Hosokawa's decision.
Some in the business community hope that the benefits of cheaper rice will
be passed on to consumers and in turn boost sales of other goods.
Analysts estimate that imports of 4 per cent of domestic consumption in 1995
will result in a gain of Y178bn (Pounds 1.2bn) for Japan.
