FT  17 MAR 93 / Bomb damages Egyptian tour buses
A BOMB explosion damaged seven empty tour buses parked yards away from the
Egyptian Museum in Cairo's busiest square yesterday, one of a series of
attacks a week after Egyptian security forces launched a tough crackdown on
suspected Islamic militants.
Tourists had left the buses for the Egyptian Museum, one of Cairo's most
popular attractions, just 100 yards away. No one claimed responsibility. But
it appeared a defiant gesture from Islamic militants who have waged sporadic
attacks on tourist targets for much of the past year - considerably hurting
Egypt's precious tourism earnings.
The explosion took place during the midday rush in Tahrir Square, scene last
month of a coffee-shop bombing which killed three.
It came in the teeth of tightened security at all Egypt's tourist centres
and intensified operations against suspected members of the Gama'a
al-Islamiyya, the underground Islamic group behind most recent attacks.
Bus drivers in Tahrir Square said their vehicles had been searched for bombs
just 30 minutes before the blast.
An explosive device was also found and defused in a building housing
'foreign experts' in a central Cairo suburb, according to the semi-official
al-Ahram news agency.
Meanwhile, militants launched three bomb attacks on police in Aswan, the
tourist centre in Upper Egypt where police last week stormed a mosque and
shot dead nine alleged members of the Gama'a al-Islamiyya.
The clashes follow a week of incidents as Egyptian security forces have
followed up the Aswan raid and simultaneous dawn raids last week on eight
alleged militant hideouts in Cairo in which a total of 23 people died.
A total of 35 thirty-five alleged militants were arrested and one policeman
killed during a security sweep in Assiut, Upper Egypt, on Monday, the same
day security forces were reported to have rounded up 424 people in
Alexandria.
The US embassy on Monday called in around 40 members of the US business
community to discuss security, following a threat earlier this month by
Gama'a al-Islamiyya to attack foreign investments.
The embassy stressed only that businesses should step up routine
precautions.
'There was no recommendation to leave Egypt or take any drastic measures,'
said one businessman present.
