FT  30 JUN 93 / BAT swaps tobacco brands with rival
BAT Industries and American Brands, the rival tobacco groups, are to swap
some cigarette brands as part of a drive towards pan-European marketing.
The move, a rare example of consumer companies swapping brands to simplify
their ownership, was announced yesterday as BAT revealed that the cigarette
price war in the US would reduce first-half trading profits at its Brown &amp;
Williamson subsidiary by Dollars 75m (Pounds 50m). The problem lay in
excessive stocks of its full-price US brands, notably Kool.
BAT will acquire from American Brands the Lucky Strike and Pall Mall
cigarette businesses in France. In exchange, American Brands will get BAT's
Benson &amp; Hedges operations in the duty-paid markets of the European
Community and European Free Trade Area.
As part of the deal, prompted by the creation of the European single market,
American Brands will pay BAT about Pounds 135m - Pounds 70m in cash with the
balance paid over 10 years according to B&amp;H sales.
The Pounds 135m will be included as a pre-tax profit in BAT's accounts for
1993. The net trading profit foregone is estimated at about Pounds 8m a
year.
The arrangements have been approved by the EC Commission.
Mr Ulrich Herter, managing director of BAT's tobacco business, said: 'This
is a key development which will enable the group to build on the continuing
success of Lucky Strike in Europe by focusing on the brand and unifying its
marketing.'
BAT, which owns the Lucky Strike and Pall Mall trademarks in the rest of
Europe, will continue to license the brands in France to Seita, the
state-owned tobacco company. Sales of Lucky Strike in France have increased
by 27 per cent a year since 1989 to 1.2bn cigarettes and BAT believes it
offers scope for development across Europe.
BAT's worldwide Lucky Strike volume, which has grown by 18 per cent a year
to 17.1bn since 1989, will also benefit from the deal which extends its
rights to the brand into the US duty-free trade and a number of other
markets, including the Philippines, Algeria and Cuba.
American Brands will retain control of the US domestic market where the
brand's sales volume amounted to 1.7bn last year.
Gallaher, the British subsidiary of the US group, which owns the Benson &amp;
Hedges brand in the UK and Ireland, will now manufacture and market the
brand throughout the rest of western Europe.
However, BAT - which owns the biggest UK export brand, State Express 555 -
will retain control of the B&amp;H brand in European duty-free and other
international markets.
Sales of B&amp;H in Europe last year accounted for 3bn of total worldwide volume
of 17bn.
Lex, Page 24
