FT  21 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Eurotunnel seeks help from French
THE International Chamber of Commerce in Paris was yesterday asked by
Eurotunnel to arbitrate in a long running dispute between the operator of
the Channel tunnel and British Rail and SNCF, the UK and French national
railways.
The dispute relates to the railway usage contract signed in 1987 between the
railways and Eurotunnel, the company which built and will operate the
Channel tunnel.
Eurotunnel claims that the contract 'can no longer deliver the balance of
benefits envisaged by the parties at the time it was agreed'. Failure to
change the contract could cost it tens of millions of pounds it believes.
However British Rail and SNCF in a joint statement said: 'Eurotunnel has
chosen to fabricate a dispute with their principal customers (the railways)
. . . . We do not have a dispute with Eurotunnel. We believe that all
parties should now work wholeheartedly together for a successful launch of
the cross Channel service on the basis of the contract'.
The contract says that 50 per cent of tunnel capacity should be made
available to the railways against payments related to volume of traffic and
operating costs. That would allow the railways to carry 17.4m passengers and
8.1m tonnes of freight each year.
However railway usage in the early years of tunnel operation, from next
year, is now expected to be far less than at the time the contract was
signed - and therefore Eurotunnel's revenue from the railways will be less.
In part, this shortfall is due to the late arrival and slow build-up of
scheduled passenger train services, according to Eurotunnel.
The contract also set out the railways' obligations in respect of
infrastructure at each end of the tunnel to support the volume of tunnel
traffic.
Eurotunnel alleges the infrastructure in the UK, in particular the station
at Ashford in Kent, is inadequate and that rail capacity in the UK,
especially on Network South East, will be insufficient for the rest of the
decade.
Sir Alastair Morton, Eurotunnel's co-chairman, recently said that the French
railways had by contrast performed 'splendidly' in providing infrastructure
on that side of the Channel.
