FT  13 MAY 93 / Personal View: The ABCs of a sensible testing policy
Britain's education secretary, John Patten, has decided to simplify national
curriculum testing next year. Has he paved the way to solving the immediate
dispute? Will the main classroom teacher unions suspend their boycott, and
will they lose the sympathy or support of governors, heads and parents if
they do not?
Commentators are right to suggest that Mr Patten would have been wise to
have gone the last hundred yards and suspend this year's tests, or find a
political euphemism for doing so by declaring them consultative. Realists
may accept, however, that his room for political manoeuvre was very limited.
In practice it is very unlikely this year's tests will proceed as Mr Patten
would like. So he must decide whether to go on the attack over a short-term
problem and risk extending it, or accept the inevitable as philosophically
as he can.
A long-term solution must be found. The government is right to emphasise one
over-riding imperative - to raise standards of UK education and training.
Failure to do so will lead to harsh economic and social consequences.
Mr Patten acted sensibly in commissioning Sir Ron Dearing, the recently
appointed chairman of the new School Curriculum and Assessment Authority, to
conduct an urgent review of the national curriculum and testing
arrangements. Some will argue that Mr Patten has now pre-empted the outcome
by his Commons statement this week.
Many more will appreciate that he has increased the likelihood of Sir Ron's
success by early public acceptance that the pointless complexity of national
testing can be simplified only if it is restricted to the core subjects. It
was always a nonsense that seven-year-olds should be assessed in English,
maths, science, technology, history, geography, music, art and physical
education.
Teachers and parents should welcome the commitment that tests for
11-year-olds in the core subjects will be mandatory only after a full year's
trial. Postponing history and geography tests for 14-year-olds until Sir Ron
has completed his review makes good sense too.
Everything turns on that review, and Sir Ron has made a good start. He has
entered into immediate talks with teachers and the organisations which
represent them. They, together with independent school bodies, have
submitted their views on a framework for progress.
Sir Ron's decision to listen to teachers gets his review off on the right
foot, but does not guarantee success. It does not reconcile one absurdity -
that there is not merely one body that advises Mr Patten but three, all
acting independently of one another.
The School Teachers' Review Body recommends on pay and conditions. Ofsted is
a field force of inspectors who see the impact of government policies and
police school performance. It is vital that Sir Ron seeks the assessments of
the review body and Ofsted on the human resource, management and quality
implications of his review.
It must explore three crucial issues. First, how much teaching time should
be dedicated to the national curriculum irrespective of the elements which
are tested.
Second, what should testing seek to achieve? For children and parents the
principal purpose is obvious: to provide confident information about how
children are performing in comparison with their age group and in terms of
their individual potential. It does not follow that testing every child is
necessary or will even indicate whether the national investment in education
is paying off.
Nor does it follow that such test results, published in league table form,
could in reality inform parental choice among schools. The government's
fixation with league tables ignores the lack of consumer interest in them,
as opinion polls have shown. Perhaps even more important, it disregards the
essential imperfection of the school market where, in reality, the consumer
has restricted choice. Parents may be far more interested in how individual
schools are competing against their own past performance.
Third, the review needs to consider the fundamental tension in government
philosophy between central regulation and local manager autonomy. Schools
can now manage themselves however they like, provided that they do it Mr
Patten's way. But school managers must be freed to manage, and not be
hamstrung by Whitehall. Corporate direction which throttles should give way
to local initiative which liberates.
The authors are, respectively, general secretary of the Association of
Teachers and Lecturers, and general secretary of the National Association of
Head Teachers
