FT  24 FEB 93 / UK Company News: SB's new drugs show strong divisional
growth in sales
GIVEN THE inevitable decline in sales of Tagamet, the anti-ulcer drug and
SmithKline Beecham's best-selling product whose US patents expire next May,
the growth of SB's drugs division will be dependent on its ability to
develop and market new medicines.
Yesterday's results demonstrated the strength of the group's drugs pipeline
as well as the power of its marketing effort.
The new drugs increased their sales by Pounds 212m, representing nearly half
of pharmaceuticals sales increase.
This growth is vital if SB is to offset ever-tightening price controls. Its
worldwide drugs sales actually suffered a 0.5 per cent fall in prices
following a 16 per cent price cut in Japan for Tagamet. Of the group's 11.4
per cent sales growth, 9 percentage points were generated by volume, and
only 1 per cent by prices. The remainder was currency driven.
The star performer among the new products was Engerix-B, a recently-launched
hepatitis vaccine, whose sales improved from Pounds 103m to Pounds 267m. Mr
Jan Leschly, chairman of SB pharmaceuticals, said only Pounds 50m of Engerix
sales were in the US paediatric market which might be affected by price cuts
threatened by the new White House administration.
Relafen, an arthritis treatment, generated sales of Pounds 175m during its
first 10 months in the US, said Mr Leschly. Its worldwide sales increased
six times to Pounds 118m. Seroxat, an anti-depressant, generated sales of
Pounds 26m. It was launched two weeks ago in the US by a salesforce of 1,800
representatives. Sales of Kytril, an anti-nausea product, were Pounds 31m.
The product launches were not without cost. Group selling general and
administrative expenses (SG&amp;A) increased from Pounds 1.55bn to Pounds
1.84bn. As a proportion of group sales, SG&amp;A rose from 33.1 to 35.2 per
cent. Group margins fell 0.7 percentage points to 21.9 per cent. The drugs
division's sales and marketing spend increased 13.6 per cent to Pounds 789m.
Meanwhile, sales of some established drugs were also impressive. Augmentin,
an antibiotic, increased 14 per cent to Pounds 589m.
Research and development investment rose from Pounds 432m to Pounds 478m,
equivalent to 9.2 per cent of sales.
