FT  27 FEB 93 / Go easy on the copycat criminals: Where computer software
companies see only theft they could find profits
WHAT IS wrong with theft if nobody gets hurt and nobody notices any loss?
Not much, say thousands of people who routinely fiddle their income tax,
conspire to avoid payment of Value Added Tax or make minor depredations
against their insurance companies. It is wrong, of course, because the
honest citizens suffer from higher taxes or insurance premiums, even if they
cannot connect these with any particular rip-off.
However, there is one form of theft, now being vigorously combated, which
many otherwise honest people commit with little or no sense of shame: the
pirating of computer software. Illegal copying is made ever easier by the
development of faster personal computers and higher capacity magnetic
storage disks (the sort which are posted into the front of the machine and
can be slipped into a shirt pocket).
Programmes for word processing, doing accounts or spreadsheets costing
between Pounds 200 and Pounds 400 can be stored on a few disks which can be
bought for around a fiver. So the temptation to borrow a friend's programme
disks and make a copy is high, especially as the risk of detection is
minimal. Not surprisingly, the software companies are anxious to stamp out
the practice, which they see as a straightforward theft of copyright and a
significant threat to the revenues of their multi-billion dollar industry.
Some well-publicised raids on companies which have allowed copies to be
passed illegally from one machine to another, aggressively worded licensing
agreements and a few programing tricks have all helped to make respectable
folk a little bit more awkward about unlicensed copying.
Yet many people feel that there is something silly about present licence
agreements, as there was in the discarded law that banned the tape-recording
of radio broadcasts for personal use. In the days when personal computers
were almost all to be found in offices, a tough stand against copying may
have made sense, for the software company must recoup high development costs
from a product whose manufacturing cost (copying a few disks) is tiny. But
computers are fast becoming a standard piece of domestic equipment in middle
class homes and private individuals do not wish to pay Pounds 200 to Pounds
300 for a programme which they may use only occasionally. On the other hand,
they do not want to struggle with an obsolete programme which may be much
harder to use than the one they have in the office.
So they make an unofficial copy, and their reasons for doing this deserve a
hearing. At that price, says the pirate, I would never have bought a legal
copy, so the vendor is not deprived of a sale. Indeed, the software company
may benefit if I decide to buy an upgraded version or a manual (which some
companies sell separately).
Anyway, says the pirate, warming to his theme, it is all the software
company's fault for trying to charge me ten times his marginal cost of
production. What is more he is inciting me to piracy by making it difficult
for me to buy the previous (outdated) version of the product at a reasonable
price.
Without doubt, excessively restrictive licence agreements (limiting use to
one person on one machine) have contributed strongly to making these
infringements widely tolerated among people who would be happy to pay a
moderate fee to 'stay legal'. Software companies have been slow to learn the
lesson from the airlines that empty seats can be sold at low prices, without
destroying revenues from business class users.
The industry has at last started to recognise these arguments by selling
'economy class' programmes at a much lower price than the up-to-date full
versions aimed at the business market, but prices are still high compared
with the cost of making a copy, and some of the restrictions imposed on
business users who might want make a copy of a programme in order to take
their work home are absurdly tight.
Now that each copy of a programme can be labelled with the name of its
legitimate user, it is possible to make the possessors of pirate versions
feel uncomfortable, every time they switch on. So it is time for the
industry to combine this moral lever with more relaxed conditions for
limited copying and aggressive mass market pricing of top quality programmes
(not just clapped out versions).
In this way they will de-criminalise large sections of the middle classes -
and possibly make money too.
