FT  29 MAY 93 / Seriously Rich: A land of millionaires - Frankfurt
Germany and the Germans have never had it so good. For the first time,
millions of Germans have been able to spend a peaceful half-century devoting
themselves to the task of making money.
Four times during the course of this century the wealth produced by a
generation of Germans was wiped out, twice in world wars, twice as a result
of inflation. But since 1948, when the introduction of the D-Mark ushered in
an era of unprecedented prosperity, there has been no war, and no inflation
to speak of.
As a result, Germans are richer than they have ever been, and the wealth
built over the past prosperous decades is about to be passed down from one
generation to another, intact.
Estimates are that approximately DM2,000bn in assets of one form or another
will be passed on in this way by the end of the century.
Some of the inheritors are the old aristocratic families for whom
inheritance is no novelty. These include fabulously wealthy grandees such as
the Duke of Bavaria, who owns much of the part of southern Germany which
bears his name, or the young Prince Thurn und Taxis, whose mother, the
redoubtable Princess Gloria, tends a fortune worth DM1bn or more until her
son comes of age.
Although Germany is teeming with aristocrats, who disport their ancient
titles and stick together socially, most are not seriously rich. They work
in the upper echelons of banks in Frankfurt or Munich, dreaming of
repossessing old estates in the east of Germany or even further afield, in
Bohemia or Silesia.
Germany's real wealth is in industry and commerce, not land. Whole sectors
of the economy are owned by a handful of individuals, and generally a much
greater share of the German economy is in private hands than in countries
such as Japan, the US or UK.
The size of the German economy, still Europe's biggest, means that Germany
has thousands of millionaires and hundreds of people who are worth tens, if
not hundreds, of millions of Deutsche - Mark.
To stand a chance of being included in the German Forbes magazine's list of
the 400 richest people in Germany, for example, you have to be worth at
least DM190m. According to this list, there are more than 100 German
families or individuals worth DM1bn or more, over 40 worth DM2bn-plus, and
10 worth more than DM5bn.
Few of these individuals will be familiar to Anglo-Saxon readers, as
Germany's super-rich live calm lives as far from public gaze as possible.
Among the most discreet is the 69-year-old Otto Beisheim, majority owner of
the Metro stores group. The last time he appeared to explain his business
strategy was shortly after it was founded 28 years ago. Metro, with sales of
around DM60bn, is one of the world's biggest retailers, and Beisheim's stake
is worth an incalculable number of billions. Long ago he moved to
Switzerland, for tax reasons.
Equally discreet are the four members of the Haub family who own Tengelmann,
a retail group with sales of nearly DM50bn, which is Germany's eighth
biggest non-financial company.
Perhaps the Haniel family is the richest of all, but their fortune, worth in
the region of DM10bn according to Forbes, is divided between several hundred
descendants of Franz Haniel. Other rich families include the Oetkers, owners
of the food manufacturing group of that name, the Oppenheims, owners of the
Sal Oppenheim private banking empire, the Henkels and the Boehringers, who
own two of Germany's larger chemicals companies, and the Merck family, which
owns the large pharmaceuticals company of that name.
For the Porsche family, the difficulties currently being experienced by the
sports car company of that name are not unduly worrying; the family's
business interests extend beyond car manufacturing and they own one of the
biggest companies in Austria.
The Quandt family owns the majority of the shares - perhaps two-thirds  - in
BMW, the most resilient of German car manufacturers amid difficult market
conditions.
These families - and a few more - are Germany's super-rich. Slightly less
prosperous are those who are merely extremely rich - people like Hans Peter
Stihl, chairman of the German industrial association, who controls one of
the world's largest manufacturers of electric saws.
But the core of German wealth lies with those who are rich on a more modest
scale. The German arm of 3i, the UK venture capital group, calculates that
there are 15,000 companies in Germany with a turnover of between DM20m to
DM200m, all but a handful of which are privately owned.
These companies form the fabled 'Mittelstand,' the medium-sized
privately-owned companies which form the backbone of the economy and are
largely responsible for Germany's post-war success.
The recession means that some families are experiencing an acute sense of
diminishing wealth. But only in rare cases is the wealth being wiped out
altogether. For all its present difficulties, Germany remains a land of
millionaires.
