FT  25 OCT 93 / Survey of Germany (3): Fickle barometers - Economists are
confused
AFTER getting it so wrong last time, the myriad analysts of the western
German economy are demonstrating admirable caution - and confusing diversity
 -in their preliminary forecasts for 1994. The range extends from a further
decline of around 0.5 per cent in gross domestic product to growth of 1 per
cent.
Most optimists base their expectations on a heady mix of reviving demand in
European Community markets, low pay awards, and faith in government promises
to screw down public spending which, in turn, will encourage the Bundesbank
to screw down short-term interest rates.
The pessimists point to fading domestic demand, stubborn inflation, the
difficulties of persuading unions to accept further real income cuts and the
effects on export prospects of a strong D-Mark.
Since private sector analysts still cannot agree on the outcome for the
economy in the current year (although most have more than doubled their
early forecasts to a drop in output of more than 2 per cent) the degree of
variance is hardly surprising. The recession, by common consent, has been
the worst since the war, and to some extent the path out of the slump is
unknown.
The statistics do not offer much of a clear pointer, though the picture they
have given of performance over the past year is bleak enough. For four
consecutive quarters - from the second quarter of 1992 until the first
quarter of 1993 - west Germany's gross domestic product was actually
shrinking: reaching its most negative rate of minus 1.5 per cent at the
beginning of the year. Perhaps thanks to that particularly sharp downturn,
it showed a 0.5 per cent recovery in the second quarter, and the question is
now whether that does indeed mark a bottoming out of the recession.
Industrial orders in the west have shown conflicting signals: up 2.9 per
cent in May, down by 1.6 per cent in June, up again by 2.3 per cent in July,
and down a provisional 2.0 per cent in August, according to the Bundesbank.
West German industrial production, on the other hand, showed a 2.2 per cent
recovery in August, after two consecutive months of slight decline. The
economics ministry in Bonn firmly believes that the worst is over, citing a
very gradual improvement also in the mood of the business community.
Inflation looks set to ease gradually, after a peak of 4.3 per cent in the
cost of living index in the first quarter, reached again in July. It was
down to 4.2 per cent in August and 4.0 per cent in September. In east
Germany, it was again looking steady at around 8.9 per cent, reflecting the
continuing adjustment of low administered prices in the old state system.
As for the unemployment outlook, that is still unequivocally bleak:
seasonally adjusted unemployment has increased steadily throughout the year
in the west, from just under 2m at the turn of the year to 2.38m in
September, a rate of 7.7 per cent. In east Germany, it is sticking at around
15.2 per cent, or around 1.16m workers. Forecasts suggest continuing
lay-offs through 1994, leading to a possible jobless total of 4m by the end
of the year.
That all this translates into a structural crisis in which the German
economy has lost its attraction as an investment location is not universally
accepted. According to the local branch of the Arthur D. Little consultancy,
the Standort Deutschland debate is too introverted and tends to ignore
external views. A poll of 50 senior foreign executives discovered 76 per
cent saying 'yes' immediately when asked if they would invest in Germany.
While those questioned readily listed the familiar disincentives of high
labour costs and taxes, bureaucracy and economic and political uncertainty,
they had no doubts about the attractions: the size and wealth of the German
market; proximity to eastern Europe; qualified, motivated workers;
infrastructure, and a stable legal framework.
Nevertheless, there is no mistaking the new sense of realism that is abroad,
in both public and private sectors.
Economists expect overall industrial and public sector pay awards for 1994
to equal or even undercut the expected inflation rate, thus taking another
twist out of the inflationary spiral. They are less sure about the
politicians' efforts, especially since Germany will spend much of next year
in a frenzy of state and local elections, ending with the federal polls.
There has already been some progress. New rules on prescriptions and a
compulsory freeze on drugs prices, introduced last January, have already
saved billions of D-Marks in federal subsidies to the over-loaded statutory
health insurance schemes. Bonn has also saved by winkling out social
security fraudsters and tax dodgers. It plans cuts in unemployment and
welfare benefits, but has yet to implement most of them. Even if it does,
sceptics say, the planned economies seem unlikely to materialise because of
the rapid increase in unemployment stemming from industry's rationalisation
efforts.
Meanwhile, regional and local authorities, mostly controlled by the Social
Democrat opposition, and naturally loath to listen to pleadings from Bonn,
have tried to offset their still-rising deficits by cranking up charges for
local services such as rubbish collection.
Excluding the billions of borrowings by the post office, Deutsche Telekom,
railways and the Treuhand privatisation agency, the general government
spending deficit this year is expected to reach DM150bn, or 5.5 per cent of
GDP, although the proportion is scheduled to fall to 4.5 per cent in 1994.
Including the 'off-budget' extras, the figure rises to DM230bn. The
Bundesbank has made no secret of its concern that it is government borrowing
which is driving monetary growth to unacceptable levels. Looming increases
in taxes on fuel and insurance will tweak inflation further. Meanwhile, the
coalition continues to undermine its own credibility by nibbling round the
edges of major structural problems. One example is the extraordinary debate
about how best to pay for care for the elderly and infirm while the entire
old-age pensions system threatens to collapse under pressure of the rapidly
ageing population.
As Mr Michael Heise of the government's independent council of economic
experts has noted, fiscal policy is a determining factor for Germany's
attractiveness as a location for business.
