FT  25 JUN 93 / International Company News: AEG, Schneider in talks on
co-operation accord
AEG, the electrical engineering unit of Daimler-Benz, the German industrial
group, is in co-operation talks with Groupe Schneider, the French electrical
engineering and construction group.
The companies are discussing plans to pool resources in certain areas of
their electrical activities.
AEG said the talks were limited to exploring possible industrial
co-operation in automation technology and components manufacturing with a
view to strengthening the groups' international sales efforts.
AEG gave no indication of how long the talks had lasted. No concrete
co-operation agreement had been reached yet, it said. It said the talks were
similar to discussions which the company held regularly with other potential
industrial partners. This appeared to rule out the possibility of
underscoring any future partnership arrangement with Schneider with a share
exchange.
Schneider yesterday issued a statement saying it had no specific plans for
co-operative ventures with AEG at present.
The French group is in the process of restructuring its interests following
the takeover two years ago of Square D, the US construction company, which
left it burdened by heavy debts. It is now trying to raise capital through
asset sales, and earlier this year agreed to sell Jeumont-Schneider, its
electrical components subsidiary, to Framatome, the French nuclear reactor
concern.
Schneider has also been affected by the problems of Spie-Batignolles, its
troubled French construction subsidiary. The FFr274.3m (Dollars 49.24m)
losses from Spie curbed Schneider's growth last year. The group's net
profits rose modestly from FFr275m in 1991 to FFr305m in 1992, on sales of
FFr61.4bn.
AEG has reported a pre-tax profit of DM8m for last year. The German group's
operating losses rose to DM200m from DM100m in the previous year. Its
turnover reached DM11.6bn in 1992, of which approximately a half was
generated areas of potential co-operation with Schneider.
