FT  03 FEB 93 / Daf collapse risks 12,650 jobs: Truckmaker sinks under Fl
3bn debt - Government accused of failing to intervene
THE GOVERNMENT yesterday became embroiled in fresh controversy over failing
to save jobs in Britain, as Daf, the Dutch commercial vehicle maker and the
leading truckmaker in the UK, was forced to file in the Netherlands for
protection against its creditors.
Mr John Talbot of accountants Arthur Andersen was last night expected to be
announced as the administrative receiver for Leyland Daf, Daf's UK
subsidiary, the UK new truck market leader with a share of 25 per cent last
year. The financial collapse of one of the leading west European truck
makers was precipitated by the failure of Daf's banking consortium and the
Dutch government and Flemish regional authorities in Belgium to reach
agreement on emergency short-term funding.
Some of the banks - National Westminster, Barclays and Lloyds, together with
Generale de Banque of Belgium - had insisted on independent auditors
studying a long-term rescue package as a precondition for taking part in the
short-term financing. The Dutch and Flemish authorities had insisted on
immediate participation.
The company has run up losses of more than Fl 800m in the past three years.
Its total indebtedness is estimated at more than Fl 3bn (Pounds 1.1bn)
including more than Fl 2bn in the finance subsidiaries.
Production at the group's plants in the UK, the Netherlands and Belgium was
hit yesterday as many suppliers stopped delivering parts, as news spread of
the Daf parent company seeking protection in the Netherlands.
The collapse of Daf, which in 1987 took over the former British Leyland
truck and van operations, puts at risk about 12,650 jobs, mainly in the UK,
the Netherlands and Belgium. Leyland Daf said its 5,500-strong UK workforce
was expected to report in today, but it was uncertain whether either hourly
or salaried workers would be paid tomorrow as originally scheduled.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, was jeered by Labour MPs
in the Commons when he refused to intervene with public money to preserve
Leyland Daf jobs.
He was repeatedly taunted about his speech to last year's Conservative party
conference in which he envisaged intervening before breakfast, lunch and
dinner to help British industry.
Mr Heseltine maintained that the best means of preserving commercially
viable jobs was through the receiver and administrators and the management
of the company working together.
Pressed about assistance for long-term investment, he said a sum of Pounds
450m had been mentioned and the government had made it clear it could not
contemplate such a project. The maximum available under regional assistance
was some Pounds 18m.
The Department of Trade and Industry had not been asked to provide
short-term working finance and, in any case, would not have done so.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's shadow trade and industry secretary, condemned the
refusal to provide assistance and warned that the collapse of Leyland Daf
would inflict another bitter blow on Britain's shrinking industrial base. Mr
Cook said Daf had advised him that it had been the three British banks which
had wrecked the consortium's planned rescue deal.
Mr Heseltine said: 'My department has been absolutely satisfied with the
British banks, and the Bank of England has been fully engaged in the
dialogue that was necessary.'
The DTI had done all that was asked of it by the company, which had made no
specific request for financial aid of the kind referred to by MPs, he said.
A spokesman for ABN Amro, the biggest Dutch bank and leader of the
consortium, said the rescue deal had broken down over disagreements between
the banks and Dutch and Belgian authorities over short-term and long-term
financing.
Mr Koos Andriessen, Dutch economic affairs minister, said: 'We were faced
with the situation where the bridging finance was simply insufficient to
meet Daf's needs.'
Daf's court-appointed administrators in the Netherlands have carte blanche
to act as they see fit, which means that they can close down or negotiate
the sale of subsidiaries. The company in the meantime enjoys protection from
its creditors.
Driven to a grinding halt Page 23
Lex Page 24
Suppliers keep calm over Daf's problems Page 29
European stocks Page 39
