FT  18 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: India expects cotton crop close
to last year's record
INDIA EXPECTS to harvest another bumper cotton crop of 13.5m bales (170kg
each) during the season that began in September, only marginally down from
last season's record.
'A 13.5m bale crop is only the beginning of the season forecast,' said an
official of the Eastern India Textile Mills Association. 'As has always been
the case in the past the crop estimate will keep changing as the season
progresses. Last year, the initial crop estimate was only 12m bales. But we
finally ended up with a record production of 13.6m bales. All this happens
because the country so far has not been able to develop a reliable crop
forecasting system.'
According to the government-owned Cotton Corporation of India, among the
major cotton growing states in the country, Maharashtra is expected to
record an output rise of 250,000 bales to 2.3m and Madhya Pradesh's
production is projected to be 200,000 bales higher at 1.2m. However, there
will be a major crop loss of over 450,000 bales, to 1.8m, in Gujarat, where
large areas suffered drought.
The cotton crop will be maintained in other major centres, like Punjab,
Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The quality of the crop
is reported to be satisfactory.
As India opened the season with comfortable stocks of nearly 3.3m bales and
it is heading for a bumper crop, the government has announced the first
instalment of export quota of 500,000 bales for 1993-94. Last year the
country exported 1.3m bales out of a total sanctioned quota of nearly 1.8m.
India releases cotton exports in stages, depending on the progress of the
harvest. This policy attempts to ensure remunerative prices to growers and
adequate supplies to textile mills. Indian mill consumption in the current
season is expected to be 11.5m bales and non-mill consumption 800,000 bales.
The organisations of growers and traders have found in the agriculture
ministry a champion of freedom of cotton exports. According to the
parliamentary committee on agriculture, the ad hoc export policy is not
farmer-friendly and India should remove all controls on cotton exports. The
committee believes there is scope, through improved productivity, to
increase exports to 2m bales a year. India manages an average yield of only
270kg a hectare, compared with the world average of 600kg.
According to the International Cotton Advisory Committee, cotton export
prices in the current season are likely to remain below average, even though
imports are projected to increase by 200,000 tonnes to 6.1m tonnes. Latin
American importers are expected to account for most of the rise.
