FT  27 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Milking the milk monopoly
A FUNNY thing is happening in the UK's Pounds 3.3bn milk market. The Milk
Marketing Board's statutory monopoly on purchasing milk from farmers expires
next April. But instead of competitive forces leading to lower prices, it
seems certain that milk prices will rise. What is going wrong?
The explanation given by angry dairy companies is that the board is trying
to turn itself from a de jure milk purchasing monopoly into a de facto
supply monopoly. Its plan, to be submitted to government for approval in the
next couple of weeks, is to reorganise itself as the Milk Marque, a farmers'
co-operative.
Recent comments by Mr Andrew Dare, Milk Marque's chief executive, look
monopolistic. He has predicted that 80 per cent of the UK's 30,000 dairy
farmers will join Milk Marque and promised that the co-operative will use
its marketing muscle to secure farmers an additional 2p per litre - an
increase of almost 10 per cent. While dairy companies are free to cut their
own deals with farmers, they are finding they need to offer a premium of
0.5p to tempt farmers away from the Milk Marque, so driving prices yet
higher.
The dairy trade is concerned that price rises will either be passed through
to consumers or be accommodated by a squeeze on profits. To avoid this
danger, it wants the Milk Marketing Board split up into several competing
regional co-operatives.
Breaking the board up would certainly suit the large dairy companies by
increasing their bargaining power. But it is doubtful whether this would be
enough to prevent price rises because the main culprit is not the board's
monopoly but the European Community's quota regime, which has fixed UK milk
production at 85 per cent of domestic consumption. So long as supply is thus
restricted, it will be possible for dairy farmers to jack up their prices.
Rationing system
The current system, operating under government oversight, has sought to
balance the interests of farmers and the dairy trade. Prices have been
struck in annual negotiations between the board and the Dairy Trade
Federation, which represents the dairy companies. The problem of excess
demand has been dealt with by an elaborate rationing system, whereby liquid
milk suppliers get priority over companies wishing to process milk into
cheese, butter and other products.
In the new competitive world, Milk Marque will no longer seek to balance
interests but to get the best deal for its farmer members. The only cap on
increases will be the cost of buying milk in continental countries such as
the Netherlands or Denmark, which have excess supplies of milk. This is
expensive because of transportation costs, but these should fall when the
Channel Tunnel opens.
Ideal solution
The ideal solution would be to scrap the EC milk quota system.
Unfortunately, there is little chancing of achieving this in the medium
term, since last year's reform of the Community's Common Agricultural Policy
agreed that quotas should last until at least 2000. But this is not an
excuse for the government to sit by idly as milk prices rise. Action is
needed both at European and national levels.
In Europe, ministers should press for quotas to be tradeable across national
frontiers. This would allow British farmers, who have some of Europe's best
land for dairy farming, to buy quotas from other countries so reducing the
gap between domestic supply and consumption. The European Court of Auditors
has already backed this idea.
At home, the best approach would be to break the Milk Marketing Board into
competing regional co-operatives. This would ensure that dairy companies had
a range of suppliers, limiting the danger that they could be put in
take-it-or-leave-it situations. Competition would also give the board's
successors an incentive to cut administrative costs.
It would be unrealistic to expect a break-up to do more than dampen price
rises. So long as supplies are restricted, farmers will be able to increase
prices and enjoy monopoly rents. Since such a transfer of revenue from
consumers to producers would be totally arbitrary, the government might
consider imposing a special tax to claw back excess profits.
