FT  15 NOV 93 / Survey of Harrogate (5): Uncertainty clouds outlook -
Agriculture
IN addition to its many conferences, Harrogate is host each year to one of
agriculture's most popular events - the annual Great Yorkshire Show.
During the second week of July around 90,000 people attend the three-day
show, the biggest agricultural event in the North of England.
First held in 1838 in York, the show moved to Harrogate in 1951 to a site on
the edge of the town. Over the last few years, however, its organisers,
faced with the need to upgrade the site's facilities, have been debating
with their 8,000 members and the general public whether the event should
continue on this land.
They have now decided that it will do so; the proceeds of an Pounds 11.5m
deal in which four acres of the site have been sold to Sainsbury will be
used to develop new, modern facilities which, between shows, can be let out
to other organisations to generate more revenue. Significantly at a time
when farmers are increasingly having to think of adding value to their basic
products, the new site will also include a purpose-built food show hall,
promoting the best of Yorkshire food.
The presence of the Great Yorkshire Show in Harrogate is just one reminder
of the strong agricultural backbone of the surrounding area. A total of 4.2
per cent of the Harrogate district's employees in employment in 1989 worked
in agriculture, forestry and fishing, compared with a UK average of 1.4 per
cent.
A report to this month's meeting of Harrogate borough council's economic
development subcommittee reports a decline in agricultural employment in the
Harrogate travel to work area, between 1981 and 1991, of 8.4 per cent, and
in the Ripon TTWA 17.2 per cent. These figures however must be set in the
context of an overall British drop of 21.8 per cent.
But, even though the decline in the Harrogate area is proving less sharp
than nationally, research carried out for the borough council on the
Harrogate economy in the year 2000 has suggested between 300 and 500
agricultural jobs will be lost in the 1990s, highlighting the need for new
activity in the countryside around the town.
The western part of the Harrogate district is included in North Yorkshire
county council's submission for European Community Objective 5b structural
funds. Objective 5b status gives rural areas eligibility to EC grants for
economic development.
North Yorkshire's bid has been passed by the UK government to the EC but it
is competing against many other parts of Britain and Continental rural
areas. A decision will be announced shortly.
The varied geography of the area around Harrogate makes for diversity in
agriculture, from the upland hill farmers of the dales and the dairy farmers
of the West Riding to the arable expanses east and south of the town.
In general, though, the current outlook for the area's farmers and
landowners can be summarised by one word; uncertainty.
At present, Britain's departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism has brought
farmers a windfall since previously agreed European subsidy levels have been
made more valuable. 'They're doing reasonably well at the moment because of
the devaluation of the pound,' says Mr Gerry Passman, northern counties
spokesman for the Country Landowners Association.
There are some signs of farmers putting the benefits of this back into their
businesses by investing in new machinery. But most see the enhanced value of
subsidies as a temporary phenomenon. 'It's not going to last,' says Robert
Sturdy, a potato and cereals farmer near Wetherby.
In the longer term, says regional National Farmers Union spokesman Robin
Cradock, the prospect is of decline in Common Agricultural Policy
intervention prices as they are brought into line with world prices. There
is also uncertainty at present over the eventual terms of the GATT round and
its impact on agriculture.
In the immediate future, hill farmers are concerned over the likely level of
next year's Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances, due to be announced on
November 30. Britain's departure from the ERM has helped sheep farmers
export much more of their production recently but, they argue, HLCA should
be a compensation for the difficulty of farming in the hills, not a payment
vulnerable to being pruned back. The shortfall of sheep quotas, which
hampers new entrants to the sector, continues to be a bone of contention.
The dairy industry faces its biggest upheaval for 60 years with the
abolition in April of the Milk Marketing Board and its replacement by a
voluntary co-operative, Milk Marque.
Unusually, some West Riding farmers had not been locked into the MMB but
instead have continued to sell their own milk directly to consumers.
However, the entire dairy industry faces an upheaval when the MMB vanishes
and constraints on milk sales are removed. Among the new groups emerging is
Northern Milk Partnership, a Yorkshire-based initiative to supply milk to
Northern Foods. The break-up of the MMB also affects Harrogate itself, as
the town houses the Board's regional headquarters.
Unlike the MMB, the Potato Marketing Board looks set to survive; discussions
on its future are being keenly watched by Yorkshire's potato growers. For a
number of them, incidentally, October was not a good month since it brought
frost which spoils frying quality. Further uncertainty hovers over sugar
beet, an important crop for many local farmers who supply the British Sugar
plant in York. They are anxious to see Britain's sugar beet quota at least
maintained in next year's EC review.
For rural Yorkshire, the British government's controversial new proposals on
farm tenancies, whereby landlord and tenant would negotiate tenancy length
and conditions individually, are also of great importance. The NFU is
strongly opposing the government's present plans for major deregulation of
the agricultural holdings legislation; the union believes the tenancy system
must be backed up by a legal framework and safeguards. The CLA however
supports a freeing up of the tenancy regulations.
Setaside policy is another source of uncertainty; why, ask many farmers and
landowners, can setaside land not be designated for a minimum of 20 years so
it can be put to better use. 'If the land isn't required to produce food,
why isn't it used to grow trees?' asks Mr Passman.
The whole question of just what - and who - the countryside is for is an
underlying concern in North and West Yorkshire, where the beauty of the
rural areas, and their relative proximity to urban settlements, have
attracted many well-heeled commuters and owners of second homes.
The CLA remains convinced that local authorities, despite their involvement
in workspace provision and other rural economic development measures, are
still insufficiently willing to give planning permission for some of the
diversifications necessary to maintain employment and life in the villages.
Yorkshire provides award winning examples of rural business enterprise such
as the high-tec office complex created by Roger Tempest from the Home Farm
at Broughton Hall, near Skipton, owned by his family for almost 400 years.
It also provides a diversification warning story, in the form of dairy
farmer Brian Moore, whose booming ice cream business at his farm at Weeton,
in Harrogate district, fell foul of the planners.
Mr Moore has since moved to Jervaulx, in Richmondshire, where he is again
dairy farming and running a successful ice cream enterprise, employing 14
full and part time staff, as well as his family. His ice cream is sold from
Northumberland to Wales and he had even opened an ice cream parlour at the
farm.
But this is not - yet - a happy ending: he is still paying off the Pounds
150,000 legal bill from his unsuccessful planning battle.
