FT  09 NOV 93 / Debate over IRA ceasefire puts peace plan under strain
THE Major-Reynolds Northern Ireland peace initiative was under strain last
night after fundamental differences emerged between London and Dublin on the
timing of a permanent IRA ceasefire.
Downing Street responded sharply to suggestions by Mr Albert Reynolds, the
Irish prime minister, that peace could be achieved by Christmas if the two
governments focused on a cessation of violence followed by talks with Sinn
Fein, the IRA's political wing.
Officials said Mr John Major had ruled out 'secret agreements on a ceasefire
with violent organisations', and was 'wary of false optimism' in Dublin. Sir
Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, suggested the timetable
outlined by Mr Reynolds could hinder the peace process.
'I don't think that this is a process that will benefit from governments
saying that this must be achieved in a fortnight, or that must be achieved
in a month,' he said. Sir Patrick tried to minimise the significance of the
differences between Mr Reynolds and Mr Major by insisting that it was 'a
mistake to look for evidence of disagreement between the two governments.
There is none'.
Mr Reynolds responded swiftly to the British comments. He said in a
statement that 'peace cannot wait'. He added: 'Time is not on our side.'
The exchanges reflect simmering differences between London and Dublin over
the framework for the peace process, which was launched by the two
governments in Brussels two weeks ago.
Britain wants round-table discussions involving the two governments and
Northern Ireland's four non-violent political parties, which are in the
middle of bilateral talks with Mr Major.
The British government insists that Sinn Fe'in should be included in the
talks only after a permanent and unconditional cessation of IRA violence.
The Irish government favours a separate peace process in which talks would
focus on achieving an IRA ceasefire, followed by the inclusion of Sinn Fein
in talks.
Irish support for this strategy has hardened since the annual conference of
the governing Fianna Fail party at the weekend revealed strong grass roots
support for peace proposals put forward by Mr John Hume, SDLP leader, and Mr
Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein.
However, the Hume-Adams proposals, which called for a ceasefire followed by
talks with Sinn Fein, have been rejected by the British government.
Sir Patrick repeated the British approach yesterday in the House Magazine, a
journal produced for MPs, saying: 'The government will never negotiate with
those who support threaten or perpetrate violence, or who fail to show their
disavowal of such evil is for real.'
Three men were remanded in custody by a special court in Limavady, Co
Londonderry, charged with the murders of seven people shot dead 10 days ago
in the Rising Sun bar in nearby Greysteel. They were also charged with
membership of the Ulster Freedom Fighters and with possession of firearms.
One was further charged with the murder of four Catholic workmen at
Castlerock, Co Londonderry, in March.
