FT  30 SEP 93 / Technology: A healthy dose of confidence - The biotechnology
sector is entering a more mature phase, better equipped to face market
hazards
A series of disappointments has wreaked havoc in the US biotechnology sector
over the past 18 months, but analysts say the industry may be on the
threshold of a new and more positive phase.
'The future is very bright,' says Jeffrey Swarz, biotechnology analyst at
First Boston, the US investment house, in New York. 'Wall Street hasn't yet
completely grasped this, but it is beginning to.'
The reason for such optimism is a recent spell of good news, which has
lifted the mood in the industry. Revenues for the sector were up by 20 per
cent in the first six months of 1993 according to a study by consultants
Ernst &amp; Young.
The late summer approval of Betaseron, the first new drug to treat multiple
sclerosis for a generation, boosted the stock price of Chiron, the US
biotechnology company which makes the drug for Schering, the German group
whose shares also shot ahead in Frankfurt on the news.
Genentech has also scored an important victory with the Food and Drug
Administration's advisory committee approval of DNase, a drug to treat
cystic fibrosis which works by breaking up the excess DNA that accumulates
in the lungs of sufferers. 'These approvals have restored some credibility
to the sector,' says Teena Lerner, a biotechnology analyst with Lehman
Brothers in New York.
Credibility with Wall Street is essential for the health of the
biotechnology industry, which requires large doses of investor confidence to
help it raise money for expensive and lengthy drug development.
The past 18 months have seen a severe drought in financing for the industry.
The sector has suffered several disappointments, which helped to depress
stock prices in 1992 and the early part of 1993. Last year, the FDA denied
approval for two septic shock drugs in the final stages of development -
Centocor's Centoxin and Synergen's Antril. And jitters over the
repercussions of President Bill Clinton's health plan have helped keep
prices low through much of 1993.
Despite the recent upturn in confidence, there is still concern that, in the
face of a hostile investment environment, the sector is trying to grow too
fast. The Ernst &amp; Young report pointed to the problems of fast-diminishing
cash reserves in the industry.
'The current financing environment is a limiting factor,' says Henri
Termeer, chairman of Genzyme Corporation. 'You can't keep offering new
products without the support of the financial markets.'
The need for new funds is far more acute at start-up companies than at the
more established companies. A handful of biotechnology groups - notably
Biogen, Genzyme, Genentech, Chiron and Amgen - have enough products on the
market to generate their own cash flow for research and development.
These are the groups most favourably viewed by Wall Street and with the most
ready access to financing. 'There seems to be more discrimination on the
part of investors between the large, more stable firms, and the rest of the
field,' says Lawrence Kurtz, spokesman for Chiron. 'There are less blanket
moves of all biotechnology stocks up and down.'
Historically, investors are unwilling to put up large amounts of money for
biotechnology. This has led to an increasing number of joint ventures
between large pharmaceutical and chemical groups.
The strategy has proved largely successful. Applied Immune Sciences
continued the trend earlier this year by forming an alliance with Rhone
Poulenc-Rorer.
'As long as financial markets are unable to supply biotechnology companies
with cash, they will turn to large pharmaceutical groups for investment,'
says Kirk Raab, president of Genentech.
Some observers worry that the lack of cash could hold longer-term
consequences for the sector, however. 'There is the danger of premature
consolidation in an industry that is inherently financially fragile,' says
James Vincent, chairman of Biogen.
Companies are hoping that the recent stock price surges in biotechnology
will be part of a longer-term optimism on the part of Wall Street.
Cash is becoming dangerously tight at many firms and a new willingness to
finance biotechnology research would ease the strain.
Analysts and industry players believe Wall Street now has a better
understanding of the drug approval process for biotechnology, and is
therefore better equipped to make wise investment decisions. 'Investors now
have a later time horizon and realise phase two studies may not be
predictive of success,' says Kurtz. 'This is good news, because it means
investors are less open to the kinds of disappointments that bring prices
down.
'People used to invest in biotechnology companies earlier than they should
have, based on premature claims on pending drugs. Now, the emphasis is more
on management, less on science and research.'
Raab agrees. 'Getting drugs to the market is a longer and harder process
than once believed,' he explains.
'Not all companies succeed and those that do need mature leadership. Success
depends on careful, thoughtful trials and working closely with the FDA.'
Investors worry that the number of protein drugs remaining to be discovered
is limited, a view vehemently denied by the biotechnology industry. 'The
pipeline for protein drugs is full, based on research we've already
conducted, and this will continue for some time,' says Raab. 'I think
proteins as drugs still have a lot of life. If anything is done on Aids or
cancer, for instance, I'm convinced it will be a large molecule drug.'
Despite continued enthusiasm for proteins, an increasing number of
biotechnology groups is diversifying into small molecule research, and this
is seen as a positive move by industry analysts. Since biotechnology
companies have a keen understanding of the interaction between small and
large molecules, they are thought to have an advantage over many
pharmaceutical groups in this area. Of particular importance is current
biotechnology research into the use of small molecules in controlling
inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and arthritis.
'Traditional pharmaceutical groups, which relied on organic chemistry, have
run into a wall,' says Swarz. 'They realise they should have gone into
biotechnology. The future is in proteins, and maybe in the kind of small
molecule and genetic engineering research that biotechnology firms are
getting into.'
The advent of gene therapy may prove an important development for
biotechnology, although few of the traditional biotechnology groups have
become involved in this area. Genzyme, with a strong commitment in gene
therapy, is a notable exception.
Excursions into new areas are thought to be a positive trend for the sector.
'To the extent that biotech groups become real companies with diversified
risk, they will be more positively viewed,' says Termeer.
The growing drug portfolios and increased diversification of the sector may
not completely erase the enormous risk involved in the industry.
Still, they may mark the beginning of a new, more mature phase for
biotechnology.
'I wouldn't say we're grown up yet,' says Raab. 'But we're certainly not
infants any more. I'd say we've entered our teenage years.'
