FT  19 NOV 93 / International Capital Markets: CBoT may win trading space in
Dollars 26m land deal
THE Chicago Board of Trade is close to clinching a Dollars 26m real estate
deal that would expand its trading space by 45,000 sq ft and alleviate the
severe overcrowding that has come with the exchange's record volume this
year.
'Construction of a new trading facility is the most crucial issue facing
this exchange,' said Mr Patrick Arbor after his board of directors approved
the plan.
'If I have one goal during my chairmanship, it is to get this plan passed,'
he said. A membership vote will be held on the plan in early January.
The deal calls for the exchange to purchase property just south of its La
Salle street office and trading complex and construct a new building that
would open on to the existing CBoT agricultural futures trading floor.
When complete, it would provide 75,000 sq ft of unobstructed trading space.
Outgoing chairman Mr William O'Connor proposed a similar plan for the same
piece of property a year ago. Members voted down that proposal because they
objected to fees proposed to finance the project.
Mr Arbor has had difficulty reviving the plan, but has apparently been aided
by this year's volume surge.
The CBoT surpassed its all-time record volume total of 154.2m contracts, set
in 1990, on November 10. Led by its Treasury bond and note futures
contracts, 1m contract days have become fairly routine, with five recorded
so far in November.
As of Tuesday, overall exchange volume had surged to 157.7m contracts.
Mr Arbor says he is confident the real estate deal can be financed through
existing exchange revenues, and that no special fees will be imposed on
members if the plan is approved.
The Chicago Board of Trade is investigating the market potential for futures
and options products based on prices of residential real estate.
The exchange said it will join with a real estate research firm, Case
Shiller Weiss, to explore trading derivatives on indices based on the
movement of single family home prices in the US.
Although the CBoT pioneered futures products based on pools of home
mortgages, there is currently no way to hedge price risks associated with
home ownership.
Mr Mark Shaels, a CBoT director, said: 'Single family homes are considered
the largest asset class in the US, far outdistancing the stock or bond
markets.'
The exchange believes that derivatives on metropolitan home price indices
could be used by mortgage writers, insurance companies, and real estate
developers for risk management, but that the project could meet resistance
from real estate professionals, who are not accustomed to using derivatives.
