FT  30 APR 93 / Ferranti seeks to pull out of US
FERRANTI, the British defence electronics company whose former US deputy
chairman is now in prison for fraud and illegal arms sales, is winding up
one of its US companies and seeking buyers for its remaining US assets.
In the UK, a spokesman for Ferranti said the loss-making group was
refocusing its operations and had a number of 'peripheral operations' such
as the US businesses. He said Ferranti was 'cash hungry and under tight
financial control' and was open to offers where it could find a suitable
buyer for its US assets.
Ferranti's US assets, which still employ nearly 1,000 people and have annual
turnover of close to Dollars 100m (Pounds 65m), represent about one quarter
of the group's worldwide turnover. In Ferranti's last financial year, ended
on March 31 1992, the US businesses contributed Pounds 113.9m of total group
turnover of Pounds 409m.
The US company being wound up is Ferranti International Simulation and
Training, a small part of the group's Pennsylvania-based operations that
featured in criminal proceedings last year against Mr James Guerin, the
former group deputy chairman serving a 15-year sentence for financial fraud
and illegal arms sales.
Fist's engineering services were sold off in January and as US military
contracts have been completed, the the company, which earlier had nearly 100
employees, is being wound up.
Also being wound up is Fist's proxy board, a group of three former US
military and intelligence officials who were supposed to safeguard
classified US defence information because Fist was owned by a non-US
company. Among the board members was Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, former
chairman of President Bush's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board who last
year hailed Mr Guerin as a 'patriot' who had worked in the past with the
Central Intelligence Agency and therefore deserved leniency.
Remaining Ferranti US businesses available for sale include the headquarters
in Lancaster, Pennsylvania; Sciaky, a Chicago-based automated manufacturing
systems company; EMP in Los Angeles, a missile tracking equipment company;
and Ferranti Venus, New York.
