FT  05 OCT 93 / 40,000 respond on Thorp future
MORE than 40,000 letters on the controversial Thorp nuclear reprocessing
plant in Cumbria had arrived at the Department of the Environment by last
night, the closing date of the second public consultation on the plant's
future.
DoE officials, who will spend the next few weeks assessing the replies, said
they reflected both strong support and opposition to the plant.
The latest consultation focuses on the economic case for the Sellafield
plant, and on wider questions of the proliferation of plutonium and nuclear
weapons capability.
Thorp, which has taken Pounds 2.8bn and nearly 10 years to build, is waiting
for a licence to start operation. It is designed to take used fuel from
nuclear reactors and separate out the reusable uranium and plutonium.
British Nuclear Fuels, Thorp's owner, delivered 12,000 of the letters in
favour of the plant from its employees and Cumbria residents yesterday.
Mr Nick Johnston, secretary of the Windscale branch of the GMB general
union, said that BNF had also gathered 22,000 signatures to petitions
backing the plant. However BNF added that there might be overlap between
letters and petitions.
The DoE has received several hundred letters from Japan, many of which are
understood to oppose the plant. Japanese power utilities make up the largest
single tranche of BNF's order book for the next 10 years.
The DoE has also received about 40 letters from Ireland, opposing the plant
because of fears of radioactivity crossing the Irish Sea.
Yesterday Greenpeace brought traffic in Whitehall to a standstill as it
organised a demonstration outside the gates leading to Number 10, the
residence of Mr John Major, the prime minister.
Wearing black paper one-piece suits and party masks designed as skulls
heads, 600 Greenpeace volunteers lay down in the road. Greenpeace, which
said that 44 protesters were arrested, claims that 600 people worldwide will
die from radiation discharged by Thorp in the first 10 years of its
operation.
BNF has maintained that the plant poses no risk to health. The first public
consultation into the plant, which ended early this year, concluded that the
environmental and health risks were insignificant.
Mr Tim Yeo, environment minister, said yesterday that he hoped that the
decision on Thorp's licence 'will be settled by Christmas'.
The High Court is expected to expected to deliver its judgment on Friday on
the case of two families who claim to have suffered from exposure to
Sellafield radiation.
