FT  20 APR 93 / Menem losing his hold over a once-retiring Congress:
Opposition has forced a pensions compromise
PRESIDENT Carlos Menem of Argentina has become used to getting his own way.
But his once unassailable political authority, particularly his ascendance
over Congress and the Peronist party, seems to be wavering.
Last week the opposition forced his government to negotiate a compromise
formula on a bill reforming Argentina's pension system.
The bill was introduced to Congress last August. The eight-month delay may
not seem unusual, but the government had become used to a pliant Congress
enacting government legislation at high speed. In 1989 it rapidly granted Mr
Menem virtually dictatorial powers to halt hyperinflation. Two years ago, it
swiftly approved a bill making the currency convertible, paving the way for
economic recovery.
As economic emergency recedes, Congress is less willing to rubber-stamp
legislation. Bills privatising the gas industry and then the national oil
company ran into heavy opposition in Congress.
The proposal by Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy minister, to replace the
collapsing state-run pension system with a semi-private scheme may be no
more daring than other reforms once thought impossible in Argentina, but it
is facing far greater opposition.
Mr Cavallo says pension reform is a crucial part of his broader economic
strategy. Not only would pensions cease to be a financial burden for the
state, but a private pension system would invigorate capital markets, boost
domestic savings, reduce reliance on imported capital and provide long-term
finance for industry.
Under the original plan, employees would compulsorily channel 11 per cent of
their wages into individual retirement savings accounts handled by private
fund managers.
But militant pensioners, opposition politicians and disaffected members of
the ruling Peronist party had obstructed the pension bill ever since its
introduction.
Last week, they finally won a government promise to make contributions to a
private scheme voluntary.
This could radically change the future pension system. It could mean that
only the better-paid would opt for a private scheme, while lower-paid
employees would continue contributing to the state scheme. Thus, the private
system would be more profitable for management companies while the state
would still be left with a heavy financial liability.
Congress had already diluted the bill's original text. One change required
the state to establish minimum investment returns for retirement saving
accounts.
Another requires state-owned Banco de la Nacion Argentina to guarantee
accounts against failure.
The government is running out of time. Unless Congress approves the bill
before campaigning begins for October's congressional elections, its chances
of becoming law this year will become even more remote.
The government has a majority in the Senate, but lacks a majority in the
lower Chamber of Deputies.
The Peronists' 117 seats make them the largest party in the Chamber, but are
still 12 seats short of a majority. Furthermore, a small but crucial
splinter group has defected to the opposition benches.
Underlying the increasing opposition is a growing awareness of Mr Menem's
need for support in his over-arching ambition to win re-election. A
two-thirds majority is required in Congress just to start this complicated
process, as the constitution at present prevents incumbent presidents from
seeking a second term. Many politicians are exploiting the government's
urgency to demand favours for themselves or increased spending for
cash-hungry local government.
Many politicians oppose the pensions bill because they say it is technically
flawed. Opposition Congressman Alberto Natale says: 'The present system is a
disaster, but the government proposal is no good either.' Mr Natale says the
private system's high operating costs would consume one-third of
contributors' savings. He claims most savings would not be channeled to
private industry, but into government bonds, not a traditionally reliable
investment.
A New York banker added: 'There are a lot (of politicians) who are not happy
at losing Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.94bn) a year in cashflow to the private
sector that they could distribute for their own populist ends.'
Others believe it is wrong to profit from pensions, and want them to remain
as a branch of social policy under government control.
The unions - which remain influential in the Peronist party - are also
opposed to the reform.
There is also a well-founded fear that Argentina's financial community could
bankrupt the system.
However, most observers, be they government officials, bankers or
politicians, agree the pensions bill will eventually become law.
The government has another two highly controversial bills to introduce this
year. One would reform Argentina's notoriously rigid labour market, the
other is Mr Menem's constitutional reform package.
But the pension reform's troubled progress through Congress is proof that
ministers can no longer automatically expect smooth treatment for government
business in the future.
