FT  08 SEP 93 / Survey of Mobile Communications (15): Service providers come
under threat - Catalysts face changing role
THE ARRIVAL of digital cellular, the imminent launch of Mercury's One-2-One
service and the need to widen the market for mobile communications have
forced the UK's service provision industry to put on its thinking caps.
Service providers have long been accepted as the catalyst that sparked the
boom in cellular radio in the UK, but their traditional role as the
interface between the network operator and the customer is now under threat.
One service provider relishing the challenges of the future is North
London-based Cellcom. An industry pioneer, Cellcom has been a service
provider since cellular began in the mid-1980s. With turnover up 16 per cent
to Pounds 32.7m in 1992-93 and margins up to 20.5 per cent, Cellcom is well
placed to respond to the new networks and services.
The increased promotional activities of Vodafone and Cellnet have stimulated
the UK cellular market. 'Business has been exceptionally buoyant and we have
had three record months,' says Mr Jack Knight, marketing manager of Cellcom.
'Churn remains about the same at around 2 per cent a month, but the growth
has tended to put this into perspective.'
Though Mr Knight sees some of the recent growth occurring among those who
previously did not perceive mobile communications as an affordable product,
he does not believe that the industry has turned the corner in terms of the
true consumer market. 'People's patterns of making telephone calls have not
yet changed.'
He has doubts as to whether the new Mercury One-2-One service, to be
launched in London next month, will make a dramatic difference to the
market. 'To be a success, the new service will have to grow its own market
sector. If all it does is take from the existing market, then it has failed.
The launch campaign will help to raise awareness of personal communications
but it has yet to be seen whether the timing is right or the product is
viable.'
He points out that the company has made a number of shifts of position on
the market it proposes to address. 'Mercury is clearly not, at this time,
attacking the consumer, but is going for the small business market.'
Britain's service providers have recently complained to industry watchdog
Oftel about some of Mercury's proposals, particularly in relation to handset
subsidies. Though the complaints are still being considered, Cellcom and
other service providers have applied to Mercury to sell the new service.
The key to selling mobile communications in the mass market is tariffs.
'Mercury's tariffs are well down on those currently being charged by the
cellular operators but they are offering less,' says Mr Knight. 'However,
the competition is not just Vodafone and Cellnet, it is CT2 Rabbit Telepoint
and BT/Mercury. For the next stage of development the industry must address
the running costs of mobile phones; this is the biggest single factor
affecting penetration of the mass market.'
One of the problems facing both the digital cellular services and Mercury
One-2-One is that the UK analogue networks are still a major threat. The
cost, variety and availability of analogue terminals and the range of
facilities on offer far outstrip the offerings from GSM and PCN, and are
likely to do so for some time.
Mr Knight sees GSM easing its way into the market and addressing niche areas
where its special features, such as pan-European roaming and encrypted
speech, are seen as benefits. 'The UK does not have the problems of some
European countries whose analogue networks were over- crowded or
non-existent. The transition to GSM will be much more orderly. As UK users
look to change their phones they will tend to migrate to GSM if it offers
similar or better service.'
GSM terminal type approval is still a problem and the industry is reluctant
to oversell the service while this barrier exists. 'It is important that
customers understand the drawbacks as well as the benefits of GSM,' says Mr
Knight.
proliferation of new mobile services and networks. 'The market needs more
facilities and these developments strengthen the case for the service
provider. The more networks there are, the more need there is for an
independent agency able to stand between them and the customer. Why deal
with five separate networks, offering five different services and five
separate bills, when you can deal with one service provider, get all the
services you want and pay a single bill? The concept of service provision
holds up very well as the new networks come on stream  - it's a one stop
shop for both dealers and the public.'
