FT  11 JUN 93 / Survey of South Africa (17): Dressed up with nowhere to go -
The problems facing the tourist industry
THE PROBLEM facing the South African tourism industry was aptly illustrated
last month by the state president, Mr FW de Klerk, when he opened the
Indaba, the annual tourism marketing forum, in Durban.
He started his speech by quoting a famous passage from Alan Paton's novel
Cry the Beloved Country, the most well known book written about South
Africa:
'There is a lovely road that runs from Ixopo into the hills. These hills are
grass covered and rolling and they are lovely beyond the singing of it.'
As Mr de Klerk noted, Ixopo is not far from Durban. Sadly, 'those same
rolling hills, and some other parts of our country are now scenes of
violence'. Having shaken off the stigma of apartheid, the tourism industry
now finds itself saddled with the stigma of violence.
That is the perception: it matters little that most of the country is
untouched by violence.
Although figures supplied by the South African Tourism Board (Satour) show
that foreign visitors increased last year by 7.4 per cent to 560,000
(excluding 2.1m visitors from Africa), this was a long way short of the 20
per cent growth hoped for.
The Indaba itself provided confirmation of hard times in the industry. The
corridors of the huge exhibition hall were hardly bustling and many
participants said business was quiet. It was very much a case of an industry
all dressed up with nowhere to go.
To be fair, economic recession is also an important factor. Indeed, some in
the trade argue that it is a more important determinant of business activity
than violence.
One such person was Mr Nick Seewer, general manager of the prestigious Mount
Nelson hotel in Cape Town. He said the hotel was doing very well, had had
its best April in years, and summer bookings were good.
He made the point that seasoned travellers, of the sort that frequent his
sort of establishment, know South Africa and are not easily put off.
Lower down the market, however, the pinch is being felt. Mr Helder Pereira,
operations director of Southern Suns, the country's largest hotel group,
confirms a 25 per cent increase in cancellations after the assassination in
April of Chris Hani, the black political leader.
Whether stability will bring the riches the industry feels it deserves -
'our fair share of the market' - is another matter.
Tourism only accounts for about 2 per cent of South Africa's GDP compared to
an international average of 6 per cent. Clearly there is enormous potential
for growth given that the quality of the product is not in dispute, and
Satour has set targets of 966,000 annual foreign visitors by 1995 and 1.75m
by 2000.
Stability alone, however, will not see these targets realised. Recent
surveys show declining consumer satisfaction in areas such as 'value for
money' and service. These shortcomings need to be rectified if South Africa
is to establish itself as a competitive, user-friendly destination.
On the other hand, tourism can only benefit from the increased priority it
now enjoys with government. A new ministry, solely responsible for tourism,
has been established; a White Paper, outlining the development of the
industry has been published and deregulation continues (evident in the
dramatic increase in the number of international carriers flying to the
country, from 19 in 1990 to 36 in 1993).
All these steps augur well for the future.
