FT  08 MAR 93 / US aid plan aims to speed reform
THE US is working on new aid measures to get the process of economic reform
in Russia back on track and at the same time bolster the political prospects
of Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
President Bill Clinton has promised to offer specific 'innovative solutions'
at his meeting with Mr Yeltsin in Vancouver next month, and officials are
working on plans for loan guarantees to help build housing for redundant
Russian troops, as well as an enterprise fund to aid entrepreneurs.
At the same time, US farmers are pressing for an urgent settlement to
Russia's debt problems, which have halted sales of their grain under a
government-guaranteed credit programme.
Russia is more than Dollars 400m (Pounds 280m) in arrears in payments on
these US grain credits, although it made a token Dollars 15m payment last
week. A full solution, however, depends on reaching a broader agreement to
reschedule all of Russia's outstanding debts to the Paris Club of creditor
countries.
This rescheduling has been held up, in part because of a dispute between
Russia and Ukraine over how to divide responsibility for debts incurred by
the former Soviet Union. Negotiations have been stalled since an offer from
the Group of Seven leading industrial nations in December to reschedule over
Dollars 15bn of past official debt, cutting Russia's debt service
obligations this year from Dollars 12bn to Dollars 2.75bn.
The Clinton administration is considering setting up a direct food aid
programme to replace the grain credits, and members of Congress from farm
states have come up with a number of other imaginative solutions, such as
the proposal from Mr Dan Glickman of Kansas to swap Russia's nuclear weapons
for forgiveness of its entire debt to the US.
Mr Clinton's outline budget proposals would increase aid to Russia and the
other former Soviet republics to Dollars 700m from Dollars 417m this year,
while at the same time cutting or freezing most other US foreign aid
programmes.
Although the State Department last week disavowed the prediction of Mr
Richard Armitage, who had been in charge of US aid to the former Soviet
republics, that Mr Yeltsin would not last long in power, many US officials
privately consider Mr Yeltsin's prospects of survival extremely fragile.
