FT  14 DEC 93 / Manufacturing upturn begins to falter
Flat manufacturing output since the spring has underlined the weakness of
the UK recovery and depressed state of many overseas markets.
Output by manufacturing industry fell 0.2 per cent in the three months to
October compared with the previous three months, and was at the same level
as in the first quarter.
Factory output between August and October expanded by a weak 1.4 per cent
compared with the corresponding period last year after the vigorous
year-on-year growth of 2.5 per cent recorded in May.
Even so, the subdued nature of the manufacturing recovery has been offset by
strong growth in energy output, which is at its highest level for five years
thanks mainly to increased oil production from the North Sea.
The seasonally adjusted numbers from the Central Statistical Office
illustrate the difficulties faced by much of industry in building up output
after the long recession.
Between September and October, manufacturing increased output by a muted 0.1
per cent compared with City expectations of a 0.3 per cent rise.
Since the second quarter of this year, output from this part of industry has
barely changed after a relatively robust 0.6 per cent rise in production
between the first and second three-monthly periods.
Between August and October, engineering and the sector covering food, drink
and tobacco both saw a drop of 0.4 per cent in output compared with three
months previously. On the same three-monthly basis, output of metals and
metal products fell 1.3 per cent, textiles and clothing was down 0.2 per
cent while chemicals production was unchanged.
A stronger picture of output trends emerges from all production industries -
manufacturing, plus energy and water. In the latest three-month period,
production industries expanded output 0.6 per cent on the May-to-July period
to reach a 2.2 per cent year-on-year increase.
Much of this strong performance was due to a rise in output from the mining
and quarrying sector, which includes oil and gas extraction. In the three
months to October, this sector increased output 2.9 per cent on a
three-monthly basis, or 7.1 per cent year-on-year.
