FT  18 AUG 93 / Monopolies Reports on British Gas: Consumers 'will face
price rises' - Industry reaction
CONSUMER organisations warned yesterday that gas bills would rise next year
if the recommendations in the Monopolies and Mergers Commission reports were
implemented.
Independent gas companies criticised the MMC's suggested timetable for
reform as too slow.
Mr James Cooper, chairman of the Gas Consumer's Council, said: 'If these
recommendations are implemented it appears that large numbers of domestic
consumers will pay more for their gas. The reports were expected to remove
much of the uncertainty - that it certainly has not achieved.'
The National Consumer Council said that the government had not carried out
any detailed analysis of costs and benefits to consumers. 'This does not
bode well for prices and standards of service in the long term, over which
no controls are envisaged.'
Mr Martin O'Neill, Labour's energy spokesman, said the reports offered
nothing for the consumer and added: 'The cost of loosening British Gas's
stranglehold on the gas supply system will be paid through dearer gas bills
if present price controls are relaxed.'
Mr Simon Hughes, Liberal Democrat energy and environment spokesman, said
that greater competition in the gas industry should be accompanied by an
increasingly strict regulatory process, guarantees of no discrimination over
the category of customer, and no risk of an increase in domestic customers'
gas bills.
Utilicorp UK, which has gas joint ventures with five electricity companies,
said the commission had taken the minimum steps necessary to introduce
competition into the domestic market.
The reports 'posed no real threat to British Gas's monopoly for five years,'
said Mr Roger Turner, Utilicorp's managing director. 'This report is a
gesture as far as the consumer is concerned. There is a danger that nine out
of 10 consumers will never enjoy the benefits of cheaper prices through
competition.'
Mr Malcolm Faulkner, marketing director of the Norweb electricity
distributor which has a gas joint venture with Utilicorp, said that, while
the report's conclusions were welcome, 'it seems to be all jam tomorrow. We
would like to see it more in line with the electricity market which will be
fully opened up by 1998.'
Mr Faulkner welcomed the recommendation that British Gas divest its supply
arm and said that he hoped it would lead to a further splitting up of the
gas distribution company to enable meter reading to be performed
independently.
'There could be a licensed meter operator,' he said. This opened up
economies of scale possibilities between gas and electricity meter reading.
However Mr Alan Marshall, managing director of Agas, an independent gas
company, said the regulatory authorities should look carefully into whether
regional electricity companies should be allowed to supply gas in their
areas.
'They would constitute a serious threat to competition. They could
cross-subsidise between their regulated electricity businesses and their
unregulated gas businesses.'
Sir James McKinnon, Ofgas director-general, welcomed the reports even though
they rejected his suggestion of breaking British Gas into 12 regional
companies and introduced liberalisation at a slower rate than he wanted.
'The recommendations will put gas customers on the same footing as
electricity customers in opening up the market to competition with all the
benefits that will bring, he said.
Ofgas dismissed suggestions that breaking up the British gas monopoly would
lead to price rises for small users. With proper safeguards, this need not
happen, it said.
Sir James said his next tasks included regulating relations between the
separated businesses which are to be created within British Gas, and setting
new terms for the transportation and storage of gas.
'Progress on these should not be affected by decisions on the ultimate
ownership of the different businesses.'
Mr Dave Stirzaker, leader of 32,000 gas workers in the Unison union, said
implementing the recommendations would mean the loss of at least 20,000 jobs
in companies which supply contracts or services to British Gas, as well as
the 20,000 jobs in British Gas itself.
Mr Donald Macgregor of the GMB general union said the report's
recommendations did not reflect customers' demands for a good and safe
service or the high level of skills needed for the job.
Mr Cedric Brown, British Gas chief executive, said the recommendations
should allow the company to plan ahead with greater certainty.
Mr Philip Rogerson, finance director, said it should be in the interest of
the company's shareholders to split the supply business from transportation,
provided an appropriate financial and regulatory framework for the process
could be found.
