FT  04 MAR 93 / International Company News: VW steps up the pressure on
suppliers - Kevin Done talks to Volkswagen group executives about the plan
to cut its uncompetitive cost base
THE VOLKSWAGEN group, Europe's leading carmaker, is applying heavy pressure
on its components suppliers to cut their prices sharply.
Audi, the group's executive and luxury car division, and Seat, the group's
Spanish subsidiary, have written to suppliers demanding a 5 per cent cut in
prices in 1993.
Mr Daniel Goeudevert, deputy chairman of the Volkswagen group and chairman
of the VW volume car division, said that in some cases the VW division was
seeking even more substantial concessions from suppliers.
'Maybe we need even more than 5 per cent at VW. We are talking to each of
our suppliers. Sometimes we are seeking cuts of 3 or 5 or 10 per cent. It
depends on the product and its history.'
Mr Erich Schmitt, Audi director of purchasing, said the group had set the
goal of reducing the prices of components purchased from outside suppliers
by 25 to 30 per cent over the next four to five years, helped by
efficiencies from the introduction of new model generations.
The Volkswagen group's belated drive to cut its uncompetitive cost base is
creating upheaval both internally and among its German supply base. Audi
components purchases from outside the group total around DM7bn (Dollars
4.2bn), while Volkswagen division purchases in Europe total around DM15bn.
The group has fallen far behind its rivals in reforming its crucial
relations with suppliers. Mr Schmitt said that the number of the group's
suppliers would have to be sharply reduced with Audi seeking to cut the
number of its first tier suppliers from 900 at present to only 300 to 400
over the next five years.
The group was seeking to cut its costly dependence on German-based
suppliers. Around 90 per cent of Audi purchases were still made in Germany
'We want to start real global sourcing,' said Mr Schmitt.
Mr Goeudevert admitted that the Volkswagen group was lagging seriously
behind its competitors. 'Everyone in the industry knows that Volkswagen has
a cost problem. We must reduce dramatically our cost structures in the next
12 to 18 months. We have two years.'
Mr Goeudevert warned that Volkswagen was forecasting a drop of 20 to 22 per
cent in new car sales in Germany in 1993 and a fall of 10 to 15 per cent in
new car sales across west Europe. 'We have two main ambitions. Cost, cost,
cost, to lower the break-even level, and quality. There will be no
concessions on quality. We must leave for a while the dedication to
improving sales volumes year by year. This will be the dedication of
management in the next two years,' he said.
With its profits plummeting and probably the worst cost structure of any of
the volume carmakers in Europe, Volkswagen is facing a period of daunting
upheaval to close the gap on its rivals.
A further shake-up of the group's top management is expected to be announced
later this month by Mr Ferdinand Piech, who took over as chairman of the VW
group management board at the beginning of January.
Speculation persists that Mr Piech is still trying to recruit Mr Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, the head of global purchasing at General Motors and the
man credited with giving GM Europe the most competitive purchasing cost base
of any of Europe's volume carmakers.
Mr Goeudevert said the VW division was pursuing a 12-point programme to cut
its costs including a sharp reduction in the workforce, cuts in materials
purchasing costs and lower capital investment, with the delay of some key
projects such as the completion of the second stage of a new integrated car
plant at Mosel in eastern Germany.
Job reductions were being brought forward with the aim of cutting 12,500
jobs in the VW volume car division in Germany in the two years 1993-94.
Originally, these cuts were to have been spread over five years.
Mr Goeudevert warned that if new car sales in Germany and west Europe
declined even more sharply than currently forecast 'then we must look at a
new job reduction programme.'
'We are going to reduce output in line with the falling market. We expect to
keep our market share where it was,' he said. VW is carrying excess car
stocks.
VW is cutting 18 production days in the first quarter and 13 in the second
quarter of 1993 with the aim of reducing output by 160,000 cars in the first
six months.
Expenditure by the group on its automotive operations was being reduced to
DM46bn in the five years from 1993 to 1997 from DM51bn previously planned
from 1992 to 1996.
