FT  17 JUL 93 / Stretched to breaking point: Is the UN falling apart? If so,
says Edward Mortimer, it is because its members expect too much
Iraq's defiance increases threat of UN attack.' 'UN to maintain Somali
action despite bloodshed.' 'Nato will use jets in Bosnia to protect UN's
peace troops.'
Every day this week, the same two letters - UN - have leapt out at us in the
newspaper headlines, as the United Nations has struggled with three crises
in three different continents. In each case the world body was either using
or threatening the use of military force, in an increasingly desperate
attempt to impose its authority on recalcitrant warlords. And in each case
there were visible strains on its cohesion, as leading member governments
argued among themselves, and with the secretariat, over the course of action
to be pursued.
In Iraq, the unity of the Security Council in taking a firm line with
President Saddam Hussein was damaged last month when the US took unilateral
action, bombing Baghdad in retaliation for an Iraqi attempt to assassinate
ex-president George Bush. Last weekend, when a UN inspection team abruptly
left Baghdad after being refused permission to seal off two missile testing
sites, the US's European allies feared they were about to be bounced into a
new US-led air attack. In the event the Council sent Mr Rolf Ekeus, head of
the UN special commission on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, on a
further trip to Baghdad to try to defuse the crisis.
Meanwhile the spotlight switched to Somalia, where US helicopters serving
with the UN force bombarded a 'command centre' used by General Mohammed
Farah Aideed, a Somali warlord who has been defying UN orders to disarm, and
has ordered attacks on UN troops. The US claimed only 13 Somalis were killed
in the attack, but the International Committee of the Red Cross gave a
figure of 54, while General Aideed's supporters produced a videotape showing
scores of bodies. Four foreign journalists were killed by a mob seeking
revenge.
Italy, one of the main contributors to the UN force, called for a suspension
of combat operations and a reconsideration of the 'overall objective', and
warned that it would withdraw its troops if differences over the conduct of
the operation could not be resolved. Mr Kofi Annan, the UN
undersecretary-general in charge of peacekeeping operations, responded by
announcing that the UN had demanded the recall of the Italian commander,
General Bruno Loi, who was said to have taken orders from Rome instead of
from the UN force commander, General Civek Bir. Yesterday the Italian
government bluntly refused to comply with this demand, declaring that
General Loi enjoyed its full confidence.
But if the UN was embarrassed by the threat of European troops pulling out
in Somalia, it was scarcely less so by the offer from seven Islamic
countries to send troops into Bosnia-Hercegovina. The existing, mainly
western contributors have conspicuously failed to send enough troops to
defend the UN 'safe areas' for Bosnian Moslems. Yet they fear that the
arrival of up to 18,000 soldiers from other Moslem countries, including
10,000 from revolutionary Iran, would only exacerbate the conflict, pitting
Moslems against Christians on an international scale.
The UN is expected to accept an offer from Nato to deploy ground-attack
aircraft over Bosnia, which may add some credibility to the safe areas plan.
But it could be further embarrassed by the fact that these aircraft would
not be mandated to act directly in defence of the beleaguered Moslems, but
only to protect the UN's own ground forces. The danger of a Somali-style
escalation, with the UN appearing to engage in its own blood feud with local
forces and the humanitarian objective being pushed into the background, is
obvious enough.
Coincidentally, this week also saw the publication of a report from the
foreign affairs committee of the British House of Commons, criticising the
ill-thought-out expansion of the UN's worldwide military role, and in
particular the way the UN operation in Bosnia is being transformed from
peacekeeping to enforcement, with no clear understanding of the different
principles involved.
Bosnia, Iraq and Somalia are by no means the only crises the UN is currently
involved in. It has had its successes in recent years, notably in bringing
peace to El Salvador and Namibia. Its most conspicuous recent failure was in
Angola, where civil war has resumed after last year's UN-supervised
election. Observers are now holding their breath to see whether the same
will happen in Cambodia.
The Angolan experience partly explains the tough attitude UN officials are
taking towards the warlords in Somalia. It shows, they believe, the absolute
necessity of disarming the factions if any peaceful solution is to stick;
and they point out that many Somalis have supported the action against
General Aideed.
Yet the results have appalled many old UN hands. Sir Brian Urquhart, UN
undersecretary-general until 1986 and regarded as the main architect of the
UN's traditional peacekeeping role, winces at reports of UN 'retaliation' in
Somalia. 'That would have been inconceivable in my day,' he says. 'Nobody's
thought out what the nature of the UN's activities really is.' This line was
echoed in a New York Times editorial on Wednesday: 'The United Nations is a
peace organisation. It should not be gunning down Somalis from helicopters,
no matter what warlord they support.'
UN officials argue that this line of criticism reflects nostalgia for the
cold war era, when the UN was limited to relatively straightforward
peacekeeping operations, usually in interstate conflicts where the parties
had already agreed to cease fire. The Somali operation, they explain, is the
first of a new type, with an explicit mandate under Chapter VII of the
charter, the part that refers to 'enforcement'.
Sir Brian concedes this. 'Yes, they've gone beyond peacekeeping,' he says.
'But they haven't changed the method. The result is that command and control
are now disintegrating, with national contingents taking orders from
national governments.' To avoid this, he has revived a proposal made in 1948
by the UN's first secretary-general, Trygve Lie, for a volunteer military
force to be recruited directly by the UN and 'placed at the disposal of the
Security Council'. He believes such a force could be sent in quickly, for
instance when the Council orders a ceasefire, to show that the UN is
serious. But since the force would necessarily be small, and could hardly be
deployed in more than two or three parts of the world at the same time, it
is not clear what the next move would be if its arrival failed to have the
desired effect.
What is clear is that, apart from inevitable blunders through lack of
experience, the UN is above all the victim of the expectations vested in it
by its members, in a world pullulating with local conflicts and no longer
disciplined by great-power rivalry. Most of these conflicts are more
domestic than international. Few can be solved without the military defeat
of the warlords, the imposition of peace by external power for a prolonged
period, and the use of that period to rebuild social and political
structures.
That is a process closely akin to old-style colonial government. The UN at
present has neither the machinery nor the resources to undertake it; yet
that is the task that it is being progressively pushed into.
