FT  29 APR 93 / London Stock Exchange: Renewed futures pressure hits shares
THE OPTIMISTS in the UK stock market were undone yesterday by heavy selling
of the stock index futures by US brokers. Futures selling quickly spilled
over into underlying equities and the setback took the FT-SE 100 Index down
by 35.4 points to below the 2,800 mark for its lowest closing level since
the end of January. This was all the more of a shock for a trading session
which opened with a gain of 11 points on the Footsie following a sharp fall
in the German repurchase rate and a further modest decline in sterling.
Optimism ahead of the Pounds 3bn auction of UK government bonds also proved
overdone, and equities were discouraged by a downward reversal in bond
prices after the auction result appeared on trading screens across the City
of London.
Early firmness in equities soon melted away in the face of at least three
determined sellers of the Footsie future. Inevitably, London was alarmed
that the US futures sales might imply renewed activity by George Soros, the
commodity and currency expert whose Dollars 400m investment in a US gold
mining group upset equities in London at the end of last week.
Equity dealers claimed to have identified several large US sellers of the
Footsie futures, including Paul Tudor Jones, Cargill and Goldman Sachs, but
if this was so, the list was quickly joined by most of the big London firms.
At the close the FT-SE 100 was 35.4 down at 2,797.3, having been at 2,787.1
at the day's lowest point. Dealers were distinctly alarmed by the fall in
the Footsie which, some feared, could leave it vulnerable all the way down
to the 2,700 area.
Oil exploration shares, encouraged by rights issue news from Total
Petroleum, provided one of the few firm exceptions. Pharmaceutical stocks
lost early gains.
London's fall well outpaced the setback in other European markets but Seaq
volume of 699.1m shares, against Tuesday's 596.5m, did not suggest massive
selling in the equity market.
The pressure from the stock index futures market saw the June contract on
the Footsie trade at a discount for much of the session. This caused
repeated sell-offs in the Footsie's 100 stocks, which distorted the overall
performance of the market. Business in the non-Footsie shares fell away to
around 58 per cent of the day's Seaq total, and the FT-SE Mid 250 Index shed
only 12.6 to 3,121.7.
By the end of the session, traders sounded very unsure of the near-term
outlook for the stock market. Fresh pressure from the US would undoubtedly
bring further losses in London, but strategists remained hopeful that, with
the Footsie at the lower end of a perceived trading range, some recovery
could not be far away.
They pointed to technical positions in the futures market which had spilled
over into equities yesterday, leaving the big marketmaking houses facing
significant losses as well as difficult trading positions.
Uncertainty over the prospects for a sustained economic recovery in the UK
were revived by severe criticism from British business leaders of government
policies. Delegates to the convention of the Institute of Directors heard
calls for a fundamental rethink of UK economic strategy.
