FT  07 MAY 93 / Arts: 'Shaw talk' on 'Getting Married' - Chichester Festival
Theatre
George Bernard Shaw claimed that he wrote Getting Married as a revenge on
the critics for not liking serious work. It was to be played for nearly
three hours without an interval. There was to be no plot, only in the
classical sense of the term, an argument: in other words, 'nothing but talk,
talk, talk, talk - Shaw talk'. There were, however, to be a few concessions:
the curtains would be dropped from time to time to allow first-aid to be
given to really bad cases in the press seats; and that Charing Cross
Hospital would have an ambulance available in case of need.
It was a very good Shaw joke. Getting Married is a wonderfully funny comedy,
sometimes bordering on farce, and it does have a plot in that most of the
characters either get or stay married in the end. The new departure for Shaw
was simply that it observed the classical unities of time and place: all the
action takes place on a fine spring morning in the Norman kitchen in the
Palace of the Bishop of Chelsea in 1908. There are no gaps in the action or
the talk.
Chichester is the right place for a revival. There is a bishop's palace just
across the road which has had some remarkable occupants over time. Alfred
Bridgenorth, the Bishop of Chelsea in Shaw's play, would have been at home
there. An intellectual and spiritual man, he has five daughters, is about to
marry the last of them off, but is worried about the state and role of
marriages made on earth. Despite having spoken to four successive prime
ministers on the need for easier divorce, nothing has been done. He has been
praying for 20 years that the crisis will not erupt within his own
household, but it does. On the morn of the ceremony daughter No 5 reads a
pamphlet about the inequities of the marriage law and decides to call it
off. So, to her surprise, does the groom.
The play includes, as Shaw said, a lot of talk about the advantages and
otherwise of the married state. It is also full of characters. The bishop,
played by Tony Britton, is a very unusual man, full of learning, wisdom and
charity. Whenever he speaks, everyone hangs on to his words with the
possible exception of his wife who may have heard them all before.
The bishop has two brothers: an army general (Christopher Benjamin) who is
hopelessly in love with the bishop's sister-in-law - since she is called
Lesbia, it is not surprising that she holds him off - and a City-type called
Reggie (Moray Watson) married to a bright young thing 30 years his junior
who wants to leave him for a character straight out of Oscar Wilde: St John
Hotchkiss. One wonders, with a name like that, if it is not a reference to
Shaw's contemporary playwright, St John Hankin.
All that is fine, though it begins to flag after about 80 minutes. Then the
director, Frank Hauser, does the decent thing. He introduces an interval and
on the verge of half-time in comes Dorothy Tutin.
Ms Tutin is a key figure in the second act, as we knew from the moment she
appeared that she would be. She plays the sister-in-law of the greengrocer
who looks after the domestic arrangements for the wedding, such as the
breakfast, the cake and the placement. She is also the local mayor, a
clairvoyant and the writer of pseudonymous love letters to the bishop,
hoping that they will meet in heaven. St John Hotchkiss, despite his wildly
different social origins, has worshipped her before and does so again. The
bishop takes her more or less in his stride, but even he is mildly surprised
when she hears voices. Ms Tutin's is an inspired performance and an inspired
piece of casting: Joan of Arc with jokes and also some passion.
I disagree with Patrick Garland's programme note that the subject is so
contemporary the play could have been written today: one of the many
pleasures is that some of the bishop's pleas for reform have since been
adopted. But it is still a splendid piece.
Chichester Festival Theatre. Tel: 0243 781312
