FT  24 NOV 93 / Jordan takes guarded steps towards peace
King Hussein yesterday opened the first session of Jordan's newly elected
parliament by reaffirming his commitment to the Middle East peace process.
However, he warned that full peace would not be achieved unless Israel gave
up its claim to the city of Jerusalem.
He said his government is taking 'foolproof (and) wisely regulated steps'
towards peace with Israel. But he stressed the need for dialogue among Jews,
Christians and Moslems on the future status of Jerusalem. 'We recognise no
sovereignty over (the city) except that of the almighty God,' he said.
Jordan endorsed an agenda for peace with Israel on September 14, a day after
the Palestine Liberation Organisation and Israel signed their agreement in
Washington. Since then, several understandings on economic relations with
Israel, the environment, water, and land have reportedly been secretly
initialled. King Hussein has acknowledged that items on the agenda will be
agreed in a piecemeal fashion but has so far ruled out talk of an imminent
unilateral agreement.
Although behind-the-scenes progress is being made, the king has repeatedly
called for urgent talks on Jerusalem. Under the PLO-Israeli deal the city's
status will not be negotiated until after a two-year interim period. The
Hashemites have strong links with the city. East Jerusalem was part of
Jordan between 1948 and 1967 and the king's grandfather and
great-grandfather are buried there. The king is personally funding
renovation work on Moslem holy sites in the city, including the Dome of the
Rock mosque.
While Jerusalem is set to be one of the more difficult sticking points
between Jordan and Israel, the kingdom's 80-member parliament should be less
reactionary to prospects of peace than its predecessor. The number of
deputies opposed to peace has fallen as a result of the multi-party
elections held on November 8.
In his speech, King Hussein said Jordan expected economic growth of 6 per
cent for this year, while inflation would not exceed 4.5 per cent.
The council of ministers yesterday unanimously endorsed next year's JD1.5bn
(Pounds 1.4bn) draft budget, Reuter adds.
The budget will be formally presented to parliament early next month for
final approval. King Hussein said local revenue in next year's budget would
cover current costs and a large part of capital costs. He pledged to
continue economic reforms agreed with the International Monetary Fund.
The debt-ridden country has counted on foreign aid to reduce chronic budget
and balance of payments deficits.
