FT  22 JAN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Freak flooding hits desert
copper mines
AMERICAN COPPER companies are assessing the financial damage they suffered
when freak storms dumped half the average annual rainfall on the Arizona
desert in only ten days. The region accounts for about 10 per cent of the
western world's copper mine production.
The deluge flooded open-pit mines, washed away rail links and diluted the
cyanide solutions used to leach metal from ore dumps more usually drenched
in sunshine.
Companies said yesterday it might take several weeks to gauge the impact on
copper production and add up the extra costs. There are four important
copper producers operating in Arizona - Asarco, Cyprus Minerals, Magma
Copper and Phelps Dodge - with about 15 mines and three smelters.
Mr David Ridinger, president of the Arizona Mining Association, summed up
the situation by pointing out that in an average year the town of Phoenix
expected seven inches of rain. In 1992 double that amount fell on the town -
in January alone this year there was five inches of rain. 'We've been hit by
three or four storms and tornadoes which just would not quit,' he added.
The usually-dry river bed running through Phoenix was now half a mile wide
with 100,000 cubic feet a second of water rushing through. 'We've sometimes
had an inch of rain in half an hour and this is a desert so there's no
vegetation to stop it running.
'Phoenix is not a mining town but miners with property near the river have
been more interested in protecting their homes than going to work,' said Mr
Ridinger.
The mining companies' biggest problem was dealing with the water, he said.
Environmental regulations prevented them from simply pumping water out of
pits threatened with flooding. It had to be pumped to areas - perhaps
disused pits - were it could be contained until it was analysed for any
contamination.
Apart from diluting the cyanide solutions sprinkled on the out-door heaps of
ore, the rain also washed mud into the so-called pregnant ponds where
solutions heavy with metal are stored. This was causing 'gunk problems' when
the solutions were processed.
Rumours that Asarco's smelter at Hayden had been forced to shut because of
the weather conditions were dismissed by the company, which said the plant
had been scheduled to close between January 12 and February 17 for routine
maintenance.
However, Asarco's Hayden concentrator shut down because the rail line
linking it with the Ray mine was flooded. Some metal solution had spilled
into the nearby Mineral Creek but tests showed there had been no
environmental damage and none was expected in future. Asarco said that in
the past ten days there had been 7.5 inches of rain at the Ray mine and in
December there had been 6.9 inches. This compared with average annual
precipitation of 17.5 inches.
Magma had to stop production at its Pinto Valley mine, which has an average
annual output of 90,000 tonnes of copper, because of flooding. An official
said there was at least 26 feet of water in one area. However, Magma's San
Manuel mine and associated smelting/refining operations, accounting for
about 25 per cent of US copper smelting capacity, were not affected.
An official at Phelps Dodge, the biggest US copper group, said: 'We haven't
lost any copper, it's just taking longer to get it out'. The deluge,
however, would increase the group's costs because a Southern Pacific rail
link was washed away and material from the Morenci mine was being sent by
road to the smelter 100 miles away.
Cyprus was also forced to switch concentrate shipments to trucks because the
East Arizona Railways line linked with its Miami smelter was washed away.
A Cyprus official said Arizona producers were swapping copper concentrates
with one another to ensure production continued and sales commitments were
met.
