FT  02 AUG 93 / Car groups' spying dispute set to enter decisive stage
THE investigation of General Motors' spying allegations made against senior
Volkswagen employees will enter a decisive stage this week with the expected
return to Germany of key witnesses.
Public prosecutors will be able to step up their questioning and are
expected soon to call Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, GM's former global
purchasing director, and three associates who GM says systematically
plundered industrial secrets from the US group and its European subsidiaries
before defecting to VW in March.
The four former GM employees and most of their VW colleagues have been away
during the traditional works holiday period.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, the German concern's chairman, will also press his
initiative for background talks with Mr Jack Smith, president of GM, without
prejudice to the legal case, VW said.
Mr Piech, who made contact last week in what was seen as a damage limitation
exercise, will telephone Mr Smith again today or tomorrow, VW said.
The VW chairman's public attack on GM last week, hinting at a conspiracy to
pervert the course of justice, was widely criticised as ill judged. It
sparked appeals for 'moderate language' from government ministers concerned
at the damage being done to Germany's reputation.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, federal economics minister, offered to act as a mediator
between the two sides after Mr Piech's accusations of mud-slinging and his
declaration that the case was a war in which the US concern wanted to
destroy his company.
Meanwhile, Mr Lopez denied in a statement further claims in the weekly
magazine Der Spiegel that 'secret' documents from a meeting in Germany on
March 10, the day after he signed a contract to work with immediate effect
for VW, were shipped at his request to his home in Uribe, northern Spain.
This conflicts in part with allegations last week from Adam Opel, the US
group's German subsidiary, that local staff, unaware of his new job,
fulfilled his requests for 'internal' Opel data which were presented at the
meeting to be sent to Spain.
According to Der Spiegel, Mr Lopez had earlier asked for nine cartons to be
sent to the Uribe address. The boxes, weighing 150kg, were reportedly sent
on February 22.
In his statement at the weekend, issued on his behalf through VW, Mr Lopez
said he had asked 'at an earlier' point for books, magazines and personal
documents from his Opel office to be sent to Uribe.
According to evidence presented to prosecutors last week but released by VW
at the weekend, a VW director claimed Mr Lopez was subjected to emotional
pressure from Mr Smith to try to keep him at the US group in March.
Mr Smith allegedly pleaded with him to stay, warning that GM would go
bankrupt if he left, and that Mr Smith would be sacked.
