FT  29 JUN 93 / Technology: Serving up more tennis
Visitors to this year's Wimbledon tennis championships can avoid some of the
frustration involved in watching one match while hearing the roar of an
excited crowd from the adjacent court.
The Inquiry Tennis Information Service will allow them to keep up with
events around the grounds using a multimedia system combining television
coverage, latest scores, match schedules and player profiles.
Designed by IBM in conjunction with Wimbledon officials and the BBC to give
commentators instant access to statistics and historical information,
Inquiry has this year been extended to the public.
A touch-screen terminal allows spectators to watch up to three live matches
in windows on the screen. It also displays data including aces, double
faults, forehand and backhand winners, net points earned and total points.
Historical information can be called up, too, showing players' track records
and world rankings.
Other options include a rundown on matches in progress with scores from all
courts and a match schedule. Visitors can use this to plan their day by
entering either the name of the player they want to watch or the courts to
which they have access. Souvenir hunters can take away a print-out profiling
and picturing their favourite players.
Further layers of sophistication being considered include a sound system
which could pinpoint the ball to within 10mm and monitor players' accuracy
in hitting just short of the service-line and baseline.
John Taylor, an IBM consultant in charge of the Wimbledon project, admits
that the public is still slightly reluctant to use the system but says it
has already found popularity among commentators, players and coaches who use
it to analyse match play and assess competitors' strengths and weaknesses.
The Inquiry service available to commentators and players uses software from
the Spanish company Micro Systems Lagiscta. US sports specialists
Information &amp; Display Systems developed the software for the public system.
