FT  27 SEP 93 / World Bank/IMF Meeting: G7 agrees name of the game is jobs
JOBS rather than growth is becoming the main priority of the world's leading
industrial nations. Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, yesterday summed
up the new mood. 'The persistence of high levels of structural unemployment
right across the continent of Europe is, in my opinion, the most serious
economic problem facing our governments today,' he said.
Addressing the International Monetary Fund's policy making interim
committee, Mr Clarke said that: 'In Europe, there is no longer a belief that
the resumption of growth is the sole remedy for all economic ills'. He was
'extremely concerned that there is no guarantee that unemployment will fall
significantly as the recovery progresses.'
Mr Clarke was taking up an issue he broached at the Group of Seven world
economic summit in Tokyo in July and which was actively debated in the
interim committee yesterday and at Saturday's meeting of G7 finance
ministers and central bank governors in Washington.
In a communique last night the interim committee expressed concern about the
continued weak growth in industrial countries and high and rising rates of
unemployment and persistent protectionist pressures.
It underlined the importance of a speedy conclusion to the Uruguay Round of
trade talks for job creation. In addition it urged price stability and
deficit reduction to provide scope for lower interest rates.
The ministers, representing the IMF membership, also said structural reforms
would have to be given greater emphasis in the industrial countries.
They singled out labour market flexibility, social security and healthcare
reform and deregulation as important for longer term growth.
'Our work is not over,' said Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary,
yesterday. 'We still have a way to go to achieve the kind of strong, job
creating growth that will put back to work the 34m men and women who are
unemployed in the OECD countries alone.'
The issue will be taken further at a special G7 jobs conference being
organised by the Clinton administration which is likely to take place later
this autumn.
Yesterday Mr Clarke stressed the importance of flexible labour markets for
job creation.
'European labour markets are paralysed by the burden of restrictive
practices, social security systems which encourage dependency and well
meaning but counter productive social legislation which reduces job creation
by piling costs on to employers,' he said.
Mr Bentsen said that every industrial nation must do its part to ensure
strong recovery.
The US must cut its budget deficit more. Healthcare reform was the top
priority in the US.
Japan should speed deregulation and craft its tax reform to provide a net
stimulus to the economy.
Europe should use 'all available room' to cut interest rates further and
reduce budget deficits.
Some ministers took comfort from greater optimism among the German
delegation that their country was past the worst of the recession.
Speaking after the G7 meeting, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank
president, hinted that the central bank might have more scope to lower
interest rates.
Germany seeks US stocks listings, Page 21
