FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (12): Measured on the Big Mac index -
Buenos Aires / One of the world's expensive cities
THE celebrated Big Mac index, invented by The Economist magazine, suggests
Argentina's exchange rate is heavily overvalued and helps to explain why
Buenos Aires is one of the world's more expensive cities.
A Big Mac hamburger bought at the McDonald's on Calle Florida, Buenos Aires'
busy shopping street costs Dollars 3.60. In New York, the same hamburger
made with the same ingredients to an identical recipe costs Dollars 2.28.
Conclusion: Argentina's peso is 58 per cent overvalued.
Foreigners must contend with prices of goods and services that are
uncomfortably reminiscent of western Europe, but whose quality is
unmistakeably Latin American. Infuriatingly, complaints about high prices
are often met with supercilious replies like: 'The dollar is worth nothing
in Argentina'.
Arguing that the peso is overvalued is heresy. Economy minister, Domingo
Cavallo, says he will never devalue, despite inflation of more than 40 per
cent since congress passed a law fixing the exchange rate at one peso to one
dollar in April 1991.
The official line is that Argentina will always be an expensive country
because it is more developed than its neighbours. Its workers are better
educated and more productive (a claim questioned by some international
companies with operations in Brazil and Chile). The exchange rate,
therefore, is here to stay.
In a way Mr Cavallo is right. Devaluation in Argentina is practically
impossible. This is because the US dollar is Argentina's real currency, not
the peso. Prices may be quoted in pesos, but all the underlying calculations
are still made in dollars, a habit picked up over the years of heavy
inflation. Any nominal devaluation would lead to a spurt of inflation that
would depress the exchange rate, leaving it unchanged in real terms.
In recent weeks a debate over the meaning of the Big Mac index has raged in
Argentina's media. Certainly, the Big Mac index is more revealing than one
would think. McDonalds says that it charges more for its hamburgers because
its inputs - bread, beef, wages, taxes, rent - are more expensive than in
the US. This is improbable. Pedro Lacoste, a Buenos Aires business
consultant, argues that the Big Mac index really shows that MacDonalds is
charging a hefty premium, not that the exchange rate is depressed.
He says McDonalds is a relatively recent arrival in Buenos Aires. Its
restaurants are in prime locations and appeal to upper middle class families
fascinated by the American way of life and prepared to pay prices 58 per
cent higher than in the US.
Juan Llach, economic planning secretary, and one of Mr Cavallo's most
trusted lieutenants, says the only thing the Big Mac index proves is that
consumer prices are distorted by a hugely inefficient retail network. He
also thinks McDonalds has margins of more than 50 per cent. Mr Llach says
that like other retailers - providers of services and non-tradeable goods
who are exposed to little competition - McDonalds has been able to raise its
margins with impunity.
Others would add that they are raising their prices in response to a
consumer boom, the like of which Argentina has not seen on over decade. As a
result, retail prices have risen by more than 40 per cent in two years in
dollar terms, while producer prices have increased by only 9 per cent. And
booming consumer demand is still pushing retail inflation up by about 1 per
cent a month.
Although visitors are horrified by the prices charged in Buenos Aires,
Argentina's exports have not collapsed - as one would expect if the exchange
rate had fallen by half. This is because the price of industrial and export
goods has increased in line with wholesale prices. And ferocious import
competition keeps wholesale prices firmly linked to world inflation.
Last month the government published revised data showing that Argentina's
gross domestic product - the sum of goods and services produced in a year -
rose to Dollars 226.64bn in 1992, a nominal rise of 25 per cent over 1991.
This impressive, not to say surprising achievement, makes Argentina the
wealthiest country in Latin America, a fact frequently quoted by President
Carlos Menem in his speeches.
Here again, the facts are less conclusive. After all, according to the
government's own calculations, GDP was a mere Dollars 68.92bn in 1990, a
year when hyperinflation destroyed Argentina's currency. Clearly,
hyperinflation distorted the data. However, it is just as likely that
today's exchange rate is also distorting GDP figures in the opposite
direction.
In fact, Argentina's GDP may be overstated by about 15 per cent. The
government's figures show that income per head last year was Dollars 6,870.
But according to data published by The Economist newspaper, this was worth
only Dollars 5,930 because Argentina's cost of living is so high. Therefore,
in purchasing power terms, the economy is only about Dollars 190bn, much
less than the government claims.
