FT  27 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: How a lender plumbed the depths -
Alison Smith reads the banking ombudsman's latest report and finds some
sobering stories
A self-employed plumber, whose bank sold him a loan protection policy
without telling him there were restrictions on unemployment cover for people
in his category, won almost Pounds 700 in compensation after his case was
taken up by the banking ombudsman.
In another case, a grandmother opened savings accounts for two boys but they
did not get the preferential interest rate advertised. Each account received
an extra Pounds 852 in interest after the ombudsman intervened.
Publication this week of the annual report from Laurence Shurman, the
industry's consumer watchdog, has highlighted the continuing level of
complaints against banks, although the increase was not nearly as steep as
last year.
Shurman stressed higher standards of conduct were still needed from both
banks and customers. He said banks should show more sensitivity, even when
they were entirely in the right, and debt counselling should be available
more widely.
Shurman urged that those entering the industry should receive specific
lessons in banking ethics as part of the training offered by the Chartered
Institute of Banking. He also recommended that the revision of the code of
banking practice should reflect a European directive on unfair terms in
consumer contracts which is due to come into effect in 1995.
The report showed that preliminary complaints rose to 10,231 in the year to
the end of September 1993 - a very slight increase on the previous year. But
complaints accepted for full investigation rose more sharply - by 16 per
cent - to 1,111.
Consumer and customer groups were disappointed that complaints had not
fallen despite the introduction of improvements such as the banking practice
code. Just under 40 banks are covered by this scheme, under which personal
customers and small companies can complain about maladministration involving
sums with a maximum of Pounds 100,000.
In just over one-third of the cases investigated fully during 1992-93, the
ombudsman found for the customer. Most awards were between Pounds 100 and
Pounds 10,000, but there were some striking extremes.
The highest, of Pounds 81,700, went to a case involving a property
development project where a small company had its overdraft facility
withdrawn after it had committed itself. The lowest, of Pounds 5, came after
a claim for Pounds 9,000 was investigated: the ombudsman decided the
complainant was entitled to 44p, which was rounded up to take account of
interest.
One area where complaints are growing concerns how banks deal with
mortgages. Shurman said customers should get clearer information about the
exact scope of mortgage protection policies since banks 'are not always as
keen as they should be to explain the limitations attaching to such
policies'.
He said a typical problem arose where two people were borrowing jointly
against their combined salaries but the second-named borrower did not
qualify for the unemployment cover, which applied only to the first
borrower.
The report showed, however, that there had been improvements in some areas.
There were fewer complaints about cash machines, and from existing customers
claiming they had not been told about new savings accounts which offered
better rates of interest.
Even so, Shurman made clear that faster progress needed to be made in trying
to reduce card fraud through measures such as fitting cash machines with
videos and monitoring suspicious patterns of withdrawals. He said also that
banks should do more to protect those who were most vulnerable to card
fraud, including the very elderly.
While welcoming the fact that complaints had levelled off, Shurman
criticised some banks for not publicising the ombudsman scheme enough and
for having complaints procedures which were so complex that they put people
off.
