FT  28 JUN 93 / Cairns warning on farm reform
SUBSTANTIAL liberalisation of international farm trade must be 'a central
and essential part' of a successful Uruguay Round deal, ministers from
leading farm exporting countries said in Bangkok yesterday at the end of a
two-day meeting of the Cairns Group.
'We will not be put in a position of being sidelined,' warned Mr Peter Cook,
Australia's trade minister: 'The Uruguay Round will not be a done deal until
all countries sign on.' He and two other Cairns ministers flew to Tokyo to
present their 'Bangkok declaration' to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa before
next week's summit of the Group of Seven industrial nations.
It is hoped the G7 will be able to agree on liberalisation of trade in
manufactures and services, allowing long-stalled negotiations on the Uruguay
Round to resume in Geneva among all 111 contracting parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Cairns ministers warned that if the G7 meeting failed to make the necessary
breakthrough, the Uruguay Round 'could be jeopardised simply because of lack
of time'.
For the past two years, progress in the Uruguay Round has been stalled as
the US and EC wrangled over farm trade reform. Since the bilateral agreement
at Blair House in Washington last November, talks have broadened, with the
US, the EC, Japan and Canada seeking a big package of tariff cuts across
manufactured goods and services. They have hoped this package could be used
to jump-start the Uruguay Round negotiations.
Recent momentum in these four-way market access talks almost stalled last
week in Tokyo when ministers failed to agree a package to be presented to
the G7 summit. They have called a special ministerial meeting in Tokyo for
July 6 - on the eve of the G7.
The 14-member Cairns group, which includes countries as diverse as Hungary,
Argentina, Thailand and Australia, yesterday called on the G7 to improve
market access for their farm exports, severely disrupted by protection in
the US and the EC.
Farm exports from the group have stagnated at under Dollars 62bn (Pounds
41bn) since 1989, with their share of world farm trade falling from 20.3 per
cent in 1989 to 18.7 per cent in 1991.
The group warned that the US and the EC would need to improve the terms of
the Blair House agreement. 'Access must be maintained on terms at least
equivalent to those existing.'
