FT  02 APR 93 / Paper profits that might be write-offs: The new proposals
that could radically alter company acquisition accounting
COMPANIES were yesterday digesting proposals from the Accounting Standards
Board on acquisition accounting which would, if implemented, wipe many
millions of pounds off the reported profits of British companies.
The controversial proposals are in a 72-page document - Fair Values in
Acquisition Accounting. Those most affected would be conglomerates which
make their business by acquiring companies.
'If I fall under a bus, I want a full police investigation,' Mr David
Tweedie, chairman of the Accounting Standards Board, joked this week after
launching the proposals.
In the 1980s, the financial treatment of acquisitions became what Mr Tweedie
calls the black hole of British accounting. 'If I could put one thing right
with accounts, this would be it,' he says.
Companies would set up what he calls 'big bath' provisions on the
acquisition of a business, ostensibly to cover the restructuring costs and
the write-down of assets over-valued by the previous management.
These costs and write-downs were never passed through the profit and loss
account, and the provision created could be released in later years with the
effect of inflating profits.
For example Mr Terry Smith, a City analyst, highlights that Coloroll in its
accounts for the year to March 31 1989 utilised Pounds 52m of provisions,
with pre-tax profits of just Pounds 56m - nearly all reported profit came
from the provisions, not operations.
One likely objection from companies - anticipated in the board's discussion
document - is prudence. Provisions appear to be conservative, since the
company appears to be carefully allowing for future losses.
Mr Tweedie argues this is not prudent for the profit and loss account.
'There is always a mulch over the accounts. It is unclear what is
happening.'
There has been a muted response to the proposals. Publicly companies tend to
say they would not object to change as long as their competitors are obliged
to follow suit.
Acquisition accounting has long been loathed by companies which were targets
of corporate predators, because it showed the acquirers' performance in a
better light than their own results.
But Mr Brian McGowan, chief executive of Williams Holdings, the
conglomerate, says: 'It is absolutely right that these things should be
disclosed. The facts should be there for all shareholders to see. But they
already are. Putting our costs through the profit and loss account will just
confuse readers.'
The philosophical basis for the board's proposals is a stark and simple
phrase in its statement of principles, the theoretical framework which
helped direct discussion as the draft was being prepared.
The phrase defines liabilities as the requirement of a company to pay out.
Most acquisition provisions - such as those for reorganisation or the
closure of duplicate facilities - do not meet these requirements.
Even when some of those still do - including some write-downs of assets -
the board's proposals say companies must disclose any material contributions
that they make to reported operating profits.
That will reduce the scope for companies to make excessive write-downs which
then allow them to sell assets and realise substantial profits without
readers of accounts being aware of how the profits were generated.
How far companies will obey any new standard along the lines proposed by the
board remains to be seen. A more detailed 'exposure' draft fleshing out the
details on acquisition accounting is not expected before late this year. A
standard would not be adopted by companies for at least a year after that.
It will be interesting to see how flexible the board will be to amendments
in the face of strong opposition.
Then there will be the tension over implementation. A number of companies
which have paid lip-service to previous standards have then bent the rules
and obeyed the letter rather than spirit when they come to report.
The question is, will Mr Tweedie and the new financial reporting machinery
be swallowed in their efforts to destroy the black hole?
