FT  06 SEP 93 / Israel says peace deal on track: Palestinian officials warn
internal PLO agreement may take weeks
ISRAEL said yesterday that it was on course to conclude deals by next week
on recognising the Palestine Liberation Organisation and on Palestinian
self-rule, despite continuing haggling over the terms governing recognition.
Israeli ministers were united after yesterday's cabinet meeting in
proclaiming that the sole remaining obstacles to signing the two agreements
were matters of wording, not principle - in particular the wording of a
statement to be issued by the PLO dissociating itself from terrorism and
disavowing significant parts of its founding charter.
As a measure of mounting confidence within Israel over the prospects of a
real peace breakthrough, stock prices on the Tel Aviv exchange rose to a
record high yesterday, with the Mishtanim share index rising 10 points to
close at 226.76.
However, Palestinian officials in Washington cautioned that it could take
weeks for the PLO to push the outline agreement through its internal
decision-making bodies. 'The (PLO) executive committee is meeting Thursday,
after that the central council. It is going to take some time,' said one
official.
The agreement drew guarded support yesterday from Syrian President Hafez
al-Assad, a key figure in the Middle East as leader of Israel's chief enemy.
The deal had been sharply criticised in official Syrian press, but in his
first statement on the subject, Mr Assad said it was up to Palestinians to
decide what they deem fit on a negotiated offer from Israel of interim
self-rule in occupied territories.
This was less than the public support sought by Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO
chairman, who visited Damascus yesterday, and threw the ball back in the
Palestinian court.
Israeli and US officials have both expressed the hope that the 'declaration
of principles' governing early autonomy in the Gaza Strip and Jericho and
covering Palestinian empowerment elsewhere in the West Bank could be signed
in Washington on September 13, at the end of the present round of peace
talks.
Both sides are determined to sustain momentum behind the breakthrough
agreement on limited self-rule for the Palestinians, unveiled more than a
week ago after secret talks in Oslo.
Mr Arafat is also seeking to accommodate internal Palestinian opposition to
the agreement, partly to expedite its approval by PLO decision-making
bodies, and has sought a meeting with Mr George Habash, leader of the
hard-line Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
He is then expected to visit the Gulf, where he is likely to seek political
and financial backing for the agreement. Gulf foreign ministers convened in
Riyadh yesterday to discuss the deal.
The Israeli government is equally determined not to see momentum lost. 'No
one has an alternative. It is impossible to go back. There is no going
back,' Mr Shimon Peres, foreign minister, told Israel radio, echoing a
statement made by Mr Arafat in his first-ever Israeli television interview
on Saturday.
Israel has signalled it would be happy to sign only the self-rule agreement
in a week's time in Washington, but the PLO is holding out for a
simultaneous deal on recognition. Mr Peres has said both agreements stand on
their own feet and are not dependent on each other.
The Palestinians, however, believe recognition is vital and should be
accorded before the final signing of the outline agreement in Washington,
partly to help the PLO muster broader support for the deal among its Arab
and Palestinian opponents.
Meanwhile, supporters and opponents of the peace proposals in Israel are
beginning to gather their forces in public demonstrations.
At least 40,000 people chanted their backing for the government in a rally
organised by the Peace Now movement in Tel Aviv on Saturday. Israeli
settlers and other rightwingers hostile to the deal plan to respond tomorrow
with a mass demonstration.
Israeli police minister Moshe Shahal said yesterday that civil guard units
would police Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, in an apparent
bid to calm Jewish settlers' anger over the Palestinian self-rule pact.
Arafat steps up drive; Milk, honey, razor wire, Page 4
