FT  08 JUL 93 / Survey of Greece (9): Tight timetable for sale of OTE - Anne
Counsell monitors progress of the privatisation programme
THE fate of Greece's privatisation programme will be sealed in the coming
weeks. Success or failure largely rests on the strategic sale and subsequent
partial flotation of OTE, the state-owned telecommunications corporation.
'It is crucial,' says Mr Stefanos Manos, the minister of national economy
and driving force behind the government's sell-off of public enterprises. He
remains confident that the equity sale will be a success and, perhaps as
important, that it will be on schedule.
The timetable is very tight. An election is due before April next year,
possibly earlier. The Socialist opposition, widely tipped to win, has
vehemently opposed New Democracy's privatisation programme and has pledged
to halt and even reverse the sell-offs.
The government has taken steps to maintain the support of pro-privatisation
MPs during the summer session of parliament to push through enabling
legislation for the privatisation programme as well as the charter and
licence for OTE. The sale of a 35 per cent strategic stake in the company is
expected by early September with an initial public offering (IPO) in
November.
France Telecom, GTE of the US, NTT, Stet, Korea Telecom and Telefonica have
been shortlisted to bid for the strategic stake prior to the equity offering
of 14 per cent, valued at around Dr90bn, the largest so far in Greece. The
flotation structure is 5 per cent to domestic investors, 5 per cent as an
international tranche and the remaining 4 per cent will be offered at a
discount to OTE's 27,000 employees and 13,000 pensioners.
International advisers and analysts swell the ranks of the already
well-staffed government offices. Credit Suisse First Boston and J. Henry
Schroder Wagg have been appointed joint international lead managers while
the international accountancy firm Arthur Andersen is winding up a complete
audit of OTE. At the Athens Stock Exchange, Coopers and Lybrand are checking
the trading system as concern has been voiced over whether the market can
absorb such a large issue.
There is considerable bustle, tinged with urgency, as the preparations
continue apace. The prospectus is expected to be in draft form by August,
radio advertising is underway and a television campaign will start this
month.
Analysts view the OTE strategic sale and IPO as not only vital to Greece's
international credibility but also a potential turning point for the entire
privatisation programme. The government is fighting for the hearts and minds
of a population long accustomed to the state provision of jobs in public
sector corporations.
Patronage appointments and the use of the public sector as a cushion against
unemployment are viewed as a duty of the state and the monopolistic utility
corporations as state assets. This attitude extends to suppliers and
contractors who enjoy cosy relationships with public sector managers, to
trade unions worried about job losses and to senior politicians concerned
about the political cost of privatisation.
The unwieldy nature of the public sector and opposition from within the
ranks of the government have not helped the privatisation process. Its
presentation and image have also been tarnished by allegations that some
smaller companies were sold on favourable terms to businessmen and by the
somewhat patchy success of some larger sell-offs such as shipyards.
The process of unbundling state involvement in all aspects of the economy
began in 1990 when more than 60 per cent of Greece's GNP was generated by
the public sector. The government created the Industrial Reorganisation
Organisation (IRO) to liquidate or sell some 60 enterprises, many of these
moribund, on its books. Many were liquidated through accelerated procedures
and of the 27 companies in operation, the IRO now has three remaining - the
Kerafina ceramics company, Athens Paper Mill and Larco, the nickel mining
company. The Dollars 200m subsidy to maintain IRO companies has been
eliminated and proceeds from the liquidations are keeping the IRO running.
Privatisation sales in 1991 and 1992 amounted to almost Dr200bn, of which
Dr124bn came from the sale of the Aget Heracles cement company to
Calcestruzzi, a subsidiary of Italy's Ferruzzi group. The sale has been
clouded by allegations that Calcestruzzi officials were involved in the
payment of kickbacks to Italian politicians.
Contractual difficulties have also contributed to slippages in the
privatisation timetable. The sale of a minority interest and management
rights in Greece's two largest oil refineries, Hellenic Aspropyrgos Refinery
(ELDA) and Hellenic Fuel and Mineral Oil (EKO), were delayed over the
appointment of international advisers. The offering memorandum is now
expected in October and lists of potential investors are being drawn up for
one or both partial buy-outs, expected to raise up to Dollars 1bn.
A continuing stand-off between the government and managers at the
state-owned Public Power Corporation (Deh) illustrates the depth of
opposition over private sector involvement in utilities and the managements'
ability to obstruct tender procedures. Deh maintains it can produce power
more cheaply than private operators and wants to maintain control of its own
development programmes whereas the government insists that Deh's debts are
too high to finance new power stations. Asking the Deh management to
co-operate with a private partner under build-operate transfer (BOT)
financing is 'akin to asking a man to chop off his own hand,' commented one
analyst. 'Of course, they declined.'
The retendering process for the 600MW Lavrion gas-fired power station is due
to start in mid-summer as part of the recent spurt in the privatisation
programme. The partial sale of 20 per cent of the Hellenic Sugar Industry,
also slowed by management and union sabotage, is expected to be completed by
early summer.
A important sale of assests belonging to the state tourism association (EOT)
is also on the busy agenda for the summer parliament. Mr Athanassios
Zambaras, special adviser to the privatisation team, expects considerable
foreign interest, especially in packages combining the sale of a hotel with
a marina or casino.
About 50 hotels, most of them small, will be sold while marinas are to be
offered on long-term leases or as sites to private operators. In addition, a
new regulatory framework is being established for nine casinos in prime
tourist sites. More than 150 indications of interest have been received for
the first round of selection this month and the casino licences are due to
be awarded by early November. Licence revenues are estimated at Dr22bn.
Privatisation plans for Olympic Airways remain on the distant horizon
because of huge cumulative debts and non-performing loans estimated at more
than Dr200bn. A new chairman has been brought in from the US and auditors
are working on the balance sheet as part of the fix first, sell later
approach to the airline. Olympic, which posted an operational loss of
Dr13.2bn in 1992, requires either a debt write-off or substantial financial
restructuring, possibly both, before it can contemplate seeking a strategic
partner.
A somewhat overdue drive towards greater transparency in the privatisation
process may have come too late to overcome deep-seated prejudices and
opposition. More important, the potential benefits will not be immediately
obvious to the majority of voters before the election.
