FT  16 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Indonesian cocoa thrives as
prices languish - One big producer is still increasing its output
THE WORLD cocoa industry is in a state of crisis, with prices at record lows
in real terms. But consumers and producers continue to bicker about a new
International Cocoa Organisation (ICCO) withholding scheme to support the
market.
Bucking the trend, however, is Indonesia, which remains remarkably bullish
about cocoa's prospects. While output from major producers such as Brazil
and Malaysia is in decline, the archipelago's output is rising inexorably.
In 1980-81, the country produced just 16,000 tonnes of speciality 'fine'
cocoa, which by 1983-84 had picked up to 32,000 tonnes and by 1987-88 to
65,000 tonnes as farmers began to plant 'bulk' cocoa trees.
Production doubled again by 1990-91 and the current crop year, ending
September 30, is forecast at 220,000 tonnes (of which 15,000 tonnes will be
fine cocoa) making Indonesia the world's fourth largest producer - behind
the Ivory Coast, Ghana and Brazil. Nor has Indonesia's cocoa-boom begun to
subside. Traders confidently expect production to exceed 400,000 tonnes a
year by the end of the decade, taking Indonesia into second place.
Mr Ibrahim Hasan, chief executive of the Indonesian Cocoa Association (Inca)
says the roots of the boom go back to the 1970s when high prices led to
interest among smallholder farmers.
Many of the plantation workers in Malaysia's cocoa-producing state of Sabah
were Indonesians who smuggled seedlings back when returning home. In
addition, the government and private agricultural companies set up seedling
nurseries.
This led to a dramatic change in the country's production base. In the
1970s, cocoa production was split between state plantations (90 per cent)
and private plantations (10 per cent). State plantations now account for
only 25 per cent of the crop, while private plantations provide 15 per cent
and smallholder farmers 60 per cent.
High productivity has allowed cocoa to be remunerative for farmers, despite
the collapse of international prices. Mr Hasan estimates the yield in
Sulawesi, the centre for smallholder production, at about 1.5 tonnes a
hectare, five times the level of some West African producing countries. He
estimates the yield in north Sumatra at slightly below 1 tonne a hectare.
'Indonesians are a force in cocoa. They're not on the peripheries, which
even two years ago they were,' explains one London cocoa trader. Other
producers and the ICCO, however, have been slow to pick up on Indonesia's
sudden importance.
As Mr Hasan observes: 'If you look at all the ICCO documents, Indonesia is
still classified as a 100 per cent fine cocoa producer'. One reason for the
ICCO's failure to update records may be that Indonesia has yet to join the
organisation, a fact that has significant implications for any future ICCO
price support scheme.
'Indonesia is the lowest cost producer and if it's not willing to
participate in any withholding scheme, it is that much more difficult to
work,' one cocoa broker points out.
Brokers estimate a withholding scheme must encompass 80-85 per cent of world
production to have any chance of supporting prices. Indonesia already
accounts for 10 per cent of world production and is likely to have a 15 per
cent share by the end of the decade.
Indonesian producers, however, are reluctant to join the ICCO, for as one
official explains: 'We are very worried that if we become a member our
production programme may be constrained by outside factors'.
Indonesian producers are confident that cocoa prices will pick up with or
without an ICCO scheme in place as the industry enters a period in which
world demand exceeds annual output. They are, therefore, more concerned with
structuring the domestic industry to take advantage of higher demand than
with the need for international co-operation.
The main thrust of the next five years will be to improve quality, say Inca
officials. Indonesian beans have a relatively low fat content and farmers
tend to ferment their crop inadequately. As a result, Indonesian cocoa sells
at a discount to the world market price.
'We have to be really concerned about quality if we are to fulfil the demand
of industry,' warns Mr Hakim Warsono, Inca's deputy chairman. The task may
not be easy - that Inca has yet to get its own offices is a reminder
Indonesia's cocoa industry is still in its infancy.
Inca officials, however, are brimming with confidence. In instances when
farmers have mimicked West African fermentation and sun-drying techniques
Indonesian beans 'get almost a Ghana-style taste profile' and can compete
among the world's best, says Mr Hasan.
