FT  08 APR 93 / Caught out by a turning tide: David Marsh argues that Europe
faces a radical reshaping of priorities
'To every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.'
 - Sir Isaac Newton
In 1989-90, a triumphant wave of western liberal capitalism crashed onto the
beachhead of central and eastern Europe, washing away communism's rusty
hold. Three years later, the western part of the continent is caught in the
backwash of its own previous success. Europe has served up a large-scale
laboratory demonstration of Newton's third law of motion.
In the east, fragmentation is on the march, illustrated by the war in former
Yugoslavia, the disintegration of the former Soviet Union and, less
catastrophically, by the break-up of Czechoslovakia. In western Europe,
fissiparous forces are at work, too, seen in regional factionalism in Italy
and Belgium, or the new economic and social cleavages in unified Germany.
Yet what has crumbled most is political vision and leadership, sapped by
economic downturn, unemployment and electoral disenchantment. The fall of
the Berlin wall, the unification of Germany and the unravelling of the
Soviet empire were cathartic events for which the west was immensely
grateful, and immensely unprepared. Western Europe reacted by trying to
speed up, through the Maastricht treaty, moves towards EC unity first
launched in the 1950s and accelerated by the process of creating a single
European market. That was always a debatable choice. In retrospect, it looks
like the wrong one.
West European politicians gave priority to deepening integration rather than
spreading it eastwards. They failed to realise that the collapse of
communism would create a corresponding crisis of adjustment in the west.
They did not recognise that the pain accompanying the necessary overhaul of
west European structures would diminish ordinary people's enthusiasm for
political and economic union.
They foresaw neither the scale of economic problems resulting from German
unification, nor the extent to which these would reverberate across Europe.
They did not anticipate that the Maastricht plan to replace the D-Mark with
a European currency would become an obstacle rather than a catalyst for the
reconstruction of Europe.
This was a catalogue of miscalculation. Now, in drawing up the
post-Maastricht agenda, west European governments face three interlinked
challenges. The most important is to build a stronger economic bridge
integrating the eastern and western parts of the Continent. Unless
governments master this first task, they are likely to fail in the other two
aims: restoring their authority and esteem in the eyes of voters, and
succeeding in Europe's economic struggle to keep up with other parts of the
industrialised world.
Three years ago, all the goals seemed within reach. In dozens of statesmanly
speeches, the talk was of partnership and prosperity, resolution and reward.
German and European unity, according to Chancellor Helmut Kohl, were 'two
sides of the same coin'. The coin has since tarnished; the rhetoric has
turned sour.
'What's the situation in Europe today? Uncertainty, uncertainty,
uncertainty. That's a disaster,' says Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, the new
Danish prime minister. As current chairman of the EC Council, he believes
that Maastricht must be ratified. But, above all, he wants the EC to escape
from economic stagnation.
A senior official in the Bonn Chancellery talks of 'an accumulation of
uncertainties' posed by concerns about immigration and inflation, and by the
perception of impotence over the war in Bosnia. He compares Germany to a
confused football team. 'We have to keep on playing while the rules of the
game are being changed.'
East and west at least now recognise their interdependence. Across western
Europe - not simply in Germany, the only country which has been physically
transformed - the upheavals in the east have changed the mood of nations.
Would the withering of British self-confidence during the past few years
have been quite so severe had the post-Thatcher recession not coincided with
the end of the UK's cold war role as a guardian of a divided Europe? In
Italy, the eastern earthquakes have contributed to the splintering of the
old state and party structures which held the country for so long in the
grip of corruption.
In France, the diminishing of President Francois Mitterrand's public
standing was hastened by his futile attempts at the end of 1989 to hold up
German unification, and his underestimation, at the time of the hardliners'
coup in August 1991, of the forces of reform in the Soviet Union. And in
Spain, the fortunes of Mr Felipe Gonzalez are waning partly because, as new
eastern horizons open, the country is facing much greater competition in
seeking to attract foreign investors and EC subsidies.
Through these setbacks to European hopes runs a common economic thread. High
Bundesbank interest rates aimed at restraining the inflationary pressures of
German unification have been a principal cause of the European recession. It
could be as deep as the one in 1975 (the last year EC economies contracted),
and still more damaging.
The Maastricht treaty precepts for economic and monetary union (Emu),
designed to lay down a path for economic convergence and budgetary
rectitude, have so far produced neither. The treaty set targets for fiscal
deficits and indebtedness as conditions to determine which EC countries
could participate in Emu later in the decade. However, as a result of
recession-induced increases in social outlays and cuts in tax receipts,
average EC deficits this year will amount to between 5 and 7 per cent of
gross domestic product, well above the 3 per cent target.
Although the Maastricht targets are not meant to be reached until 1996 or
1998, a number of countries (including Germany) are likely to continue
diverging from them during the next few years. As a result, a treaty
ostensibly mapping the route to Emu now appears to contain built-in
road-blocks.
One continental European central bank governor, a long-time student of the
Bundesbank's scepticism about Emu, says: 'I could imagine that the Germans
said they (the targets) were necessary because they were impossible to
fulfil.'
West Europe's economic difficulties would be bad enough if they were merely
cyclical. But the EC's falling competitiveness shows they also embody an
important structural element.
Many EC countries, led by Germany, have for several years been registering
falling shares of international export markets for manufactured goods. The
trend is linked to Europe's high labour costs and technological shortcomings
compared not only with the US and Japan, but also with the emergent
capitalist economies of south-east Asia. The EC ran a trade deficit of
Dollars 90bn with the rest of the world last year - roughly three times its
1985-90 average. High production costs partly reflect the burdens of running
generous welfare systems which - for both economic and demographic reasons -
are becoming impossible to maintain.
Reflecting on such structural problems, Mr Alfred Grosser, one of France's
leading political scientists, says the European recession is not just 'a
temporary crisis'. Rather, it raises questions 'over the way we organise our
industrial society'.
Mr Grosser, a specialist on the Franco-German relationship, says basic links
between the governing classes in Paris and Bonn are in good order. He adds,
however: 'That's of little significance.' Commenting that unemployment and
economic uncertainty have created a gulf between governments and ordinary
citizens, Mr Grosser says, perhaps overdramatically, 'The two countries are
in the process of falling apart.'
Whatever the effects of recession, Franco-German ties will remain of utmost
importance for Europe's future. One emotion at the heart of the relationship
is, however, French mistrust of Germany - still not allayed after nearly
five decades of post-war co-operation.
According to a survey after last September's French referendum on
Maastricht, 21 per cent of France's Yes voters, and 40 per cent of No
voters, said that fear of Germany's domination of Europe had determined
their voting stance. The chairman of one of France's largest banks says
France still has a three or four-year 'window of opportunity' in which
post-unity Germany will be 'vulnerable.' During this time, France will be
able to negotiate with Bonn; afterwards, Germany will be too powerful.
Mr Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for Reconstruc tion and
Development (EBRD), has occupied a key vantage point in Paris-Bonn
relations, and now has a central role on another part of the European stage.
As President Mitterrand's foreign policy adviser during the 1980s, Mr Attali
was one of Maastricht's architects. Now, however, Mr Attali calls it 'the
last treaty of the cold war'. The agenda has moved on.
Mr Attali concedes that the main objective of Maastricht is to 'get rid of
the D-Mark'. He stresses the importance of finalising the treaty: 'I'll
accept the word 'outdated' after it's ratified'. But he adds that once the
treaty, as he hopes, passes its hurdles in Denmark and the UK, 'the EC will
have to think of something else'.
This could be, Mr Attali suggests, the establishment of a pan-European
common market in order to lock the economies of eastern and central Europe
to the west. These countries should also participate, he proposes, in formal
political collaboration with the EC, ideally, through immediate full
membership.
In common with Mr Attali, Professor Alan Winters, an international trade
expert at Birmingham University, complains about EC protectionism in its
trade agreements finalised over the last year or so with former Soviet bloc
countries.
Prof Winters says: 'Noble concern for the welfare of our brothers in eastern
Europe has been subverted by entrenched economic interests.' He fiercely
criticises EC import restrictions in sectors such as steel, agriculture and
textiles.
Countries in eastern and central Europe have made impressive strides in
switching trade towards the west. But the run-down of traditional industries
has been much greater than expected.
Allowing for anticipated modest recovery in 1993, the combined real GDP of
Hungary, Poland and the Czech and Slovak republics at the end of this year
will be roughly 20 per cent below that in 1988. Even after zero or maybe
negative growth in the EC this year, the Community's GDP at the end of 1993
will, by contrast, be 8 to 9 per cent above the 1988 figure.
Mr Jacek Siwicki, investment manager in the Warsaw-based Polish-American
Enterprise Fund, dealing with privatisation and acquisitions in Poland, was
in 1991 secretary of state in his country's privatisation ministry. He says
errors were made in forecasting the process of east European transition.
'We did not realise this is not like a turnround of a corporation. It is
like a situation after a war - after the atomic bomb has gone off. Millions
of people are hurt and injured.' Bringing about economic regeneration, he
says, 'has to be a managed process. You need a surgeon on the battlefield.
You cannot leave it all to the markets.'
To help organise structural change, Mr Roberto Leonardi, an expert in
government relations at the London School of Economics, calls for creation
of pan-European organisations similar to the European Coal and Steel
Community of the 1950s. Such ideas can find favour with industrialists. The
EBRD has established informal links with Eurofer, the European steel
producers' federation, to discuss steel overcapacity in east and west.
One board member of Mannesmann, the German engineering group, says everyone
would benefit from an orderly sharing out of work between steel companies in
the east and west. In view of high German production costs, 'The quicker we
transfer production eastwards, the less overall jobs (in Germany) we will
lose. We will gain new competitiveness, new markets and new volume.'
If co-operative arrangements such as this come to the fore, they will
reflect a redrawing of European priorities. The links between action and
reaction in east and west are now clear. Finding creative and mutually
beneficial ways of responding to them is likely to dominate Europe's
post-Maastricht agenda.
