FT  01 NOV 93 / London and Dublin press on with initiative: Governments
'will not be diverted by gunmen' - Widespread support for talks / Killings
condemned
THE BRITISH and Irish governments yesterday stressed their determination not
to allow the Northern Ireland peace process to be derailed by Saturday's
mass shooting in County Londonderry.
Downing Street said Mr John Major, the prime minister, who has been kept
closely informed about the shootings, would not be diverted by the gunmen.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said terrorists had to be
prevented from dictating the political agenda in the province. He added:
'Last night's slaughter of the innocents puts more pressure on us to
accelerate our efforts to find a formula for the cessation of violence and
get the constitutional parties back around a negotiating table.
'One of our major problems is the lack of a political process and dialogue.
Consequently the men of violence are allowed to take centre stage, and that
has to be addressed immediately.'
The London-Dublin initiative was condemned by Mr Peter Robinson, deputy
leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist party, who said it was part of
the 'nationalist agenda'.
He said the initiative had 'raised the temperature' in the province. 'We are
only half a step away from Northern Ireland being out of control. If the
violence continues like this the ordinary man is going to take sides for
protection.'
However, there was widespread support for the governments' determination to
press ahead. Mr Kevin McNamara, Britain's shadow Northern Ireland secretary,
said the killings were 'absolutely horrendous'. It was 'urgent that full
attention should be paid to the Major-Reynolds initiative to find a solution
which will respect the integrity of both communities and to establish
institutions which can be useful both to the people of Northern Ireland and
to the people of Ireland'.
Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the nationalist SDLP, said the shootings
were 'another bloody milestone in the move towards peaceful resolution of
the problems here'.
Dr Robin Eames, the Anglican primate of all Ireland, said he did not believe
that the joint statement by Mr Reynolds and Mr Major had prompted the
killings. 'Obviously people's minds will centre on the reaction to the
recent inter-governmental announcement, but my experience is that these
terrorists, whoever they are, don't have to look for a reason,' he said.
'This is psychopathic blood-letting and their so-called banner of 'For God
and Ulster' on the one side and 'For a united Ireland' on the other are now
irrelevant to most people.'
Mr Martin McGuinness, vice-president of Sinn Fein, said the murders were a
brutal reminder of the conflict in Northern Ireland. He urged the
nationalist community to remain calm and vigilant.
Mr Philip McGarry, chairman of the Alliance party, said the shootings were
'a disgraceful landmark'. He called on people to support the security
forces.
