FT  17 AUG 93 / Rexrodt puts coal subsidies on hit-list
MR Gunter Rexrodt, Germany's economics minister, yesterday took aim at
monopolies and highly subsidised industries such as coal by calling for
faster privatisation and greater competition.
He said no sector would be spared in his campaign for greater flexibility
and competitiveness in the economy. A key element would be the reduction of
subsidies in all sectors over the next five years and the privatisation of a
broad range of state companies.
In a hard-hitting paper presented to his Free Democratic Party (FDP), the
junior partner in the Bonn coalition, Mr Rexrodt said the politically
sensitive coal industry should be included in the reforms.
Direct federal subsidies to the western states, excluding federal tax
concessions and soft loans, totalled DM13.5bn (Pounds 5.2bn) in 1992, or 1.3
per cent of gross domestic product. Nearly half the subsidies have been
earmarked for supporting agriculture and the coal industry, the latter
accounting for 19 per cent of western Germany's total energy consumption. In
1990, coal mining subsidies amounted to DM80,500 per employee, or 1.8 times
the average yearly income of a blue-collar worker.
A reform of the coal industry would be particularly welcomed by western
German consumers. The sector's price structure was mapped out in a 1980
agreement between the coal and electricity industries. The agreement
stipulated the amount of domestic coal the utilities undertook to burn for
the remainder of the century.
But because of high production costs, the electricity companies pay about
DM280 per ton, compared with world prices of DM80. To compensate for the
high cost of coal, the electricity utilities collect the Kohlepfennig, a
levy from the consumer. This explains why German electricity is among the
most expensive in the European Community.
The FDP paper was jointly put forward with Mr Klaus Kinkel, the foreign
minister and head of the party.
An FDP spokeswoman said Mr Rexrodt wanted to present the paper on creating
more competition when parliament resumes after the summer recess.
By singling out reductions in subsidies and the faster privatisation or
deregulation of the public sector  - including Deutsche Telekom, the
national telecommunications company, and Lufthansa, the state airline -
economists said that Mr Rexrodt was challenging structures which helped
maintain high costs for the consumer, as well as wage levels.
