FT  25 AUG 93 / Bigger trucks carry a heavy payload of disappointment: A
reform trumpeted as a boost for rail will struggle to take freight off roads
WHEN John MacGregor, the transport secretary, announced earlier this month
that 44-tonne lorries were to be allowed on Britain's roads he would have
expected criticism from the environmental lobby.
But there was also disappointment among hauliers that the lorries were to be
permitted only for journeys to and from rail freight terminals. The
opportunity had been missed, they said, to raise weight restrictions on the
whole range of freight traffic.
The 44-tonne limit applies to trucks carrying containers or drawing
swap-bodies - vehicle bodies that can be demounted from the tractor and
transferred on to trains.
Mr MacGregor says he wants to put container lorries and swap-bodies on level
terms with conventional lorries that make road-only deliveries as part of
the government's strategy of reversing the decline in rail freight compared
with road freight.
Containers and swap-bodies are heavier when empty than conventional truck
bodies, which have a competitive advantage over the containers and swap
bodies needed for a combination of road and rail journeys. Under the old
38-tonne limit for articulated lorries, which will still apply to
non-road/rail traffic, conventional vehicles could carry more cargo than
swap-bodies, which could not carry their full capacity.
Mr Bill Newton, manager of the environment research centre at the Transport
Research Laboratory, a government agency, said: 'We are getting into a
situation where rail freight is almost entirely moving bulk goods - coal,
oil, aggregates, some bulk steel and refuse.'
The Channel tunnel has raised new hopes of developing the rail freight
industry because, generally, the longer the distance the goods are carried,
the more cost-effective a rail component is.
On the Continent, where most countries already have a 44-tonne limit for
lorries geared to road-rail travel, the use of swap-bodies tripled between
1980 and 1989. If there had been no move to relax British regulations, the
tunnel would have highlighted the UK as an anomaly.
Continental freight carriers may be the first to benefit from the UK rule
change because they have already invested in swap-bodies.
Railfreight Distribution, which will run the main Channel tunnel freight
services, admits the investment in swap-bodies is crucial for intermodal
(combined road-rail) travel but admits to uncertainty about the level of
demand.
Railfreight Distribution, British Rail's freight subsidiary, is selling its
train space to two intermediate wholesalers - Allied Continental Intermodal,
and Combined Transport, a consortium of Continental intermodal - road/rail -
companies and UK road transport operators. They will sell train space to
freight forwarders and transport operators.
Mr Mike Stockdale, Combined Transport's commercial manager, says the company
would initially have three trains a day in each direction, with swap bodies,
tanks and containers carrying the equivalent of 26 lorry-loads. By 1995, he
forecasts five trains a day.
It seems improbable that 44-tonnes lorry will become common on the roads as
soon as they are permitted in the autumn. Their proliferation will depend on
the popularity of Channel tunnel rail freight and, as Railfreight admits,
much about the tunnel is uncertain.
Most of the 44-tonners willtravel to and from Britain's nine Channel tunnel
railfreight terminals. Some critics believe that this limited number of
freight terminals is the greatest obstacle to reversing the decline in rail
freight.
Freight terminals no longer shunt individual wagons in and out of sidings,
because it is no longer economic, and instead concentrate on shifting whole
trains. The sorting of the components of each train is done by road,
bringing together a train's worth of containers and swap-bodies.
But if goods are a long way from the nearest rail freight terminal, there is
a strong case for keeping them on the road. Especially since at the other
end of the journey there is very little to stop a 38-tonne lorry making
deliveries to the doorstep of high street shops.
Mr Ken Buchan of the Metropolitan Transport Research Unit, an independent
consultancy which was commissioned to look at freight traffic by the
environmental pressure group Transport 2000, says the bias against rail
freight is greater than a matter of weight restrictions.
Road freight, he argues, is not paying its costs in environmental and safety
terms, and will continue to have economic advantages over rail until it is
made to do so.
But Mr MacGregor, now that he has decided to permit some 44-tonne vehicles,
may find it more difficult to resist the road lobby's pleas to raise weight
limits for all traffic.
He has said the new vehicles will be no bigger and cause no more wear to
roads than existing vehicles. The road lobby is sure to use that same
argument in an attempt to drive a bigger hole through the 38-tonne limit.
