FT  11 NOV 93 / Seoul rules for Citibank in fund row: First arbitration in
labour dispute involving foreign business
THE SOUTH Korean government has issued its first arbitration decision
involving a labour dispute at a foreign business by ruling in favour of the
management at Citibank, the largest foreign bank in the country.
Foreign businessmen, particularly bankers, had worried that a government
decision supporting union demands would provoke labour unrest at their
concerns.
The ruling for Citibank, hit by staff demonstrations and industrial action
since late August, follows government efforts to reverse a decline in
foreign investment. Labour problems have often been cited as a main factor
discouraging foreign investment in Korea.
The arbitration panel, appointed by the Ministry of Labour, said Citibank
did not have to establish an employee welfare fund that was at the heart of
the dispute.
It also ordered Citibank to give its workers a 9.5 per cent wage increase,
higher than the management offer of 8.9 per cent but much lower than the
union demand of 15.7 per cent.
Foreign businessmen had initially feared the labour ministry's intervention
in the dispute would hand down a a victory for union members, since the
ministry has been promoting the idea of an employee welfare fund since 1991.
The government wants companies to use part of their pre-tax profits to
establish a fund that would finance employee benefits, such as low-interest
housing loans. Proposed as a way to slow high wage demands, the fund has
been accepted by most domestic banks and some large manufacturing companies
as a result of state pressure.
Citibank refused to establish the fund because its workers are already among
the best-paid in the Korean banking industry and are provided with a
compensation package that is more generous than that offered by local banks.
Several other foreign banks, including Westpac, ABN-Amro and Bank of Boston,
have suffered labour disputes over pay differences and compensation
policies. High wage growth has been blamed for falling profits at most
foreign banks, which have also been hurt by the economic slowdown and a loss
in market share.
