FT  22 NOV 93 / Political Diary
BRUSSELS
Monday: EU economics and finance ministers are likely to agree to expand the
growth initiative by making loans from the European Investment Bank more
readily available. They will also formally approve Alexandre Lamfalussy as
head of the European Monetary Institute.
Fisheries ministers meet for their annual price-setting session. Tuesday:
Social affairs ministers look at commissioner Padraig Flynn's green paper on
social policy.
Thursday: EU president Jacques Delors and Hans van den Broek, commissioner
for external affairs, meet Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister to discuss
Middle East peace. The EU has pledged Pounds 385m aid for the West Bank to
help smooth the deal.
Friday: Belgian unions are threatening a general strike, in protest against
the government's austerity plan.
                       *       *       *
WASHINGTON DIARY
Monday: Leon Brittan, EU Trade Commissioner, arrives for talks with Mickey
Kantor, US trade representative, on Gatt.
President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines visits the White House for talks
with President Clinton on economic and security issues.
The House of Representatives debates the Penny-Kasich to reduce federal
spending by Dollars 100bn over the next five years.
Tuesday: The House of Representatives adjourns until January. The US Senate
will also adjourn until January later this week, but no definite date has
been set.
Thursday: President Bill Clinton, the Nafta deal under his belt, will
retreat with first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton an daughter Chelsea to eat
turkey at Camp David over the Thanksgiving holiday.
US financial markets and most businesses will be closed.
                       *       *       *
TOKYO
Monday: Official figures for Household Spending and the index of leading
indicators for September due to be published by the Economic Planning Agency
will shed light on the depth of the downturn in the Japanese economy.
Tuesday: National holiday to celebrate Thanksgiving.
Wednesday: Mongolian prime minister Puntsagiin Jasrai, arrives for a
five-day visit. He holds talks with prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa on
Thursday to discuss a Japanese aid package.
Mongolian prime minister Jasrai is due to meet Emperor Akihito and Empress
Michiko at the imperial palace. .
Friday: Former UK prime minister Margaret Thatcher is to receive an honorary
doctorate at Gakushuin University.
Her visit coincides with the launch of the Japanese version of her book The
Downing Street Years.
                       *       *       *
LONDON
Monday: The Commons' third day of debate on the government's legislative
programme laid out in the Queen's Speech will deal with local government in
Scotland and Wales. Debates on the Queen's Speech continue until Thursday,
covering home affairs, education, trade and industry and deregulation and
the economy. Tuesday: Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, will answer
defence questions. Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, will give evidence to
the foreign affairs select committee on the European summit to be held in
December.
Wednesday: Trade and Industry questions.
Thursday: Home Office questions are likely to focus on the government's
ambitious plans to reform the criminal justice system.
Friday: Commons debate on progress towards national education and training
targets.
