FT  21 SEP 93 / Road tolls plan moves nearer
MR JOHN GUMMER, envir-onment secretary, yesterday gave the strongest hint
yet that the government favours a system of road pricing or 'congestion
charging' in London.
Mr Gummer said in Manchester that Norwegian experiments in controlling
traffic with electronic tagging and metering had achieved limited success.
'It may just be we have to have a more simple form as far as London is
concerned,' he said.
Mr Gummer was speaking at the Partnerships for Change conference, which is
seen as a follow-up to last year's Earth Summit in Rio.
His main message was overshadowed, however, when he became embroiled in
controversy after branding an environmental activist a fascist after being
heckled by a male demonstrator at the conference over the extension to the
M3 motorway through Twyford Down.
The incident came after members of Earth First] had blockaded a tram on
which he was riding and then interrupted a press conference.
Mr Gummer retorted by saying there were too many people in the environment
movement who were 'absolutists'.
Labour pounced on the outburst saying its timing - less than a week after
the extreme rightwing British National Party won a council seat in east
London - was 'extremely unfortunate'.
Mr Chris Smith, Labour's front bench spokesman on environmental protection,
said the use of such 'intemperate language' suggested that Mr Gummer was not
confident of his case.
Mr Gummer's message that increasing traffic problems had to be faced implied
that the debate in government was switching from whether road pricing was
desirable for London to discussions of what form this might take.
Officials confirmed this change in emphasis but said that ministers remained
concerned that controversial measures should not be introduced until it was
established that they would work.
Mr Gummer said opinion polls showed that people favoured measures to
encourage motorists to switch to public transport but objected when these
were applied to them personally.
The issue has aroused heated debate in the government and Whitehall. Mr
Gummer said that the departments of the environment and transport were
working together to reconcile conflicting objectives in areas such as
charging to beat congestion.
He added: 'You need a roads programme which does properly take into account
environmental needs.'
He said the motor vehicle had 'increasingly destroyed our cities and
increasingly destroyed the quality of life of many people.'
'But it has, on the other hand, provided a degree of freedom and opportunity
to many people who didn't have it before. Somehow or other we have to bring
these two things together.'
He defended widening the M25 and building bypasses through the countryside.
The M25 served strategic national needs, such as the transport of freight
which could not be moved by rail between north and south, he said.
Bypasses were needed 'to make life livable' in many villages and small
towns.
