FT  09 JUL 93 / EC and Ireland closer to solution on funding row
PROSPECTS for a solution to the row over the European Community's regional
aid funding rose yesterday, as Ireland appeared to be softening its demands
over its share.
According to senior European Commission officials, Dublin is signalling a
willingness to settle, raising hopes that next week the European Parliament
can endorse the aid package in time to start disbursing it next January.
But there has been considerable confusion about what share Ireland is
claiming over exactly what period.
The Ecu157bn (Pounds 120bn) aid package, to replace the 1989-93 structural
funds worth Ecu63bn, is spread over two periods: of six and seven years.
Ecu141.5bn in new structural funds - for backward and industrially stricken
regions and for training the unemployed - is for 1994-99. But the Ecu15.5bn
cohesion fund for the EC's four poorest member states - Ireland, Spain,
Portugal and Greece - was started up this year and runs to 1999, or over
seven years.
Mr Albert Reynolds, Irish prime minister, said at the Edinburgh summit last
December when the overall package was agreed that he had guarantees from the
Commission of IPounds 8bn for Ireland over seven years.
Senior Commission officials in Brussels say that Dublin this year submitted
a demand for nearly that figure, but over six years - the 1994-99 period -
and that this was rejected, leading to the Irish veto.
A senior Irish official in Brussels categorically denied this yesterday,
saying 'there was never any time when we were looking for a figure except
over seven years.'
If the seven-year formula is stuck to, Mr Reynolds' government can add in
the EC aid of IPounds 956m already committed to Ireland for this year,
although this allocation was set four years ago. That addition could get
Dublin reasonably close to its bottom line, but it is still not clear
whether it will be close enough.
One senior Commission official said that even with the addition, and on the
most generous interpretation of the weighting system for allocating the
funds earmarked for the poorest states, it was difficult to arrive at a
figure above IPounds 7.5bn.
Irish sources said Dublin was willing to see the relatively high percentage
share Ireland got out of the last programme diluted in the new package, but
probably not below IPounds 7.8bn.
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, is due to talk to Mr Reynolds
today.
The Lisbon government will seek Es3,500bn (Pounds 14.4bn) in structural
funds from the European Community for the period 1994 to 1999, Mr Anibal
Cavaco Silva, prime minister, has announced, writes Peter Wise in Lisbon.
