FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of World Car Industry (1): A fierce fight for
survival - The recession has exposed severe problems within the world car
industry. In the battle to restructure there will be casualties
THE tables are being turned with a vengeance in the world motor industry.
After several years of intense pain, the big three US carmakers have
returned from losses, earning Dollars 2.3bn of net profit in the second
quarter of this year alone.
Now, it is the Japanese and European vehicle makers who are on the rack. As
sales fall, the losses are mounting. Nissan is in loss in Japan, as is
Volkswagen in Europe.
The fortunes of the US carmakers are improving as part of the gradual
recovery in the US economy, but the US auto industry turnround is more than
merely a cyclical recovery.
There is a new air of confidence in Detroit as General Motors, Ford and
Chrysler sense that a watershed has been reached in their battle to
restructure and to contain the advances of the previously all-conquering
Japanese vehicle makers.
Under heavy pressure from the rising value of the yen, Japanese producers
are being forced to raise their prices in the US much faster than their
American rivals. After a number of years in retreat US carmakers are
stemming the tide - at least for the moment - and it is their Japanese
rivals who are now being forced to cede market share in North America.
Symbolic of the changing order, the Ford Taurus last year ousted the Honda
Accord from the position it had held for three years as the best-selling car
in the US. The share of Japanese makes in the US car and light truck market
fell in 1992 to 24.3 per cent from 25.7 per cent a year earlier. In the
first seven months this year the Japanese share dropped away further to 22.3
per cent.
The US vehicle makers have benefitted in particular from the growing
popularity of light trucks - pickups, mini-vans and sport/utility vehicles -
which increasingly are replacing saloon cars for passenger use. The big
three dominate the US light truck market, where sales have jumped by 18 per
cent in the first seven months this year, compared with a rise of only three
per cent in new car sales.
The return to health of the US industry - signalled most emphatically by the
transformation of Chrysler's fortunes, whose share price has jumped fivefold
in the last 18 months - is still far from complete, however.
The big three carmakers face a difficult round of labour negotiations this
autumn, and General Motors, the wounded giant of the world auto industry, is
barely out of intensive care. After three turbulent years, GM's North
American automotive operations were still in the red in the first half of
1993 incurring a loss of Dollars 289m, although Mr Jack Smith, GM chief
executive, insists that the business can meet its target of a Dollars 4.5bn
turnround by breaking even at an operating level in the full year.
Japanese carmakers, under pressure in North America, are facing, too, an
unprecedented third successive annual decline in new car demand in their
domestic fastness, where imports still account for only four per cent of the
market. New car registrations in Japan this year are forecast to be 18 per
cent lower than in the peak year of 1990.
Several Japanese carmakers have fallen into loss, most notably Nissan, the
country's second largest vehicle producer, and Mazda. Toyota, the world's
richest carmaker and leader of the Japanese industry, has suffered three
years of falling profits and a further decline is expected this year.
Honda's pre-tax profits in the three months from April to June fell by 55
per cent.
The Japanese industry is being forced to restructure at a time when it is
burdened by high fixed costs and high depreciation, following recent years
of heavy capital expenditure and the building of new assembly capacity in
Japan. It no longer enjoys the advantages it had in earlier years of an
undervalued yen and cheap money. Plant closures are being forced, and
Nissan's drastic move to shut its Zama car plant in 1995 is unlikely to be
the last.
In contrast with the dramatic proliferation of new products at the end of
the 1980s, Japanese carmakers are now having to cut the number of model
variants and types of options offered, which in recent years have
'proliferated excessively' according to Mr Yoshifumi Tsuji, president of
Nissan.
They are seeking to use more common parts among different car models, and
some are also planning to extend product life cycles - previously regarded
as one of the Japanese industry's key advantages over European and US car
makers.
Japanese vehicle makers are also being forced to make up for weaknesses in
their product armouries by marketing cars or niche vehicles from rival
makers under their own badges rather than trying to develop competing
products themselves.
Loss-making Isuzu has pulled out of carmaking altogether in order to
concentrate on four-wheel-drive leisure utility vehicles and trucks. Instead
it will market a range of Honda cars under its badge in Japan, while Honda
is planning to sell Isuzu leisure/utility vehicles under the Honda badge
both in the US and in Japan. Honda also plans to sell in Japan the Rover
group's UK-built Land Rover Discovery four-wheel-drive vehicle under the
Honda name. Nissan and Mazda are exchanging light commercial vehicles in
Japan.
The spate of deals to share both vehicles and components appears to presage
a more far-reaching restructuring of the Japanese motor industry, as some of
the smaller makers are absorbed into the bigger groups, as has happened
already in Europe.
According to Mr Tsuji the Japanese motor industry 'may now be at a
structural crossroads'. The rapid appreciation of the yen would appear to
favour a further transfer of production abroad, but Mr Tsuji has voiced the
fear that such a move could entail a 'hollowing out' of industrial
operations in Japan. He has warned that 'the global motor industry is facing
a business climate of unprecedented severity.'
The Japanese vehicle makers continue, too, to face acute trade pressures as
the US pushes to reduce its huge deficit in automotive trade with Japan, and
the European Community seeks to restrain the volume of vehicles imported
from Japan in the face of plunging new car demand in Europe.
Faced by the accelerating contraction of the west European market the
established European producers have clamoured for intervention by Brussels
to renegotiate Japanese import levels.
'The agreements between the European Community and Japan are not enough,'
said Mr John Hardiman, until last month chief executive of Ford of Germany.
'We are deeply dissatisfied. . . We are demanding that Brussels sets
Japanese export quotas exactly in line with the actual development of the
market. . . You do not have to be a prophet to foresee that the goal of
orderly adjustment and a far-reaching restructuring of the European auto
industry cannot be reached by 1999.'
The real challenge is not so much the Japanese imports, however, as local
Japanese production in Europe, where Nissan, Toyota and Honda are already
showing that they can reach Japanese levels of quality and efficiency with
European (British) workforces, albeit in new plants and with new labour
agreements.
In west Europe the plunge in new car demand has been precipitous. Carmakers
are facing an even steeper decline in sales than occurred in the wake of the
first oil crisis in the early 1970s. Sales across 17 markets in west Europe
have fallen by an estimated 17.7 per cent in the first seven months of the
year with 1.5m fewer new cars sold than in the same period a year ago.
The most damaging falls have occurred in some of the biggest European
markets with sales in the first seven months dropping year-on-year by 21 per
cent in Germany, 24 per cent in Italy, 17 per cent in France and 28 per cent
in Spain. Only the UK, of the larger markets, has achieved any growth, with
sales rising by 9 per cent, albeit from a very depressed level after three
years of recession.
Large parts of the European industry have been forced on to short-time
working. The European auto industry's workforce is being drastically pruned,
components suppliers are being squeezed harshly to cut prices, and as
overcapacity grows, companies are being forced to rationalise and
restructure.
In an uncanny reflection of the earlier fate of General Motors in the US,
the Volkswagen group, the dominant leader of the European market, has
crashed heavily into the red with a DM1.6bn loss in the first six months of
1993. Ford of Europe will run up a third consecutive annual loss this year,
Fiat's car and light commercial vehicle operations suffered an operating
loss of L544bn (Dollars 339m) last year and their financial performance has
deteriorated further this year, while Renault's pre-tax profits plunged by
almost 90 per cent in the first six months this year.
The fight for survival in the global car industry has never been so fierce,
and the tensions have broken the surface in unprecedented fashion in the
ugly, bare-knuckle conflict between GM and VW over the US carmaker's
allegations of industrial espionage and the theft of thousands of highly
confidential documents during the departure of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, its former global purchasing director, to become Volkswagen's
head of production and purchasing.
What started as a bizarre tug-of-war over the services of Mr Lopez has
developed into a full-scale public battle between two of the world's biggest
industrial corporations, which still threatens unpredictable consequences
both for Volkswagen and for Mr Lopez and Mr Ferdinand Piech, the aggressive
and autocratic former head of Audi, who took over as chief executive of the
beleaguered VW group at the beginning of the year.
The Lopez saga, which has mesmerised the world auto industry, reached a
fresh climax two weeks ago with the raid by police and German public
prosecutors on the Volkswagen headquarters in Wolfsburg. VW has already
admitted that GM documents have been shredded at one of its Wolfsburg
premises. The espionage allegations are also being investigated by the US
justice department.
The bitterness of the conflict between GM and VW has prompted interventions
by German Chancellor Mr Helmut Kohl and German Economics Minister Mr Gunter
Rexrodt, in an effort to contain the damage - but to little avail.
Mr Piech added fresh intensity to the conflict by accusing Opel, GM's German
subsidiary of mud-slinging and conducting an international war against VW
and Germany. He suggested that GM/Opel may have hacked into VW's computers
to plant secrets there. In return GM Europe has described the Piech attacks
as 'grotesque' and said the VW chief executive's war-like words suggested a
'psychosis-like bunker mentality.'
Mr Piech has claimed publicly that he is engaged in nothing less than a
mission to save the European auto industry and that Mr Lopez shares the same
messianic vision. His burning determination to bring the Spanish engineer
from GM to VW was not to be resisted.
The Lopez investigations are diverting top management attention from the
central issue of rescuing VW from its uncomfortable postion as the highest
cost volume carmaker in Europe.
Mr Piech has placed the blame for VW's precipitous collapse into loss firmly
on the group's previous management, with the onset of recession blamed only
in passing.
'The VW group's current difficulties can only be blamed in small part on the
weakness of new car sales - and the same is true for other German
manufacturers,' he says. 'The real cause is much more the structural
problems of the entire sector, which are now being openly exposed by the
recession.
'We have to accept that in the eight years of booming sales we did not do
our homework. Because as soon as sales fall we are in the red. Our task for
the coming years is to come to grips with this structural transformation.
'In eight years of boom we concentrated exclusively on expansion and we did
not prepare for bad times. We should break even with our plants working at
70 per cent or less of capacity. We came into this crisis with a break-even
level of around 100 per cent of capacity. From 1989 our sales volumes grew
every year and our profits shrank every year.'
Competitive pressures are being felt throughout the European auto industry
as it moves uncomfortably through the seven-year transitional period to a
west European car market, where all protection against Japanese imports is
supposed to have been removed by the end of the decade. The heat is most
intense in Germany, however, where vehicle makers were cushioned initially
by the surge in sales that followed reunification. This delayed the start of
restructuring.
The German automotive industry must shed a further 100,000 jobs and cut
costs by between 20 and 30 per cent in the next two years Mr Achim Diekmann,
chief executive of the German Automobile Federation, warned recently. German
vehicle and component makers had already cut 95,000 jobs in the two years to
the end of June, he said.
High costs in Germany have played an important role in decisions by both BMW
and Mercedes-Benz to develop new plants for passenger vehicles in the US,
and German components manufacturers are also increasingly moving capacity
abroad.
In a stunning departure from corporate tradition Mercedes-Benz, the world's
most prestigious luxury car maker, has embarked on 'a very extensive
realignment of its strategic product policy'. Mr Helmut Werner, who took
over as chief executive in May, admitted earlier this year that
Mercedes-Benz's present luxury and executive cars were 'over-engineered',
and said that the company would end up being 'priced-out' of world markets
if it persisted with such a policy for developing new models.
As the battle in Europe to restructure and to become globally competitive
intensifies, the industry faces the growing problem of overcapacity which is
'a major strategic concern' for all carmakers in Europe according to Mr
Jacques Nasser, chairman of Ford of Europe. Ford does not expect new car
sales in west Europe to return to the trend level of 1990/91 until the late
1990s. 'The potential for excess capacity in the mid to late 1990s wil be
around 7m units,' Mr Nasser warned recently.
This amount of overcapacity would pose 'severe structural problems' for the
European auto industry, which would be compounded by a rising market share
gained by Japanese carmakers. This 'may result in continued losses or
severely depressed profitability for many manufacturers.'
As the Japanese build up their local production capacity Europe has become
the main battleground in the world auto industry.
