FT  08 JUL 93 / Technology: Barriers to a brave new world - Multimedia's
biggest test will be at the hands of the humble consumer
If computer and telecommunications executives have their way, the world will
be a very different place 30 years from now. Government postal services and
overnight couriers will have been forced out of business, as people rely on
electronic mail to send letters and documents.
A traveller sitting on an aeroplane will be able to sign a letter using a
pen-device and send it over a wireless phone. Newspapers will no longer be
delivered to the doorstep; rather, a selection of articles, complete with
illustrations, will be pulled up on a computer screen.
This vision of a futuristic world may not be far removed from reality. What
will make some of these scenarios possible is the convergence of the
telecommunications and computer sectors, forming the 'multimedia' industry.
The innovations of this new mega-industry may have an impact on our lives as
profound as those wrought by the computer and the telephone.
'As a society, we have not begun to understand the changes this new
technology is going to cause,' says Lee Hoevel, vice-president in charge of
technology and development for NCR Corporation, an American Telephone &amp;
Telegraph (AT&amp;T) subsidiary. 'Just as the computer and the telephone touched
everything, so will this.'
The convergence of telecommunications and computers has already produced
many innovations which are widely used in the business community. Among them
are electronic mail, video-conferencing and data access services. But this
is only the beginning of the revolution.
AT&amp;T has just announced a new telephone which will allow the user to send
full-colour, television-quality pictures down a telephone line, while
simultaneously talking on the same line. Silicon Graphics and Time Warner
Cable will work together on the world's first interactive digital cable TV
network, allowing viewers to select videos and do their shopping on screen.
Intel and Microsoft have established new interface standards to facilitate
modem communication and bring it on to the mass market.
In the longer run, the changes will be even more profound. Within 30 years,
the average household may be equipped with a single device the size of a
television remote control which will handle all computer, fax, voice mail,
electronic mail, data connections and home entertainment needs.
What is making this revolution possible is the convergence of a number of
new technologies. Fibre-optic cables can handle 100 times the amount of
information as the old-fashioned coaxial telephone lines. And digital
compression technology allows information to be squeezed into tiny signals,
easy for the telephone wires to handle.
Add to this the miniaturisation of consumer products, the move to wireless
communication, improving software and increasingly sophisticated
microprocessors and the possibilities seem endless. 'The technology is
moving so fast that microprocessors, for instance, are doubling capacity
every 12 to 18 months,' says David Herrah, a spokesman for IBM. 'We're
definitely on the steep side of the learning curve. In a few years, the
computer chip on your television remote control may be more powerful than
the chip in most personal computers today.'
Sophisticated technologies such as video-conferencing and wireless
communication, although becoming familiar to business executives, are a
mystery to most people. To make the leap on to the mass market, these
technologies will have to become more affordable.
'Right now, these products are far too expensive for the average consumer,'
says Wayne Dyer, vice-president of products management for EO Incorporated,
a California-based multimedia group. 'But this is the natural path for new
technologies to follow. First, they make their way on to executives' desks;
then, as the technology becomes cheaper, they move on to the mass consumer
market.'
The industry may be facing bigger challenges than just affordability. Some
executives fear the multimedia technology is outpacing the products'
user-friendliness.
'The technology side has definitely been running ahead of the usability
side,' says Mark Porat, president of General Magic, a newly-formed
multimedia group. 'Unless this is addressed, the problem will come back to
bite companies in the industry.'
The 'user-friendly' issue is quickly gaining prominence. Microsoft and
Intel's decision to standardise modem communications addresses the
difficulty many people have in sending electronic mail. And new start-ups
such as General Magic and EO are focusing heavily on the problem.
'To be widely accepted, we have to start looking at the human interface,'
says NCR's Hoevel. 'It's far more complicated to run an interactive computer
meeting than it is to run a meeting with a room full of employees. Someone
has to decide who has control of the mouse, for instance. Unless these
things are resolved, it will limit growth for the industry.'
Another hurdle multimedia groups will have to overcome is the myriad of
telecommunications regulations in many parts of the world. Some warn,
however, that too much deregulation will not be good for the industry,
either. 'If they had made the right decisions on standardising modem
communications from the beginning, the market would have moved a lot
faster,' contends Porat.
Another uncertainty is the way in which companies will organise themselves
within the industry. 'One thing that's clear is that no single company has
the wherewithal to develop all the necessary technologies itself,' says
Gordon Bridge, president of EasyLink, an AT&amp;T business unit concerned with
inter-computer communications.
As a result, multimedia is probably in for a long period of re-organisation.
Recent corporate activity has involved acquisitions (such as AT&amp;T's purchase
of the computer group NCR), joint ventures and partnerships (such as General
Magic, an alliance between Apple Computer, AT&amp;T, Matsushita Electric,
Motorola, Philips and Sony), and start-ups (such as EO).
Still, figuring out how the corporate chips will fall may slow down the
technological drive of the fledgling industry. 'If there's one thing
inhibiting the advance of multimedia, it's the problem of deciding how
different industries will interact, and who will get which slice of the
pie,' believes Hoevel.
Although the revolution may not proceed at the pace many in the new
multimedia industry would like, in the long-run its success seems inevitable
and its impact profound. 'This thing is so big, no one can miss it,' says
Dyer.
