FT  07 MAY 93 / Parliament and Politics: US edging closer to Britain over
Ulster: Sir Patrick Mayhew's Washington visit has highlighted a policy shift
WHEN Northern Ireland secretaries made their annual visit to Washington in
the 1980s, they often faced scepticism and even downright hostility from
some members of Congress. Sir Patrick Mayhew this week received a much
warmer reception.
Congressman Frank McCloskey, an Indiana Democrat, described Wednesday's
meetings with Sir Patrick as 'very cordial'.
Mr McCloskey, chairman of the Friends of Ireland in Congress, said: 'I was
positively impressed.'
The spectrum of opinion within the US on Northern Ireland has narrowed
considerably. In the past the administration and the foreign affairs
establishment in Congress tended to back the UK, while some members of
Congress, mostly from New York and Massachusetts, were willing to overlook
some of the means adopted by the IRA out of sympathy for the ends of the
Irish nationalists.
President Bill Clinton's nominally more interventionist Northern Ireland
policy has been finessed since he took office into something much more
palatable to the UK government. At the same time many members of Congress
representing Irish-American constituencies are showing much less sympathy
for the IRA than in the past, and are far less critical of UK policies.
Both British and congressional officials credit the work of Mr Peter Brooke,
the former Northern Ireland secretary, in starting peace talks. They also
credit the 1989 Fair Employment Act, which went some way towards meeting US
criticisms of job discrimination against Catholics in Northern Ireland -
although some members such as Congressman Joseph Kennedy still have
reservations.
In addition, according to some congressional aides, the bomb that killed two
children in Warrington earlier this year has further diminished the sympathy
for the IRA.
The practical result is that little concrete action is likely to be taken in
the US this year on Northern Ireland.
President Clinton has toned his promise to send a peace envoy down to a
fact-finding mission, but the White House seems in no hurry to name its
leader.
At the same time the State Department has maintained its policy of refusing
a visa to Mr Gerry Adams - president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the
IRA - as someone who has engaged in terrorism, even though Mr Clinton last
year said he favoured letting Mr Adams enter the US.
Neither issue was raised at Sir Patrick's meeting on Wednesday with
congressional leaders.
While legislation has been reintroduced offering sanctions against breaches
of the fair-employment principles of Mr Sean MacBride, the late Irish
statesman, congressional experts say it is unlikely to move forward.
Contributions to the multilateral International Fund for Ireland, however,
are likely to pass more smoothly. The Bush administration was unenthusiastic
about the fund, and the Senate was also eager to cut funding; pressure from
the House of Representatives, however, kept the money in the budget. This
year, a Dollars 20m contribution is included in the Clinton budget request.
