FT  25 AUG 93 / Bus reform fears rejected
THE GOVERNMENT plans to press ahead with the deregulation of London's bus
services in spite of gloomy backbench forecasts of a backlash from voters.
The decision means ministers could find themselves fighting backbench
opponents on both bus deregulation and the details of rail privatisation
when parliament reconvenes in October.
Mr Steven Norris, the London transport minister, said the government was
committed to deregulation, which was promised in the Conservative manifesto
for the 1992 election.
Mr Norris said the government would avoid the transitional problems which
led to complaints when services outside the capital were deregulated in the
mid-1980s.
He also gave an unequivocal assurance that the Travelcard system, which
allows passengers to switch between different modes of transport, would be
retained.
Mr Norris's comments were aimed at calming Conservative critics inside and
outside parliament who fear that deregulation will lead to higher fares and
cuts in services.
Backbench critics showed no signs of backing down, however. Sir Rhodes
Boyson, Conservative MP for Brent North, said deregulation was 'a form of
suicide pill' for Conservative prospects in London council elections next
May.
Worryingly for ministers, Sir Rhodes linked deregulation to other issues
causing backbench unease, including railway privatisation and health and
education reforms.
He said: 'I think the government is doing too much. It is running around all
over the place and falling off cliff edges.'
Ministers believe the government would have little difficulty in forcing bus
deregulation through the Commons as part of an omnibus deregulation bill
being prepared by the trade and industry department.
But even a small rebellion on deregulation would increase the aura of
disunity on the Conservative benches.
Government sensitivity on the issue was underlined by a plea for unity by
Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman, in the latest issue of Newsline, the
Conservative newspaper.
