FT  09 JUL 93 / International Company News: Laidlaw takes Dollars 120.5m
charge in third quarter
THE deteriorating economics of US landfill operations have led Laidlaw, the
Ontario-based waste services and transport operator, to take a special
USDollars 120.5m charge against third-quarter earnings.
The write-down pushed Laidlaw to a Dollars 33.6m loss, equal to 12 cents a
share, in the three months to May 31, compared with earnings of Dollars
38.8m, or 14 cents, after extraordinary items a year earlier.
Revenues climbed to Dollars 543.8m from Dollars 517.4m.
Equity earnings from Laidlaw's 28 per cent interest in ADT, the
international security and vehicle auctions group, and from its 35 per cent
stake in Attwoods, the UK-based waste management company, edged up to
Dollars 8.8m.
A Laidlaw official said yesterday that the write-down followed a year-long
review of US markets.
The company has decided not to develop five sites bought earlier for
landfill operations, nor to expand three other existing landfills.
Rubbish volumes in North America have declined markedly in recent years,
partly as a result of the recession, but also reflecting moves towards
recycling and re-using waste.
At the same time, margins have been squeezed by intensifying competition.
Laidlaw's solid-waste margins narrowed to 8.4 per cent in the third quarter
from 10.3 per cent a year earlier.
Hazardous-waste margins slid to 9.8 per cent from 15.3 per cent.
Laidlaw's expansion in waste-services has recently focused on Europe,
especially Italy. It is also investigating opportunities in Mexico.
The company recently diversified its passenger-transport business by
acquiring San Diego-based Medtrans, one of North America's biggest ambulance
and medical transport operators.
The medical transport business is expected to offer acquisition
opportunities similar to those which spurred the growth of its school-bus
operations in the 1980s.
Total industry revenues are estimated at Dollars 4bn a year, but the
business is fragmented among about 4,800 operators.
Laidlaw is 47 per cent owned by Canadian Pacific. Its share price fell by 63
cents to CDollars 9.25 on the Toronto stock exchange yesterday.
