FT  27 FEB 93 / Books: Women on women
THE MERMAIDS IN THE BASEMENT by Marina Warner Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds 9.99,
228 pages
A LAZY EYE by Mary Morrissey Jonathan Cape Pounds 8.99, 229 pages
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS edited by Shena Mackay Virago Pounds 14.99, 330 pages
FROM the Queen of Sheba to My Naughty Little Sisters, a woman's social
presence has always been different from a man's. Art through the ages has
confirmed it - all those classical nudes begging to be looked at, flattering
their male owners; literature has mostly maintained stereotypes. Here are
three outstanding volumes of stories which, through the oblique but
penetrating truths of fiction, say much about the gap between women as
perceived and perceivers, as helpless icons and as creators of their own
imaginative worlds.
We know Marina Warner as a distinguished cultural historian of female
archetypes in biblical and folk tales; in The Mermaids in the Basement she
turns her talents inside out and, in a series of dazzling monologues,
imagines updated versions of the familiar figures speaking for themselves.
It is not quite the Virgin Mary as Molly Bloom, but here is modern Kate as
the Pharoah's daughter finding a baby in a basket, Susannah (she of the
'Elders') spied upon by her husband's property developer colleagues in a
poolside villa, Martha buying tortellini and frozen blueberries and washing
up for Mary as she realises, after years of housewifely devotion, that she
hates her sister.
Warner's skill is to free her characters from the archetypal expectations
that have hung on them for centuries and yet to use the very resonance from
these myths to surprise and enchant anew. In 'The First Time' she alternates
a comic pop rhythm from the Serpent, who has 'diversified' into selling
tropical fruit at a supermarket, with the little-girl-lost floodgates of a
lovelorn teenager who goes home with guavas, tamarillos and 13p change. The
best story, 'Be My Baby', is an elaboration on nun-ish wisdom - 'Sister
Richard used to say the nun's was the highest calling, but that motherhood
wasn't far behind' - through the superb, salt-of-the-earth Cockney
vernacular of a nurse turned child-snatcher.
Sensuous yet rigidly controlled, dallying with everyday banalities but
stopping just short of cliche, darting erudite reference into imaginative
empathy, Warner writes with the delicious delicacy of a tightrope walker. In
her last novel, Indigo, the attempt to pull myth into fiction read like a
top-heavy academic joke, but in the short story, it seems to me, Warner has
found her milieu. The form enables her to spin out from one rich image or
archetype into an original view of the world, and to convey it in a
lyrical/tough style which does not sink under the weight of its own
analysis. The result is exhilarating.
In fictional technique, the Irish writer Mary Morrissey could not be more
different from Warner. The heroines of A Lazy Eye are anonymous,
back-of-the-woods women whom we see for just fleeting moments of sheer,
humiliating physicality - the start of menstruation, which gets a young
traveller thrown off a European sleeper train; a woman revealing an
embarrassing discharge to a hardnosed doctor. Storylines are slim, abrupt,
almost proudly inconsequential; a throw-away, breathless prose rushes
headlong, then smashes into deliberate flatness. Yet each of Morrissey's
women manages, within events of a few minutes or hours, to encompass two
worlds: one of guilty oppression (the interior of the train or surgery,
controlled by the conductor or doctor), the other a wild, macabre landscape
of the mind to which this claustrophobia gives rise.
There is the daughter, bargaining in hospital with God to save her father
and let a youth in the next ward die instead, who is so intoxicated by her
inner reality that she feels as guilty as a murderer. There is the
shoplifter who remains loftily above her accusers when she is distracted and
caught by a half-caste child who reminds her of the black babies the nuns
once taught her to pray for. With artistry and warmth, Morrissey gives her
characters a language as distinct as Warner's; people whom we might glimpse
and pigeon-hole daily become atypical, particularised as quirky individuals
standing up for themselves in a vengeful world.
The fascination of Virago's new anthology of women's writing on sisterhood,
Such Devoted Sisters, lies in the parallels between pieces written in five
continents over almost two centuries. Some of the finest, and most familiar,
extracts here are thus illumined: Janet Frame's 'Keel and Kool', for
example, a restrained yet vivid picture of a Christmas picnic in New Zealand
where a child works out her response to the death of a sister, has emotional
echoes of the sentimental, closed-in scene of Beth's death from Louisa
Alcott's Good Wives.
Shena Mackay has had a plentiful sea to trawl from, and her choice includes
some stories which are perfect examples of the form, often from writers
better known as novelists. Edna O'Brien's 'The Connor Girls', where a
child's view of two adult sisters and their romances changes painfully as
she grows up, has the intensity and yearning nostalgia of The Go-Between
condensed into 20 pages. Mary Flanagan's tale of sisterly bullying unravels
like a horror movie. If there is an integrating theme, it is the
innocence-to-experience story, with the particularly female twist of
breaking away from family and social assumptions into self-knowledge and
liberated identity. It is a welcome showcase for both women's writing and
the short story.
