FT  18 SEP 93 / Woman in the News: Heroine to her country's bumpkins - Anne
Enger Lahnstein
Anne Enger Lahnstein, leader of Norway's Centre party, was in defensive mood
yesterday in her office in the Storting (parliament), still festooned with
flowers after her triumphant performance in Monday's general election.
Explaining the propensity of language-differences to pervert meanings, she
insisted on answering questions in Norwegian, despite her own good command
of English. After all, she said, leaders such as John Major, Francois
Mitterrand and Helmut Kohl would speak in their own tongues in similar
circumstances.
Her determination to control interviews stems from the suspicion that the
outside world - not to mention many urban Norwegians - regards her
resolutely anti-European Community party, now the leading opposition in
parliament, as not much more than nationalist country bumpkins grown fat on
Norway's endless stream of subsidies to its farms and regions.
It is a tag she angrily rejects. Opposition to Norway's application to join
the EC, she says, runs much wider and deeper than fears of a loss of income
by the country's rural communities, the original power base of her party.
Animatedly, she relates Norway's history of 400 years under Danish rule, a
century under the Swedish yoke that ended only in 1905 and, finally, the
bitter years of Nazi occupation during the second world war. The EC
question, she explains, is above all one of independence and
self-determination. Breaking back into English, Ms Lahnstein declares: 'We
want to take care of our own democracy, not because we feel we are better
than anyone else, but because we believe that is the best way for society.'
The clarity of this message, repeated relentlessly during the campaign and
always accompanied by her impish smile, struck a deep chord with many
Norwegians whose hostility to EC membership propelled the Centre party to
its best election result, tripling its representation in the 165-seat
Storting to 32 and overtaking a demoralised pro-EC Conservative party as the
biggest opposition party.
Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland's ruling Labour party managed to
survive the storm. But it remains a minority government and now faces
guerrilla political warfare with the buoyant Ms Lahnstein and her party as
Labour attempts to reverse anti-EC sentiment and win an eventual referendum
on membership.
Ms Lahnstein, a nurse by training, is credited by Mr Johan J Jakobsen, her
immediate predecessor as leader, for having lifted the Centre party to such
heights since she took over two years ago as the head of what was then only
the sixth-largest group in the Storting.
In a country where women now dominate the top political positions, Ms
Lahnstein, 43, has none of the authoritative stature of Mrs Brundtland or
the intellectual aura of Mrs Kaci Kullmann-Five, the Conservative leader.
But she outshone both on the campaign trail with her forthright views and
the youthful passion with which she conveyed them. The Centre party suddenly
found itself winning voters on a scale it had scarcely imagined before. It
now has MPs in each of the country's multi-member constituencies and it is
clear that support is drawn from a wider pool than the 4 per cent of the
population still earning their living on the land.
Today, the Centre party has become a lightning rod for the anti-EC camp. It
has skilfully exploited the perception that EC membership would undermine
Norway's independence by threatening 'the Norwegian way' of elaborate rural
subsidies, which support the population in the country's far-flung and
frigid regions. 'I think we are talking about a very important question for
people - how to take care of this country,' says Ms Lahnstein. 'It is a
rough and tough life in many districts with long distances and a harsh
climate. This toughness is part of the Norwegian people's self-image.'
Many Norwegians who no longer live in rural communities nevertheless
continue to respond warmly to this thinking - which conveniently allows the
Centre party to continue to defend its traditional core agricultural
constituency and steal support from Labour among fishermen. Ms Lahnstein
admits that food production in Norway is 'not cheap'. IMF figures show
subsidies make up 77 per cent of the value of agricultural output in Norway,
compared with an EC average of 49 per cent. But she estimates 70,000
Norwegian farmers would go out of production if the country joined the
Community.
Instead, the Centre party is prepared to go on paying a high price to
sustain Norway's uncompetitive farming - a price that to date has been
financed from North Sea oil revenues. Ms Lahnstein is unimpressed by
arguments that access to EC markets would benefit Norway's underdeveloped
food processing sector, adding to exports. 'Exports are not so important for
us,' she says. 'Most important is to feed our own population and not have to
import more food. The 50 per cent we import now is enough.' Party policy,
indeed, calls for Norway to scrap its participation in the European Economic
Area trade pact with the EC due to take effect soon.
Reversing Norway's commitment to the EEA is not realistic, however, as it is
already ratified by parliament. Rather, Ms Lahnstein's challenge now is to
maintain the momentum of the election in her crusade against full Community
membership. She has plenty of ringing phrases left over from the campaign to
carry her forward. 'So many people dream of the new Europe. But ask the
people what will be the result of this. It will be too much power in too few
hands and too much power for money. I think it is good for the common people
to work where they live and to stay with their families,' she declares.
Then she prepares to head to her hytte, or country cottage, near her own
family's home east of Oslo for the weekend. 'I'm going back to my roots,'
she says.
