FT  15 MAY 93 / Victim of a class action: Social divisions are alive and
damaging the Tory party
If there is an attitude calculated to rouse the fury of Mr John Major it is
the condescension born of class-consciousness. So when Sir Norman Fowler
this week launched a public attack on the sniping from the 'patrician
tendency' at Mr Major's premiership, the Conservative party chairman was
speaking with his master's voice.
According to Sir Norman, in his speech to the Scottish Tory conference, Mr
Major had fallen victim to the prejudices of the self-appointed guardians in
the press of Britain's traditional class structure.
Put bluntly, the critics symbolised 'everything that brought this country
low during in the years before 1979 - the class division, prejudice and a
wholly blinkered and outdated view of the world'.
The immediate occasion of Sir Norman's attack was an article in The Times by
Lord Rees-Mogg which concluded in less-than-subtle terms that the
beleaguered Mr Major had been promoted above his station.
In tones reminiscent of an era when The Times was ironed by a butler before
being presented to the master of the house, Lord Rees-Mogg said that Mr
Major's natural place in politics was in the post of deputy chief whip
rather than in 10 Downing Street.
Mr Major was enraged. For him the article was the latest in a series of
personalised attacks which went beyond legitimate criticism of a long list
of government mistakes. He was being vilified not simply for getting it
wrong but because he had not been born into the ruling class.
Alongside Lord Rees-Mogg the targets of his anger are a group of journalists
at The Sunday Telegraph and The Spectator, both owned by the Canadian
enterpreneur and ardent admirer of Lady Thatcher, Mr Conrad Black.
At the top of Downing Street's roll of shame are Mr Charles Moore, the
editor of the Sunday Telegraph, Mr Simon Heffer, the deputy editor of the
Spectator, Mr Frank Johnson, a Sunday Telegraph columnist, and Mr Noel
Malcolm, a Spectator leader writer.
If there is a common thread to be drawn between them - aside from their
allegiance to Mr Black - it is an image of England and the United Kingdom
shaped by past greatness rather than present-day mediocrity.
They tend to be high Anglicans, although some may join the Church of Rome to
protest the ordination by Canterbury of women priests. Dr George Carey, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, is bracketed alongside Mr Major as a man who has
risen too far.
More important, their attachment to history and tradition has made them
passionate opponents of the Maastricht treaty. England, the mother of
parliaments, possesses still a political system and culture far superior to
those across the channel.
Mr Moore, who confesses publicly to membership of the 'highly-educated upper
middle classes', expanded his views in an article in The Spectator this week
under the headline: 'People find it embarrassing that this man is prime
minister.'
The style of Mr Major, judged 'the most demotic prime minister in our
history', was contrasted with that of the 'tall and distinguished-looking'
Mr Douglas Hurd. What a relief it was to have a foreign secretary (like Mr
Moore, an old Etonian) 'who is calm and dignified and can string a sentence
together'. Mr Moore and his colleagues are encouraged in such venom by the
certain knowledge that their barbs strike home. For that Mr Major has
himself to blame.
He has been over-sensitive about the press from the moment he entered
Downing Street - perhaps because during his meteoric rise during the 1980s
he managed to escape the opprobrium so frequently heaped on other members of
the government. Before he reached No 10 he was never in a job long enough to
pay for his mistakes.
Now his friends fret about his preoccupation with the newspapers, his
tendency - as he did after the publication of the Rees-Mogg article - to
pick up the telephone and complain directly to newspaper editors.
Nor can Mr Major pretend that he has not sought to make capital out of his
non-establishment antecedents. In 1990 the prime minister judged his humble
beginnings one of his principal political strengths. What better way for an
unpopular Tory party to reassert its relevance to the working classes than
to elect the boy from Brixton as its new leader.
Mr Major was quick to exploit the image. A subsequent pledge during the Tory
leadership election to create a 'classless' society was designed to
differentiate his candidacy from that of the aristocratic Mr Hurd. It
worked. Mr Hurd swapped his Savile Row suits for pullovers. But Mr Major had
won the point.
The prime minister's critics deny they are motivated by class prejudice.
They can point to the fact that the Tory party has not been led by a
patrician since Sir Alec Douglas-Home was replaced by Mr Edward Heath, a
grammar school boy, in 1964. And Mrs Thatcher, the daughter of a shop-owner,
won the adoration of those now attacking her successor.
Mr Moore says that it is Mr Major's lack of determination that drives his
attacks: 'Someone who has little formal education and no social connections
and has done well in politics would normally be a very clear and determined
character,' he told the FT. But 'he seems to be a very conformist,
conventional person who takes the establishment view on everything'.
Lord Rees-Mogg insists he is similarly uninterested in the fact that Mr
Major feels comfortable in motorway cafes and has not been known to hunt at
weekends: 'It's because of the chap that he is. If you think of John Major
in a non-political context he would not be a boss in any business.'
Maybe. There are plenty in the Tory party who lament the 'lack of grip' in
10 Downing Street. There are others who have always sniped at Mr Major's
less than polished social style.
But scanning the acres of newsprint devoted to personal attacks on the prime
minister it is hard to escape the feeling that for some he has become a
symbol of an admission they dare not make - that England, the United Kingdom
have swapped a glorious past for a second-rate future. The writers of this
article, though, must declare an interest. They both went to grammar
schools.
