FT  01 JUN 93 / Fire attack fails to surprise Solingen
THERE was anger, violence, despair and discouragement at Solingen this
weekend. But no-one voiced surprise.
'How can I be surprised?' asked Christian, a young German student, standing
in front of the house where, until the lethal fire on Saturday, a family of
20 Turks had lived for over two decades. Neo-Nazi youths have often been
seen in the town, minor arson attacks have occurred, and everybody has heard
of violence against foreigners elsewhere in Germany.
'Every day in Germany, racist attacks are carried out and not reported in
the media. At Solingen, the result was five deaths. But it could have been
anywhere, anytime,' Christian says.
Grouped in small circles in front of the burned-out house, hundreds of
demonstrators, mostly Turkish, have spent the weekend arguing and venting
their anger.
The same questions have come up again and again: Why had the police not
acted against the neo-Nazis, whom the neighbours had often seen in the local
park assembling around a fascist flag? Why was the government doing nothing
to integrate foreigners in Germany?
'They are kids, these neo-fascists, they don't think. They don't know what
they are doing,' one woman argued in front of the closed window shutters of
the house next door.
'Not at all - they follow an ideology, they are systematic,' retorted Hasan,
a Turk who has lived in near-by Essen for 12 years. 'They want to push us
toward violence until the whole society hates us,' he added.
Christian believes the racism will continue to grow as long as the 6.2m
foreigners living in the country cannot become German and vote. But the more
pragmatic Hasan said that his name will never sound German enough to erase
the differences.
'In a racist Germany, why would I become German anyway,' he said, as
whistles covered the sound of his voice. Escorted by a flurry of policemen,
Mr Norbert Blum, federal labour minister, walked through the crowd to the
patch of flowers and candles laid in front of the house. After a few
inaudible words, he quickly turned around.
'Where is Chancellor Kohl? Why has he not come?' a demonstrator asked.
