FT  23 OCT 93 / The triumph and tragedy of the Thatcher years: Geoffrey
Howe, Thatcher's former chancellor, reviews her memoirs and tells why they
are scarred by an obsessive desire
but without treachery. Margaret Thatcher's 11 years as prime minister will
stand out as a period of remarkable achievement, marred by decisive and
fatal errors of judgment in her third, final term in office.
It is a sad reflection of the scale of those errors, and her absolute
incapacity to recognise them, that her memoirs are scarred by an almost
obsessive desire to justify her last three years in power, to the exclusion
of so much else.
Virtually all public comment on The Downing Street Years has focused on the
years 1987-90, and so perhaps inevitably will this review. That is a pity.
The first two-thirds of Margaret Thatcher's book are a relatively balanced
and well-researched account of her government. They lack the arresting
immediacy of Hugo Young's biography or the intellectual brilliance of Nigel
Lawson's record of the same years. But they capture something of her heroic
battle against the accumulated causes of British decline.
It is all too easy for the conflicts and failures of later years to eclipse
the scale of earlier triumphs. Most difficult and most lasting was the
dismantling of the malign, if unspoken, compact between state ownership and
monopoly trade-unionism in Britain's bloated public sector - culminating in
divisive but essential success against Arthur Scargill.
Almost as fundamental were three key economic changes: the central switch we
made in our tax structure away from demotivating burdens on enterprise and
investment, the recovery of control we secured over public finances, and the
remarkable success we achieved against inflation. Margaret Thatcher rightly
takes credit for the renewed economic vitality with which we entered the
1987 election - just as she does for the broader revival of national
self-confidence that sprang from the Falklands victory.
I acknowledge the generosity of Margaret Thatcher's tribute to my work as
chancellor and return the compliment. It was an exciting privilege to serve
in a government that first arrested and then began to reverse Britain's
prolonged economic decline. As chancellor, my policies could not have been
sustained without the Prime Minister's sometimes near-solitary support. In
retrospect, I may have been too ready to rest upon this backing, and so to
condone her instinct to dispose of cabinet members who were not 'true
believers'. Her base might have been stronger in the years ahead, especially
after the Westland affair, if she had tried harder to secure the
understanding of 'difficult' colleagues, rather than their departure.
Such shortcomings, however, seemed of little consequence in the early years.
It was my happy fortune to serve as foreign secretary during a period when a
prospering economy and a respected leader together generated growing British
influence in the world. The sparkling dynamic of Britain's increasingly
successful woman prime minister opened many doors, not least across the
Atlantic. The special chemistry of her relationship with Ronald Reagan
enabled her, on two occasions at Camp David, to secure concessions that were
as crucial for our continental allies as for ourselves.
The first Camp David was in December 1984, when President Reagan accepted
crucial changes for his SDI (strategic defence initiative) programme - so
that it would enhance not undercut, the doctrine of deterrence, and so that
deployment, as distinct from research, would be a matter for negotiation. At
the second meeting, two years later, Margaret Thatcher repaired the
near-fatal damage inflicted at the Reagan- Gorbachev Reykjavik Summit: the
president was persuaded to re-affirm that NATO's strategy of flexible
response would continue to require effective nuclear deterrence.
Margaret Thatcher is entitled to remind us, as she does, that 'much hung on
my relationship with the president'. The Thatcher relationship with Mikhail
Gorbachev became curiously similar in many respects to her transatlantic
partnership. I watched it developing between the first meeting at Chequers
in December 1984 and its 'consummation' on her first visit to Moscow in
March 1987. Probably the closeness of their dialogue had more impact on the
US view of Gorbachev than on the Soviet leader himself. But it was none the
less important for that.
The conversation that bubbled between Thatcher and Gorbachev was talk
between fellow radicals. It was almost as lively between Thatcher and Reagan
 -between fellow conservatives. In both cases, the prime minister's attitude
was always one of respect, almost of deference. It was very different, of
course, with her European opposite numbers. She was dealing here with folk
and nations of her own size - or smaller. Initially her European shock
tactics had a cathartic effect. With the growing experience of Helmut Kohl
and Francois Mitterrand - as well as the strategic skill of Jacques Delors -
this approach began to backfire badly. She never enjoyed European politics,
and never understood the importance of diplomacy and persuasion.
In many ways, the turning point of her tenure was the Westland affair. It
was then that she identified Europe as a key fault line in her government,
and indicated to senior colleagues that saving her own position would take
precedence over loyalty to others. Her explanation of those events is
ultimately unconvincing and verges on comic.
At one point she notes: 'Alas, Leon's days were numbered.' She even declares
that Michael Heseltine's advocacy of his position meant that 'cabinet
collective responsibility was being ignored. . . This had to stop.' Coming
from the past mistress at marginalising cabinet committees and deciding
issues in bilaterals, this is quite a statement. Margaret Thatcher developed
over time a clear determination to limit dialogue within government. As
chancellor and, to a lesser extent, as foreign secretary, I was lucky enough
to be one of those who very often had to be present. But one has little
doubt - and at the time had few illusions - that she came to see collective
discussion as an irritating inconvenience. Her book is full of examples of
this, disclosed with astonishing candour. Taking SDI again, she notes
casually: 'I kept tight personal control on discussions . . . Laid back
generalists from the Foreign Office let alone the ministerial meddlers in
charge of them - could not be relied upon. By contrast, I was in my
element'. She goes on to note the inconvenience of having included Michael
Heseltine and myself, as defence and foreign secretaries, in a subsequent
SDI discussion at the White House. 'I did not bring them again'.
Throughout the book, Margaret Thatcher's deep distrust of the Foreign Office
shines through. My own increasing 'unsoundness' on Europe is attributed to
'the Foreign Office's deformation professionelle . . . the more the
Community moved in a centralised direction, the more influential the Foreign
Office became in Whitehall'. My own belief in ERM entry is seen as
conversion to an FCO 'departmental enthusiasm'. The fact that she herself
agreed a European Election manifesto in June 1979 which actually endorsed
ERM entry is, of course, never mentioned. The fact that the ERM really
started to work successfully after 1983 - when France, gave priority to a
strong franc over Socialist economics - was a powerful fresh argument.
The ERM issue was, as Nigel Lawson has eloquently chronicled, the epitome of
Margaret Thatcher's 'I must prevail' syndrome. It matters little to her that
she found herself alone - apart from John Biffen - at the crucial
ministerial meeting on the ERM in November 1985, when Willie Whitelaw, Leon
Brittan, Norman Tebbit and John Wakeham joined Nigel Lawson, myself and the
Governor of the Bank of England in recommending early entry.
Instead of moving ground, she decided that there should be no more
collective discussions. As is well known, my own belief is that had the UK
joined the ERM in 1985, we would have been spared the excesses of the
boom-bust cycle.
Equally we could have avoided the clashes over ERM entry in 1989 which
ruptured irretrievably the once solid troika which Nigel Lawson and I had
formed with Margaret Thatcher. One cannot help feeling that her own
reputation might be the greater today - indeed she might even still be in
power - if she had not tested that relationship to destruction in pursuit of
an ideological obsession.
It is in the last third of her book that the sparks really begin to fly. I
am cast as perhaps the guiltiest of her guilty men. So be it. I am in good
company, and I will explain in full my motives and behaviour when I publish
my own memoirs - although on a rather less spectacular scale - next year. My
feeling now is one of sorrow, rather than anger. Sadness that she should
feel so deeply and so bitterly about the rights which others asserted to
have their say. Sorrow that she could not understand, and - as her recent
interviews suggest - is coming even less to understand, the danger in her
mood of invincibility and intolerance towards any who dared to disagree.
For Margaret Thatcher in her final years, there was no distinction to be
drawn between person, government, party and nation. They merged in her mind
as one seamless whole. Her interests were axiomatically those of Britain.
Any criticism of her was an unpatriotic act. To see that tragedy for what it
was and react accordingly, was not to engage in treachery, but to do what I
at least believed to be right for my party and my country. I have no regrets
whatsoever about that.
It is impossible in one review fully to rectify her account of those final
years, especially the memorable episodes of the pre-Madrid 'ambush' (in June
1989), my departure from the Foreign Office (a month later), and ultimately
my resignation from her government (in November 1990), three weeks before
her own. But I will try to give a flavour of how her description falls short
of objectivity, at least in respect of the first, and comment briefly on the
second and third.
First, Madrid. Before the Madrid European Council, where the Delors Report
on monetary union was to be discussed, the prime minister was not planning
any discussion with her chancellor or foreign secretary about the key issues
to be tackled - how we were going to prevent maximalist conclusions being
reached, including a possible timetable for stage two of EMU. Nigel Lawson
and I produced a joint memorandum on Madrid strategy and insisted on a
meeting. This was conceded with bad grace and elicited little response.
After a second joint note, we secured with great difficulty a further
meeting. At this, we threatened to resign if she could not make a specific
commitment at Madrid to join the ERM at some point in the reasonably near
future.
We suggested that, subject to specific conditions, the UK should enter not
later than the end of 1992. Without concessions in this direction - and ERM
entry was, after all, official policy and desirable in itself  - we believed
that it would be very difficult to detach stage one of EMU from Stages two
and three. An early intergovernmental conference to draft an EMU Treaty
would become inevitable. Britain would be isolated and there would be little
chance of holding back the Delors route to a single currency.
The prime minister was deeply annoyed by this 'nasty little meeting', as she
describes it - it was certainly not an easy occasion - and left the matter
unresolved. She did not reveal to either of us what she planned to do. When
she and I flew to Madrid, later that same day, we exchanged no further words
on the matter. She locked herself into her hotel room on arrival. It is
therefore instructive to record more fully than she does in her memoirs what
happened the next day.
There was widespread expectation that Margaret Thatcher would object to EMU
lock, stock and barrel. However, when the prime minister spoke, she said
that the Hanover European Council had agreed that there should be concrete
stages leading to the progressive realisation of EMU, and we should be
pragmatic. The Delors Report, she said, was right to go for a staged
approach to EMU and its analysis was valuable. We were ready, she said, here
and now to make an early start on stage one with effect from July 1 1990,
and in some respects we wanted stage one to go further than proposed, for
example in the use of the ECU. She had always made clear that we would join
the ERM when the time was right, but this would have to be carefully judged.
She could reaffirm the UK's intention to join in conditions which would
strengthen the ERM. The timing, she said, would depend on progress in the UK
against inflation and progress in the community on the single market
(scheduled for completion in 1992), and particularly on the abolition of
exchange controls (agreed for 1990). The timing, of course, was for HMG
alone. As for the later stages - two and three - we had serious
difficulties: the adoption of a single currency would not be acceptable to
the House of Commons.
The effect was electrifying. At the end of the morning a number of
colleagues came over to commend the new, strangely calm, presentation of a
much more positive position - and Jacques Delors with 'Congratulations,
Geoffrey, on having won the intellectual argument within the British
Government.' I explained that it was probably not quite as straightforward
as that - and so it proved. But although the prime minister had avoided any
commitment to a date, we had made the essential breakthrough. The Madrid
conditions, which led - duly modified - to entry 15 months later had been
set. President Mitterrand had incidentally been isolated. And the occasion
was seen as a victory for the UK - and a significant shift by Number 10.
This brings me to my removal from the Foreign Office. With the benefit of
hindsight I should have seen dismissal coming. However, the media had been
led to report that there would be no change in the top team, and I myself
had received implicit assurance from the chief whip that no such moves were
planned. I was therefore somewhat surprised, as was everyone else, when the
knife fell. Her account of our first meeting on July 24 1989 - which I
managed to keep secret by entering through the Cabinet Office - is
misleading. She offered me both the home secretaryship and the leadership of
the House at this meeting. I rejected the first and said I would consider
the second.
There was no negotiation, as she implies, over Dorneywood. I did not request
it; she said Nigel Lawson would have to leave it and she would settle that
matter with him privately. At the second (publicly known) meeting, in the
afternoon, I accepted the leadership of the House on the basis - which I
requested - that I would become deputy prime minister, with certain cabinet
committee chairmanships. This had been largely agreed in telephone contacts
before the meeting. There was no particular resistance from Number 10.
Astonishingly, she was not prepared to reveal the name of my successor.
It was perhaps a mistake to have believed that this arrangement could have
worked. It was not helped by the fact that, because Number 10 unnecessarily
revealed that there had been two meetings, the press quickly worked out that
there had been a negotiation over the job. Once that happened, we were on a
slippery slope. Bernard Ingham's rubbishing of the post of deputy prime
minister fatally compounded the problem. Certain Number 10 sources talked
freely about Geoffrey Howe having no reason to feel 'hard done by', since he
had been offered other jobs.
Margaret Thatcher was unforthcoming about why she wanted me to leave the
Foreign Office. She said simply that it was lack of agreement over Europe.
It is therefore all the more surprising that she still claims not to
understand why I resigned. This brings me to the third point. I resigned for
the same reasons she sacked me from the Foreign Office: deep and growing
differences over her handling of European affairs. In late October 1990, she
allowed what we had avoided at Madrid to occur in Rome - total isolation on
EMU.
She did it by saying 'never' and refusing to negotiate. I was deeply
concerned by the 11-1 outcome. I was shocked by her cavalier announcement to
the media afterwards that we would simply veto any EMU Treaty the others
negotiated. I could not accept her casual undermining  - in throw-away lines
in her Commons statement on the Rome outcome - of the Chancellor's hard ECU
plan, a possible route which everyone in the party could live with and which
kept us in the same negotiation as the rest of Europe.
Certainly I could have been more explicit in my resignation letter. Her and
Kenneth Baker's deliberate attempt to trivialise my concerns - as style
rather than substance - made my resignation speech, 13 days later,
inevitable. Her decision expressly to rule out a single currency, rather
than negotiate to postpone or dilute it, was not the 'removal of camouflage'
she talks of, but a decisive break with the 30-year-old Macmillan concept of
Britain's role in Europe. She was breaking with Europe - the logic of Bruges
taken to extreme - and I had to break with her. I could not know the exact
consequences: I wanted to change the policies, not the leader. But if that
meant that the leader had to go, then so it had to be.
Margaret Thatcher was beyond argument a great prime minister. Her tragedy is
that she may be remembered less for the brilliance of her many achievements
than for the tenacity, the recklessness, with which she later defended her
own, increasingly uncompromising views. The insistence on the undivided
sovereignty of her own opinion - dressed up as the nation's sovereignty -
was her undoing.
The withdrawal of support for her leadership, not just by her
reluctantly-retained deputy, but first by almost half the parliamentary
party and then by the bulk of her own Cabinet, was a consequence not of
malice or weakness but of an increasingly clear perception that her
single-mindedness, which had once achieved so much, now threatened to take
her party and the nation into the wilderness.
Ironically, this characteristically candid book makes clear to almost
everyone except its author the reasons that lie behind the tragedy, as well
as the triumph, of Margaret Thatcher.
