FT  08 FEB 93 / EC steelmakers braced for cuts
EUROPE'S steel industry has indicated it is willing to discuss new
far-reaching cuts in capacity as part of a future EC rescue plan, according
to a report ordered by the European Commission.
The report by Mr Fernand Braun, the EC's special steel envoy, shows that the
deepening recession and mounting losses have forced steel producers to raise
estimates of possible capacity cuts well beyond those set out just a month
ago.
Mr Braun's report will form the starting point for discussions between the
Commission and EC industry ministers, who later this month must decide how
much political, financial and commercial support to extend to EC steel
producers facing their worst crisis in 10 years.
The Commission has proposed spending more than Pounds 700m on helping
steelmakers to shut excess capacity, but much depends on the credibility of
the industry's commitment to joining an industry-wide restructuring exercise
led by Brussels.
After more than three months of talks with about 70 managing directors of EC
steel producers, Mr Braun has extracted information which adds up to
'potential' and 'probable' cuts in capacity of around 17m tonnes in crude
steel and around 11m tonnes in rolled products.
These figures come on top of firm industry pledges to reduce capacity by
around 8.5m tonnes of crude steel and 6.6m tonnes of rolled steel which
appeared in an interim report that Mr Braun sent to the Commission last
month. At least 50,000 jobs are likely to go.
The interim report was criticised within the industry because it failed to
secure actual agreements from steelmakers to reduce some of the 30m tonnes
of production overcapacity in the EC. Mr Braun is believed subsequently to
have persuaded steelmakers to be more explicit about their restructuring
plans. These figures are based on discussions within the industry and the
likelihood that steelmakers face little hope of an upturn.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC trade commissioner, has pressed member states to
consider granting a more generous market share for eastern European
exporters, beyond the current 5 per cent.
He would also like to see a more restrained approach to anti-dumping against
the former communist countries, although EC steelmakers say cheap imports
are driving up losses.
