FT  02 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Labour steps up attack on VAT plan
LABOUR leaders last night stepped up their attack on the imposition of
valued added tax on domestic fuel following confirmation in the Commons that
it will also apply to gas and electricity standing charges.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, incensed Labour MPs by rejecting their
claims that it had not previously been made clear that standing charges
would be subject to VAT from April of next year.
He insisted that for standing charges to be exempt would open up an obvious
route for avoiding the tax.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, seized on the standing charges issue
to renew demands that pensioners and others on low incomes should be fully
compensated for the increase in domestic fuel bills due to the imposition of
VAT.
He wrote to the chancellor asking him to confirm that levying VAT on
standing charges would impose an additional burden of Pounds 14 on
pensioners and others on low incomes.
Mr Brown is orchestrating a new publicity campaign aimed at embarrassing
Tory MPs by highlighting their personal election pledges not to increase the
tax burden.
Labour MPs hope this will result in Tory backbenchers coming under
increasing pressure on the extension of VAT to domestic fuel while they are
in their constituencies during the Easter recess.
The government encountered little resistance from Tory critics of the VAT
imposition when it was challenged from the opposition benches during the
Budget debate, but Labour strategists believe ministers could face greater
difficulties when the specific provisions are put to the vote.
During question time Mr Lamont reaffirmed that the normal timetable for
uprating social security benefits would ensure that extra help was available
from April of next year - 'the precise moment that extra bills arrive'.
He stressed: 'While we regard this measure as necessary on both fiscal and
environmental grounds it is not our intention that poor people should
suffer.'
Poor families spend only marginally less on domestic fuel than those on
average income, the government admitted yesterday.
In response to a written question by Mr Donald Dewar, shadow social security
secretary, Mr Anthony Nelson, a junior Treasury minister, said households on
50 per cent of average income spend Pounds 11.50 a week on domestic fuel,
compared with Pounds 12.10 spent by households on average income.
Poor households spend more on electricity than their counterparts on average
income and four times as much on coal and coke.
