FT  02 JUL 93 / Oil prices fall after US backs lifting of ban on Iraqi
exports
WORLD OIL PRICES tumbled yesterday after the US said it would allow Iraq to
export some oil if Baghdad agreed on conditions with the United Nations in
talks next week. Traders fear that the arrival of Iraqi oil could worsen the
glut on world markets.
World prices fell to six-month lows after Ms Madeleine Albright,
Washington's ambassador to the UN, said the US would raise no objections to
any accord reached on oil sales between Iraq and the UN. Negotiations are
due to begin next Wednesday.
The price of North Sea crude oil for August delivery dropped 50 cents in
busy trading to Dollars 17.20 per barrel. Prices had touched Dollars 18 a
barrel at the beginning of the week after the US air strike on Baghdad,
which many traders believed signalled a harder US line towards Saddam
Hussein's regime.
'The mood in the market is one of impending doom - the timing is terrible,
markets are not at all well balanced,' said Mr Peter Gignoux, head of the
energy desk at commodity broker Smith Barney in London.
World markets are already awash with oil as members of the Organisation of
Petroleum Exporting Countries continue to overproduce. Oil demand in the US
and Europe remains depressed by the recession.
'You could see the market go down several dollars if Iraqi oil returns and
it could get very nasty,' said Mr James Fiedler, energy trader at ED&amp;F Mann
in New York.
Iraq will be discussing a plan put forward by the UN Security Council two
years ago for exporting Dollars 1.6bn-worth (Pounds 1.06bn) of oil over six
months in order to pay for humanitarian aid such as food and medicines.
Baghdad has objected in the past to conditions attached to the sale, which
included the monitoring of the oil shipments by UN officials.
If this plan were to go ahead, it would mean Iraq exporting about 500,000
barrels a day of oil, adding to Opec's current overproduction which is
estimated to be about 700,000 b/d.
Large Opec producers such as Saudi Arabia are unlikely to cut their output
in order to make room for Iraq, although some members would push for an
emergency Opec meeting.
Commodities, Page 28
