FT  30 JAN 93 / The coal spectre Thatcher failed to banish: Benefit of wider
market 'outweighs costs'
COAL is an industry that has haunted the Conservatives for more than two
decades. Baroness Thatcher thought she had banished the spectre after her
crushing victory over the miners in 1985. Mr John Major discovered to his
cost last autumn that she had not. Now his government is preparing to pay
the price.
The precise response of the cabinet to yesterday's report from the Commons
trade and industry committee will not be determined until next week. Mr
Major will read the report before chairing a meeting on Monday of the
cabinet committee charged with drafting the white paper.
Senior ministers say there are still battles to be fought over what has
become for some in the cabinet a fight for the government's soul: between
the free market ideology of the 1980s and the lame duck interventionism
which preceded it.
But, fierce though it is, the debate will affect only at the margin the
outcome of the review. The committee, a cross-party group of backbench MPs,
said the market for coal should be expanded by 16m tonnes a year until 1998,
financed by a diminishing state subsidy.
If it is not to be defeated at Westminster, the government must now come up
with a plan which will persuade the Conservative members of the committee -
and the 30 or so more militant Tory opponents of pit closures - that it has
responded in good faith.
The right in the cabinet - among them Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary
to the Treasury, and Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary  - have staked
out a position which would limit the enlargement of the market to a maximum
of 12m tonnes. The subsidy would run for 3 rather than 5 years. It would be
slightly less per tonne than that suggested by Mr Michael Heseltine, the
trade and industry secretary.
For his part Mr Heseltine wants a formula that can be seen both to make some
economic sense and to be fairly certain of convincing the Tory back benches.
His starting point is that the ideologists have chosen the wrong
battleground.
The present arrangements for the electricity market already provide in
effect for a subsidy of Pounds 1bn a year. If the government did nothing,
that would fall to about Pounds 350m next year. So the issue is not whether
the industry should be propped up next year but how much more the government
should spend above the Pounds 350m already committed.
Mr Heseltine is aware also that the only rational argument that can be made
for an additional subsidy is that it would provide a breathing space in
which British Coal could become competitive. The case would be undercut
decisively by too small a subsidy for too short a period.
Mr Major's focus is on a Tory majority of 21 and on the risk that a further
row over coal could again sour the political mood and sap confidence in
economic recovery. The judgment that will be crucial for him will be that of
Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip. It will be Mr Ryder's job to tell Mr Major
what is necessary to reduce the number of Tory rebels to comfortably below
10 and to take coal off the political agenda until after the next election.
The 30-strong Tory group opposed to the original closure plan has told Mr
Ryder that the price of its support is the rescue of at least half the
threatened 31 pits. That suggests the government will be obliged to come up
with something comparable to the committee's recommendations even if it
disagrees with some of the report's technical analysis. The U-turn that
started in the autumn will then be complete.
Undoubtedly Mr Major will be branded by some as a Heathite. But there is an
interesting historical footnote. There are those on the right of the Tory
party who are blaming not Mr Major but Lady Thatcher for the present
predicament. During the miners' strike she considered coal privatisation.
The news leaked and she was cowed by the ensuing political row into dropping
the plans. There will be nothing new in Mr Major's retreat.
