FT  13 JUL 93 / Personal View: Estonia draws up reformers' blueprint
Estonia has assumed the pioneer position among the post-Soviet republics in
implementing political and economic reforms. This is due to a large extent
to the political consensus among its citizens about the concept and pace of
reforms, as well as the determination of its current leadership to carry
them out. These reforms, started in 1989, were much accelerated after the
country regained its independence following the attempted Moscow coup of
1991.
A new democratic constitution was adopted in June 1992 and free
parliamentary elections were held in September. This resulted in the
formation of the majority centre-right coalition government. In order to
isolate itself from the economic chaos and inflation affecting Russia and
other post-Soviet republics, Estonia introduced in 1992 its own currency,
the kroon, pegged to the German D-Mark, and a stabilisation programme. This
was a great success. However, a severe drop in industrial production caused
by disruptions in inter-republic trade is threatening to overwhelm the
Estonian economy with bankruptcies and unemployment.
To deal with the issue, the Estonian government has made restructuring and
privatisation of state-owned enterprises its main task. So far, progress in
privatising large enterprises has been slow, about 30 per cent of services
and small enterprises have already been auctioned.
This spring, the Estonian government elaborated and then adopted in June a
new, comprehensive law to integrate and simplify privatisation. The
re-establishment of independence was legitimised by claiming continuity with
the prewar Republic of Estonia. In privatisation, this has meant a policy
based on restitution of property lost in 1940 after the country was
incorporated into the Soviet Union and on compensation for exploitation by
the Soviets.
To carry out the programme, an elaborate system of vouchers was instigated.
The restitution scheme attracted more than 200,000 claims, of which about 15
per cent have been resolved. Where it has been impractical to return
property in kind, compensation vouchers are issued to claimants. In
addition, 'work contribution' vouchers are given out, based on years of work
in Estonia between 1945 and 1991. These are interchangeable and can be used
in the privatisation of housing, land, collective farm implements and
state-owned enterprises, or redeemed for shares in the compensation fund.
While the voucher system has been implemented, commercial sales of property
are proceeding on a pilot basis, with the Estonian Privatisation Agency
having already sold 30 large, state-owned enterprises. This success bodes
well for Estonia because of the interest shown by foreign, mainly
Scandinavian and German, investors.
The aim of the new privatisation law is twofold. The first is to spell out
the principles for the integration of these two aspects of privatisation
policy: the use of citizen vouchers and commercial sales. A small percentage
of shares, determined individually for each company, will be reserved for
sale in exchange for citizen vouchers. The majority of shares will be sold
for cash to strategic investors, in the tender for sale of 52 state-owned
enterprises, announced in May.
The second central issue of this law is the creation of the State Property
Agency. This will combine separate small and large enterprise privatisation
operations and include a restructuring unit which will assume authority over
all state enterprises and direct efforts to prepare them for privatisation.
Separate laws deal with the privatisation of housing, and of collective
farms, three-quarters of which have been dismantled on the basis of resolved
restitution claims or leases based on anticipated restitution. Another law
creates a compensation fund, the shares of which can be obtained for
vouchers. These laws create the legislative framework for privatisation and
hopes are high for rapid progress.
Estonia is ahead, not only of the post-Soviet republics but also of some
east European countries, in its efforts to build a demo-cratic society and a
free market economy.
It has a democratic consensus on the direction of its reforms, a legitimate
government, a sound currency, and a credible economic transformation and
privatisation programme that aptly balances the needs of foreign investors
with the desire for participation and a sense of justice of the local
population. Fulfilment of its demonstrable promise could serve as a model to
others in the former Soviet Union who have to travel the difficult and
uncertain road of return from the communist system.
The author was between March and May 1993 an adviser on privatisation to
Liia Hanni, Estonia's deputy prime minister
