FT  30 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Levitt's law
The message sent by the outcome of the Roger Levitt case is unpalatable: one
law for white collar criminals and another for the rest of us. More than 40
per cent of people found guilty of theft of less than Pounds 200 are sent to
prison. Mr Levitt, whose financial services company traded fraudulently,
leaving debts of Pounds 34m and many investors with serious losses, walked
from court with a sentence of 180 hours community service.
The case represents another low point for the Serious Fraud Office. Just 18
months ago, following the collapse of the second Guinness prosecution and
the failure of the year-long Blue Arrow fraud trial, the SFO was in the dock
for throwing the book at defendants and presenting prosecution cases of such
size that the process became unmanageable. Now it appears to have swung to
the opposite extreme, allowing a white collar criminal to escape trial on
charges of forgery and false accounting as a result of a botched plea
bargain.
What went wrong? The SFO says sentencing is a matter for the judge alone. It
admits that it knew Mr Levitt would not go to jail when it accepted his plea
in return for dropping the other charges, but felt it could not then back
out. The judge, Mr Justice Laws, felt a non-custodial sentence was
'commensurate' with the offence to which he had pleaded guilty.
In reality however the case had begun to go wrong months before when,
because of its size, the judge ordered it to be split in two. After the SFO
had decided to proceed with the fraudulent trading charges, the judge later
ruled much of the prosecution evidence of Mr Levitt's alleged deception of
investors inadmissible in the first trial. The SFO appears then to have
panicked. Faced with the prospect of a three-month trial in which Mr
Levitt's lawyers would be able to put up a defence telling only part of the
story, which it could not refute, the SFO decided to offer him a deal. Mr
Levitt held out for a guarantee that he would not go to jail. When the SFO's
worst fears were realised in the first days of the trial, he got his wish.
Three steps need to be taken to avoid another such case. First, the SFO does
not appear to have learnt the lessons of Blue Arrow. In spite of reducing
the charges against Mr Levitt from more than 60 to 22 the judge still
regarded the prosecution case as too cumbersome to be handled in one trial.
The SFO must concentrate on a limited number of good counts, so bringing the
case down to a manageable size.
Second, the case underlines the need for any system of plea bargaining to be
open and formal, allowing the judge to take into account the wider picture
when deciding sentence. Plea bargaining can save a lot of public money. It
should be encouraged, provided an appropriate sentence results. The Royal
Commission on Criminal Justice recommended it. But the government has not
found space for the idea in the criminal justice bill. If further study is
needed, money should be made available at once.
Finally, judges need to come up with a consistent approach to fraud. The
contrast between the sentences passed in the first Guinness trial for an
arguably victimless crime and the result in this case is an unhappy one. The
Lord Chief Justice should take the lead.
