FT  25 MAY 93 / New leads in Italy scandal: Telecoms industry widens tangle
of inquiry
BY arresting a string of leading telecommunications executives, including
the local heads of multi-nationals such as Siemens and Ericsson, Italy's
magistrates have plugged into an important new line in the political
corruption scandal.
Cynics have already renamed the ministry of posts and telecommunications the
ministero delle poste e tangenti (bribes), reflecting the stream of
allegations regarding billions of lire in kickbacks on big telecoms
contracts.
The information, based largely on the leaked testimony of Mr Davide
Giacalone, a former adviser to Mr Oscar Mammi, the former posts minister,
has proved a deep embarrassment to the Republican party. Small but
influential, the Republicans have managed to remain relatively unscathed by
the corruption scandal, in spite of a warning to Mr Giorgio La Malfa, their
former leader, of possible prosecution on allegations of illegal party
funding.
That calm was shattered at the weekend after leaked testimony by Mr
Giacalone alleged the Republicans received about L9bn (Pounds 4m) in
kickbacks on telecoms business between 1987 and 1990. The allegations
prompted magistrates to inform Mr La Malfa and Mr Mammi that they were under
investigation on more serious charges of receiving illicit funds and illegal
party funding. Both politicians protested their innocence, and Mr Mammi is
to resign as an MP, which removes his parliamentary immunity.
The revelations also embarrassed Mr Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's media
magnate, after it was learned Mr Giacalone worked as an independent
consultant to Mr Berlusconi's Fininvest group on leaving the ministry. Among
Mr Giacalone's tasks for Mr Mammi was advising on the highly sensitive
allocation of valuable broadcasting frequencies, an issue of concern to
Fininvest, which controls Italy's three biggest private TV channels.
Telecommunications are likely to keep magistrates engaged for some time. In
the past 10 days, they have arrested the heads of the Italian telecoms
subsidiaries of Sweden's Ericsson, GEC Marconi of the UK and, most recently,
Germany's Siemens. Both Alcatel and Pirelli, leading cables producers, have
also reportedly admitted to paying kickbacks.
In the past three days, magistrates have made two further calls. Mr Luigi
Montella, managing director of Sirti, the network engineering subsidiary of
the huge, public-sector Stet telecommunications group, was arrested at the
weekend. And yesterday saw the arrest of Mr Tommaso Rea, a senior Stet
executive who headed its Seat yellow pages divisions until last year and now
runs its AET subsidiary. The involvement of Stet, one of Italy's biggest
companies and closely followed by international investors, marks a
potentially explosive development in the inquiries, which have so far
focused on the former ASST state telecommunications agency.
Unlike the UK, France or Germany, Italian telecommunications is split
between seven different companies. Stet, which is majority-owned by the Iri
state holding company, is the umbrella group for Sip, the main telephone
utility; Italcable (international calls); Telespazio (satellite
communications); Sirti and Italtel (equipment manufacturing).
The group is notorious for its political appointees. Top executive posts
have mushroomed to accommodate the political parties' desire for
representation, while co-ordination is limited and in-fighting endemic.
Until this year, ASST was an additional player in the telecoms game.
Directly controlled by the post ministry, rather than Iri, the agency in
theory dovetailed between Sip and Italcable. ASST handled inter-city trunk
traffic (leaving Sip to make local connections at either end) and
shorter-distance international calls (with intercontinental business left to
Italcable). In a belated attempt at rationalisation, ASST was transferred to
Iri this year, and renamed Iritel. The company which employs about 18,000,
is expected to disappear in a restructuring which may leave just one
telephone utility by the late 1990s.
Both ASST and Stet have invested massively to bring the once lamentable
telephone system up to date. Sip alone had a L5,000bn-a-year investment plan
for 1988-91, which was stepped up to L11,000bn yearly for 1992-95.
The allegations of kickbacks have so far been restricted to ASST, with
indications that the agency, linked directly to the political establishment,
was used as a direct source of funds. The investigations started after Mr
Giuseppe Parrella, former director general of ASST, was arrested in
connection with alleged kickbacks of L40bn on L2,500bn of business involving
domestic and multinational telecoms group between 1987 and 1991. Soon after
came the arrest of Mr Giuseppe Lo Moro, a former assistant to Mr Parrella,
and then Mr Giacalone.
The telecoms inquiries are probably still in their infancy. Magistrates are
already looking into the links between ASST and the posts ministry. So far,
Mr Antonio Gava, Mr Carlo Vizzini and Mr Mammi, the three post ministers
between 1987 and 1991, have all been told they are under investigation for
alleged political corruption. However, Mr Mammi is the only one so far
facing allegations specifically relating to his term of office.
