FT  10 NOV 93 / Survey of Mexico (10): Cementing global ambitions - Cemex
CEMEX is the largest producer of cement in the western hemisphere and the
fourth largest in the world. As early as 1986, the company decided it should
concentrate on its main business, ridding itself of assets in mining,
petrochemicals and tourism.
To succeed, the company decided it needed to increase its market share. 'We
saw the concentration that was taking place in the industry worldwide. To
ensure our survival we needed to spread throughout the country,' said Mr
Gustavo Caballero, the company's finance and planning director.
It was able to do that through the purchase, from Blue Circle of the UK, of
Tolteca in 1989: now it has a 60 per cent market share in cement and 70 per
cent in ready-mixed concrete. It protected its home market by purchases of
cement makers over the border in the US. But it did not end there: last
year, in a controversial move, it bought two cement companies in Spain,
giving it more than a quarter of the Spanish market.
It was controversial for a variety of reasons. The company had just made an
international stock offering and some shareholders felt aggrieved that they
had not been advised of Cemex's intention to make the big Spanish purchases.
Many were buying Cemex as an investment in Mexico, and they found themselves
with significant investments in Europe. Furthermore, Cemex was seen by some
as having paid too high a price for cement companies in a market that was
heading rapidly for recession.
Since then, Cemex has come back into favour, outperforming the Mexican stock
market index, even though Spanish cement market volumes fell last year and
are expected to fall again this. This is partly because Cemex is seen as
managing well the integration of its Spanish operations, placing it in a
good position for recovery there.
But Mexico has not been forgotten: 'We are investing Dollars 400m-Dollars
450m a year in Mexico' to upgrade its plants, says Mr Caballero. But if
growth in Mexico is disappointing, the company will slow down or stop the
investment.
Beyond this, the company's aim is to complete the restructuring of its
Spanish operation. In the long term, 'we'll probably look to the Far East'.
