FT  29 NOV 93 / Yet to win his new democrat spurs: America
After the White House victory on the North American Free Trade Agreement
many Republicans began to revise their opinion of President Bill Clinton.
His advocacy of lower trade barriers with Mexico was so passionate, it
seemed churlish to doubt his credentials as a 'new democrat' - a man
obviously committed to market forces.
At the Seattle meeting with Asian leaders, Mr Clinton scaled new rhetorical
heights. Turning to the far more important battle for global trade
liberalisation, he claimed a new Gatt agreement could transform the US
economy, eventually creating 1.4m jobs and raising average household incomes
by Dollars 1,700. 'This, my fellow Americans,' he said, 'is the answer to 20
years of stagnant wages for the hard-working middle class.' It could have
been George Bush speaking.
Mr Vin Weber, a leading Republican strategist, promptly welcomed Mr Clinton
into the conservative fold. He pointed out, correctly, that tariffs and
quotas are merely taxes and government regulation by another name. Mr
Clinton could not logically favour free trade without also favouring free
enterprise and low taxes domestically. Policies the president deemed
essential abroad could scarcely be harmful at home.
In the forthcoming battles over healthcare reform and other social policies,
Mr Clinton should thus not feel dependent on support from unions and other
stalwarts of the Democratic left. Provided he stuck to the principles he
enunciated so clearly in the Nafta debate, conservatives would flock to the
Clinton cause. The impromptu Nafta coalition could be converted into a
permanent congressional force for market-oriented reform.
It was an inspired if mischievous, thought. But is Mr Clinton really a new
style of Democrat? He only began to fight hard for Nafta once he realised a
defeat could undermine his authority in foreign policy and perhaps his
standing as president. If you consider his first year as a whole, his record
is less impressive. Indeed, only a few months ago, Mr Clinton was looking
about as modern as Walter Mondale in 1984.
Having just forced through a budget that raised the top rate of personal
income tax by a third, he did not seem remotely concerned by the adverse
impact this domestic tariff might have on incentives for high-paid
individuals or the owners of successful small businesses. The only thing
that mattered about the budget was its 'fairness' - the fact that nearly all
the new taxes were to be borne by the wealthiest 1-2 per cent of families.
But for a Senate filibuster, Mr Clinton's budget would have included a
wholly unnecessary short-term Keynesian stimulus. In these pre-Nafta days,
Mr Clinton's rhetoric on trade was far less enlightened. He tried to inflict
a crass form of 'managed trade' on Japan, involving quantitative targets for
various industrial sectors. In stark contradiction to the rule-based Gatt
system which he is now championing, it sought guarantees from Japan that
chunks of its domestic market would be reserved for US and foreign
companies.
So who is the real Bill Clinton? Is he the ardent advocate of global free
trade, the man who promises to 'compete, not retreat.' Or is he the
old-style Mondale democrat, keen on soaking the rich, revving up the economy
and bashing the Japanese?
The answer will become apparent only as the coming year's debate on social
policy begins to heat up. A deal with the right is certainly conceivable.
Most conservative Democrats and Republicans are doubtful about central
elements of the Clinton healthcare plan, such as the proposed caps on growth
of private insurance premiums and the 'mandate' requiring all employers to
pay 80 per cent of employees' healthcare costs. But many enthusiastically
support other elements, such as the attempt to increase cost efficiency by
promoting 'managed competition' between private-sector providers of care. If
Mr Clinton is willing to negotiate, he might be able to assemble a centrist
coalition similar to that which triumphed on Nafta.
Similar considerations apply in welfare reform and job training. Many
Republicans were impressed by Mr Clinton's campaign pledge to introduce a
strict two-year limit on welfare payments, after which most recipients would
have to enrol in training schemes or accept jobs. Conservatives recognise
the need to upgrade training to give workers displaced by global competition
a better chance of acquiring new skills. They would probably support a
Clinton job-training initiative, if it incorporated market-oriented
mechanisms, such as vouchers.
There are good political reasons for Mr Clinton to move to the right on
social policy. By firmly occupying the middle ground of US politics, he
would reduce his vulnerability to a presidential challenge from a moderate
Republican in 1996.
Yet it is far from clear that he will jump this way. Mr Clinton's top social
policy advisers, such as his wife Hillary and Mr Robert Reich, the Labour
Secretary, seem less market-oriented than the Treasury officials who played
a big role in the trade debate. After Nafta, Mr Clinton is bound to want to
restore cordial relations with organised labour. All this may preclude
radicalism on healthcare, welfare or job training. The notion that the Nafta
coalition can be transformed into a permanent force for radical reform may
be too good to be true. Mr Clinton has yet to earn his new democrat spurs.
