FT  07 OCT 93 / Crisis in Russia: Moscow hints it may breach troop cuts
treaty
RUSSIA has issued a veiled threat that it will breach the terms of the
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) disarmament treaty unless it is
allowed to raise the ceilings on its forces in the Caucasus region.
President Boris Yeltsin wrote to leaders of several Nato states last month
seeking to change the accord, but this is being firmly resisted.
The initiative is seen as part of Mr Yeltsin's recent campaign to win the
favour of the senior Russian military establishment.
The CFE treaty, cutting holdings of tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery,
helicopters and aircraft in Europe, was signed in 1990 when the Warsaw Pact
and the Soviet Union were both intact. Russia and other former Soviet
republics agreed on how to share out the cuts at a summit in Tashkent in May
last year. But Russia now sees this arrangement as having left it too weakly
armed on its southern flank.
Diplomats at Nato said the Russians had not gone so far as to threaten
withdrawal, but had warned that they might resort to measures outside the
treaty. This was seen as implying that they might move equipment beyond the
limits set in the treaty. Turkey, the Nato member which would be most
affected, has asked allies to oppose the moving of additional Russian
forces.
Russia raised the issue earlier at the Joint Consultative Group which meets
in Vienna to oversee implementation of the CFE treaty.
A breach of the treaty would be taken 'very seriously' by allies, diplomats
said. Nato would try instead to persuade Russia to make use of the treaty's
flexibility over forces in the 'flank zone', which includes Russia's North
Caucasus military district. The treaty, they said, gave it leeway to move
equipment to the Caucasus from the Leningrad district, also part of the
flank zone.
They added that Russia did not, in any case, have to meet its ceilings until
November 1995, the deadline for full implementation of the treaty. 'They
have two years to do whatever they want in the Caucasus,' one commented.
Nato opposes an amendment to the treaty because it fears that would prompt
demands for changes from other countries, undermining the whole accord.
Poland has told Colonel Vladimir Lomakin, the Russian military attache in
Warsaw, to leave because of 'activities incompatible with his status as a
diplomat', the Polish Press Agency said yesterday.
Defence Ministry officials in Warsaw refused to confirm that Col Lomakin's
opposite number in Moscow, General Roman Harmoza, had also been expelled,
saying he had been recalled to Warsaw for 'consultations'.
