FT  27 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Keeping the faith in a falling
market - Kieran Cooke talks to a mine operator who refuses to admit defeat
MR SIA Hok Kiang, a Malaysian tin miner, sat in his hut surrounded by jungle
anxiously watching the latest prices on his computer screen.
The tin market was falling yet again. Ten years earlier the metal had been
fetching between MDollars 32 (USDollars 13) and MDollars 34 a kilogram at
the Kuala Lumpur Tin Market; now it was down to MDollars 10.80.
'It just can't go on like this,' said Mr Sia. 'There's no sense in tin
prices being so low. By any judgment, prices will have to start rising
again.' He has since been proved right - last week the KLTM price touched
MDollars 12.71, but that was still well below the break-even level for most
of the world's producers.
Mr Sia is managing director and part owner of the world's most extensively
developed underground tin mine at Sungei Lembing, a remote settlement at the
end of a valley on peninsular Malaysia's east coast.
At the turn of the century 5,000 miners were producing more than 4,000
tonnes of tin a year at Sungei Lembing. Now only 55 miners work at the mine.
'I am ashamed to say how little we are producing now,' said Mr Sia. 'We are
mining enough to cover costs and stop the mine falling into total neglect.
That's all we can do with prices being the way they are.'
Malaysia was once the world's leading tin producer. Tin is part of the
country's history: hundreds of thousands of immigrants from China originally
came to the country to work the tin mines.
But with prices falling, tin mines have been closing. Ten years ago Malaysia
was producing more than 60,000 tonnes of tin in concentrates. This year
production will probably fall to below 10,000 tonnes.
Mr Sia, a geologist who, through a varied career, has prospected for gold in
Peru and diamonds in central Africa, is one of the few in the tin industry
confident about the future.
'Tin cannot just go out of fashion,' he said. 'It's still an essential
metal, a vital part of so many products.'
Mr Sia's optimism was based on the view that global demand for tin remained
strong, at about 160,000 tonnes a year, while all the signs pointed to a
fall in world production.
'There is a lot of rubbish being talked about the collapse in tin prices,'
he insisted. 'People talk about growing production by China and about the US
selling off its tin stockpiles. That alone doesn't explain the price drop. I
think the market is being manipulated.'
Mr Sia forecast that the world stockpile of tin, estimated at about 40,000
tonnes, would soon start to fall. And he accused some traders of inventing
figures on world production and creating an artificial surplus.
'These traders are able to manipulate prices between Kuala Lumpur and
London,' he explained. 'They buy cheap and make a killing when prices rise.
The Kuala Lumpur market should be shut down, then trading would be much more
transparent.'
Sungei Lembing was originally developed by Cornish tin miners 100 years ago.
The mine, stretching over an area of 4,000 acres, has 500 miles of workings
and in some places shafts go down more than 2,000 feet.
Only a very small portion of the mine is now being worked, but the echoes of
more prosperous times still fill the area. The mine office is lined with
musty books from the old Sungei Lembing club, once centre of activity for
more than 100 expatriates. Pre-war British equipment, some of it still in
use, is everywhere.
Supported by a loan from the Commonwealth Development Corporation, Mr Sia
and a partner took over Sungei Lembing in 1989. The previous owners, a
Malaysian concern, had gone into liquidation because the fall in tin prices
following the collapse of International Tin Council's price support
operation four years earlier. Mr Sia had to buy the old equipment back from
the liquidator.
Mr Sia spends much of his time computerising the old records of the mine.
'The British kept thorough recordings of geological structures for every six
inches of tunnel advance,' he said. 'When I came here they were stacked
ceiling high: I now have a complete record of the workings from the turn of
the century up to 1986. Only the war years, when the Japanese flooded the
mine, are missing.'
Sungei Lembing has more than 700,000 tonnes of proven and probable ore
reserves, containing nearly 10,000 tonnes of recoverable metal. Mr Sia said
the average grading was about 1.5 per cent, though some fairly extensive
workings contained about 15 per cent.
'Last August I found a very rich deposit with 55 per cent grading,' said Mr
Sia. 'With tin prices so low I don't want to mine this precious reserve. But
obviously such rich deposits are easier to mine and give a far better
return.'
Substantial amounts of money have to be invested in the mine to shore up the
tunnels and replace rusting railway tracks. To cover costs Mr Sia is
contemplating using the mine's surface area to plant palm oil and other cash
crops.
'Some people call me eccentric,' admitted Mr Sia, 'but I'm determined to
keep Sungei Lembing open. If prices are still down at present levels in a
few years time I might have to concede defeat. But if prices rise, I'll
become a big player in the market. There are those who describe tin mining
as a sunset industry. I say that the sunset is always followed by the
sunrise.'
