FT  15 APR 93 / Leading Article: Doubts about the EBRD
THE CONTRAST between the grandeur of Mr Jacques Attali's self-styled
'European Bank' and disbursements of a mere Ecu200m (Pounds 125m) after two
years of existence is bound to attract hostile comment. The institution is
on trial. Yet it is too early to condemn it. The EBRD must be judged on
whether it makes a useful contribution to reform of eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, rather than on the magnificence of its offices or the
flying arrangements of its president.
This does not mean that its housekeeping can be ignored. Some Pounds 200m
was spent on its offices and overheads between April 1991 and the end of
1992. It is difficult to feel confident that the directors responsible for
supervising its expenditures ensured these sums were all essential, since
they are themselves beneficiaries of EBRD largesse.
In this and other respects, the problem lies more with the model on which it
was founded than with the EBRD itself. Politicians complain incessantly
about the 'fat cat' life-style of institutions such as the World Bank. To
this charge, the latter reply that many of their employees enjoy alternative
opportunities in the private sector; that they are not lavish by the
standards of private-sector financial institutions; and that their
performance has been at least as good as that of such institutions.
Populists may dislike these answers, but they have force all the same.
What makes the questions about the EBRD's life-style more pointed is that
many wondered whether it should have been established in the first place.
Some argued that it would divert attention from the need to provide generous
assistance and liberal market access to the newly liberated countries. To Mr
Attali's credit, it is here that the EBRD has been most effective. His bank
offers a fine pulpit. It may be made of Carrara marble, but he has used it
well, particularly on the need for Continent-wide free trade.
Yet the EBRD cannot be justified by the ability of its president to say
sensible things. The question is whether it can also become an effective
lending institution.
Many believed that the EBRD's mandate to lend 60 per cent of its money to
the private sector would prove a crippling handicap. Yet so far the more
important obstacle to rapid disbursement has been the public sector. The
EBRD is affected, like everything else, by the political chaos of most
countries of the former eastern bloc. But lending to the public sector is
not the EBRD's sole problem. Its desire to lend prudently clashes with the
need to take risks in support of the fledgling private sector.
The EBRD has still to justify its creation. It needs to demonstrate control
over its own spending, but above all it needs to lend effectively, without
lending foolishly. This is a fine line to tread. It may never be possible to
be sure that the EBRD serves a useful purpose. But it must make a serious
effort to convince the world it does.
