FT  11 DEC 93 / Old and out of touch with Mr Blobby: Dominic Lawson feels
the onrush of middle-aged senility as he contemplates the pop charts
This week I celebrate my birthday. I now realise that I must be getting not
just older, but actually old. I know this because it took me a while to work
out what age I would become on December 17. I discovered, after much
counting of fingers, that I am to be 37. This worried me, because a month or
so ago I was rung by a newspaper reporter who asked me how old I was, and I
said, after some hasty arithmetic, that I was 37. Only a year out, I know,
but there was a time, not so long ago, when I could not have made such a
mistake.
The physical signs of ageing bother me not a bit. I enjoy the sight of more
and more silver hairs as I study myself in the mirror. I do not mind that I
now stand with the middle aged on the right hand side of London
Underground's escalators, while once I joined the whizz-kids running up the
left lane. I do not even mind that, with every passing year the wicket
keeper for the village cricket team I play for, is moving closer and closer
to the stumps as I bowl.
Such physical manifestations of ageing are somehow dignified. As I grow
older I want to be taken more seriously, and such infirmities help. But the
mental signs of ageing are less pleasing, aesthetically. People who say that
they do not know their own age because birthdays no longer matter to them,
are deluding themselves. They forget because they are no longer good at
remembering things. The reason why I forget my own age is the same reason
why I cannot remember the name of someone to whom I have just been
introduced. My brain cells are atrophying, just like the muscles in my
bowling arm.
We, the senile middle-aged, have, of course, a store of knowledge, which we
can plunder, to give the misleading appearance of being alert. What is now,
in nostalgic retrospect called 'an old fashioned education' sometimes stands
us in good stead, like the hibernating squirrel's store of nuts. But
meanwhile the march of popular culture leaves us looking more and more like
beached whales.
I experience this most in my discussions with my cartoon editor at The
Spectator. Gently, like a good boy scout assisting an elderly lady across a
busy road, he explains to me all the cartoons I do not understand, pointing
out how this one refers to a particularly popular new television programme,
or that one is a joke about the latest American film.
A couple of weeks ago he began filling the paper with cartoons of a strange
figure, who bore a passing resemblance to the Michelin man. 'Who is that?' I
asked. 'Who is that?' said my cartoon editor. 'You're like the judge who had
never heard of the Beatles. That is Mr Blobby.' 'Who is Mr Blobby?' I
persisted. 'It doesn't matter,' sighed my cultural adviser, 'but he's
massive. He's huge. He's taking over the country.'
And he was right. The front page of yesterday's Daily Mail consisted of not
much more than a picture of 'Mr Blobby' at the door of number 10 Downing
Street. And I finally discovered who Mr Blobby is. He was described by the
Daily Mail as 'the chart-topper.' So that was it. Mr Blobby is to the youth
of 1993 what the Beatles were to my generation, and I have indeed become
like the famous High Court judge who thought the Beatles were insects.
I suppose I should be worried about my isolation from the biggest influences
on the UK's youth. And I suppose I should not express the age-old thought
that my popular heroes were giants compared with those of a succeeding
generation.
All the same, can Mr Blobby really be as good as Lennon and McCartney? John
Lennon scandalised the people of US, when he told them that the group was
'more famous than Jesus Christ'. I fear that if Mr Blobby were to make a
similar boast, he would find many supporters.
But I will make no protest. The old appear merely petulant when they damn
the follies of the young. And I must be careful: I have a daughter, who in
less than two weeks will reach her first birthday. I must make it my
business not to sneer at Mr Blobby, because he will seem almost sensible
compared to the idols of the next generation. Meanwhile I will celebrate my
birthday with a much younger person, who is quite happy not knowing how old
she is.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator
