FT  01 FEB 93 / Tensions of the French connection: France's policy of
stabilising the franc against the D-Mark is facing its sternest test
'The Germans will respect us only if we have a strong currency.'
 - Adviser to Mr Pierre Beregovoy, French finance minister, 1985
As the weaker currencies melt one by one in the furnace of the European
exchange rate mechanism (ERM), France's policy of stabilising the franc
against the D-Mark is facing its sternest test.
Governments of both left and right under President Francois Mitterrand have
backed the franc fort with impressive continuity since Mr Mitterrand's
first, ill-fated dash for reflation ended in 1983. But, underlined by the
squalls forcing the weekend devaluation of the Irish punt, France has not
yet earned sufficient credibility and strength for financial markets to
believe that the policy will never be abandoned.
In contrast to Britain, France has avoided negative growth during the
European economic slowdown, while its prowess on weak export markets is
illustrated by a FFr30bn (Pounds 3.68bn) trade surplus last year. Yet, with
unemployment now nearly 3m, the economy is rapidly sliding into recession
under the dual burden of high German interest rates and the devaluations by
many of France's European trading rivals since last autumn.
France is trying to remain aloof from the monetary flare-up surrounding the
punt. The French franc was trading comfortably within its ERM margins on
Friday - but this relative calm has been bought at a high, and rising,
price.
French monetary tensions were illustrated by the rise of one-month French
money market rates on Friday to 13.5 per cent. Short-term French interest
rates thus carry a 'risk premium' of nearly 5 percentage points above
equivalent German rates. This is despite a fall in the French inflation rate
last year to a 36-year-low of 2 per cent, half the current German rate of
4.4 per cent, pushed up by Germany's unification strains as well as an
increase in value added tax.
The burden of high French interest rates has been kept within limits. Under
government orders, French banks have held base lending rates to 10 per cent.
None the less, the chairman of a leading French investment bank laments
that, since inflation in the industrial sector is zero or even negative, the
10 per cent base rate represents not just a nominal but also a real interest
rate. He complains that the economy is falling foul to a 'war of ideology'
over the exchange rate - caused, he says, by France's 'fixation with
Germany'.
The link with Germany is all-encompassing. The overriding political
rationale for a firm franc was strengthened by the upheaval of German
unification in 1989-90, when France reacted to the spectre of a larger,
potentially dominant Germany by intensifying its drive for European union.
The turbulent economic outcome of unification - soaring German fiscal
deficits, a Bundesbank monetary squeeze, and recession - is now undermining
French policy aimed at containing its eastern neighbour. Maintaining a
strong exchange rate, which has contributed to France's improved inflation
and foreign trade performance, is the centrepiece of economic strategy. It
has also become the touchstone of foreign policy - backed both by the
Socialist administration of Mr Beregovoy, prime minister since last year,
and by the new right-wing administration likely to take over after the
national assembly elections next month.
The franc fort represents the mechanism with which France, under the
Maastricht treaty, can eventually achieve European economic and monetary
union. Emu would represent the emasculation of German monetary power - the
accommodation of a larger Germany in a united Europe through the replacement
of the D-Mark by a single European currency.
During the campaign before the Maastricht referendum in September, Mr
Beregovoy reminded his compatriots that setting up a single currency would
allow France to recover control over its monetary affairs largely ceded to
the Bundesbank. Breaking the D-Mark/franc link in 1993 would not
automatically block the path to Emu. Under Maastricht, this would take place
in 1997 at the earliest. Yet, at a time when Britain and Denmark still have
not ratified the treaty, and most European countries (including Germany) are
failing to meet the Maastricht economic performance targets, a franc
devaluation could eliminate the already-weakened political will behind Emu.
If France followed the line taken by Britain and Italy in September of
leaving the ERM, rather than simply devaluing within it, the mechanism would
be reduced to nothing more than the EC's 'snake' stabilisation scheme of the
1970s.
A French exit from the ERM - similar to the two French departures from the
'snake' in 1974 and 1976 - would spare Gallic pride. It would allow French
ministers to claim (as British ones have been doing since September) that
they had decided simply to 'float' rather than to 'devalue'. More
importantly, by leaving the ERM, as opposed to devaluing within it, France
could open the optimistic option of cutting interest rates and eventually
floating upwards against a weakening D-Mark.
Up to now, France's policy of maintaining its D-Mark parity has been given
solid support from Bonn and Frankfurt. The longer-term objective of the
franc fort policy - the replacement of the D-Mark by a single European
currency - is regarded with suspicion by the Bundesbank and German public
opinion. But the Bundesbank well recognises the political stakes involved as
well as the importance for Germany's exporters of maintaining stable
exchange rates with its senior foreign trade partner.
Amid a display of Franco-German monetary co-operation envied by governments
in Britain and smaller ERM members, France weathered the crisis accompanying
the September ERM exit of sterling and the lira. The Bundesbank has however
stopped well short of volunteering unlimited support for the franc. And Mr
Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, last week quashed speculation
of an accelerated Franco-German drive to Emu.
Ostensibly, leading right-wing politicians likely to form the new Paris
government are backing the present government's franc policy. Mr Edmond
Alphandery, the centre-right UDF deputy tipped by many as the next finance
minister, said last week: 'To maintain confidence, we must absolutely avoid
decoupling the franc from the D-Mark.'
As far as industry is concerned, the French government maintains that
devaluations by Britain, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scandinavian countries and
now Ireland are not a problem, because France has built up competitive gains
by squeezing unit costs since the end of the 1980s. But precisely because
devaluation elsewhere has increased the temptation for France to do
likewise, right-wing parties are split on the wisdom of the present
strategy. And the right's natural allies in industry are broadcasting rising
concern.
Mr Francois Perigot, the president of the Patronat employers' federation,
has loyally defended the Socialist government's franc fort policy in public.
But he said last week: 'We cannot eternally stand the interest rates
practised by the Germans, and the exchange rates practised by the British.'
The Patronat is hoping for a relaxation in German monetary policy. If the
Bundesbank during the next few weeks moves to cut its discount and Lombard
rates, currently 8.25 per cent and 9.5 per cent, the pressure on the franc
could ease.
A strong body of opinion in the Bundesbank policy-making council favours a
gesture to preserve Franco-German bonds. However, a more influential
faction, led by Mr Schlesinger, believes a convincing path to the
Bundesbank's 2 per cent inflation target is not yet in sight. These
officials argue that premature easing, before definite signs emerge of
reduced wage and fiscal pressures, would be damaging for Germany's long-term
outlook.
During the next few weeks, the level of Franco-German anxiety seems likely
to grow. The show of strong nerves by the French government will probably go
on; but the performance which determines the future of the franc will take
place not in Paris, but in Frankfurt.
