FT  17 MAR 93 / International Capital Markets: Japan's rush for corporate
paper provokes reform - Barriers are coming down
THE weakness of the Tokyo stock market and the reluctance of Japanese banks
to lend have forced Japanese industry to turn to the domestic corporate bond
market which, until recently, has been constrained by regulation,
restrictive market practices and conservative investors.
The pace of reform has been quickened by the rising number of companies
dipping into the corporate bond market, says Mr Masaaki Nogawa, head of
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone's finance department.
With redemptions of over Y10,000bn (Dollars 84.7bn) worth of equity-linked
bonds expected in the year to March 1994, Y5,000bn is expected to be raised
through the straight bond market.
But the surge in corporate bond issues has flushed out inefficiencies in the
secondary market. Traders and issuers blame structural barriers. The lack of
a centralised settlement system has limited trading, and reporting
requirements imposed by the Bank of Japan on borrowing and lending bonds has
restricted market-making by securities houses.
The lack of a proper government bond yield curve has given little incentive
to use corporate bonds as hedging or arbitrage instruments against
government bonds. Mr Nogawa points out that active trading on the government
bond market is almost limited to the benchmark bond.
But the barriers also seem to stem from attitudes of market participants.
For most institutional investors, corporate bonds are still instruments kept
until maturity.
The lack of interest among investors has resulted in a situation where the
bid, or buying price, of one securities house would sometimes be placed
higher than the offer, or the selling price, at another house.
For many Japanese brokers, which are not used to taking risks on their own
capital, market-making is still a new concept. While eight houses -
including Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Nomura Securities, Daiwa
Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities - now quote two-way
prices through trading screens, sparse investor interest has led to
distorted prices.
Some issuers blame the inconsistent offering methods in the primary market
for the lack of investor support. Mr Nogawa at NTT says pricing on the
primary market is still not transparent.
Traditionally, domestic corporate bonds were issued using the so-called
'proposal' method, under which underwriting is awarded to the securities
house with the most competitive bid. Intense competition for underwriting
contracts led to unrealistic offering prices. To break from such practices,
NTT appointed Morgan Stanley Japan, along with Nomura, as lead managers of
its issue. 'We needed innovation,' says Mr Nogawa.
NTT has since led the way in changing the market by gaining approval for
trading on the secondary market in the offering period. Former practice
required investors to hold bonds until the offering period was over, leaving
them vulnerable to market movements.
From April, the ministry of finance will remove other barriers deterring
companies from the domestic bond market.
Limits on the amount that can be issued are due to be eliminated. Also, the
commission-bank system, under which every issue needs a commercial bank
acting as an agent representing investors, will be scaled back. Companies
say the ministry's move is a start, but it will probably take further time
for the ministry to address other issues.
In April there will also be an initial easing of barriers between the
banking and securities industries. Securities houses are bracing themselves
for the entrance into the corporate bond market of affiliates of long-term
credit banks, such as IBJ. Mr Mikio Fujii, of Nomura's fixed-income
department, puts on a brave face, saying the increase of business will
activate the market.
But an official at a leading US house is pessimistic. 'If the banks go for
market share, as they have in the past, the market could collapse,' he says.
