FT  19 JUL 93 / Universities seek new funding sources
UNIVERSITY PRINCIPALS have commissioned London Economics, an economic
consultancy, to examine alternative ways of raising additional funds.
The move follows cuts earlier this year in the tuition fees paid by the
government to universities. These have led several universities to predict
reductions in courses, including those for teacher training. They say some
additional source of funds is necessary if a decline in standards is to be
avoided.
A final report will be published in the second week of August, as
18-year-olds receive their A-level results, and will then be presented to
the Department for Education.
The Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals says three alternatives are
being considered:
A graduate tax, whereby all graduates who had reached a certain level of
income would pay an extra level of tax, which would be dedicated to higher
education.
Repayable loans along the lines of those in Australia, whereby students
would repay a fixed tuition fee over a period of time determined by their
level of earnings.
Top-up fees, whereby universities would charge students whatever extra fees
they felt necessary above a fixed fee paid by the government.
London Economics is evaluating the proposals to see how effectively funds
could be collected in each case. Principals will make a definite
recommendation in favour of one of the options once the report is completed.
Tuition fees paid by the government were cut from Pounds 1,850 per student
to Pounds 1,300 for classroom-based courses. Fees for scientific and medical
courses are higher and remained unchanged.
Mr Tim Boswell, higher education minister, has stated that the government
will not stop individual universities from charging extra for tuition.
A graduate tax has growing support, and has been endorsed by Manchester
University's students' union as a way of avoiding cuts.
The Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals reported particular concern
about education courses. It said: 'Several universities are looking at
whether or not it's worth their while to be in the market for teacher
training at all, particularly given the government's latest proposals for
shifting initial teacher training towards schools.'
The Department for Education said it would look carefully at any proposals
from universities. It recognised that graduates would be less likely to
choose teaching once the economy recovered, and this explained the move to
introduce reforms of teacher training announced last month. These included
allowing non-graduates to teach in primary schools.
The interest rate on student loans is to fall to 1.2 per cent in the
academic year starting September 1, it was announced yesterday.
The government-owned Student Loans Company, which runs the scheme, said it
was a 'significant fall' from the previous rate of 3.9 per cent for the
1992-93 academic year, and 5.8 per cent the year before. In the academic
year 1991-92 student loans totalled Pounds 128m.
