FT  29 APR 93 / Survey of Baden-Wuerttemberg (4): Plenty of scientists but
no monkeys - Public spending on research and development is the most
generous in Germany. Ariane Genillard visits one of the state's 36 science
parks
THE NEW GLASS buildings glitter in the snow on Monkey Hill. 'It's the
historical name. There are no monkeys here, just scientists,' explains Mr
Johannes Stolz, the director of the Ulm Science Park.
Opened 18 months ago, it is the largest of the 36 science parks in
Baden-Wurttemberg, which collectively give the state the the highest ratio
of scientists per head in Europe.
With 75 patent applications per 100,000 inhabitants, Baden-Wurttemberg also
prides itself on producing more innovations than any other state in Germany.
Public funding for research is generous: in 1992, the state spent 3.5 per
cent of its gdp on research and development, compared with 2.8 per cent
nationally.
The local tradition for inventiveness even has its own name - Tuftlertum -
an untranslatable word meaning roughly a dogged determination to solve any
technical problem. In 1900, near Lake Constance, Count Zeppelin made the
airship that took his name.
The region's technological eminence flourishes in a carefully planned
research environment which fosters interaction between research conducted in
the public sector and the needs of private industry.
An institutional web now links centres of higher education, research
laboratories and state-funded institutes with the important local car and
chemical industries.
Like other large enterprises in Germany, the leading companies in
Baden-Wurttemberg all have extensive research facilities.
The state also houses Germany's most famous research centres, the Max Planck
Institute and the Fraunhofer Society.
There are also numerous small and medium-sized enterprises, often
family-owned, which excel in precision engineering, machine-tools and
electronics.
Under the aegis of Mr Lothar Spath, prime minister of Baden-Wurttemberg in
the 1980s, a research sector was developed to meet the needs of these
enterprises.
Today, officials hope that the links between research and industry will
continue to foster innovation, and fend off the challenge from other
countries, particularly Japan.
Those links emerged amid a public debate on the role of scientific research.
It had become apparent that research needed to be brought closer to
industrial applications if enterprises were to compete more effectively in
global markets.
'What the Japanese were doing made everybody think. The question became how
to make scientists work on concrete projects and not on Byzantine text
interpretation,' explains Mr Oliver Gunther, from FAW, a foundation in Ulm
science park geared to finding commercial applications for research
projects.
Public funding moved from large research projects to more basic research
which could benefit small and medium-sized enterprises. Priority was given
to areas of perceived German weakness, where tangible commercial benefits
could be gained, such as information technology, laser and materials
research, and the growing field of so-called preventive technologies,
including medical and environment research.
Institutions such as the Steinbeis foundation in charge of technology
transfer and the Baden Wurttemberg Agency for International Co-operation
became increasingly important in promoting dialogue between the small and
medium-sized enterprises and research facilities.
The Steinbeis foundation, created in 1971, operates 158 regional branches,
mostly in centres of higher education, which offer consultancy services
technology and management to small and medium-sized businesses.
Originally financed by the state, 95 per cent of its DM80m budget is now
covered by fees from its industrial clients - embodying the mixture of
public and private money common in Baden-Wurttemberg's research activities.
Today, officials continue to believe that technological transfer is the
recipe for the survival and long-term prosperity of the state's small and
medium-sized enterprises.
Mr Dieter Spori, state economics minister, sees technological investment as
the best weapon against international competition.
'We must concentrate on specific technologies, such as microsystems, laser
technology and environmental research, and on gearing research towards
commercial application,' he said recently.
But for Mr Johann Lohn, chairman of the Steinbeis Foundation and state
commissioner for technology transfer, the problem is multifold.
'We have to devise additional strategies to keep our industry competitive,'
he explains.
'One of them is focusing on the technological servicing of existing products
rather than on innovations.'
Mr Lohn says enterprises are increasingly have to integrate old and new
technologies - a new challenge for the Swabian Tuftlertum. They will also
have to cope with an expected fall in public funding of research projects as
the country continues to pay the heavy cost of cost of German reunification.
Researchers in Germany's publicly-funded universities are therefore more
reliant on more private finance. 'The percentage of research which is
sponsored by the private sector in the US and Japan is much greater than
here.
'We must put out the message that non-governmental means are needed to
finance research in public institutions,' explains Mr Wolfgang Pechhold,
rector of Ulm university. 'We realise that this will only be achieved if
universities conduct projects which can be used by industry,' he adds.
Opposite the university stands the three year old research centre of
Daimler-Benz, the car maker which has diverted a substantial proportion of
its research activities to the science park.
Scientists from the university and Daimler-Benz are currently working on six
projects together.
'Our survival will depends on how well we apply our motto: innovation
against recession,' says Mr Pechhold.
