FT  31 DEC 93 / 1993 in Review
JANUARY
A relatively good year for the UK economy starts with a cut in UK base rates
to 6 per cent, to lowest level for 15 years. A big year for resignations and
departures starts with Jurgen Moelleman leaving as German economics
minister; Poul Schluter resigning as Danish PM over Tamil refugees scandal;
Gerald Corrigan, president of Federal Reserve Bank of New York, announcing
plans to resign; James Robinson departing as chairman of American Express;
and John Akers quitting as IBM's chief executive, after Dollars 5bn loss.
Zoe Baird, Bill Clinton's nominee for attorney general, never even makes it
into office. In his last month as president, George Bush orders a series of
missile attacks on Iraq and signs Start 2 arms treaty with Russia. Insider
Eddie George is appointed as new governor of the Bank of England; outsider
Rupert Pennant-Rea moves from editorship of Economist to be deputy governor.
Dirty seas as Liberian oil tanker Braer wrecked off coast of Shetland
Islands. 'Dirty tricks' affair causes British Airways to make apology to
Virgin Atlantic and pay Pounds 610,000 in libel damages. John Major issues
libel writs over magazine allegations about his private life.
FEBRUARY
It ends at last. The final trial of the Guinness affair sees Thomas Ward
acquitted of theft. They pay at last. John Major announces that the Queen
and Prince of Wales are to be liable for tax. Extra tax revenue would be
gratefully received by Bill Clinton who launches a Dollars 500bn deficit
reduction package. More resignations and departures; Brian Mulroney quits as
prime minister of Canada; Lord King steps down early as chairman of British
Airways; Duke of Westminster, one of Britain's wealthiest men, quits
Conservative party over leasehold reform. Italian cabinet ministers resign
and magistrates order arrests of politicians and businessmen as corruption
scandal grows. It rumbles on for the rest of the year. Timex decides to sack
all workers at Dundee plant and replace them with a new labour force; the
decision leads to angry scenes on picket lines. Punxsutawney groundhog sees
shadow. The effects of recession linger in the UK. Headline unemployment
reaches 3m for first time in six years, as ICI announces plans to split in
two and shed 9,000 jobs; and National Westminster bank announces 4,000 job
cuts. A bomb at New York's World Trade Centre kills five.
MARCH
Edouard Balladur becomes French prime minister after elections sweep
socialists from power, one of a series of upsets for incumbent governments
this year. In the UK, Norman Lamont delivers, unbeknownst to him, his last
Budget. He announces many delayed-action tax increases. The most
controversial measure is VAT on fuel, but the City is more upset by the cut
in the tax credit on dividends. The government loses a key vote on
Maastricht bill by 22 votes, prolonging ratification process. But there is
some good news for the Tories: unemployment falls for first time in three
years. Michael Heseltine's coal white paper promises to save 12 of 31
threatened pits and to speed up privatisation. The corporate merry-go-round
whirls on. Peter Rawlins, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange,
resigns after the abandonment of Taurus, the electronic share settlement
system. Ernest Mario, Glaxo's chief executive, is ousted in boardroom coup.
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua quits General Motors to join Volkswagen,
starting long and bitter dispute; Hoover dismisses its European president
and two senior executives after a flawed free flights offer; IBM hires Lou
Gerstner of RJR Nabisco to be its new chief executive. Bomb blasts in Bombay
kill 200.
APRIL
The European Bank of Reconstruction and Development is revealed as the bank
that likes to say yes to itself, especially when it comes to marbled halls
and travel expenses. Another government falls. Giuliano Amato resigns and
Carlo Ciampi, governor of the Bank of Italy, asked to form the country's
52nd post-war administration. But voters express confidence in President
Boris Yeltsin in referendum as G7 countries agree Dollars 43bn aid package
for Russia. Old institutions face up to change. Lloyd's of London announces
radical restructuring plan, including the introduction of corporate capital.
The Guardian agrees to buy the 200-year-old Observer. Philip Morris cuts
price of Marlboro cigarettes and sparks debate about value of brands in
straitened 1990s. Bundesbank cuts discount rate by a quarter, and the
Lombard rate by a half, of a percentage point. Siege of Branch Davidian cult
headquarters in Waco, Texas ends tragically when fire sweeps the compound -
more than 80 cult members die. IRA bomb in Bishopsgate kills one man and
causes massive damage. Thirty Zambians, including 18 members of the national
football team, are killed in an air crash off the coast of Gabon.
MAY
John Major's darkest hour. Substantial losses for Conservatives in county
council elections leaves them in charge of just one shire. Liberal Democrats
win Newbury by-election. Soon afterwards, Major replaces Norman Lamont as
chancellor with Kenneth Clarke. An angry Lamont leaves the cabinet. While
the prospects for the Maastricht treaty improve as Danish voters say Yes in
second referendum, the prospects for European monetary union turn distinctly
worse. Continuing strains in Exchange Rate Mechanism lead to devaluation of
peseta and escudo. As the French government sets out plans for an
independent central bank, the Bank of England is sued by Bank of Credit and
Commerce International depositors for failing in its role as regulator.
Government drops unit fines system, under which offenders paid penalties
according to level of income. Asil Nadir is evidently unimpressed by the
reform as the Polly Peck boss skips bail and flies to northern Cyprus.
Receivers are called in at Swan Hunter, the Tyneside warship builder. Bomb
in Florence kills five and damages Uffizi gallery.
JUNE
Politicians vie for the Howe/Lawson award for the most controversial
resignation speech of the year. Norman Lamont says 'We give the impression
of being in office but not in power.' But, although he damages the
government, the award goes to Michael Mates's speech. His criticism of the
Serious Fraud Office for its handling of Nadir case is continually
interrupted by speaker Betty Boothroyd. Goodbye to Jacques Attali, who
resigns as head of European Bank of Research and Development; hello to
Tansur Ciller, Turkey's first woman prime minister. The US launches missile
attack on Iraqi intelligence HQ in Baghdad. In Nigeria, the military annuls
the result of the presidential election. Invesco MIM is fined Pounds 750,000
by UK investment watchdog Imro; three of the 55 charges relate to Mirror
Group Pension Fund. Goldman Sachs fined Pounds 160,000 by the Securities and
Futures Authority over its dealings with Robert Maxwell. Lloyd's of London
records highest ever loss of Pounds 2.9bn. Robin Leigh-Pemberton, outgoing
Governor of the Bank of England, receives a peerage in Queen's Birthday
honours; Samuel Brittan of the FT is knighted.
JULY
House of Commons finally agrees to ratify the Maastricht treaty, despite the
doubts of Cabinet Euro-sceptics, or 'bastards' in the taped words of John
Major. The ERM continues to totter after Bundesbank's decision to leave
discount rate unchanged disappoints other governments. The unpopularity of
incumbent administrations is revealed once again as Japan's Liberal
Democratic party loses its parliamentary majority after almost 40 years in
power, and Britain's Liberal Democrats win Christchurch by-election from
Tories. 'Ring of steel' (mostly plastic, actually) set up around the City to
counter threat of terrorism. Chokepoints on Cheapside but transport
secretary John MacGregor proposes widening the M25 to 14 lanes in some
places. Royal Commission on Criminal Justice recommends abolition of a
defendant's right to trial by jury. Scientists decide that bones found in
Yekaterinburg were almost certainly those of Tsar Nicholas II and his
family, murdered in 1918. Treasury tells Securities and Investment Board
that commission earned by life insurance salesmen must be revealed to
consumers.
AUGUST
Whatever happened to the silly season? News refuses to take a holiday, as
Israel and PLO reveal they have been conducting secret peace discussions in
Norway; EC finance ministers virtually abandon the ERM, allowing currencies
to float within bands of 15 per cent; President Clinton's budget package
passes Senate by one vote; and Morihiro Hosokawa becomes prime minister of
Japan as head of a seven-party coalition. Although the Bank of England warns
that Britain's inflation record could be threatened by rising government
borrowing, signs of UK economic recovery help the FT-SE 100 index to break
3,000 for the first time. More firsts: ER indoors opens some of Buckingham
Palace's staterooms to the public and Martin Taylor becomes the first ex-FT
journalist to be appointed as chief executive of Barclays. Monopolies and
Mergers Commission recommends that British Gas should lose its monopoly of
gas supply to domestic consumers. Police raid Volkswagen's head office and
the homes of several top executives in search for documents allegedly stolen
from General Motors' subsidiary. US lawyer Robert Altman is acquitted on
BCCI fraud charges.
SEPTEMBER
Signs of hope in the Middle East as Yitzhak Rabin and Yassir Arafat shake
hands and Israel and PLO sign agreement on limited Palestinian self-rule.
But signs of civil war in Russia as Boris Yeltsin imposes direct
presidential rule and calls fresh elections; parliament votes to strip him
of his powers and installs Alexander Rutskoi as his replacement. A
cornucopia of cuts: US vice-president Al Gore's report on eliminating waste
in public expenditure promises Dollars 108bn of savings in five years; the
Bundesbank (a bit late to save the ERM) reduces Lombard and discount rates
by a 1/2 percentage point; and the Times cuts its cover price from 45p to
30p, causing the Independent to attack Rupert Murdoch's paper for 'predatory
pricing'. The public purse opens in Japan, where the government announces a
Y6,150bn economic recovery package; it closes in Britain as Kenneth Clarke
says public sector pay increases will only be allowed if funded by
productivity improvements. Merger mania returns. Viacom makes agreed Dollars
8.2bn bid for Paramount; QVC launches rival, hostile Dollars 9.5bn bid eight
days later. Renault and Volvo agree to merge their automotive operations. U
OCTOBER
Troops loyal to Boris Yeltsin storm Russian parliament; 170 people are
killed. A dreadful month in Ulster as IRA bomb kills 10 in Shankill fish
shop and Loyalist gunmen murder seven at Greysteel. Another electoral upset.
Liberals win landslide victory in Canadian election; outgoing Progressive
Conservatives reduced to just two seats. Benazir Bhutto returns as
Pakistan's PM. Bundesbank reduces interest rates again - by half a
percentage point, triggering wave of cuts across Europe. Megamergers
continue: Bell Atlantic agrees to buy cable TV group Tele-Communications for
around Dollars 20bn. GEC announces 1p per share bid for Ferranti. But Leeds
Permanent and National &amp; Provincial building societies abandon merger plans.
British supermarket chains fail in legal attempt to stop opening of Costco
discount superstore in Essex. Baroness Thatcher's memoirs published. Michael
Jordan, basketball star with the Chicago Bulls, announces his retirement.
Government announces plans to implement some of Sheehy proposals for police
reform but drops idea of fixed term contracts. Timex employees vote to end
eight-month dispute.
NOVEMBER
The US House of Representatives votes in favour of the North American Free
Trade Agreement, after frantic lobbying from Bill Clinton, and frantic
opposition from Ross Perot. Bank of England cuts interest rates from 6 to
5.5 per cent, one week before Kenneth Clarke's first unified Budget, which
focuses more on public spending, less on tax rises, than expected, and is
well received by the markets. Annual rate of UK inflation falls to 1.4 per
cent. UK government admits contacts with provisional IRA. Sunday Mirror
prints pictures of Princess of Wales exercising in gym. Municipal elections
in Italy result in severe setback for Christian Democrats and gains for
Northern League, former communists and neo-fascists. Rudolph Giulani wins
mayoral election in New York, replacing David Dinkins. Proposed Alcazar
alliance of four European airlines collapses. Former financial adviser Roger
Levitt pleads guilty to fraudulent trading and is sentenced to 180 hours of
community service. A fault in 70-year-old London Underground cabling traps
20,000 commuters in tunnels. Two 11-year-old boys found guilty of murdering
two-year-old James Bulger on Merseyside.
DECEMBER
John Major and Albert Reynolds make 'Downing Street declaration'. Sinn Fein
invited to join talks within three months of end to violence. Ireland
accepts status of Northern Ireland can only be changed with consent of
majority. Britain says it has no selfish, strategic or economic interest in
Northern Ireland. 117 countries approve Gatt world trade treaty after
protracted negotiations. Vladimir Zhirinovsky's neo-fascist Liberal
Democrats perform well in Russian elections. Referendum approves Boris
Yeltsin's constitution. At Scott inquiry, Lady Thatcher denies detailed
knowledge of machine tool exports to Iraq. Sir Edward Heath secures release
of three Britons held in Iraq. Michael Heseltine says competition in
domestic gas market will start in 1996, but British Gas will not be broken
up. MPs approve Sunday trading: large stores will be allowed to open for six
hours, small stores all day. Ferranti calls in receivers after GEC drops
offer, Granada bids Pounds 600m for London Weekend Television, merger
between Volvo and Renault called off, Paramount board recommends QVC's
Dollars 10bn bid. Clinton dogged by sex allegations.
