FT  07 JUL 93 / Arts: It's bad news week - again / Television
According to TS Eliot (an over-rated poet, yes, but you cannot deny the
strength of The Four Quartets), 'Human kind cannot bear very much reality'.
But Eliot died nearly 30 years ago, before television hit its stride. What
on earth would he have written, had he survived long enough to share our
nightly glut of reality in 1993?
The evidence of man's inhumanity to man is bad enough: whereas past
generations learned at second or third hand, and months or even years after
the event, about some hideous piece of cruelty on the other side of the
world, we hear and see and share vividly in such experiences within hours of
their occurrence. These days, television even ensures quite often that we
are present as the ghastliness takes place, whether in Bosnia, Israel, or
the City of London as the madmen of the IRA go about their mayhem.
However, just as destructive of the viewer's spirit is the way that
television pushes our noses up against equally vivid pictures showing the
cruelty not of man but of fate. Previous generations knew, of course, that
life is often nasty, brutish and short. They too lived with the mentally ill
'in the community', and consequently saw their suffering and, no doubt,
occasionally suffered from their violence. Naturally they watched their own
parents die and, more often than we have to, their own children, too. But at
least they could believe, when faced with such personal tragedies, that this
was an anomaly, that there was something better somewhere else.
Members of the television generation in countries such as Britain have no
such cushion against reality. We know how usual are pain and suffering,
because they are brought to us, day in, day out, from our own doorsteps and
from doorsteps around the world, in graphic pictures and detailed speech.
To live with the sadness and pain of your own life is one thing, but to try
to live with the sadness and pain of the whole world is something else. Half
a century into the age of television you begin to wonder whether this is
not, perhaps, insupportable. What we are trying to do in living with global
television is unlike anything that any previous generation has attempted.
It is not just, or even mainly, a question of television news, though Martyn
Lewis had more justice on his side than his derisive colleagues would admit
when he called for more 'good' news.
Anybody who has ever worked on a national news desk has felt that collegiate
tendency towards the macho which no one likes to question and which insists
that a murder is a 'better' story than, say, a world championship won by a
Briton in some supposedly obscure sport, champions in minor sports being one
of the specific examples of a void nominated by Lewis and carefully ignored
by his opponents.
Without toppling over into the embarrassing world of the 'Good News'
bulletin ('Two thousand aircraft didn't crash on take-off from Heathrow this
week. . .'), it is time somebody tried to break out of the self-perpetuating
circle of bad news junkies. Using the fashion editor as copy taster for a
week might help.
But however much the public may be on Lewis's side in this, viewers are
surely not surprised when news programmes reflect much of the nastiness of
the world. What becomes so dispiriting is the unending succession of current
affairs programmes and documentaries detailing the hurt and horror of life
everywhere. It is bad enough when this occurs where you expect it. Anyone
familiar with the extraordinary work of the late Juris Podnieks will have
known what sort of thing was likely to turn up in Channel 4's tribute,
Camera Of Courage.
Sure enough Sunday's Homeland was Podnieks' own cut of an amazing
documentary alternating between massed choirs of Latvian folk singers and
archive clips showing the invaders from Russia and Germany who have taken it
in turns to make Latvian life utter misery: 'Mother was a midwife. She
helped anyone in need, communist or guerrilla. For that, they forced her
into a freight wagon. . .' and deported her to the gulag where there are
still 200,000 unidentified corpses.
What does the man of conscience do against totalitarianism in the age of
television? He puts a video camera on his shoulder and heads for the sound
of gunfire. Working with Podnieks, cameramen Andris Slapins and Gvido
Zvaigzne both walked towards the Soviet tanks which circled the parliament
buildings of the Baltic states just a few summers ago, and both paid with
their lives. It is difficult to avoid tears as you watch the skewed pictures
which Zvaigzne's camera continued to record as he fell, hit by the
occupiers' bullets.
Equally predictable was the melancholy of BBC2's Black Daisies For The
Bride, a combination of documentary and drama to mark National Alzheimer's
Awareness Week. Director Peter Symes and poet Tony Harrison succeeded in
capturing most of the appalling characteristics of the disease, though they
did not emphasise enough the dreadful effects upon those most closely
related to the victim, usually husband or wife.
The account by The London Programme of violent schizophrenics being released
'into the community' and then committing murder was scarcely surprising; we
have heard already about these cases piecemeal. Most frightening was the
clear indication (though this was never explicit, it did not need to be)
that we now live in a democracy where it is considered more important to
save money than to avoid murder.
More depressing than these, however, are the programmes which you think will
be positive and heartening but which are not. Knowing Antony Thomas's
previous work, it was fair to assume that his Viewpoint 93 programme for ITV
called 'In Satan's Name' would direct a good blast of fresh air on the
subject of Satanic child abuse. Previous programmes with credulous reporting
from people such as Beatrix Campbell had helped turn a modern myth which
lacked even a scrap of evidence into a phenomenon widely believed by social
workers, clergymen and even members of the police force. Sure enough
Thomas's report revealed this international hysteria for what it is, but in
the process it made your heart sink even further.
Without ever mentioning the phrase 'false memory syndrome' Thomas showed
that these 'memories' of ritual abuse occur after sessions with
'psychotherapists' and church leaders. In other words this is the same old
witch hunting trick that we have seen down the ages: invent a set of demons,
introduce them to the minds of the impressionable, put pressure on the
impressionable in public and, hey presto, demons] To see the ease and
effectiveness with which this ancient technique is still being used, for the
self-aggrandisement of therapist and churchman, is deeply saddening.
But if in the past week you wanted the final push towards suicide you needed
to watch a two-hour programme in Channel 4's 'True Stories' series called
Time Indefinite. This began as one of those home movies made by American
members of the Me generation who believe that any aspect of their own lives
captured on camera must be fascinating to the rest of the world because -
well, it's about Me, isn't it? In the second half, however, Me's grandmother
died, Me's wife miscarried, and Me's father died, a series of blows from
fate which, in the end, seemed unfair even to such an insufferable egotist
as Me.
No viewer is forced to ingest such a concentrated diet, it is true. Even
television critics are entitled to opt for a comedy or a light entertainment
programme from time to time, assuming that in July they can still find one
that has not been shown umpteen times before. But unless you do sit down and
plan carefully to avoid it, you can find television bringing you more
reality than human kind can bear.
