FT  02 JUN 93 / Leading Article: For whom the motorway tolls
MR JOHN MacGregor, Britain's transport secretary, should be congratulated
for his nerve. Only a day after narrowly avoiding a House of Commons defeat
over railway privatisation, he proposed last Wednesday another potential
political hot potato - motorway charging.
Although the idea has some theoretical appeal, Mr MacGregor will have to
work hard to make it politically acceptable. He also has yet to make a
convincing case that motorway tolls are an economically sensible way to
raise more money from motorists compared with the much simpler alternative
of putting up fuel taxes - an option which receives barely a mention in his
discussion paper.
The attraction of motorway charging is twofold. First, it could lead to a
more efficient allocation of resources within the economy. So long as roads
are free at the point of use, motorists will have an artificial incentive to
drive rather than using railways or not travelling at all. It may also be
right to impose higher charges on road-users to take account of the full
costs to the community of motoring, which include congestion, noise and
pollution as well as building and maintaining roads.
Second, unless motorways can produce an extra stream of income, the
government argues that public-spending constraints will prevent new roads
being built as quickly as desirable. Similarly, without a source of income,
it will be difficult to privatise the motorways or franchise parts of the
network to private sector companies.
But annual motorway permits and electronic tolls - the methods of charging
currently favoured by the government - have drawbacks. It is hard to see any
merit in permits, since motorways would still be free at the point of use
and so nothing would be done to promote a more efficient allocation of
resources.
More pollution
There are also snags with electronic tolls. They would distort road usage
since only motorways would be covered. As a result, traffic would be
diverted on to secondary roads bringing more noise, pollution and accidents
to Britain's towns and villages. Even with a charge of 1.5p per mile - which
would only raise Pounds 700m a year - the government estimates 10 per cent
of traffic would be diverted off motorways. There could also be substantial
costs in building and operating an electronic toll system, although Mr
MacGregor's paper makes no attempt to quantify them.
Moreover, the government has yet to make a case that congestion is a
widespread problem throughout the motorway system. Britain does have a road
congestion problem, but it is most acute in city centres - particularly
London. The case for urban road-pricing is strong, but is not dealt with in
this week's discussion document.
Extra money
Increasing fuel taxes would face none of the drawbacks of motorway tolls.
There would be no traffic diversion since taxes would cover all roads, not
just motorways. Moreover, collection costs would be minimal given that there
is already a system in place.
The main snag with higher fuel taxes from the government's perspective is
that they would not obviously help promote the second objective of preparing
the motorways for privatisation. The danger is that the extra money would be
grabbed by the Treasury to finance the general budget deficit instead of
road-building. But this is a danger also faced by motorway tolls. And, if it
can be solved by establishing a separate fund far from the Treasury's
clutches, it is not obvious that the same could not be done for a proportion
of fuel taxes.
Moreover, the government has yet to produce persuasive arguments that there
will be substantial efficiency gains from privatising motorways. The private
sector already builds and maintains the roads under contract. There may well
be benefits in redrawing such contracts so that private operators bear more
of the risk. There could also be advantages in hiving off the motorway
network into a public corporation separate from the Department of Transport.
But neither move would require an elaborate system of motorway tolls.
To be fair, the government's proposals are not set in stone but are designed
to launch a 'wide, informed and vigorous public debate'. Good.
