FT  16 JUN 93 / Unification changes the place of women in the new German
home: Judy Dempsey finds women in the east feel they have paid a high price
'UNIFICATION has not been kind to the women of eastern Germany,' says Ms
Barbara Pfeiffer. In 1989, demonstrations in her home town of Leipzig
spawned the people's revolution which brought down the Berlin Wall. Two
years later Ms Pfeiffer lost her job when the chemicals factory where she
had worked for 25 years closed down.
Ms Pfeiffer, however, was sufficiently determined - and lucky, she says - to
find a part-time job with a local construction company. Many women, who have
borne the brunt of the surge in unemployment in eastern Germany since
unification, have not been as fortunate.
The official April unemployment total of 15.4 per cent hides the extent of
the problem. Including those on job creation and training schemes and those
who only have part-time jobs, about 30 per cent of the workforce are without
full-time work. Two thirds of the unemployed are women.
By contrast, East Germany guaranteed employment to more than 90 per cent of
women, who accounted for 49 per cent of the labour force in 1989. 'The
regime needed us,' explains Mrs Pfeiffer. 'It wanted to show there was
equality under the communist system and it wanted us to work because many
had fled before the Wall went up in 1961. We also needed the money, even
though we were paid less than men,' she adds.
Although the chemical plant where she worked turned out low-grade products,
health standards were almost non-existent, and few employees were motivated
by a management chosen for their loyalty to the communist party, 'it was a
job,' says Ms Pfeiffer.
The state's abundant provision of child-care made it easy for women to work.
Until 1989, 80 per cent of children under three had a creche place, 95 per
cent of pre-school over-threes attended kindergarten, more than 80 per cent
of those aged six to ten received day-care after school, and 90 per cent of
children attended cheap holiday camps.
There are fears that the number of kindergartens will soon be reduced. 'Some
people complained that the kids would be indoctrinated by the stupid
communists,' says Ms Gaby Schwartz, a 37-year-old East Berliner. 'But the
child-care system in western Germany appals me.'
In the western states, 2.3m children compete for 600,000 partially
subsidised state child-care places. Generally, however, many women employ
nannies, or stay at home with the children.
According to the federal ministry of women and youth, there is an
overcapacity of kindergartens in eastern Germany. 'About 120 places exist
for 100 children. The local communes will have to decide where to cut back.'
It said east German women would in future have to pay for child care.
Such a move would come on top of the scrapping of the former East Germany's
generous child benefits. Unemployment - and the abolition of those benefits
 -has slashed the birth rate from 2.5 children per family to 1.3, as low as
in western Germany and one of the lowest in Europe.
Unification has also impinged on the former East Germany's liberal abortion
laws. 'In the old days, women in eastern Germany had one big freedom:
abortion on demand. We could not understand why it was illegal for West
Germans to have abortions,' says Helga Kokoschka, an unemployed 28-year-old
mother of two children.
Abortions were a common form of birth control, as in all of eastern Europe.
Yet East German women saw abortion on demand not in ethical or moral terms,
but as a political issue where women had complete freedom of choice. 'The
state never dared interfere. This was our one area of freedom,' says Ms
Pfeiffer.
Thus the German constitutional court's ruling last month that abortion
should remain illegal and only available under certain conditions has
angered many east German women. 'The new unified state is imposing its will
on us,' says Ms Pfeiffer. 'Our choice to work and control our own lives have
disappeared.'
East German women have had difficulties coming to terms with the multiple
challenges of unification. Ms Eva Kolinsky, professor of German studies at
Britain's Keele University, who is studying the position of women in Leipzig
since 1989, says an entire generation of women have lost out as a result of
unification. 'Those in mid-career, in their 30s or early 40s, will find it
very difficult to re-enter the labour market,' she says.
Ms Kolinsky is hopeful, however, for the next generation. 'More women are
attending university. They see qualifications as the key to entering the
market, when it picks up,' she says. 'But the price has been high. An entire
generation has lost their social status in the new Germany.'
