FT  05 AUG 93 / Technology: Software's secret war - US computer companies
are at odds with the government over data security plans
A battle over computer data security standards has erupted in the US, with
private industry and the government at odds over the most effective way to
protect information that flows through large networks of computers.
A group of companies led by Novell, the network software company, is
attempting to set a new data security standard, while the US government is
getting little industry support for its 'Clipper chip' proposal for voice
and data security, which was introduced in April.
The key to protecting computer networks from unauthorised access by computer
hackers and spies lies in the use of data encryption technologies.
Encryption also offers individuals much-needed data privacy that can protect
their electronic communications and their bank accounts.
Novell says its proposal is based on a more sophisticated data encryption
technology than the government's Clipper system, and is better suited to
computer networks.
The company has formed a coalition consisting of 22 users and vendors to
define a reliable data security system. Coalition members include Brian
Gladman, senior procurement manager at the UK Ministry of Defence, and
Herman Roos, a partner at accountants KPMG Peat Marwick in the Netherlands.
The government's Clipper technology is based on a secret encryption method
developed by the National Security Agency and adopted by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). But there is concern within
industry that the Clipper encryption technology has a secret 'trapdoor' that
would allow the NSA to decipher messages. The NSA denies that the trapdoor
exists but will not reveal the Clipper encryption algorithm.
In June more than 50 organisations united to criticise the government's
endorsement of Clipper. Members of that group included AT&amp;T, IBM, Apple
Computer, MCI and public interest groups Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility (CPSR) and the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF).
CPSR and the EFF say that allowing law enforcement agencies to snoop on
communications violates individual privacy rights. And they complain that
keeping the encryption method secret could leave systems open to attack by
computer hackers who might stumble upon a way to crack the encryption
algorithm.
Communications companies also say that Clipper is too slow. 'We need a data
security system that can keep up with high-speed networks,' says Charles
Hart, president of Semaphore Communications, a data security company based
in Aptos, California.
Novell proposes using a system based on the IBM-developed Data Encryption
Standard (DES) and the Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) encryption method,
considered almost unbreakable.
The RSA encryption method relies on the product of two large prime numbers
and the use of keys - special numbers to encode and decipher messages. Users
have a public and private key. To send a message, the file is encrypted with
the sender's private key and the recipient's public key. Only the intended
recipient can decode the message.
RSA Data Security, which licenses the RSA encryption technology, claims it
would take supercomputers running for hundreds of years to decode encrypted
messages.
Glenn Hyatt, head of data security consultants HighGate Solutions in
Wilmington, Delaware, says: 'There is an important need among large
corporations for a reliable data security model. Novell is the right company
to co-ordinate this since their software is a de facto standard in
networks.'
Despite the protests the US government is expected to press ahead with
Clipper after the proposal's review period ends in October.
Officials at the NSA and NIST insist that while Clipper is likely to become
a government standard its use by the private sector will be voluntary.
However, US government procurement effectively sets standards that private
industry - especially those companies that do business with the government -
will be forced to follow.
Even as a standard for government computing, Clipper sets a dangerous
precedent, warns Marc Rotenberg, director of the Washington office of the
CPSR. 'We believe that privacy protection is important for building a
national communications infrastructure and Clipper does not provide that
privacy.'
Rotenberg is also suspicious that new laws could force private companies and
individuals to provide a way for the Federal Bureau of Investigation to tap
into encrypted communications systems. The FBI has been trying to gain
support in Congress for the passage of the digital telephony bill, which
will force companies producing communcations equipment to give easy access
to FBI wire-taps.
'The government says that Clipper's use will be voluntary, but if the FBI
succeeds with its digital telephony bill it could make Clipper's use
mandatory,' Rotenberg says.
The FBI claims that criminals using encryption technologies make it
impossible for the bureau to conduct wire-taps. However, the CPSR says the
agency has not yet shown that a single investigation has been hampered
through criminals using encrypted communications.
The computer industry fears that such initiatives will force companies to
adopt weaker data security measures than those available to foreign
competitors.
While US companies are permitted to use whatever encryption technology they
want, there are restrictions on the export of computer products.
'For every export order, we have to obtain special permission from the
Department of Commerce,' says Bill Ferguson, vice-president of sales and
marketing at Semaphore. 'This paperwork takes about two months to complete,
even to countries in western Europe. Our competitors abroad don't have these
restrictions.'
The Software Publishers Association, which represents more than 1,000 US
software companies, has also complained to the government that export
controls on software containing encryption features are harming the software
industry.
At a hearing organised in early June by the NIST, the association's general
counsel, Ilene Rosenthal, testified: 'Unilateral US export controls do not
make any sense given the widespread legal availability of foreign encryption
programs.'
