FT  23 FEB 93 / Survey of Ontario (4): Businesses back off - Dissatisfaction
has driven some companies south of the Canadian border, but others are doing
fine
SOME BUSINESSES are so disenchanted with Ontario that they have moved their
factories lock, stock and barrel elsewhere - invariably to the US or Mexico.
Tridon, a Canadian-owned maker of motor vehicle indicators, windshield
wipers and hose clamps, closed its Ontario operations in mid-1991 with the
loss of over 600 jobs. The same items are now produced at three plants near
Nashville, Tennessee.
Lawson Mardon, the packaging group controlled by Cragnotti and Partners of
Italy, put up the shutters at its detergent carton factory on the outskirts
of Toronto last year at the same time as it started producing the same items
at a new plant in Syracuse, New York. The mining industry, a backbone of
many rural communities, is especially unhappy. American Barrick, the gold
producer whose head office is in Toronto, is not spending a penny on
exploration in Ontario (or any other part of Canada) this year. Citing low
returns on investment and Ontario's recent labour law, Mr Bob Smith,
Barrick's president, asks rhetorically: 'Where the hell would you put your
money?' Barrick is now focusing its efforts on the US, Mexico and Chile.
Ms Martha Hoffman, project manager at the Western New York Economic
Development Corp in Buffalo, estimates that 200-300 Canadian companies have
set up operations in that part of New York state since the mid-1980s.
According to Ms Hoffman, the gap between costs in Ontario and New York is
not as wide as it is often perceived to be. But incentives offered by US
agencies - such as extended property tax concessions and low financing rates
 -are more generous than those available in Canada.
The expectation of wider access to the US market is the clincher for many
companies. 'By being here, they feel they have a better chance of
penetrating it than they do from Canada,' Ms Hoffman says.
Tridon's move to Tennessee is typical of the manufacturers which have headed
south. Mr Murray Kingsburgh, executive vice-president of Devtek, Tridon's
controlling shareholder, says the impetus came from competitors in the
northern US, which were moving to the southern states and Mexico in search
of lower costs, especially labour. 'We knew it had to be done to remain
competitive,' Mr Kingsburgh says. The move was driven entirely by a
comparison of costs. He specifically mentions high wages and taxes in
Ontario. Neither the old nor the new workforces was unionised.
With trade barriers crumbling between the US and Canada, Ontario faces the
challenge of proving to investors that it is the best base for serving not
only Canada's industrial heartland but also a wide swathe of north-east
North America.
Lawson Mardon's new carton plant in Syracuse, for instance, supplies both
the US and Canadian markets. Customers south of the border, such as Procter
&amp; Gamble, Colgate and Unilever, encouraged the company to move as stiffening
competition from US suppliers cut into Lawson's market share.
