FT  10 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Union criticism as Ferranti sheds 630 more
jobs
Receivers at Ferranti International yesterday announced 630 redundancies
among the 3,600-strong workforce.
The job losses, which had been expected since the company went into
receivership last week, are to be spread across the group's operations
throughout the UK.
Mr Murdoch McKillop and Mr John Talbot, the two Arthur Andersen receivers
appointed to the ailing electronics business after GEC withdrew takeover
plans, believe the job cuts will save Pounds 1m a month in operating costs.
This should allow them to run the business activities without further
immediate losses if all Ferranti's customers can be persuaded to agree
various contract changes.
Mr Talbot said they remained optimistic about their ability to sell the
businesses as going concerns.
'What this means is that anyone wanting to buy any of the businesses will
now be able to pick them up without having to fund the cost of
redundancies,' AEEU, the engineering union, said last night.
Mr Paul Gallagher, leader of the union's electricians' section, said the
news was worse than he had feared.
'It is a bitter pill to swallow, especially as the government could easily
have saved these jobs by awarding outstanding Ministry of Defence contracts
to Ferranti.'
The redundancies are higher than management had wanted - it had planned for
500 - but the receivers hope the job losses will allow them the breathing
space they need to make the businesses viable.
In the past three years Ferranti had reduced its workforce from 22,000.
The redundancies follow the same pattern as those at Leyland Daf last year
where Mr Talbot and Mr McKillop also made severe job cuts after they took
over as receivers.
An industrial tribunal chairman, awarding compensation to sacked Leyland
workers in November, criticised the receivers for failing to meet their
statutory obligations.
Under employment laws, workers should receive more than 90 days notice of
redundancy. The receivers said, however, they were unable to comply with the
requirement.
Mr McKillop said he sympathised with the employees who were losing their
jobs.
