FT  29 JUN 93 / US agency stiffens guidelines for AZT: Wellcome's shares hit
by recommendation
ADDITIONAL guidelines for the use of AZT, the most widely used drug to treat
HIV and Aids, have been submitted by the US National Institutes of Health.
The influential agency recommended that doctors and patients not showing
symptoms (asymptomatic) should decide between them whether to start using
the therapy. Previously it had advised all patients with HIV to take the
drug as soon as white blood cells in the immune system, called CD4 cells,
fell to about half the normal level.
Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases and a leading Aids researcher, said: 'The option of not
treating is a viable option.' He added that the drug remained the first line
of defence against the disease.
The recommendations follow an Anglo-French study presented at the annual
Aids conference this month, suggesting the drug, Wellcome's second
best-selling medicine, might be of limited use in asymptomatic patients.
Dr Trevor Jones, Wellcome's research and development officer, said: 'I would
have preferred that they just continued to endorse the existing guidelines
rather than add these caveats, but it does confirm the utility of the drug
in asymptomatic patients.' Wellcome estimated between 10 per cent and 15 per
cent of those on AZT were asymptomatic.
The drug had sales of Pounds 131m in the six months to February 1993. AZT's
worldwide sales were Pounds 213m in 1991-92, representing 12.5 per cent of
group turnover.
Wellcome's shares fell 10p to 688p yesterday on the news. The fall was
exacerbated by concerns over a court case involving AZT's patents which
started yesterday between Wellcome and two US generics companies, Barr
Laboratories and Novopharm.
The American companies argue the drug was co-developed for treating Aids by
US government scientists, and that the British group should not hold
exclusive rights. They want to supply the drug at far lower prices than
Wellcome.
The patents are due to expire in 2005.
UK-based analysts said the company's shares were likely to remain volatile
during the six- to eight-week trial, which is being held before a jury in
New Bern, North Carolina.
'Based on the science, Wellcome should win,' said Mr Paul Woodhouse, analyst
at Smith New Court. 'But it is in front of a jury and Aids and AZT are
emotive issues.
'If Wellcome loses, the inevitable appeal will be held in front of a judge,
and sanity should prevail.'
