FT  05 NOV 93 / Yeltsin thwarting free and fair election, EC delegation told
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin is thwarting a free and fair election by depriving
opposition parties and groups of media coverage and facilities to organise
ahead of the polls due in December, a European parliamentary delegation was
told in Moscow this week.
Allegations of corruption have also been made against some of the parties
trying to collect the required 100,000 signatures needed by midnight tonight
to qualify for registration.
At least 32 main parties are trying to gather the signatures and most are
likely to qualify.
Ms Magdalena Hoff, leader of a delegation of European Community
parliamentarians which visited Moscow this week, heard a litany of
complaints about the electoral process, the most serious from parties on the
communist left and nationalist right.
The strongest allegation came from Mr Sergei Baburin, leader of the Russian
National Union and a former hardline deputy, who said that his telephone and
those of all the deputies who had stayed in the Russian parliament
throughout the siege had been cut. He had been told he could only meet
foreign correspondents in his home with the permission of the authorities.
The loss of communications made it difficult to organise the collection of
signatures, he said.
Mr Genady Zyuganov, leader of the Russian Communist party, said he had
written to Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, first deputy prime minister, asking for a
meeting to protest against media bias - but had received no reply.
'At the moment, news broadcasts begin with (Mr Yegor) Gaidar (the first
deputy prime minister and head of the liberal Russia's Choice group) and end
with Gaidar.'
From the centrist groups Mr Arkady Volsky, leader of the Civic Union, said
that the press - much of it still subsidised by the state - was heavily
biased in favour of the pre-presidential groups, such as Russia's Choice.
He had told Ms Hoff, he said, that 'we don't need observers on election day,
we need them now'.
Mr Nikolai Travkin, leader of the Democratic party, said calling elections
on a tight schedule with unclear rules 'had one justification - securing the
legitimacy of the current power. It is political piracy.' He admitted,
however, that it offered a chance to avert a social explosion.
Most of the main groups now claim to have or be near to securing the
signatures needed - but there are numerous allegations of buying votes.
Russia may not get funds this year, Page 13
Fight for freedom of speech in Russia, Page 18
