FT  03 NOV 93 / Survey of Morocco (5): How to tempt the tourist - Hotels are
doing better, but the industry still has problems
TOURISTS ARE back in force and hotel managers are smiling again. The Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait three years ago was catastrophic for the tourist sector,
which remains Morocco's second largest hard currency earner, after
remittances from Moroccan workers living in western Europe. Last year's net
receipts from tourism, Dh11.7bn, were one third up on 1991 and this year is
expected to be even better.
France remains the leading source of visitors with more than 2m, followed by
Germany with 1.7m visitors, and then Spain and Italy. The recovery in
tourist numbers, notably in Marrakesh, has been helped by the war in former
Yugoslavia and attacks on tourists in Egypt and, more recently, Turkey.
Casablanca has also seen a larger flow of visitors, both tourists and
businessmen.
However, the gains may not be as great as they seem. Not only are European
tourists spending little outside their hotels, but the price of many tours
and hotel rooms for businessmen can easily be booked at discounts of 30 to
50 per cent.
In 1890, Lord Salisbury dismissed Morocco as an 'enormous amount of sand'
which he was happy to let the 'Gallic cockerel' have. That remark is very
unfair to the sheer beauty and variety of the lands ruled by the oldest
monarchy in the Arab world.
For those who seek sun and sea, good beaches abound along the Mediterranean
and Atlantic coasts. Around Agadir, one may enjoy 300 days of sunshine a
year. For those with more cultural pursuits, the old imperial cities of Fez
and Marrakesh offer the easiest exposure to the 'mysterious Orient'. For the
rapidly growing adventure holiday sector, walking and skiing in the High
Atlas mountains and motoring to the spectacular Saharan valleys around
Erfoud and Zagora offer endless scope.
Morocco has been spared the vandalising of its coastline so characteristic
of parts of Greece and Spain, yet its lack of visitors remains a puzzle. Why
does the country do no better than Tunisia, its small eastern neighbour,
whose scenery and traditions, however pleasant, are no match for its own?
Why does Morocco attract less than a fifth of those who visit the Canary
Islands? The two main reasons are not too hard to find.
First of all, foreign visitors are liable to harassment by flocks of teenage
touts and 'guides' almost wherever they go. Secondly, there is often no
obvious connection between the number of stars that a hotel boasts and the
quality of service that the tourist should expect.
1. More discerning visitors are also disappointed by the absence of any
serious policy to restore old buildings and cities and the lack of any
cultural activities, except for the most jaded of folk dances, which are
often a source of embarrassment rather than entertainment.
The authorities have often promised to crack down on unofficial guides and
beggars and on unscrupulous taxi drivers, whose endless expectation of yet
another tip helps to explain why, for so many European visitors, their first
visit to Morocco is their last. Begging has begun to be discussed more
openly in the media, notably on television. Nevertheless, in Marrakesh the
situation is so bad that many Moroccan nationals refuse to visit the city.
Repression alone will not provide an answer as the intricate network of
protection and corruption, built up over the years and taking in shopowners,
young Moroccan guides and the local police, makes the problem a complex one
to unscramble. Income disparities in Morocco remain great and the European
visitor is inevitably cast as the rich man, particularly in towns such as
Marrakesh and Fez, where one fifth of the population remains unemployed. In
Marrakesh one half of the population is believed to derive its living,
directly or indirectly, from tourism. The last two years of drought have
compounded difficulties as more people than usual flock from the countryside
to the cities, desperately seeking some means of earning a living.
Many Moroccans suspect that the aggressive attitudes shown to foreign
visitors are not susceptible of an easy cure. Morocco is paying for its high
income disparities and poor education system, which leaves two-thirds of the
population illiterate. The comparison with Tunisia is instructive - there
harassment is simply not a problem.
2. The second reason is equally complex. Morocco has always prided itself on
being an upmarket destination. Yet despite the 'beautiful' people who travel
to Marrakesh, most European visitors travel on package tours, like millions
of others around the Mediterranean. Yet they are often billeted in four- or
five-star hotels, which provide only what has been paid for, not that
demanded by high-class establishments.
The authorities have tried to downgrade certain hotels, but nonetheless the
visitor must be prepared for surprises. Some three-star hotels are
excellent, but many five-star hotels are not worth the money.
It is damaging to the country's reputation among tourists when hotels such
as the Hotel Palais Jamai, which dominates Fez and is meant for the
seriously rich, provide indifferent service or when the Tour Hassan Hotel,
the second best in the capital, Rabat, charges prices way above the service
it offers. Its five-star de luxe status is viewed, in Rabat, as a bit of a
joke.
The Tour Hassan is privately managed which shows that a privately-run hotel
can be as badly run as a public sector one. In general, Morocco's hotels are
burdened with a surfeit of stars; the older hotels suffer from lack of
upkeep and many establishments have a gung-ho attitude towards their
customers.
However, there are enough well-managed hotels to suggest that Moroccans are
capable of maintaining high standards. The Royal Mansour in Casablanca,
which is managed by Forte, and the Minzah in Tangiers, perhaps the most
attractive hotel in Morocco, are two prime examples. Further down the scale,
the Idou Anfa and Kandara hotels in Casablanca offer good service at a
reasonable price.
More recently, a new chain called Moussafir started to open hotels that
operated on a new formula. All are built at railway terminals and though
boasting only three stars they are competitively priced, decorated in a
simple style and provide good service. They enjoy a 75 per cent occupancy
rate. Eleven more are due to open in the next few years.
The Moussafir chain is the brainchild of the largest private group in
Morocco, ONA, which owns the hotels jointly with the Banque Commerciale du
Maroc and the Moroccan state railway company ONCF. Unlike many hotels in
Morocco, these hotels are staffed by professionally trained personnel.
ONA is also launching three large 'integrated' tourist projects in Cabo
Negro, near Tetouan, in the north, Casablanca and Marrakesh. All will have
golf courses and with luck will provide an example to others.
The difficulty of imposing modern standards of management in many hotels
stems from the fact that many private entrepreneurs who have made money in
one sector like to invest their savings in bricks and mortar. They often run
their hotels themselves, and do not allow the professionally trained
managers they appoint any real say in decisions. They do not see fit to
reinvest profits in the business and thus standards deteriorate over time.
Too many hotels are built for essentially speculative reasons.
Another, historical, reason explains this lack of progress. Until the Treaty
of Fez established the French and Spanish protectorates in 1912, Morocco was
as closed and unknown to foreigners as Tibet. The country had been an
independent kingdom since the arrival of Moulay Idriss, a grandson of the
prophet Muhammed in the 8th century AD. This independence had been fiercely
guarded until the the beginning of this century.
Being cut off from the outside world did, however, offer the great advantage
of preserving, far more than elsewhere in North Africa, old traditions. The
other side of the coin is that until recently, Morocco has not been as
successful at marketing itself abroad as it should have been.
Nor has the number of just over 84,000 beds increased: the figure is what it
was six years ago. However, some Moroccan observers argue that the tourist
industry's main task should be to raise its standards and to contain
harassment.
That means more professional staff and a willingness on the part of the
authorities to act rather than talk. Recent measures by Mr Hassan Abouyoub,
minister of tourism, suggest he is fully aware of what is needed. If the
problems which confront the sector are tackled with determination, the
pickings, in terms of foreign income and new jobs - not to mention a kinder
perception of Morocco abroad - will be rich indeed.
