FT  20 AUG 93 / London Stock Exchange: Shares in HSBC savaged
THE MASSIVE rerating and upsurge in HSBC shares since the Hong Kong bank's
July 1992 merger with Midland Bank, of the UK, was brought to a shuddering
halt yesterday after the UK market reacted with dismay to much lower than
expected profits from HSBC's Hong Kong subsidiary Hang Seng Bank.
The Hong Kong subsidiary posted profits up 17 per cent at HKDollars 2.75bn,
compared with HKDollars 2.37bn, while the market had expected a profits rise
in the region of 23 per cent. Hang Seng accompanied its results with a
cautious review of prospects in the region.
HSBC is by far the largest of the UK-registered banks, measured by market
capitisation, dwarfing others such as Barclays, NatWest and Lloyds. Some
London-based analysts put on a brave face as marketmakers savaged the HSBC
share price. One said: 'The market has not taken on board the fact that it
was only recently that the Hong Kong banks began to lift the veil of secrecy
that has surrounded their real profits for the last 60 years. There is a
feeling that Hang Seng may have only declared something like 80 per cent of
their real profits during the half year.' The analyst added that a much
clearer picture would emerge with Hang Seng's full-year numbers.
HSBC is scheduled to report interim results on August 31, with analysts
previously looking for profits in excess of Pounds 1.25bn, up from Pounds
521m, boosted by the inclusion of profits from Midland Bank and the big
shift in the value of the HK dollar against sterling.
HSBC shares, trading at 341p at the time of the Midland merger in July last
year, subsided to 316p by last August before embarking on a remarkable run
which took the share price up to a record 772p earlier this week. Yesterday
it dropped 40, or 5.2 per cent, to 724p, with the Hong Kong-registered
shares down 35 at 706p.
Turnover in HSBC 75p shares reached 13m, with more than 3m of the Hong
Kong-registered shares changing hands.
The Hang Seng shock also jolted Standard Chartered shares from their upward
tack. Worries that profits growth generated by the bank's Far Eastern
businesses could slow saw Standard slide 25 to 964p.
