FT  13 DEC 93 / International Company News: BCI sell-off may be brought
forward
The Italian government is considering accelerating the privatisation of
Banca Commerciale Italiana, one of the country's leading banks, following
the strong domestic demand for shares in Credito Italiano.
The Credito Italiano deal involves the privatisation of the 67 per cent
stake owned by the IRI state holding company. When allocations for the
transaction, expected to be up to seven times oversubscribed, are made on
Wednesday, retail applicants will be pared back to a maximum of 2,500 shares
each.
Meanwhile, investors who sought to buy shares in the latter part of the
application period, which closed ahead of schedule on Wednesday, are not
expected to receive any stock.
The call to bring forward the BCI sale has been influenced by the strong
interest in Credito Italiano and the pace of political developments in Rome.
The original timing for BCI's privatisation at the beginning of April has
been overshadowed by the growing chance that general elections will be held
in late March.
Bankers have warned against scheduling the privatisation in the immediate
aftermath of the poll. The election is likely to return a highly divided
parliament and trigger a period of considerable uncertainty in Italian
politics in the short term.
As a result, the government is thinking about bringing forward the deal to
the second half of February. That would leave insufficient time for the
planned simultaneous listing of BCI stock in the US, but would otherwise be
technically feasible, according to one banker.
'The US listing could be done subsequently, and the likely reduction in US
demand as a result will probably be immaterial in view of the strength of
domestic retail interest in privatisations shown by Credito Italiano,' he
said.
The biggest obstacle to the new timing could come from a clash with the
scheduled sale of Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, the big Rome-based financial
services group.
The treasury is planning to sell up to 30 per cent of IMI's shares in early
February 1994. Although BCI and IMI have markedly different specialisations,
and the two privatisations are expected to appeal to differing investors,
any attempt to sell the two banks almost simultaneously, 'could be more than
Italy's privatisation programme could bear', said one banker.
Surprisingly, neither the government nor IRI appears to have considered
bringing the IMI deal forward, or swapping it in the privatisation queue
with BCI, which is likely to raise considerably more cash for the
hard-pressed treasury. However, Mr Luigi Arcuti, IMI chairman, indicated at
the weekend the bank might try to bring forward its privatisation.
Separately, IMI announced that net profits in the first nine months of this
year were L376bn (Dollars 224m), while total assets at the end of September
amounted to L72,430bn.
