FT  28 OCT 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Future seen for steel
mini-mills in developing countries
the basis for all sheet steel products - could make big inroads in
developing countries, but are much less likely to be competitive in Europe
and Japan.
This is the main conclusion of a study by CRU International, the
London-based metals and mining consultancy, which has spent the past 10
months trying to answer one of the most important long-term questions for
the steel industry - and indirectly for its raw material suppliers.
The success of Nucor, the US company that is making hot-rolled coil at
mini-mills in Indiana and Arkansas, has prompted integrated steel producers
elsewhere to question whether their large, labour-intensive plants can
survive against smaller, nimbler competitors.
New technology - in particular the development of continuous thin slab
casting as used at Nucor - has increased the pressure on integrated
producers.
But the CRU report vindicates the strategy of European producers such as
British Steel, which believes its best long-term strategy for flat products
is to be a low-cost integrated producer.
Mini-mills use a combination of scrap or direct-reduced iron - produced by
reducing iron ores to metallic iron without the normal coke-making step - as
raw materials. These are then turned into liquid steel in an electric arc
furnace.
But CRU says the high cost of energy and scrap reduce the potential
competitiveness of the mini-mill in Western Europe and Japan. Scrap costs in
western Europe are 5-10 per cent higher than in the US, while energy costs
are 50-60 per cent higher.
In addition, it says, structural overcapacity and political considerations
in these markets will slow the penetration of mini-mills significantly, so
that their share of the hot-rolled market will reach only 6.4 per cent by
2005 from less than 1 per cent today.
In contrast, the mini-mills' biggest opportunity for an increase in
production share is expected to be in the developing regions of Asia, the
Middle East and Latin America. The study says the new thin-slab mini-mills
are ideal for small, dispersed markets because of their smaller scale and
lower capital cost.
The study forecasts mini-mills will have increased their share of Asian
(excluding Japanese and Chinese) and Latin American markets from 9.7 per
cent to 29.7 per cent by 2005.
Flat products: how competitive is the mini-mill? CRU International, 31 Mount
Pleasant, London WC1X 0AD. Pounds 10,950.
