FT  28 MAY 93 / Mayhew issues denial on 'one crucial' point: Iraq arms
inquiry hears clash of evidence
SIR Patrick Mayhew, the former attorney-general, issued a detailed and
forthright denial yesterday to the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry that he had
attempted to suppress evidence in the supergun affair.
He was speaking after the strength of the original allegation against him by
Sir Hal Miller had been softened in revised written evidence given to Lord
Justice Scott by the ex-MP and former Conservative party vice-chairman.
Sir Hal, in his oral evidence, had referred to a meeting in April 1990 with
Sir Patrick in the lobby of the House of Commons. He said he had threatened
to produce evidence in support of Mr Peter Mitchell of Walter Somers, a
Midlands engineering company, who was facing prosecution on suspicion of
illegally exporting arts for the supergun.
Sir Patrick read from a seven-page statement that had been prepared at the
request of Lord Justice Scott before yesterday's public hearing. He said: 'I
want to say at the outset that I do not challenge Sir Hal's good faith in
giving that evidence . . . I disagree with it in one crucial respect. I
assert my absolute confidence that I never attempted, as he alleges, to
persuade him not to go to court and produce documents if Somers were
charged.'
In his revised statement read out by Lord Justice Scott at the start of
yesterday's hearing, Sir Hal amplified and amended his account of the
meeting with Sir Patrick.
He was no longer as definite that Sir Patrick had attempted to dissuade him
from going to court. He was also uncertain about whether he showed Sir
Patrick the pieces of evidence or merely 'flashed them' at him as the two
men stood in a queue, waiting to vote. Referring to the original allegation
about the advice to withhold evidence, Sir Hal said Sir Patrick 'may have
been merely testing me, but the inference I drew was that he didn't expect
me to go to court'.
Sir Hal claimed Sir Patrick said, 'You wouldn't do that, would you?' when he
threatened to go to court with evidence showing that parts for the supergun
had been exported with the apparent approval of the Department of Trade and
Industry and the knowledge of both British intelligence and the Ministry of
Defence.
But Sir Patrick said he recollected that the character of his words had
been, 'So be it', or, 'That is up to you'. He insisted that throughout his
term as attorney-general he and other government law officers had remained
vigorously independent from ministerial interference.
While casting little fresh light on government involvement in military
exports to Iraq, yesterday's evidence raised new questions about the role of
British Customs in the supergun affair.
According to Sir Patrick's evidence, senior Customs officials wanted to
proceed with the prosecution of Walter Somers on the ground that if the case
collapsed, the credibility of the government's control on export of defence
equipment to Iraq would be dealt a 'heavy blow'.
The inquiry was adjourned until June 11.
Match lacks punch, Page 8
