FT  17 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Tough task for cabinet spending
committee
THE CABINET will today launch this year's public spending round by setting
up a powerful cabinet committee that includes Mr Michael Howard, the home
secretary, to oversee negotiations between the Treasury and spending
departments.
The EDX committee is expected to be given a tough remit at today's meeting,
with cabinet ministers expected to agree that public spending should not
exceed the Pounds 253.6bn ceiling set for 1994-95.
The inclusion of Mr Howard, regarded at Westminster as likely to back harsh
spending curbs rather than tax increases, will help appease rightwingers in
the Tory party.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, is expected to set out a bleak outlook
for public finances in the year ahead, emphasising that he does not believe
that Britain's Pounds 50bn annual public deficit can be reduced only by
economic growth.
He will warn colleagues that extra spending in the next financial year by
one department will have to be offset by savings elsewhere.
Besides Mr Howard, other members of the EDX committee are likely to include
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Tony Newton,
leader of the Commons, as well as Mr Clarke and Mr Michael Portillo, chief
secretary to the Treasury.
With the debate within the Conservative party over tax and expenditure plans
likely to last throughout the summer, Mr John Smith, Labour leader, warned
yesterday that the government 'has declared war on the welfare state'.
Speaking at the health service union Cohse's annual conference, Mr Smith
said: 'There could hardly be a more stark example of this government's
priorities. When faced with the failure of their economic policies they
don't consider closing tax loopholes for the rich . . . they penalise people
on Invalidity Benefit.'
In response, Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, said it was
'monstrous' to suggest the government was attacking the worse off, saying
the government's review of public spending 'will produce a better system
that protects the most vulnerable whilst being affordable'.
Cohse's annual conference is expected today to vote against a motion
supporting existing trade union links with Labour - a move that would
encourage Mr Smith in his efforts to win enough support to avoid a
confrontation with union leaders in the autumn.
Meanwhile, Labour MPs yesterday rejected proposals to reform the system for
electing party's chief whip. A meeting of the parliamentary Labour party
voted to keep the system of separate elections for the chief whip and his
deputy.
The PLP backed a proposal to increase from three to four the number of women
that Labour MPs must vote for in shadow cabinet elections.
