FT  03 SEP 93 / Government Bonds: Spate of auctions exaggerates effect of
profit-taking
EUROPEAN government bond investors seized the opportunity to bank profits
yesterday following recent sharp rallies. The sell-off was exaggerated as
many dealers kept back funds to take advantage of a spate of bond auctions
yesterday.
It was further compounded by a shiver of nervousness emanating from
Belgium's decision to raise interest rates and sharp currency falls against
a surging D-Mark.
Finally, many investors were shifting funds back into shorter-dated
maturities following the phenomenal rallies at the long end over recent
weeks. This was particularly true in France, where even apologists have
become slightly nervous over the extent of the rally.
Yesterday, the main focus was on a Treasury auction of FFr13.1bn of 10-year
paper and FFr6.4bn of 30-year paper. There had been concern that the slowing
trend for rate cuts would leave auctions less attractive than for previous
issues. However, the 10-year bonds with a 6.75 per cent coupon were actively
bid, with the auction covered 1.9 times and the average yield at 6.17 per
cent.
Dealers said most of the buying was carried out by market makers needing to
cover short positions after selling heavily to overseas investors,
particularly Japanese life insurance companies. Recent intervention by the
US Federal Reserve has persuaded Japanese investors that the yen is unlikely
to rise further in the short term so they have been expatriating funds in
order to consolidate the currency's strength.
The shift of attention from the secondary market sent French debt prices
lower. The September futures contract traded on the Matif fell half a point
before recovering to close 14 basis points lower at 123.42.
BELGIAN government bond prices were hit by the newly independent central
bank's decision to hoist interest rates to protect the currency.
Most investors are unconvinced that the central bank will be able to keep
the currency strong in the face of very high government debt. They believe
it will have to cut rates and weaken the currency to reduce the interest
payable on the public deficit.
However, the short-term shock, in the face of a Europe-wide climate of low
rates, sent bond prices reeling. The 10 per cent coupon maturing in April
1996 fell two percentage points at worst and closed one and a half points
down at 106.50. The debt futures market saw record volatility and turnover.
SPANISH government bonds fell sharply initially as traders prepared their
dealing positions for up to Pta1,000bn of supply, but rallied later. In the
event, the Treasury allocated only Pta558.97bn against bids totalling
Pta1,571bn at the tender for three, five and 10-year paper. There was an
immediate squeeze in the market and the Bonos futures contract for September
traded in Barcelona shot up one and a half points before settling a net 55
basis points higher at 100.70. Portuguese bonds were weaker after the
Treasury issued Es15bn of 10.625 per cent 10-year paper at an average 9.6101
per cent.
LONG GILTS were a point lower at one stage as investors took profits in the
face of the turbulence in Europe and weaker sterling. Buyers at lower levels
ensured that most maturities stabilised later. The gilt futures contract for
December closed half a point lower at 113.20.
SENTIMENT in the German government bond market was lifted by strength in the
D-Mark and comments from Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president.
The September bund futures contract on Liffe closed 17 basis points higher
at 98.36, but 10-year bunds closed slightly lower.
US TREASURY prices posted fresh gains across the board yesterday on reports
that the Federal Reserve had been buying securities for foreign central
banks.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year bond was up  23/32 at 102 15/16 ,
yielding 6.034 per cent, a record low. At the short end, the two-year note
was up  3/32 at 100 3/32 , to yield 3.809 per cent.
Prices were firmer from the opening. Economic news was mixed - weekly
jobless claims fell unexpectedly, while July factory orders dropped 2.1 per
cent, a larger than forecast decline - and had little impact. Instead,
prices were buoyed by reports of the Fed buying two-year and five-year notes
on behalf of European central banks and by continued demand from mutual fund
buyers, which has exacerbated a shortage of supply at the long end.
Otherwise, attention was focused on today's employment report for August.
Analysts expect a rise of about 150,000 in non-farm payrolls.
