FT  01 MAY 93 / Letter: Teaching the history of business
Sir, In reviewing Mr Michael Heseltine's new industrial strategy
('Heseltine's plan 'to help Britain win' ', April 26), your reporter is
right to point out that not all critical ingredients are in the industry
minister's sphere of influence. If Mr Heseltine wants to encourage the
cultural revolution he feels is so necessary to lift Britain's business
prospects, he should go to the heart of the problem and make an appointment
with the education minister.
At this meeting, he might ask Mr John Patten why, while subjects such as
political, military, social and economic history are an integral part of the
general educative process, business history as a curricular subject is not
part of any form of universal education at UK schools?
He might point out that its neglect is evident at higher levels too, even at
business schools. Just 6 per cent of business students are exposed to the
subject in any way, equal to fewer than  1/2 per cent of the country's
university population, a statistic which is put into further perspective by
the number of professors of business history in the UK - just three against
Japan's 300.
Our research into business history's application in the workplace shows that
 -unlike many of their overseas competitors - British managers and workers
at all levels acquire little historical awareness of business in general and
companies in particular from the wider educational system. This is
compounded by the minimal efforts by companies to pass on their own history
to employees.
While low historical awareness helps to explain the absence of a wider
business culture, it also means that industry is unable to take advantage of
its own practised example.
It can also be argued that the concentration on wider-based economic history
at the expense of more specific business history makes aspiring British
entrepreneurs less practical businessmen.
The industrial revolution is more than 220 years old. By being its first
participant, Britain should have an inbuilt advantage of experience,
knowledge and tradition - if it were passed on.
If the education system and industry did not ignore business history, Mr
Heseltine wouldn't have to depend so much on initiatives such as advice
shops to help individuals do what should - by now - come naturally.
Arnold Kransdorff,
Pencorp,
Beagle House,
80 Hill Top,
London NW11 6EE
