FT  10 JUN 93 / International Company News: Sharp reduction in number of
component suppliers planned
THE VOLKSWAGEN group is planning a drastic reduction in the number of its
component suppliers, as it seeks to rationalise production and purchasing
operations.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW group chairman, said in an interview with the FT that
the company was planning to move to a system in which some of its leading
suppliers became 'logistical partners'.
These first tier suppliers would take over responsibility for supplying
complete modules rather than individual components.
'Around the year 2000 our group will have 100-200 logistical partners.
Toyota has 220 logistical partners today,' said Mr Piech. At present the VW
division alone had 1,500 suppliers and Audi, the group's executive car
division had around 800.
Mr Piech said Audi currently had around 22 suppliers providing components
for a complete dashboard and instrument panel, which were assembled in the
car plant.
'We are beginning to plan for one of the 22 to become responsible for the
logistics of the other 21 suppliers, and this partner would supply a
complete module,' he said.
Since the arrival of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua from General Motors
as the VW group director for purchasing and production, VW has started to
build a global purchasing organisation with the aim of cutting costs and
reducing dependence on its high cost German supply base.
Volkswagen has created seven purchasing centres around the world, said Mr
Frans Boot, head of the recently established VW group purchasing office in
the UK.
The groups have been set up in Wolfsburg, Germany, with responsibility for
purchasing from suppliers in northern Germany, Scandinavia and the Far East,
in Ingolstadt with responsibility for southern Germany, Austria and Italy,
and in Mlada Boleslav in the Czech Republic for eastern Europe.
A group purchasing office had been set up in Barcelona with responsibility
for Spain, Portugal and South America, in Detroit with responsibility for
the US, Canada and Mexico, in Brussels for the Benelux countries and France
and in Milton Keynes for the UK and Ireland.
The regional purchasing offices have been set up to serve all four of the
group's brand divisions, Volkswagen, Audi, Seat and Skoda, and under the
Lopez system all the groups will be seeking to scour their regions for lower
cost suppliers at high levels of quality and service.
Mr Boot said that the group was seeking to standardise many components
across model ranges.
