FT  08 FEB 93 / Smith clears ground for rethink of Labour aims: Vision of
party's 'new politics'
MR JOHN SMITH yesterday cleared the ground for Labour's objectives to be
reworked by projecting the party as a non-ideological champion of ordinary
citizens' interests.
In a keynote speech to Labour's local government conference at Bournemouth,
Mr Smith avoided a confrontation with the party's trade union elite. At the
same time he signalled that policy dogmas such as state ownership and
redistributive taxation were no longer central to its aims.
'What we need is a new political approach for a new political era. A new
politics that puts people first, that rejects dogma and embraces practical,
common-sense solutions,' he said.
Senior party officials said Mr Smith's 37-minute address was intended to be
the springboard for a wide-ranging assault on long-established 'shibboleths'
which will begin in a full-day shadow cabinet meeting in London next Monday.
It will be followed by as many as seven further addresses by Mr Smith before
the end of May.
The opposition leader's goal is to capture the political centre-ground by
portraying Labour as the advocate of 'pragmatic and practical' change and
the Conservatives as the party of entrenched elites and vested interests.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, will press home the attack in a
speech on vested interests this week. Later this month he is due to flesh
out Mr Smith's pledge of a 'framework for investment'. This is intended to
use regulation to improve competition, set standards and enforce workplace
rights as a substitute for state ownership.
Throughout his speech, Mr Smith avoided references to socialism and
equality. Instead he stressed government's duty to devise a long-term
strategy to invest in skills and training as 'the building blocks for
individual and national prosperity'.
He promised to provide an 'infrastructure of opportunity' to allow people to
raise their earning power. 'Our task is to stand again and again for the
frustrated ambitions of the majority of our people.'
His frequent references to the need for change will be taken as a tacit
endorsement of Labour's 'moderniser' faction at the expense of party
traditionalists. Earlier yesterday, Mr John Edmonds, influential leader of
the GMB general union, appeared to endorse the strategy by welcoming 'the
age of ambition' as representing the decent demands of ordinary people.
However, Mr Tony Benn, the veteran Labour MP, later derided Mr Smith's
approach as 'the repudiation of socialism', intended to prepare the party
for joining a national coalition.
In one passage in his speech, the Labour leader appeared to offer a critique
of past party policy as a 'failure of dogma'. He said: 'The political debate
in Britain has been bedevilled for too long by simplistic argument and false
choices. The truth is that we need both dynamic markets and active
government.'
Instead of the 'largely sterile debate' about the ownership of industry and
services, he said, Labour saw both the need for a mixed economy and an
'active and creative partnership' between the public and private sectors.
Endorsing a bill of rights, and a freedom of information act, he said the
goal of democratic socialism was a 'radical theory of citizenship in which
access by all to the power of knowledge is the foundation of liberty'.
'Yobs' blow Euro-raspberry at Major Page 7
Editorial Comment, Page 13
