FT  09 JAN 93 / Travel '93: Go east - or north, south or west - Eastern
Europe is opening up, but you should look before you leap. Michael
Thompson-Noel surveys the latest holiday options
A SHORT while ago I spent a bleak weekend in Vilnius, Lithuania. There is
almost nothing to see or do in Vilnius, except go to church, scuttle in
search of restaurants - and marvel at the bankruptcy to which the Evil
Empire drove its vassal republics before history gave it the heave-ho.
So far as I could see, the Lithuanians make nothing, own nothing, and have
almost nothing to do. Despite this, they are trying to be cheerful. Here,
for example, is an extract from a release put out by Lithuanian Tours, one
of the first private travel companies in the country, which is establishing
relations with foreign tour operators:
'If you long for wild nature, green forests full of singing birds, swift and
clean brooks, golden sand dunes and refreshing sea breeze, you should come
to Lithuania . . . It is here that organ, chamber and symphonic music is
still highly admired and people gather in concert halls solemnly
concentrated and dressed for the occasion. It is here that the Church mass
is still held with ancient dignity harmoniously matching elegant, monumental
and ornated church architecture.'
It will be many years, I fear, before Lithuania makes its mark in the
cut-throat world of international tourism. But for those with ancestral
connections, or who like to visit places that are 'new' and 'different,'
things are starting to stir.
Just before Christmas, Instone Travel, London-based, launched a brochure
featuring Russia and the republics. 'Russia,' claims Des McGuinness,
Instone's managing director, 'offers one of the most exciting and
stimulating travel experiences available today. Our new tour programmes
reflect and exploit fully the greater freedom and flexibility now to be
found in Russia and the republics.'
Instone is offering 14-night tours of the Baltic republics, starting in St
Petersburg and taking in Tallinn (Estonia), Riga (Latvia) and Vilnius, then
Moscow.
The all-in price (travel, hotels, meals and guide) starts from Pounds 839
per person for the April 26 departure. Other offerings: four-, seven- and
13-night visits to St Petersburg, Moscow and central Asia, or a trip on the
trans-Siberian railway (starting price for 14 nights: Pounds 999).
Among the vast array of cruise company brochures, one that catches the eye
is Cunard's first Great Rivers of Europe programme, which offers a variety
of cruises on the Rhone, Elbe and Danube on purpose-built craft. Example: a
10-day cruise on the Danube Princess from Passau (Germany) downstream to
Constanta on the Black Sea, calling at Durnstein, Vienna, Budapest, Kalocsa
and Mohacs (Hungary), Belgrade, Turno-Severin (Romania), and Russe
(Bulgaria). Prices for seven-day cruises start at Pounds 880, including
flights between the UK and Passau or Constanta.
A number of cheap and cheerful do-it-yourself holidays is available in the
French Country Cruises brochure of Andrew Brock Travel, which says that hire
costs of a four-berth boat start at Pounds 446 per week in low season, while
a 12-berth boat in peak season costs Pounds 2,286. The brochure details 16
bases for cruising on French canals; the reintroduction of a base in Holland
(Loosdrecht, south of Amsterdam), and the start-up of boating holidays in
eastern Germany, on the 'waterway wonderland' of lakes and canals in the
Mecklenburg and Brandenburg regions.
'The well-maintained locks are rare,' says Brock, 'commercial traffic rarer
still, and in the hot central European summers, bathing is a matter of tying
up to a tree and plunging into the lake. Now is the time to see it all,
before the Russian troops and the Trabants are gone for ever.'
A brochure devoted to sea voyages by passenger-cargo vessel can be had from
Gdynia America Shipping Lines (London), while the 1993 brochure from
Clipper, which organises natural history and cultural cruises, includes
several new itineraries. Examples: Antarctica and the Chilean Fjords,
Bridging the Bering Strait, and Treasures of Western South America.
If you want to go north, study the brochure of Arctic Experience, which
specialises in tours to Iceland, Greenland, Spitsbergen, Norway, Finland,
Lapland, Canada and Alaska. Its Images of Finland holiday, for example,
ranges from the lakes of the south to the high fells of Lapland, and
includes two nights in St Petersburg.
Short-stay holidays have had plenty of attention in recent years. A useful
brochure (because of its brevity) is the Romantic Escapes programme of Made
to Measure Holidays, featuring - or so it says - 'some of Europe's finest
hotels as well as some less rossetted properties which offer great charm and
great food.' It covers obvious attractions like Paris, Venice, Florence and
Berlin, but also less rossetted spots such as Annecy, Sintra and Durnstein.
The cross-Channel ferry companies are reasonably big holiday operators in
their own right. Brittany Ferries, for example, has a series of brochures,
including Holiday Homes In France (more than 400 British-owned properties
for rent), Holidays and Breaks in France and Spain, and Gite Holidays in
France.
One of the best of all British travel companies is Cox and Kings, run by the
energetic Peter Kerkar. It is probably best known for its Indian and
environmental programmes, but is at present devoting a lot of time to South
America. In addition to group tours and suggested itineraries for
independent travellers, the company's Latin American brochure has a third,
themed section divided into five categories: beaches, cruises, rail, and
country and city tours. Cuba features in the brochure, alongside Mexico,
Venezuela, Peru, Brazil, Argentine, Chile, Belize, Panama, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Bolivia, the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador and Patagonia.
A company for which I have a great deal of time is Meon Villa Holidays,
which offers top-quality villas in popular European centres. It started out,
25 years ago, by offer ing 30 villas on the Algarve, and now offers 500
villas and apartments in 16 places. Last autumn Meon fixed me up with a
villa in northern Majorca. I took my executive assistant and her mother.
Everything worked impeccably. Meon's formula - flights, properties with
private pools, maids and car hire - and its service, are exemplary.
This year, Meon is offering a wider range of properties in Florida and says
that overall, many prices in its brochure are lower than in 1991-92. Flights
 -daytime weekday whenever possible - are from Gatwick, as well as
(depending on destination) Birmingham, Bristol, Heathrow, Luton, Manchester,
Stansted and Glasgow. Telephone help is available from Meon staff.
Other useful self-catering brochures are those of Classic Cottages (west of
England, though it is now seeking French properties); Something Special
Travel's Florida Villa Experience, and French Affair, which manages quality
rural properties in the Dordogne, Lot Valley, Gasgony, Provence and
Languedoc-Roussillon. Its sister company is Corsican Affair.
High Places is an independent mountain travel company in its seventh year.
New itineraries for 1993 include: Peaks of Ecuador (22 days, Pounds 1,880),
Madagascar by Bike and Boat (24 days, Pounds 2,460) and A Trek to Spiti, a
newly-opened Buddhist kingdom (24 days, Pounds 1,630).
For culture vultures, a useful programme is that of Specialtours, under the
wing of the National Art Collections Fund. You need to be a fund member,
although non-members can book provided they take out a year's membership,
which costs Pounds 15, before departure. Specialtours says it has more than
20 years' experience in arranging cultural tours, and has contacts among
curators and collectors, in Europe and the US. Its 1993 tours include A
Journey Through Syria, Art in California and Treasures of Berlin and
Dresden.
Telephone numbers: Instone Travel: 071-377-1859; Cunard: 071-491-3930;
Andrew Brock Travel: 0572-821330; Gdynia America Shipping Lines (London):
071-251-3389; Clipper: 071-436-2931; Arctic Experience: 0737-362321; Made to
Measure Holidays: 0243-533333; Brittany Ferries: 0705-751708; Cox and Kings:
071-834-7472; Meon Villa Holidays: 0730-266561; Classic Cottages:
0326-565656; Something Special Travel: 0992-586999; French Affair:
071-381-8519; Corsican Affair: 071-385-8438; High Places: 0742-757500;
Specialtours: 071-730-2297.
