FT  06 NOV 93 / Westland presses Major after contract loss
WESTLAND, the helicopter manufacturer based in Yeovil, Somerset, yesterday
used a visit by Mr John Major, the prime minister, to press its case for
additional UK orders following the loss of a Canadian contract worth about
Pounds 400m to the company.
The company is waiting for a government decision on plans to purchase 25
EH101 helicopters in a troop-carrying version for the RAF.
Mr Major told Westland employees he expected a decision soon and expressed
disappointment over the Canadian cancellation.
Until recently Canada was the biggest client for the new helicopter, which
Westland makes jointly with Agusta of Italy.
Canada last year ordered 50 of the helicopters in seaborne and
search-and-rescue versions. In September this was reduced to 43. But Mr Jean
Chretien, the country's new Liberal prime minister, confirmed on Thursday
evening his election pledge to cancel the whole purchase.
The contract would have been worth CDollars 4.8bn (Pounds 2.4bn) over 13
years. More than half the total value was for work to be done in Canada,
with the first delivery not due until 1999.
The Anglo-Italian joint venture, EH Industries, and its Canadian partner
Paramax Systems, are now to negotiate compensation from the Canadian
government under penalty clauses in the contract.
The cancellation, although not a surprise, is a setback for the EH101
programme, which is crucial for Westland's prospects. The only firm order so
far is for 44 Royal Navy anti-submarine helicopters, placed in 1991. Italy
is also expected to order an initial batch of 16, with options for eight
more, but has yet to sign a contract.
Westland said the decision was unlikely to lead to substantial job
reductions, although it affected prospects for additional jobs from around
1995. The company still estimates a potential market for at least 750 of the
helicopters including civil variants.
The project, under development since 1984, has been subject to severe delays
and cost increases.
