FT  18 JUN 93 / World Trade News: Aid urged for East European steel cuts
THE German steel industry yesterday called for the European Community to
help pay for the social costs of cutting steel production capacity in
eastern Europe, in exchange for the promise of reduced output.
Urgent action was needed for eastern and western Europe to co-operate in
capacity cuts and ensure that steel trade is conducted at fair prices
according to the rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, said
Mr Ruprecht Vondran, president of the German steel federation.
He suggested that the bill for social subsidies to eastern Europe need not
be steep: Ecu100m (Pounds 78.60m) would pay for a year's wages for 40,000
redundant steelworkers in countries such as Poland, Hungary and
Czechoslovakia, providing time for job-creation and retraining measures.
Mr Vondran, who was speaking at the Aachen technical university, warned that
restructuring plans in eastern Europe were being drawn up in a haphazard
way, although the eastern governments realised the need for large-scale
capacity cuts.
With a workforce of some 350,000, the east European industry was working at
barely 50 per cent of its former 56m tonnes capacity.
In western Europe, the steel industry was facing capacity cuts of 30m tonnes
of raw steel capacity, putting up to 100,000 people out of work. The German
industry alone had decided to cut 8.5m tonnes of raw steel capacity, and 4m
tonnes of hot rolling capacity, since the beginning of last year. At least
30,000 jobs would be lost, he said.
'The eastern European steel producers are trying to save themselves through
exports,' Mr Vondran said. 'But EC acceptance of them has limits.'
East Europeans had drawn up 'sweeping adjustment plans' but implementation
was held up by lack of the 'social mechanisms' to handle mass redundancies.
'It is in the interests of the European Community and its eastern European
neighbours to conduct cross-border talks on putting into effect capacity
adjustments. The EC could offer to take on part of the social costs arising
from the necessary cut-back in production potential,' he said.
The extent and timing of capacity cuts would be determined in the
negotiations and, at the same time, the east Europeans would be expected to
introduce western environmental protection standards and trade strictly
according to Gatt rules.
It should then be possible for the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and other west European financial institutions to provide loans
for the remaining east European steel mills, to improve product quality and
efficiency.
