FT  25 AUG 93 / Hague court to hear Bosnia genocide claim
THE International Court of Justice in the Hague will consider today Bosnian
accusations that Serbs have been carrying out a campaign of territorial
expansion through 'ethnic cleansing' and genocide.
A similar application by the Bosnians four months ago resulted in a court
order to stop the genocide.
Legal officials in The Hague say a decision on the case is unlikely for
several days, not least because the court will simultaneously be considering
similar accusations from Serbia of genocide carried out by Moslems.
The International Court of Justice, which is made up of 15 permanent judges,
plus a further two nominated by the parties involved, does not have any
powers to enforce its orders, although its decisions have traditionally
carried some diplomatic weight.
However, though few expect the court's ruling to have much effect on the
forces on the ground, the hearing is likely to fuel a wider diplomatic
debate about attempts to bring legal retribution to bear in Bosnia.
Next month the United Nations general assembly is expected to name 11 judges
who will sit on the UN war crimes tribunal on former Yugoslavia.
Meanwhile, in a separate move, the International Red Cross (ICRC) has called
a conference in Geneva on August 30 to discuss the treatment of war victims.
The organisers claim the conference has been called to raise awareness of
the Geneva conventions, with participants expected from more than 100
countries.
But ironically, the ICRC's tradition of neutrality has left it refusing to
co-operate with UN investigators seeking evidence of war crimes.
The ICRC insists that collaborating with a Bosnian war crimes tribunal would
sully its traditional reputation of neutrality - a problem that Mr Christian
Kornevall, head of communications at the ICRC, sums up as a dilemma of
'whether to act or speak'.
In the wake of accusations earlier this year that the ICRC had been slow to
reveal the existence of detention camps in Bosnia, Mr Kornevall admitted
that there was now a growing debate within the ICRC about their policy
towards the media - a development which appears to have contributed to the
decision to call the conference later this month.
With other European governments increasingly reluctant to dwell too much on
the issue - particularly when the west is pressing for adoption of a peace
plan - there are fears at the UN war crimes council, formed seven months ago
to collect information, that attempts to build a case could ultimately be
undermined by a reluctance to submit evidence.
Although the US has already submitted extensive material on war crimes in
Bosnia to the UN, Britain has come under attack for its apparent delays in
providing evidence.
However, the Foreign Office yesterday denied that Britain was reluctant to
co-operate fully and said the delays had been due to its insistence that all
material should be thoroughly verified.
'This is a very complicated process. Apart from the Nuremberg trials, which
were really a very different thing, there has never been a case like this
before,' a spokesman said.
