FT  21 OCT 93 / Poll leads to cabinet reshuffle as Labour shifts to left
MR JOHN SMITH, the Labour leader, was last night preparing to reshuffle his
shadow cabinet after the party's annual election underlined a shift to the
left in the parliamentary Labour party.
In a poll that saw Ms Harriet Harman and Ms Ann Clwyd lose their positions
in Labour's 18-strong team, the top three places went to leading figures
from the party's centre-left.
Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair, the party's foremost modernisers, both
dropped down the rankings having been first and second last year.
The two newcomers were Mr George Robertson, the long-serving Europe
spokesman who had an impressive year masterminding Labour tactics on
Maastricht, and Ms Joan Lestor, a former minister in Labour governments of
the late 1960s and 1970s.
In spite of a rule change designed to increase female representatives on the
shadow cabinet, the number of women elected fell from four to three.
Mr Jack Cunningham, shadow foreign secretary, retained his place in the
shadow cabinet by a margin of just three votes, a result likely to fuel
speculation that Mr Smith may move him from a job in which he has rarely
looked at home.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary who topped last night's
poll, would be one possible replacement. But Mr Cook said last night he was
not 'looking for a change'.
Another winner was Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, who
increased his personal support by 26 votes and rose to third place. Mr
Prescott has been seen as one of those most likely to benefit from a
reshuffle. His speech at Labour's annual conference was widely held to have
swung the vote on selection reforms in Mr Smith's favour.
Candidates to succeed Ms Harman as shadow chief Treasury secretary include
Mr Robertson and Mr Chris Smith, shadow environment minister. Ms Marjorie
Mowlam has been tipped for shadow education secretary.
Senior party officials said Mr Smith was aiming to announce details of his
reshuffle today.
Details, Page 10
