FT  11 JAN 93 / Chile to brief Hurd on Moyle death
BRITISH Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, who arrived yesterday from Argentina
on a two-day visit to Chile, is to discuss with Chilean officials the
unsolved murder of Mr Jonathan Moyle, a British defence journalist killed in
Santiago three years ago.
Mr Hurd was expected to be briefed by the Chilean Foreign Ministry on the
slow progress of the murder inquiry. So far, the inquiry has failed to shed
any light on the assassination, which was made to look like suicide.
Mr Moyle, the 28-year-old editor of Defence Helicopter World, was murdered
in the Carrera Hotel in Santiago in March 1990 while covering an airshow.
British interest in Mr Moyle's fate was revived following the collapse of
the Matrix Churchill trial, where it was shown that UK government ministers
sanctioned the sale of military technology to Iraq via a Chilean middle-man,
Mr Carlos Cardoen.
Attempts to link Mr Cardoen to Moyle's assassination collapsed last week
during an identification parade in which a Carrera Hotel chambermaid failed
to recognise a Cardoen employee she thought she had seen talking to Mr Moyle
on the eve of his death. Mr Cardoen has always denied any link to the
murder.
Mr Hurd's two-day visit to Chile is also expected to be taken up with trade
and investment talks, and the impact of the European Community single market
on Chilean exports. The UK is Chile's biggest export market in Europe, with
sales of some Pounds 200m last year, against imports of some Pounds 110m.
British multinationals also have a strong presence in the Chilean mining,
cement, tobacco and food industries, with Pounds 2bn of investments, but
British diplomats in Santiago believe UK exporters are not taking full
advantage of Chile's booming economy, which grew 9.7 per cent last year.
Mr Hurd's five-day visit to Argentina was described by both sides as a
success, even though they made no progress over the Falklands, the only
issue that divides them.
Mr Hurd said his trip proved 'that it is possible to come to Argentina and
not be bombarded all the time by the sovereignty dispute'. British officials
were pleasantly surprised that demonstrators did not meet them on their
arrival in Buenos Aires on Wednesday.
One of Argentina's top Falkland negotiators said Mr Hurd's visit, the first
by a cabinet minister since the 1982 Falklands conflict, meant 'we are on
our way to a broader, richer relationship in which the islands are only a
part of the relationship, not the only issue'.
