FT  21 SEP 93 / Building societies lose lending share to banks: Depositors
move funds to equity products
FURTHER EVIDENCE that building societies are facing their most severe
competition since the mid-1980s emerged yesterday in figures that showed a
squeeze on both mortgage lending and deposit-taking by the 88 societies.
Statistics released by the Building Societies Association and the British
Bankers' Association showed banks raising their share of mortgage lending -
largely through offering fixed-rate mortgages - at the expense of societies.
Societies are also suffering an outflow of retail funds, as depositors have
withdrawn money to invest in equity products such as personal equity plans,
as well as the sale of the third tranche of the government's British Telecom
stake.
The Building Societies Association said it expected investors to reinvest
with societies following the fall in the FT-SE 100 index from its recent
peak. It said bank competition for mortgages lending was also cyclical.
'There is a touch of concern, but no more than that,' said Mr Adrian Coles,
director-general of the association. Mr Coles said societies were facing the
strongest competition for mortgage lending from banks for at least three
years.
The continuing poor climate for retail deposit-taking could lead to renewed
pressure from societies to be allowed to raise more than 40 per cent of
funds from wholesale markets, the limit currently set by the 1986 Building
Societies Act.
New commitments from borrowers to taking mortgage loans from societies fell
to Pounds 2.4bn in August from Pounds 2.9bn in July. Banks showed a
continuing rise in mortgage lending in the same period, lending Pounds 902m
more following a Pounds 1bn rise in July.
Although lending by societies has recovered this year, with net new
commitments at Pounds 9.1bn in the second quarter compared with Pounds 5.9bn
in the last quarter of 1992, banks have competed strongly amid a lack of
other forms of loan demand.
Banks have been keen to lend because they can borrow money at close to 6 per
cent base rates, and lend it at a variable mortgage rate of 8 per cent.
Societies would have to cut their savings' rates in order to undercut this
mortgage rate.
There was a net outflow of Pounds 132m from society savings accounts in
August, following a Pounds 61m outflow in July and a Pounds 56m outflow in
June. Such outflows put more pressure on societies to fund lending from
capped wholesale funds.
Mr Coles said the outflow was 'not as large as might have been expected'
given the BT3 offer and competition from equity-based products.
Recovery hopes rise, Page 8
