FT  01 OCT 93 / International Company News: Shareholder reform reaches Japan
 -Reluctant companies face radical changes
JAPANESE companies are under mounting pressure to become more compatible
with western corporate culture and to increase the rights of shareholders.
Many companies are bracing themselves for a rush of lawsuits as radical
revisions to Japan's commercial code come into force today. These ease
filing requirements for shareholder litigants and should, in theory, lead to
greater financial disclosure. The commercial code revisions are:
The cost of lawsuits against company executives by shareholders on behalf of
the company will be limited to a flat Y8,200 (Dollars 80) rather than a
percentage of the damages sought.
Investors holding 3 per cent of a company's shares will be allowed access to
a company's accounts. The earlier limit was 10 per cent.
Large companies will need at least three auditors with at least one
independent auditor. Their term of office will be lengthened from two years
to three.
Keidanren, Japan's leading business grouping, is asking companies to become
more conscious of shareholders, urging greater disclosure of information and
acceptance of the philosophy that companies are not just for employees.
Mr Yoshio Nakamura, director of Keidanren's international economic affairs
division, says there is a need to answer claims that the Japanese system is
built on ideologies totally different to those of the west. 'Japanese
companies need to and can become more like US and European corporations,' he
says.
While corporate executives have responded to the possible rise in lawsuits
by rushing to buy insurance cover, only a few companies have so far publicly
acknowledged the calls for more disclosure and further shareholder rights.
To prevent disruption, companies try to hold their meetings on the same day,
keeping them as short as possible with the help of majority stable
shareholders. This year, more than 1,900 companies held their annual
shareholders' meetings on the same day in June.
Dividend policy is also part of the shareholders' rights debate. Dividends
have been kept low, using the argument that earnings should be retained for
future investments. The dividend yield of the Nikkei average is currently
around 0.8 per cent, against around 2.9 per cent for comparable US indices.
Companies tend to claim they are institutions run by employees for the
benefit of employees. Mr Kanemitsu Anraku, director of Nissan Motor, points
out that before the stock market boiled over in the late 1980s, company
investment decisions were under the tight grip of their main creditor banks.
Recent stock market trends have eroded the banks' power over companies, but
the gap has yet to be filled by shareholders.
Mr Masaru Yoshitomi, vice-chairman of LTCB Research Institute, feels
shareholders are in a vacuum. In spite of earlier predictions, the cross
shareholding system between companies - one of the leading factors in the
lack of shareholders' rights - has yet to change drastically, he says.
Meanwhile, some lawyers are sceptical about changes in corporate attitudes
due to the amendment of the commercial law. Mr Hideto Iida, a lawyer who is
preparing to take Nomura Securities to court over the way the securities
house compensated some clients for stock losses, says it is unlikely that
ordinary individual shareholders will take action, since damages are paid to
the company instead of the plaintiff.
The recent ruling by the Tokyo district court that directors of Nomura
Securities were not required to reimburse the securities house for client
stock losses has been an obvious blow to the shareholder litigants.
Businesses may try to resist the corporate governance debate and oppose an
elevated role for shareholders for as long as they can. Mr Nakamura at the
Keidanren points out that companies may claim that the economy has to
recover before they can start caring about investors.
'When profits are down, you only think about trying to boost them up again,'
he says.
