FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals, Research and Development (3):
Blockbusters prove worthy - Some of the large pharmaceutical groups are
building up considerable experience in biotech production
THE FIRST two blockbuster products of biotechnology are beginning to prove
themselves in the pharmaceutical market, almost 20 years after the crucial
discoveries - recom-binant DNA and monoclonal antibodies - that laid the
foundations for the modern biotech industry.
Amgen, based in California, is far ahead of its biotech competitors. Each of
its first two drugs - Epogen launched in 1989 to stimulate red blood cell
production and Neupogen launched in 1991 to boost white blood cells - is
expected to bring in revenues of more than Dollars 500m this year.
According to a forecast released last month by Lehman Brothers' global
healthcare research team, Epogen and Neupogen will be two of the five
'super-blockbuster' drugs in the year 2000 with at least Dollars 2bn sales
(the other three are conventional pharmaceuticals).
Altogether there are a dozen biotech products in the Lehman list of 65 drugs
with 2000 sales above Dollars 500m. 'If our projections hold true, the
decision 10 years earlier of companies like Roche (of Switzerland), which
took an aggressively optimistic view of the opportunities the biotech
approach would present, will be fully justified,' the Lehman analysts say.
Roche represents one extreme of the range of approaches by large
phar-maceutical groups to bio-technology - direct investment in independent
US biotech companies. In 1990 Roche paid Dollars 2.1bn for a majority stake
in California-based Genentech, then the sector's largest company, and it has
minority shareholdings in Chiron and Protein Design Labs. The Swiss group
also has collaborative agreements with several others, including Amgen,
Synergen and Hybridon.
Dr Jurgen Drews, Roche research director, says the policy is to keep
Genentech's research and development (R&amp;D) at arm's length from Roche's, so
as to avoid stifling its entrepreneurial spirit. 'We made it clear to
Genentech that we wanted to collaborate with them but we didn't want to
manipulate them.'
An example of collaborative R&amp;D is DNase, a cystic fibrosis treatment, which
Genentech and Roche are developing for the north American and European
markets resp-ectively. 'We've had to prove our abilities a couple of times
but that has led to a relationship of trust,' Dr Drews says. 'They come to
us with proposals and we go to them. They still have the characteristic
Genentech culture. It takes patience for the two groups to work tog-ether
but it's a lot of fun.'
A similar policy of direct investment in US biotech R&amp;D has been followed by
the other two large Swiss pharma-ceutical groups, Sandoz and, to a lesser
extent, Ciba. Last year, for example, Sandoz paid Dollars 392m for a 60 per
cent stake in SyStemix and announced a long-term agreement to fund Dollars
300m worth of research at Scripps Research Institute - both based in
California.
Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo, the largest UK pharmaceutical
group, agrees that 'it is absolutely critical for a research-based company
to have strong links both with the academic science base and with the
research boutiques that have sprung out of it, particularly in the US'.
But Glaxo's approach to plugging into the biotech industry is quite
different from its Swiss competitors. The UK group has links with eight US
biotech companies including Amylin, Gilead and Icos. The partnerships are
based on limited R&amp;D programmes with specific objectives and generous
incentives for success.
Glaxo's policy is not to put large amounts of money into its biotech
partners nor take control of them.
'I don't agree with the approach of the Swiss companies,' says Dr Sykes.
'The biotech companies have tremendous drive and it is difficult to create
that environment in a pharm-aceutical group. If you buy a large stake in any
of the companies you have killed its spirit.'
Although young companies started with venture capital funding over the past
15 years represent the cutting edge of scientific progress, some of the
large pharmaceutical groups are building up considerable experience in
biotech production. According to a survey of the world biotechnology market
released last month by Datamonitor, the two largest 'biopharm' companies by
sales after Amgen are the insulin manufacturers Eli Lilley of the US and
Novo Nordisk of Denmark. Both sell human insulin produced by genetically
engineered micro-organisms.
Indeed the endocrine (hormone) sector of the pharmaceutical market is where
biotechnology made its first impact. Apart from insulin, the most important
product of this type is human growth hormone produced by genetic
engineering. This has a sales potential far beyond that of its predecessor,
growth hormone extracted from the pituitary glands of corpses, because
supplies are much greater and it avoids the risk of infection associated
with the natural product. The manufacturers - including Genentech, Lilley
and Kabi Pharmacia of Sweden - hope that research will support the hormone's
use beyond growth disorders in children; there is speculation that it could
reverse some of the effects of ageing.
Interferons have not lived up to the 'wonder drug' hype they received in the
late 1970s but they are beginning to make an impact on cancer treatment and
for treating some infections such as hepatitis. Analysts expect alpha
inter-ferons such as Schering Plough's Intron A and Roche's Roferon A to
emerge as blockbuster drugs.
Biotech will make further progress in the anti-cancer and anti-infective
sectors if and when the large number of drugs based on monoclonal
antibodies, now under dev-elopment, reach the market. Antibody-based drugs
may also be very useful for treating rheumatoid arthritis and other chronic
diseases that result from underlying disorders of the immune system.
In the cardiovascular sector, tPA - Genentech's clotbuster launched in 1987
and once expected to be biotech's first blockbuster - has been a commercial
disappointment. Sales failed to take off after large-scale clinical trials
showed that it was no better as a treatment for heart attack victims than
streptokinase, a relatively cheap drug disc-overed in the 1950s.
Biotech has had several other serious disappointments and there are certain
to be many more in the years ahead, as the industry matures. But, as biotech
enthusiasts are fond of pointing out, the total market capitalisation of all
independent biotechnology companies is no greater than that of Merck, the
largest pharmaceutical group.
Of course, their combined R&amp;D pipeline is far more extensive than Merck's
but it remains to be seen whether they have sufficient financial resources,
development expertise, production experience and marketing muscle to outwit
the established giants.
 ------------------------------------------------
THE US BIOTECH INDUSTRY (DOLLARS Bn)
 ------------------------------------------------
                        1992      1991   % change
 ------------------------------------------------
Product sales            5.9      4.4       35
Total revenues           8.1      6.3       28
R&amp;D spending             4.9      3.4       42
Net Loss                 3.4      2.6       32
Number of companies    1,231    1,107       11
Employees             79,000   70,000       13
 ------------------------------------------------
Source: Ernst &amp; Young
 ------------------------------------------------
