FT  18 SEP 93 / Elite corps ends mutiny in Bosnia
MR Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, yesterday survived a mutiny
from his elite army corps when soldiers lifted their blockade of Banja Luka,
the biggest Serb-controlled city in northern Bosnia.
Mr Karadzic appears to have smashed the rebellion, dubbed 'September 93', by
arresting some of its leaders and winning over others. But the protest
reflects the growing splits between the Belgrade leadership of President
Slobodan Milosevic and Serb leaders from outside Serbia proper.
Yesterday, after securing pledges of improved living conditions the corps,
made up of Bosnian Serb soldiers, abandoned their eight-day protest, and
withdrew tanks and anti-aircraft guns. But with the Serb economy in a state
of near collapse, fears are growing in Belgrade that similar protests could
be repeated in the coming months.
One reason is that Banja Luka, the northwestern Serb military headquarters
and the industrial centre of the self-proclaimed Serb state, has been much
harder hit by the war than many other regions nearer to Belgrade.
The soldiers who rebelled receive the equivalent of a mere two DM2 (80
pence) a month - a fraction of what the new Serb traders who have sprung up
in the region are earning.
Captain Bilak, a leader of the rebels' crisis committee, yesterday accused
'spies of trying to hijack their protest' which, he said, was prompted by
economic rather than political aims.
'During recent days we noticed people planted among us who were very
dangerous for our state and our president, Dr Radovan Karadzic. But we
spotted them in time,' he said showing his loyalty to the current
leadership.
But Mr Nenad Zafirovic, a journalist at Belgrade independent radio B-92
yesterday said that resentment appears to be growing about Banja Luka's lack
of control over the political agenda, largely in the hands of Mr Karadzic.
'The Banja Luka corps has also provided the bulk of the manpower for
Bosnia's Serb army,' Mr Zafirovic said.
The mutiny appeared to be an attempt to weaken Mr Karadzic, who has emerged
from recent peace negotiations in a strong position. He managed to overrule
the objections of his commander, General Ratko Mladic, and hand over a small
amount of Serb-held territory to Bosnia's president Alija Izetbegovic for
the proposed mostly Moslem republic.
There is continuing confusion about who instigated what is seen by some as
an attempted coup. Mr Vojislav Seselj, president of the powerful,
ultra-nationalist Serbian Radical Party, denies his involvement. He blames
the Communist Party-Movement for Yugoslavia which is led by Mr Milosevic's
wife, Mrs Mirjana Markovic.
In the first sign of the expected power struggle between Serbia's two
strongest leaders, Mr Seselj threatened to call a no-confidence vote in Mr
Milosevic's Belgrade government. Mr Seselj accused Mr Milosevic's closest
allies of 'trying to separate Serbia from Serbs living in Bosnia and
Croatia'.
Mr Milosevic seems increasingly keen to broker a peace settlement in the
hope of lifting UN sanctions. Yesterday international mediators Lord Owen
and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg arrived in Belgrade in an effort to win his
endorsement, ahead of the proposed signing of the peace plan on Tuesday.
As the mediators shuttled between the different political groups, the
leaders of the three communities appear to be moving closer to signing a
peace package. But Mr Izetbegovic insists that his landlocked republic must
get more land from Serb and Croat leaders before he signs any deal. Bosnian
and Croat commanders yesterday formally agreed to implement a ceasefire in
central and southern Bosnia, which, according to the agreement signed by
their leaders in Geneva earlier this week, should take effect today.
But as a sign of tension that could wreck the deal, fighting continued
between Moslem and Croat forces in central Bosnia, with fierce clashes
around Vitez and Mostar.
