FT  11 NOV 93 / Arts: What the butler didn't see - Cinema
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY (U) James Ivory
DEMOLITION MAN (15) Marco Brambilla
GUILTY AS SIN (15) Sidney Lumet
L'ACCOMPAGNATRICE (PG) Claude Miller
The Remains Of The Day takes the oldest of movie genres and turns it upside
down. Instead of 'What the butler saw' here is 'What the butler didn't see
(or in some cases pretended he hadn't).' Like Kazuo Ishiguro's Booker
Prize-winning novel, James Ivory's film is a tragicomedy about spiritual
myopia. But irony dances gleefully amid the gloom. Not the least of the
movie's own tangy paradoxes is that our buttoned-up and blinkered hero, this
all-unseeing carrier of silver salvers, is played by Sir Anthony Hopkins,
whose most famous recent screen role was as a man who Saw Everything. Not
only saw it but smelt it, heard it and whenever possible ate it alive.
The main things Stephens fails to see - let alone savour - are love
(housekeeper Emma Thompson) and political imbroglio (James Fox as his
quisling master Lord Darlington, hosting appeasement pow-wows in the
Nazi-threatened 1930s). But he also fails to discern his own atrophying
sensibility as a life of 'Yes, sir, no, sir' self-subordination cuts off the
normal arterial flow between heart and brain.
The novel was a tour de force of wry pathos and behavioural comedy. Its
autopsy on British repression - on what EM Forster once called our
'deficiency of the heart' - was not just about Stephens, it was narrated by
Stephens. And like all good first-person narratives, from Gulliver's Travels
to Moby Dick, it encouraged us to be sceptical about the narrator himself.
Might not this omniscient 'I', aiming his prejudices or disdains or
disingenuous innocence at the world, be the biggest of all the book's
boobies, prigs or self-deceivers?
Helped by his longtime screenwriter Ruth Prawer Jhabvala (A Room With A
View, Howards End), Ivory deftly transfers the book's past/present interplay
onto screen. Here is Stephens in 1956, tooling through the English
countryside in his new master's Daimler to rendezvous with, and he hopes
re-hire, the now unhappily married Miss Kenton (Thompson). And here is
Stephens 20 years before, when she and he suppressed their little flame in
the ruthless rituals of domestic service. Polish that gridiron] Dust that
alcove] Prepare your 'staff plan' for those all-important visits by
Chamberlain and Ribbentrop.
The book's comic highlights are wittily born again for the film: Stephens
aghast at being asked to instruct a young relative of Lord D's in the 'facts
of life'; or Stephens shrinking into himself like a salt-sprinkled slug when
Miss Kenton tries to wrest his latest reading matter from him (a romantic
novelette). Even when the film threatens to overplay a moment from the novel
 -Stephens intruding on a Miss Kenton sobbing helplessly in her bedroom to
convey the latest dusting instructions - caricature is kept at bay by our
total belief in Hopkins and Thompson.
Other casting choices are dodgier. Too often the film reaches for the James
Ivory Rep Directory and sticks a random pin in it. Christopher Reeve? - oh
dear me no] - as the American anti-appeasement senator who roughs up the
1930s conferences and then returns, greyer but no less one-dimensional, to
buy up Darlington Hall. (This is an over-neat screenwriter's touch; in the
novel the two American characters were different.)
Reeve is a gawky bantamweight thrown into a ring full of swift-moving
heavyweights. But what a show those superior bruisers put on. Hopkins is all
bullheaded grace and lethal diffidence, holding off the world's blows with
little flinches of the head and sometimes offering his own respectful
version of a right hook. (Show him a dirty hand-towel and you will be
spreadeagled on the canvas.) Thompson, as in Howards End, strides straight
out to the middle of the emotional arena and never retreats. This actress
can make everyday distress seem like high tragedy and spinsterly longing
wring the filmgoer's heart. More British acting Oscars on the way?
In Demolition Man Sylvester Stallone wakes up in the year 2032. He has spent
36 years in a 'cryo-penitentiary,' but age has not withered nor
refrigeration staled those plug-ugly features. (Nor that Yogi Bear voice
with a hint of lisp.) Soon Sly is re-donning the cop clothes he disgraced
back in 1996, when his gung-ho showdown with black psychopath Wesley Snipes
resulted in the death of 30 hostages.
Now he is back in 'San Angeles' (sic) and so is Snipes, woken from his own
deep-freeze to become a state hit-person. Add a comely policewoman (Sandra
Bullock), a villainous city ruler with a Brit accent (Nigel Hawthorne) and
an outbreak of runaway production design (David L. Snyder, once of Blade
Runner) and you have this merry if sometimes indigestible recipe for a
sci-fi film cum cop opera.
Mercifully, amid the bang-bangs, there are some ha-ha's. If Schwarzenegger
gave self-satire an honourable name in Last Action Hero, it is Stallone's
turn now to put the 'ludic' back into ludicrous. He mows down baddies with
post-modern implausibility; he cracks blithe one-liners; and he even has a
gentle swing at his rival with a bit of dialogue about the 'Schwarzenegger
Presidential Library.' (It transpires that Big Arnie has recently run the
White House.)
Erupting around our hero is the movie's take-no-prisoners futurist vision.
Among the 21st century terrors to contemplate: the Taco Bell chain will run
every restaurant (you have to have been to LA to realise the full horror of
this); street pay-phones will allow you to 'dial an ego-boost'; and smoking,
drinking, meat-eating and sex will be banned except through the pretend
thrills of Virtual Reality.
Oh, and under the sidewalks dwell the rebels of Cardboard City, munching
ratburgers, swilling beer and declaring war on political correctness. In a
film that shamelessly casts a black man as baddie - give or take Mr Snipes's
orange hair - no prizes for guessing on which side of the PC line dwell the
film's own sympathies.
No prizes either for guessing who is sympathetic and who not in Guilty As
Sin. Murder-suspected ladykiller Don Johnson, a walking thousand-dollar suit
with a smirk on top, smarms his way into top lawyer Rebecca De Mornay's
office and insists that she defend him. Did he defenestrate his now-dead
wife? Probably. Will he throw De Mornay off the top of her career pinnacle?
Probably. 'This is the monster client syndrome every lawyer dreads]' gurgles
our heroine to her (soon to be ex-)boyfriend Stephen Lang.
Director Sidney Lumet, once of Twelve Angry Men, is himself tottering atop
his pinnacle at present. He last gave us Close To Eden in which Melanie
Griffith, playing a hardnosed woman detective, met the monster miscasting
syndrome. Lumet does a better job here with Griffith's spouse. But even an
extra-oleaginous Johnson and a super-califragilistic Mornay - suggesting
frailty along with with the hydraulic-hipped sex appeal - cannot help the
director lift the contrivance-heavy script by Larry Cohen (late of Q - The
Winged Serpent) into plausibility.
Also, where do these people live? Like Demolition Man - but at least that
was a fantasy - Guilty As Sin has a case of runaway production design
(Philip Rosenberg). Every flat looks like a white-scrubbed modern art
gallery; every office seems to exist in a penthouse beyond the clouds.
Perhaps it is a metaphor for the high living that comes before a fall. Or
perhaps it is therapeutic wish-fulfilment for a movie town that lives with
smog, earthquakes and forest fires.
It should make one warm to the honest, low-key period detail of Claude
Miller's L'Accompagnatrice (The Accompanist). But low-key can be a synonym
for dull. Here the tale of a beautiful Russian-French soprano (Elena
Safonova), her timid young pianist (Romane Bohringer) and the refined
battering their lives take in the political storms of the French Occupation
never rises, in wit, perceptiveness or excitement, above middle C.
