FT  28 MAY 93 / Survey of UK Relocation (17): Crewe lays on the red carpet -
Profile of Sokkia
TRAFFORD Borough Council came within a pittance of winning the relocation of
Sokkia, the Japanese surveying instrument company, from south-east England
last year.
A perfect site to build a new factory had been found near Sale, only 10
minutes from Manchester airport, but the Japanese turned it down because of
the council's attitude.
'They wrote a rather blunt letter saying they could offer us nothing,' Mr
Stephen Blaikie, Sokkia's UK managing director says. 'It made a tremendously
poor impression on my Japanese superiors. Even a small discretionary grant
of Pounds 5,000 towards some of our costs would have swung it, but my
colleagues' view was that if they didn't want us, we didn't want them.'
Sokkia went to Crewe Business Park in the Cheshire countryside instead.
Crewe and Nantwich Council - like Trafford - has no regional selective
assistance to offer, but it made the most of what it could give.
This included a cash grant to help with landscaping outside the new factory
and small sums to assist local recruitment and training. Nine people were
hired locally, including a financial controller.
There was also 'key worker accommodation' available in council housing or an
equivalent subsidy for private rental. Three of the seven Sokkia staff
transferring from Crawley in West Sussex took advantage of this while
selling their homes in the south-east.
Above all, however, was the warmth of the welcome. Sokkia executives toured
sites all over north-west England on a two-day package tour organised by
Inward, the region's government-backed inward investment agency.
When they visited Crewe they got the friendliest reception and were
entertained to lunch by the mayor and council chief executive. The mayor
later opened the company's new building, to which Sokkia moved in the first
week of April 1992.
'Coupled with the willingness to help in any way they could, all this showed
a commitment to us by the local authority. My Japanese colleagues put great
store on commitment. If people commit themselves to us, we will commit
ourselves to them,' Mr Blaikie adds.
Sokkia decided to move out of Crawley when its rent came up for review,
threatening to rise from Pounds 9.50 a sq ft to around Pounds 17.
It started looking for land to buy and build upon, but was deterred by
south-eastern prices of Pounds 700,000 an acre and poor sites - the only
nearly-suitable one was an infill between existing buildings on an
insalubrious industrial estate.
The company had also come to question being south of London anyway. Its big
customers - construction companies in particular - are in the Midlands and
north. Getting to Crawley involved stressful journeys around the M25 which
were often an ordeal for the people Sokkia was selling to or training.
Mr Blaikie investigated the south coast, Oxford, the Medway Towns,
Basingstoke, Portsmouth and the M4 corridor. The company already had offices
in Sunderland and at Salford Quays, but was bursting out of the latter. He
soon decided the north-west offered the best prospects.
Once Sokkia's senior Japanese executives in Europe and Japan had approved
the move, the company bought 1.1 acres of land in Crewe Business Park at
Pounds 200,000 an acre, with an option on another half an acre. Its
purpose-built premises have 12,000 sq ft of modern space and have been
designed to allow a 50 per cent expansion on the existing site.
Offices, workshops, stores, demonstration rooms and training facilities have
views over green fields. The business park itself is being developed with
ecological considerations foremost. New roads are being planted with avenues
of trees. Staff walk nature trails at lunchtimes.
The location has also provided a very practicable means of calibrating
surveying instruments when they come in for service. They work by bouncing
an infra-red beam off a distant prism, allowing distance to be calculated to
within a fraction of a millimetre.
The Crewe location has given Sokkia several important line-of-sight
baselines for calibration, ranging from 10 metres to more than 1.2km.
Instruments being calibrated are mounted on a computer-controlled test bed
within the building. Infra-red beams are then aimed by the instruments at a
series of reflecting prisms known distances away.
The two nearest are on Sokkia's own walls, but there is one on another
building in the park at about 250 metres distance and others on the halls of
residence and main teaching block of Crewe and Alsager College, between 400
and 600 metres away.
The farthest is on British Rail's multi-storey block in Crewe, more than
three-quarters of a mile away. Invisible - and harmless - infra-red beams
shoot across the open spaces round the clock as instruments are calibrated.
In Crawley, there would have been no chance of doing this on such a scale,
with a few hundred metres the best distance achievable.
The difference between Sale and Crewe, however, matters little in terms of
servicing the customer base. The business park is six miles from the M6 and
therefore easily accessible by road. Crewe's famous tradition as a railway
junction, of course, speaks for itself.
Since instruments and spares are relatively small items, much trade comes
and goes through Manchester airport, only 30 minutes away. 'We are very near
the centre of Britain in terms of travelling time,' Mr Blaikie says. The
company, which now employs 32, has been able to close down all other UK
branches except in Sunderland, vacating both Salford Quays and Crawley.
Staff formerly based in Salford now travel to Crewe to work.
There has also been a financial bonus. Despite selling mainly to a
construction and civil engineering sector that has been damaged badly by
recession, Sokkia has managed to keep its turnover within 3 per cent of last
year's.
This means it has increased its share of a falling market. Mr Blaikie says
Sokkia now has about Pounds 4m-worth of a current Pounds 15m UK market. Its
main competitor is Leica, the Swiss-owned optical company. Mr Blaikie
expects to do very well out of economic recovery.
He says easier access to customers - and customers' easier access to Sokkia
 -is critical to improving performance. The days when customers battled
round the M25 and arrived exhausted in Crawley have gone.
