FT  23 FEB 93 / TUC campaigning skills 'inadequate'
THE Trades Union Congress should take drastic action to change the image of
trade unionism as 'a vested interest with no concern for the general
welfare', an internal report says.
The TUC should appoint an independent public affairs consultancy to advise
it on campaigning, and should use its 125th anniversary this year to launch
a campaign presenting 'the case for modern trade unionism', the document
adds.
The highly critical report says: 'Far too many people see the unions as part
of the industrial problem which Britain faces rather than part of the
solution.'
It was written by Mr Charles Clarke, who was chief adviser to Mr Neil
Kinnock when he was Labour leader, and was discussed at yesterday's meeting
of the TUC finance and general purposes committee. Mr Clarke, who recently
started a public affairs consultancy, was appointed by the TUC in September
to examine ways of modernising its public relations and communications.
He argues that the TUC has failed in recent years to be 'effective' in
taking up public issues. The report suggests that the TUC's 'style is still
primarily oriented to former ways of persuading government' by presenting
ministers with 'well-presented argument'.
Mr Clarke claims the reaction to October's pit closures announcement and the
narrowing of the Conservative parliamentary majority after last year's
general election indicate that 'further possibilities' have opened up for
the TUC for 'successful action across the political spectrum'.
The report says: 'For those reasons the whole style of presentation and
public affairs has to be modernised if trade unions are to influence British
government decisions in the modern era.' It recommends that the TUC should:
Appoint an official to take charge of its public affairs activities.
Create 'co-ordinated contact with leading employers'.
Improve technology to reduce costs.
Decentralise managerial decision-making.
Develop a 'directory of all its network of contacts' on a computer database.
Revamp the press department.
Mr Clarke wants the TUC to take 'a more active initiating role' in
campaigning. He believes co-ordination with affiliate unions is 'patchy'. He
adds: 'A large number of informal networks exist, some on an almost
secretive basis.'
