FT  22 MAY 93 / Books: Lighten up the face of science - Scientific works
should have more popular appeal with better use of illustration
THE SCIENCE Book Prizes, whose sixth annual awards ceremony will be held at
the Science Museum in London next Wednesday, have done much to raise the
visibility of popular science publishing in the UK - and at the same time
have drawn attention to its serious shortcomings.
The fundamental problem is that most science books, even those aimed at the
general reader, are written in a dense style that emphasises instruction far
more than entertainment. Yet publishers remain reluctant to give them the
amount of illustration - photographs and, above all, good explanatory
diagrams - that they need.
Heather Couper, the astronomer and broadcaster who chaired this year's
judging panel, was struck above all by the 'sheer unrelieved density' of
most of the 69 books submitted for the Pounds 10,000 adult prize, sponsored
by Rhone-Poulenc, the French-owned chemicals company. (Sixty science books
for children were entered for the Pounds 10,000 junior prize.)
Science suffers from the existence of a gulf between lavishly illustrated
works - often referred to disparagingly as coffee table books - and the
majority of publications in which words are all-important and any pictures a
casual afterthought. This gulf reflects a deeply ingrained belief that text
is intellectually superior to pictures. Good illustrations are seen as
essential only for certain book categories, such as those for children and
students, art books and how-to-do-it manuals.
Yet scientific concepts cry out for illumination by illustration. Publishers
should be planning more books in which lively text and graphics are
conceived in tandem to complement and reinforce each other, and fewer with a
smattering of fuzzy photos or textbook-style diagrams.
One book shines out from the prize shortlist for the quality of its
illustrations: Insects in Flight by John Brackenbury, a Cambridge University
zoologist who painstakingly developed his own technique for photographing
the astonishing contortions of flying insects' wings, legs and bodies. The
publisher, Blandford, should be congratulated both for printing
Brackenbury's stunning photos in high quality and for integrating them well
with his lucid text and Rachel Chesterton's explanatory drawings.
The public longing for illustrated explanation accounts for the
international success of Dorling Kindersley's Eyewitness Science series,
which are produced primarily for young readers but also sell well to adults.
Other publishers may claim they cannot afford to produce science books with
more and better illustrations. But they should remember that most will not
need the full Dorling Kindersley treatment; just a few well placed graphics
could make all the difference. And if costs do increase, the answer is
surely to produce fewer, better books with more international sales
potential. There is no overall shortage of science books - the total number
of new titles published in the UK rose from 2,225 in 1991 to 2,847 last
year, according to Book Marketing Ltd.
Of course, improved visual presentation is not the whole solution. Science
books also need a more inspiring text, says Anthony Wilson, publications
manager of the Science Museum, who has been involved with the Science Book
Prizes from the start and is on this year's judging panel. 'Although the
entries have improved in quality over the five years, and the standard of
writing and explanation in the shortlisted books is high, they are not
always as lively or engrossing as we would like,' he says. 'A more poetic
approach - and more wonder and amazement - might make these books more
popular with general readers.' In Wilson's opinion, the only 'really
unputdownable' read on this year's shortlist is The Malaria Capers by Robert
Desowitz, a professor at the University of Hawaii.
Publishers generally prefer their science books to be written by active
scientists rather than professional writers - even a master such as the
American journalist James Glieck, shortlisted for Genius: Richard Feynman
and Modern Physics. Among scientist-authors, the most consistently inspiring
include Stephen Jay Gould of Harvard, Richard Dawkins and Colin Blakemore of
Oxford and Jared Diamond of UCLA. They are among the 12 eminent scientists
who have been enlisted by John Brockman, a New York agent, to write for
Science Masters, the most ambitious science books venture so far. An
international consortium of 16 publishers, led by Orion in the UK and
HarperCollins in the US, will launch the books in autumn 1994.
The world's publishers see popular science books as a growth market and they
are willing to invest in it, as the multi-million pound Science Masters deal
shows. Bookshops are keen to give them more prominence too. The biggest
single boost for science books in the UK may come from the recent decision
by W H Smith, the largest national chain of book shops, to set up separate
'popular science' sections in its 500 branches. Publishers and authors must
now produce science books with real popular appeal that will persuade buyers
to return consistently to those shelves.
