FT  10 AUG 93 / Hard Ecu plan deepens Tory rift
THE RESURRECTION of prime minister John Major's proposal for a common
European currency appeared yesterday to have aggravated Tory tensions over
Europe less than a week after Foreign Office ministers had launched a
concerted attempt to damp them down.
The plan to create a 'hard Ecu' - a 'common' currency to trade alongside
Europe's national currencies - was dismissed as 'pie in the sky' by Mr
Michael Spicer, the hardline Tory Euro-sceptic.
Mr Spicer, MP for Worcestershire South, said the objective of a single
European currency would become the law of Europe, to be implemented by
January 1 1999, if the Maastricht treaty was ratified.
Pro-European Tories were more positive about the revival of Mr Major's plan.
Mr Ray Whitney, the MP for Wycombe, said it was worth 'taking down the file
marked hard Ecu and looking at it again'. The plan represented a 'pragmatic
and realistic' approach, he added.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC vice-president who warned at the weekend that some
of Britain's EC partners might try to accelerate progress towards full
monetary union, said the hard Ecu was 'worth thinking about' among other
options.
The Institute of Directors - which last week set the ball rolling by
claiming that the hard Ecu was the only option left for business to gain
full advantage from the single European market - launched an attack on Sir
Edward Heath. It criticised the former prime minister for 'suggesting that
business wants a European single currency rather than a common currency'.
Mr Peter Morgan, IoD director-general, said Mr Major was 'listening to
business' in reopening the hard Ecu issue. Sir Edward's 'dream' of a single
currency and full monetary union was not 'within the realm of practical
economics this century'.
Mr Nick Brown, a Labour frontbench Treasury spokesman, said the hard Ecu was
'a non-starter'. The proposition would be 'laughed at by those with a
serious knowledge of the topic and not understood by anyone else'.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, last week began the task of trying
to heal Tory wounds over Europe by holding private meetings with
backbenchers in an effort to highlight common ground.
