FT  24 SEP 93 / UK Company News: United News to sell Extel Financial
LORD STEVENS, chairman of United Newspapers, publisher of the Daily and
Sunday Express and the Daily Star, yesterday formally announced for the
first time that he planned to sell Extel Financial, the electronic
information subsidiary.
The asking price for the company, which provides a range of data, news,
company information and investment accounting services, is likely to be in
the Pounds 50m-Pounds 60m range.
The announcement of the long-rumoured sale came as United announced pre-tax
profits of Pounds 51.3m for the first six months of 1993, a 10.4 per cent
rise on last time's Pounds 46.5m.
Lord Stevens said that the decision to sell Extel Financial had been taken
because of the increasing investment needs of the financial information
industry. As a result, he added, 'the interests of its customers and staff
could probably best be developed within a larger financial information
business'. The sale will be handled by Veronic Suhler &amp; Associates of New
York.
Last year the business made an estimated profit of Pounds 4.9m on revenues
of Pounds 33m. Extel Financial was part of the Extel Group bought by United
in 1987 for Pounds 250m. Parts of the business such as the Extel Racing
Service were closed soon after and others sold. The segment now being sold
accounted for about 14 per cent of the original purchase.
The Pounds 51.3m pre-tax profit figure for United was in line with City
expectations but Mr Derek Terrington, publishing analyst at stockbrokers
Kleinwort Benson last night described the results as good, particularly the
improved margins on the company's national newspaper titles.
Mr Terrington is looking for Pounds 115m pre-tax for the full year, not
including exceptional items.
Earnings per share rose to 16.9p against 14.2p, an increase of 19 per cent,
while the interim dividend is maintained at 7.5p.
The Pounds 190m proceeds from the July rights issue have been used to reduce
net debt which now stands at Pounds 80m.
Strong advertising revenue and tight control of costs contributed to a 16
per cent profit rise from the national newspapers.
