FT  13 MAR 93 / Records: Breakaway rock
ROD Stewart may be making plans to tour with The Faces again, and minds are
already boggling at the thought of John Cale and Lou Reed contemplating a
reformed Velvet Underground, yet the most interesting albums of the last
month have come from a newer generation of performers only too pleased to be
breaking away from the bands that first brought them fame. The urge to shake
off collective responsibilities and strike out on a solo career seems
stronger than ever, the shelf life of a successful band correspondingly
shorter.
Frank Black's eponymous debut album arrived at the same time as a press
release confirming the break-up of The Pixies, the band in which Black
(operating under the guise of his previous incarnation, Black Francis) was
the moving, vaguely sinister spirit. What ever the reasons for the band's
demise, it does not appear to have been a dispute over direction, for though
Black has recruited a new band (including one half of They Might Be Giants
and a former member of Captain Beefheart) the musical mix on Frank Black
(4AD CAD3004) is recognisably of a piece with the sounds and sources that
made The Pixies' four albums so distinctive and engaging.
The original concept was apparently to compile a collection of cover
versions, but only the Beach Boys homage has survived. All the rest is new
material from Black, in which he is able to give full rein to his pet
obsessions, especially extra-terrestrials and UFOs, as well as throwing in a
tribute to the Ramones and a brief nod towards John Denver. Just as often
though the verbal meaning is hard to divine, and then the songs fall back on
their exuberance to survive; the energy and the invention are unmistakable,
naggingly insistent.
Throwing Muses was the creation of Kristin Hersh and her half sister Tanya
Donnelly, but with Hersh's retreat into motherhood the band that threatened
to corner the market in opaque lyrics seems to gone terminally dormant. Left
to her own devices Donnelly has assembled her own band, named it Belly, and
after a couple of exploratory EPs last year now produced a first album, Star
(4AD CAD3002), which turns out to be a remarkably assured and insidiously
powerful collection.
Within musical packages that move easily between bright, clean pop and
acoustic-based country and take in all points between, Donnelly secretes
lyrics of undisguised bleakness, deploying her little-girl-lost voice with
unexpected resource and subtlety.
No such problems with Balinese Dancer (China WOLCD 1031), the second solo
album from Chuck Prophet, guitarist and a very good one too with the West
Coast band Green on Red. While there is no hint yet of that refreshingly
straightforward band going their separate ways, Prophet is clearly a
confident and accomplished solo performer in a style that is basically
country rock, even if the odd blues inflection is mixed in here and there.
His singing voice may be closest to Tom Petty, and he can manage a passable
Dylan whine, but the material stands up well in its own right, and is always
graced by Prophet's own elegant guitar playing.
For some of course, there's no need to lookback or hanker after a return to
former glories. There must now be a whole new generation of Sting fans who
have no idea who Police were or how their hero first achieved his present
eminence. And just as Sting's very genuine talent threatened to disappear
under the self-inflicted weight allusion and pretension he has produced a
new album, Ten Summoner's Tales (A &amp; M 540 075-2), which represents a
decisive return to his top form.
The references to Chaucer and to his own surname (Sumner) in the title can
be dismissed as untroubling conceits; the 12 songs here (ten 'tales',
together with prologue and epilogue) explore familiar Sting territory, even
though South America seems off limits this time. But there is a new
directness and simplicity in the songwriting and the arrangements; besides
which he is, whatever anyone says, a remarkably fine singer.
