FT  29 MAR 93 / Socialists face rout in French National Assembly election
THE sweeping victory of France's conservative parties was last night
confirmed in early exit polls, which predicted they had won all but 100 of
the 577 National Assembly seats in yesterday's run-off election.
Though the turn-out appeared to be slightly higher than in the first round
last week, the outgoing Socialist government failed in its appeal to
leftwing voters and abstentionists to rally behind it to limit the size of
the centre-right landslide. In the first round 80 seats went to the
conservatives and none to the left.
The BVA polling institute gave the Socialists 68 seats, compared with the
277 which they and their minor allies had held in the last parliament. This
is only just above the threshold needed to be an effective opposition,
because a party requires 58 votes to be able to launch censure motions
against the government.
Within the centre-right coalition, the RPR Gaullists had clearly
consolidated their first round edge over their UDF partners, with the
pollsters giving the former a range of between 253 and 261 seats and the UDF
an estimated 214 to 215 seats.
President Francois Mitterrand, who will today receive the resignation of Mr
Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, is in theory free to pick the premier
of his choice. In practice, he is likely to choose from the party which has
gained most seats.
The preferred RPR candidate is Mr Edouard Balladur, its finance minister in
the last cohabitation government.
The rout of the Socialists was underlined by the defeat of Mr Roland Dumas,
who failed to keep his Dordogne seat. He is considered likely to go to the
Elysee as an adviser on foreign policy. This is expected to be one of the
contested areas of policy between the Socialist president and the victorious
conservative government.
Mr Michel Rocard, who hopes to be the Socialists' presidential candidate in
1995, had called on leftwing voters not to be demoralised by the first round
results, and to come to the ballot box to prevent the election of a
'one-legged parliament', entirely dominated by the right.
After the first round in which the combined vote of all leftwing parties was
more than 50 per cent in only 29 constituencies, leftwing voters evidently
accepted the inevitability of the conservative landslide.
Mitterrand keen to make mark on the new team, Page 2
Socialists appear deaf to appeal to mobilise, Page 17
Editorial Comment, Lex Page 18
Ian Davidson, Page 32
