FT  17 JUN 93 / Man crosses street to avoid Gooda: Richard Lapper and Norma
Cohen find a usually restrained community in southern England convulsed by
hatred. The former chairman of a Lloyd's agency insists he has done nothing
wrong. Many of the neighbours disagree vehemently
MR TONY GOODA'S easy charm and social prowess may have been the key to his
success as a Lloyd's agent, but they cannot shield him from the bitterness
and venom his Names now feel towards him.
Around Coneyhurst in West Sussex, where Mr Gooda lives in a restored
17th-century farmhouse, the former chairman of the Gooda &amp; Partners members'
agency is reviled by neighbours and former golfing partners alike.
'My wife saw Tony Gooda in Budgens supermarket. She said 'You dirty sod, why
don't you commit suicide?'', says one Name, who used to socialise with Mr
Gooda.
One neighbour crosses the road when he sees the former Lloyd's agent. 'He
never said 'bad luck' or 'How are you surviving?' There was not a single
word of regret. It had been a 30-year friendship,' says the man who used to
play golf with Mr Gooda.
But Mr Gooda defends his record as an agent. 'I've done nothing wrong,' he
says. 'I am not going to run away and hide. I never asked Names to join
Lloyd's ever.'
He adds that most of the more than 250 Names who joined Gooda &amp; Partners
approached him through friends or other contacts. 'I know you find it hard
to believe that I never knocked on people's doors,' he says. Mr Gooda says
he is also ruined because he invested his own fortune and that of his wife,
who is seriously ill with multiple sclerosis, in the same syndicates as his
Names. He is so financially ruined that he has had to apply for help from
Lloyd's hardship committee to stave off personal bankruptcy.
Tanned, fit and looking younger than his 55 years, Mr Gooda is far from
relaxed. 'For the last 2 1/2 years I have been bombarded by letters and
phone calls,' he says. 'All of them aggressive, all highly critical. There
aren't words to describe the way I feel. Is there a word that is worse than
'very upset'?'
His fall from grace has been spectacular. At the West Sussex Golf Club where
Mr Gooda held lavish 'golf days' in the heyday of the Lloyd's market in the
mid 1980s, he says his attendance has been reduced to a game a year.
To comprehend the sense of outrage and betrayal of Mr Gooda's Names, you
have to understand the manner in which they came to stake fortunes on a
business which many did not understand.
Underlying the recruitment process was the sense that Mr Gooda embodied the
middle-class respectability and easy wealth of the home counties. Mr Hugh
Taylor, who joined Lloyd's in 1985 and now faces ruin, says: 'I knew where
Tony Gooda lived and where he drinks on a Sunday morning in Coneyhurst. He
used to leave his Porsche outside.'
He adds: 'We'd been on a skiing party together. His sister married my wife's
brother. I was at the wedding at his father's house in Coolham.'
Names say that Mr Gooda underplayed the risks of Lloyd's membership and
concentrated them on high-risk catastrophe syndicates. Mr Richard Godden, a
retired businessman who joined Lloyd's in 1985 and now faces losses of more
than Pounds 600,000, says: 'I emphasised I didn't want to be greedy. He said
it was a good spread.'
Mr Gooda says: 'My job as a members' agent was to point out the risks.' In
particular, in short meetings in his London offices with Names, Mr Gooda
says he explained the concept of 'unlimited liability', by which Names could
be liable for all their assets to meet claims on policies underwritten by
their syndicates.
He said the agency's policy was to place its Names, at least initially, on
the seven syndicates managed by its sister agency, Gooda Walker Ltd. Three
of these syndicates specialised in the growing catastrophe reinsurance
market.
Mr Gooda concedes that he never explained in detail the potential risks of
this kind of business. 'Nobody would have joined Lloyd's if they had been
fed the information you are implying we should give. It would take six
months to do it.
'I certainly pointed out the risks. Whether they took it on board I doubt. I
explained it all in very simple terms. No promises were made for the
future.'
Other Names allege that Mr Gooda did not advise them to buy stop-loss
insurance - a kind of personal reinsurance - which would have limited their
losses. Mr Gooda says he told Names that stop-loss was expensive, and that
he never bought a policy for himself, but he insists: 'I never said 'Don't
take one out'.'
Names also complain that they were not informed about the way their
syndicates' losses worsened in 1989 and 1990. 'We had no indication of the
results for 1989 when they were aware there would be substantial losses,'
says Mr Taylor. Ms Gill Cotterell, who joined Lloyd's through Gooda in 1987,
complains that Mr Gooda persuaded her to increase her commitment to the
market at a time when many of the syndicates to which she belonged faced
heavy losses.
Mr Gooda cannot remember how many letters his agency wrote but insists that
the objective was to keep Names 'fully informed at all times'. He adds: 'I
think it was October 1989 that the figures started coming through. Then we
just started fire fighting.'
Mr Gooda's former friends and neighbours are unconvinced. 'He doesn't seem
to have any conscience,' complains Mr Godden. 'His name is mud around here.'
