FT  02 APR 93 / UK Company News: Spirax moves ahead to Pounds 23m
SPIRAX-SARCO Engineering, the steam equipment specialist, reported a slight
increase in profits, in spite of difficult conditions, but was downbeat
about this year's trading prospects.
The Cheltenham-based group, which makes 80 per cent of its sales outside the
UK, also announced the acquisition of its former licensee in Italy and an
initial 25 per cent stake in the group's Spanish licensee.
Pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 22.5m to Pounds 23.1m in the year to
December 31, while sales improved 6 per cent from Pounds 158.3m to Pounds
168.4m.
The profit, compiled under FRS 3, was depressed by the disposal of the
Drayton domestic heating controls businesses for Pounds 5.4m. An exceptional
loss of Pounds 3.4m would have been taken below the line under the old
accountancy standard.
Speciality steam equipment maintained volume, while Watson-Marlow, the
peristaltic pump business, increased sales helped by the acquisition of its
US distributor.
Operating margins at both businesses were virtually maintained at 16.1 per
cent.
Mr Chris Tappin, executive chairman, said while there were some signs of
improvement in North America, the prospects for continental Europe and much
of the Far East remained difficult to predict.
'In our business, which runs some way behind the cycle, we still see no
signs of any improvement.
The group has agreed to pay Pounds 13.4m for the industrial division of
Jucker, its former licensee in Italy, and to pay Pounds 1.1m for an initial
25 per cent stake in its Spanish licensee, Industrial Mas Nieto.
The agreement provides for an increase in this holding to 50 per cent in
1995 and 60 per cent five years later.
Earnings per share fell from 18p to 17.1p, partly because of the net
exceptional charge of Pounds 1.3m.
Adjusted to reflect the group's underlying operating performance before
exceptionals, earnings rose 4 per cent to 18.8p (18p). A proposed final
dividend of 6.6p makes 9.3p (9p) for the year.
COMMENT
Steam may not be glamorous, but Spirax-Sarco has quality products which give
it a strong presence in 25 countries. Having left the consumer market with
the Drayton disposals, the group continues its strategy of buying licensees,
with the Italian deal making it leader in Europe's third largest market.
Unfortunately the products tend to lag the cycle, and the group sees few
signs of recovery. Forecast profits of Pounds 27m put the shares, up 8p to
357p yesterday, on a multiple of about 17. In spite of the likely currency
benefits to come this year, they look fully valued at that level.
