FT  17 JUN 93 / Survey of Poland (17): Professionals take over - Christopher
Bobinski takes a look at the local media
POLAND'S media have reached a watershed, with state owned radio and
television about to face competition from legally established private
channels and competition at home and abroad thinning the ranks of once
plentiful newspapers.
It seems a far cry from the heady days of 1989 and 1990, when writers
wallowed in the freedom to write what they chose, and people looked to
television and radio to express each and every point of view. Now, as
advertising revenues loom ever more important, and readership figures become
the key to survival, the professionals able to produce a marketable product
are slowly taking over.
Fiercely partisan newspapers such as Nowy Swiat, which passionately attacked
President Lech Walesa, have failed. Those dailies which are growing, such as
Rzeczpospolita, which is half owned by the French Hersant group, or Gazeta
Wyborcza, are expanding into smart non-political colour supplements and
general features to attract the advertisers. Gazeta Wyborcza, with well over
500,000 readers, has emerged as Poland's best selling paper.
But it is in the broadcast media that the next 12 months will bring the
greatest changes.
Poland's parliament has finally passed a broadcasting law which removes the
state radio and television monopoly and puts in place a framework for the
establishment of private national radio and television stations.
This does not mean that there has been no element of competition up to now.
In Wroclaw, TV Echo was an early private broadcasting pioneer, operating on
a one-off licence issued by the authorities. In Warsaw, Radio Zet, founded
by Andrzej Wojciechowski, a talented journalist and organiser, filled the
airwaves with western pop music and its own distinctive promotional jingles,
as well as advertising.
Radio Zet captured well over a third of the listening audience. Now, in
concert with British investors, the company is considering a move into the
former Soviet Union, Bulgaria and eastern Germany.
A plethora of radio and television 'pirate' broadcasters without licences of
any sort then took to the air, as the authorities waited helplessly for
parliament to produce a law regulating the air waves.
Into this legal gap Mr Nicola Grauso, a Sardinian media baron, has moved. He
first provided equipment to 12 local television stations in an investment of
about Dollars 30m - including, by his own account, his purchase of the
ailing Zycie Warszawy daily.
Earlier this year he followed this up by providing each station with eight
hours of programming daily, promising to provide advertising through
Publitalia, a Berlusconi owned agency. Mr Grauso owns a 33 per cent share in
each station, the most a foreign partner in a broadcasting company can
legally own.
These broadcasters still have no licence. Theoretically they face prison
once the requisite article of the new law comes into force on July 1. Mr
Grauso has said he will consider what to do when that moment comes.
Meanwhile he has shown every indication that he intends to apply to the new
Broadcasting Council for regional licences.
This body, composed of nine men, was chosen by parliament and President Lech
Walesa. Its political allegiances range right across the spectrum. It is
headed by Mr Marek Markiewicz, a soft spoken lawyer from Lodz who, for the
next four to six years, will not only be responsible for issuing licences
but also for policing the airwaves.
Some time in the autumn the council will have to decide to whom they will
hand the one national channel which will be available alongside State TV's
first and second channels. The competitors include Bertelsmann, the owner of
RTL and several Polish groups, including one called Super Television.
This is funded by a group of rich Poles who did well out of the communist
1980s and the last three years. Another is NTP, a group led by Miroslaw
Chojecki, a veteran of the dissident publishing movement, who stresses his
wish to provide programming which will play up Polish cultural values.
The unanswered question is whether the Polish economy can generate the
revenues to sustain all this activity. Bertelsmann's representatives make no
secret of the fact that the company only expects a return round about the
turn of the century.
Most of the top names in world advertising now have a presence in Warsaw and
campaigns have concentrated on state television and radio's prime time
slots. These have become progressively more expensive, but at about Dollars
1,000 per 30 seconds, rates still lag behind those in the west.
According to Mr Brian Dunnion at Saatchi and Saatchi in Warsaw, the total
advertising spend has risen to about Dollars 200m from Dollars 24.5m two
years ago. The total spend is expected to grow, with western multinationals
piling heaping on the pressure to sell their domestically produced and
imported goods as Polish companies realise more and more that advertising is
essential to survival.
For although Poles increasingly complain about intrusive television
advertisements, these continue to do wonders for sales. Anything shown on
television, the retailers say, begins to climb the sales curve. And Ms Anna
Krajewska from NBS, a locally owned company which helped handle the
publicity for the recent public share offer of the Wielkopolski Bank
Kredytowy, even claims that the advertising campaign on television not only
sold shares but also brought new clients into the bank.
