FT  19 NOV 93 / The Queen's Speech: Harsher penalties signal shift in
emphasis - Analysis
CRIMINAL justice is a centrepiece of the government's legislative programme
for the second time in three years, but with an entirely different political
emphasis.
Three years ago, the bill leading to the 1991 Criminal Justice Act was
hailed as a progressive attempt to reduce Britain's relatively heavy use of
prison and shift to community-based penalties.
To the dismay of penal reformers, rising public concern about crime has
altered the government's priorities. Mr Michael Howard, home secretary,
announced a 27-point programme against crime at the Conservative Party
conference last month.
This session's criminal justice bill will give courts new powers to send
12-14 year old persistent offenders to secure training centres for up to two
years, and double from one to two years maximum sentences for 15-17 year
olds.
Ministers want to develop new-style training centres for 12-14 year olds,
concentrating on education and training and trying to break patterns of
offending behaviour.
A high proportion of crime is committed by the young. But penal reformers
believe that extending the use of custody for young people would aggravate
the youth crime problem. Mr Harry Fletcher, assistant general secretary of
the National Association of Probation Officers, described the forthcoming
bill as a 'miscellanea of counter productive ideas.'
The government's proposals came under immediate criticism from penal reform
groups, civil liberties organisations and lawyers. Liberty, the civil rights
group, said it would challenge the ending of the right to silence in the
European Court of Human Rights.
Ministers apparently now feel they must display unflinching willingness to
be tough on offenders, while trying to strengthen the fight against crime.
One way they propose stepping up the fight is through improved police
efficiency.
A police and magistrates courts bill will increase chief constables'
managerial flexibility, and make police authorities smaller and more
businesslike.
The police authority proposals, which will reduce local authority
representation and give the home secretary powers to nominate some members
and appoint chairmen and women, will face strong parliamentary opposition.
Chief constables and local authority representatives say the plans would
reduce public accountability.
The Law Society expressed dismay that the government did not propose any
measures to implement the central recommendations of the Royal Commission on
Criminal Justice which reported in July. It had recommended the urgent
establishment of an independent criminal cases review authority to
investigate alleged wrongful convictions. The cost is thought to have been
too high for the Treasury.
But the likelihood of the government fighting crime while locked in a battle
with the police about pay and conditions has been reduced. The Police and
Magistrates' Courts Bill will implement some of the Sheehy inquiry proposals
for the police, but not the most controversial ones such as fixed-term
contracts for lower ranks and Sheehy's complex performance-related pay
formula.
