FT  08 OCT 93 / Management: Work without strain - Health Check / National
Back Pain Week starts in Britain on Monday
FOR some people, every week is back pain week. Although estimates vary, back
pain is responsible for more than 50m certified sick days a year in the UK,
and a sizeable loss of output by anyone's reckoning. Since some 80 per cent
of people in the west suffer back pain at some time, symptoms could be
considered part of the human condition, but they are not unavoidable.
Most of those afflicted have low back pain, because the greatest mechanical
stress is at the base, but pain can occur anywhere in the spine and may
radiate down a leg or arm. Symptoms usually resolve with a little rest along
with painkillers and perhaps local heat to ease muscle spasm.
The spine is a complex piece of machinery originally designed for creatures
that walked on all fours. Tumours and other diseases do occur, but the most
common cause of back pain is mechanical strain, which is where some problems
could be avoided.
Many accidents reported to the Health and Safety Executive arise from manual
handling of loads, but pain results from repetitive trauma as well as
one-off injuries.
The HSE publishes guidelines on the weight of loads that should be carried.
These are by no means absolute, for many factors - including workplace
routine and individual fitness - affect the risk of injury. Under the Manual
Handling Operations Regulations 1992, assessment of risk rests on the
employer.
Employees should also reduce the need for heavy or awkward handling in order
to lessen the dangers. There are several obvious ways to do this, from
making the load lighter to giving employees better training. Almost everyone
knows what a good lifting technique is, but few people - even those with
backache - put it into practice.
Backache also comes to those who sit and work. Research shows that much more
weight passes through the discs when sitting than when standing. Perhaps
this is because the spine's gentle S-shape is lost when seated. On car
journeys, it is worth stopping regularly to get out for a stretch, however
tight the schedules. If buying a car, it is a good idea to choose a model in
which the height as well as the angle of the seat can be adjusted.
In the office, the height of chair and/or desk may need adjustment. Short
breaks to stretch the back should be the order of the day.
Particular problems can arise with VDUs, of which there are close to 10m in
use in the UK. Mastering a PC should include attention to the physical
aspects of sitting at a terminal for any length of time.
Following EC directive 90/270, new legislation came into force in the UK on
1 January. It applies to those using VDUs for a significant part of the day,
and obliges employers to evaluate possible risks (both physical and mental)
to take steps to reduce risks, and to provide staff with information and
training.
Back problems are less likely if elbows are at right angles and the upper
arm vertical when using the keyboard. Shorter people may benefit from
footrests, and under the legislation anyone who asks must have one provided.
Chairs should tilt slightly forward, and the computer screen positioned
straight ahead in the line of vision, with the aid of monitor arms or
telephone directories. Unfortunately this may increase glare - and eye
symptoms - from the screen. It is also impossible to arrange with laptops.
Again, breaks are needed before tiredness sets in - at least once an hour
for a few minutes, or as long as it takes to remove one's eyes from the
screen and do some stretching, at the desk if it is impractical to get up.
The Organisation of Chartered Physiotherapists can give advice to businesses
on the ergonomics of office work (Tel: 0702 77462).
The HSE Information Centre is at Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ (Tel: 0742
892345; Fax: 0742 892333).
Chiropractors in the UK are offering free back-pain screenings and posture
checks next week (Call Freephone 0800 212618).
The author is a London general practitioner.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WATCH YOUR BACK
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
 -Keep your back straight and bend your knees when lifting. Hold the
  load close to your body, or, better still, use a trolley.
 -Adjust work surface heights so that you can work upright. If the
  surface has to be low, don't bend. Use a stool, chair, or kneel.
 -Don't slouch at work, at home, or in the car. Sit as upright as
  possible and place a small cushion at lower back height.
 -Try to keep your back's natural hollow when kneeling. Take some weight
  through the arms and stretch gently from time to time.
 -Sleep on a firm, comfortable mattress, on your back or side. Sleeping
  on your front can put stress on the lower back and neck.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
National Back Pain Association
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
