FT  25 MAY 93 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (6): Renewed interest -
A more efficient use of steam
THE development of gas turbine technology may have taken most of the
limelight in recent years, but it would be wrong to give the impression that
steam turbines, the stalwarts of power generation for a century, are being
ignored.
Inevitably, technology is developing faster in the much younger gas turbine
sector, but recently the pace of change in steam turbines has been
accelerating.
Part of the reason is that steam turbines are an integral part of combined
cycle power generation, and must therefore play their part in increasing the
overall efficiency of the system - which is one of its key selling points.
But, across the world, there is also renewed interest in getting greater
thermal efficiency and economy from new coal-fired plants, which require
steam turbines that run hotter, and at greater pressures.
A third task for which significant technological advancement has been
achieved is turbine modernisation for existing coal-fired and nuclear power
plants, notes Siemens.
In contrast to the rivalry in the gas turbine market, where it is possible
to identify clear leaders, the steam turbine market has many more players,
and there is no obvious technology leader. 'It's a very close race,' says Mr
Hans Levander, senior vice-president for technology at Asea Brown Boveri's
power plants business.
Along with European and US producers, all of which are working along much
the same lines, the Japanese have also been active. One of the most
sophisticated designs, for a 700MW double reheat turbine powered by
'supercritical' steam, was developed by three scientists at Toshiba and won
an award in 1991 from the UK's Institution of Mechanical Engineers.
The reason for the activity is simple. 'If the competition can produce a 1
per cent better heat rate, you won't get the order,' says Mr Michael
Barrett, managing director of GEC Alsthom's large steam turbines division.
'That applies to coal-fired generation and combined cycle.'
There are two broad types of steam turbine, impulse and reaction turbines,
which differ in the way that the blades interact with the steam flow. GE,
GEC Alsthom, Toshiba and Hitachi produce the impulse type while ABB, Siemens
Westinghouse and Mitsubishi have opted for reaction turbines.
Proponents of each type tend to say theirs is better, says Mr Barrett, but
the fact remains that both types have survived, and each is capable of
further development.
The key challenge for steam turbine technologists is to increase thermal
efficiency without sacrificing reliability, flexibility or environmental
performance. All these factors - and in particular the emissions performance
 -depend on the choice of boiler too, of course.
Increasing the 'cycle efficiency' of the turbine is a question of raising
steam pressures and temperatures at the inlet of the machine, to get more
work out of the series of turbines and increase the torque of the turbine
rotor (this turns the rotor in the generator to produce the power).
A typical European steam turbine of the 1970s and 1980s would have an inlet
pressure of 165 bar and a temperature of 5650C. Mr Levander says there is
renewed interest in steam turbines over 5800C with reheat and double reheat
of the steam via return trips to the boiler. GEC Alsthom this month won
contracts for steam turbines at two Danish power stations which will operate
at 285 bar and 5800C, and there are other designs where the temperature is
nearing 6000C, says Mr Barrett.
The steam is said to be 'supercritical' above pressures of 221.2bar and
temperatures of 5400C and higher. Beyond this threshold, the transition from
water to steam is continuous and the steam becomes a much more efficient
carrier of heat.
The effect of such developments is to increase the thermal efficiency - the
amount of energy produced per unit of fuel burnt - from the high 30s to the
mid40s in percentage terms. Claims of 46 or 47 per cent efficiency are being
made for some stations in Denmark.
In the US, GE has developed what it calls an ultrasupercritical steam
turbine, suitable for conditions of 300 bar and about 5950C, as part of a
project funded by the Electric Power Research Institute. According to GE,
the design, in conjunction with an advanced boiler design, can deliver
higher efficiency and reduced emissions per KW produced than turbines and
plants employing conventional subcritical and supercritical steam cycles.
These temperatures may look puny compared with the 1200-13000C of gas
turbines, but the technologies are completely different - although there are
some spin-offs for steam turbines from aero-derived developments in gas
turbine design.
For steam turbines, achieving the higher efficiencies available in theory
from supercritical conditions has several implications in practical terms.
Advanced steel materials are needed for casings, rotors and buckets due to
the high pressure and temperature requirements, says GE. Erosion is a big
problem in steam turbines, so new steam path coatings with improved adhesion
and solid particle erosion resistance have been developed.
Mr Levander says ferritic steels have now been developed which can cope with
the higher temperatures, avoiding the extra cost and some technical problems
associated with austenitic steels. The next phase of materials development
will see a concentration on sophisticated steel alloys with 9 or 12 per cent
chrome, says Mr Raymond Lawrence, engineering and operations director at
Parsons Turbine Generators.
Blade design is also crucial to better overall performance. Improved
computational methods, measuring techniques and manufacturing technology are
contributing to the introduction of advanced three-dimensional blading, says
Mr Levander. Similarly, says GE, the aerodynamics of other components such
as valves, inlets and exhaust hoods have been improved, due to advances in
computational fluid dynamic (CFD) computer codes.
Additionally, says Mr Barrett, turbine clearances (the gap between the tip
of the blades and the casing) have been made much tighter to reduce steam
leakage, and sealings have been improved.
A second very important trend in steam turbines is towards reduced size of
the overall machine, thus lowering the cost for the utility and the space
required to site the turbine. A typical 500MW steam turbine in use in the UK
might have one high-pressure turbine casing, one intermediate and three low
pressure casings, but modern designs make it possible to have a combined
high/intermediate turbine and a single low-pressure section, says Mr
Barrett.
A number of producers point out the significance for this trend of the
ability to make longer blades or buckets for the last (low-pressure) stage
of the turbines - due to new manufacturing methods and materials, especially
titanium. Longer blades have the effect of increasing the exhaust area, and
thus removing the need for two low-pressure stages. Titanium blades and
buckets up to 1360mm are available, such as the last-stage buckets on GE's
steam turbines for a Tokyo Electric Power nuclear plant.
For larger turbines, this trend means that turbines which were previously
configured as three-casing machines with four steam flows can now be
configured as two casing, double flow machines, says GE. Similarly, the
output of the smaller single flow, single-casing units has been increased.
All these trends have an impact on the repowering market as well as that for
new equipment. Siemens cites the example of its replacement of the
low-pressure steam turbine in the 1300MW Unterweser nuclear power station
near Bremen, increasing output by more than 50MW at constant thermal power
of the reactor.
The plant's total efficiency was increased from 35 per cent to 36.5 per cent
through the addition of one blade row per flow, advanced blade profiles for
all stages, and the optimisation of the exhaust flow conditions.
All the producers believe there are further opportunities for improving the
efficiency of steam turbines - Mr Barrett says the technology has yet to
reach the point of diminishing returns.
The next few years seem likely to see a continuation of the present focus on
improved efficiency and compactness (or power density as it is known). 'It
is hard to come up with a quantum leap on the steam side,' says Mr Del
Williamson at GE.
Steam turbines will, therefore, make some contribution to one of the biggest
technological challenges for the power equipment industry - further
improving the thermal efficiency of combined cycle power which is currently
hovering at about 55 per cent.
Efficiency gains could come either from the gas turbine or the steam
turbine, says Mr Williamson. Competitors agree, although the majority feel
that, as befits a less mature technology, the efficiency of gas turbines
will probably rise faster.
