FT  06 MAY 93 / EC states risk action on passport checks
ACTION will be taken against member states which resist the abolition of
passport checks on people travelling within the EC, the European Commission
warned yesterday.
Mr Raniero Vanni d'Archirafi, the EC internal market commissioner, said the
Commission had not changed its tough line on border controls, in spite of
recent comments by the new French government suggesting that the conditions
for lifting internal controls on people will not be met before the end of
this year.
The Community missed the January 1, 1993 deadline for lifting controls. Mr
Vanni d'Archirafi has set a new deadline of December 1 for the nine
continental European countries which have signed the Schengen free-travel
agreement, and has indicated that other countries - Britain, Denmark and
Ireland - will have to follow suit by the end of the year.
Yesterday, celebrating 100 days of the new internal market, the commissioner
said if member states could not demonstrate they were making 'constant
progress' towards that objective, then they might have to be encouraged by
Commission legislation, or even legal action, in the second half of the
year.
Mr Vanni d'Archirafi said he thought the balance-sheet for the rest of the
single market - aimed at ensuring the free movement of goods, services,
capital and people across the 12 member states - was 'fairly positive,'
although he said there still appeared to be some resistance to
liberalisation of the EC's lucrative public procurement market.
The commissioner, who also demonstrated the EC's computerised database on
the single market, said one key to making the market work was distributing
more information about the opportunities available.
The European Commission has yet to act on promises to speed up the most
difficult EC competition inquiries, officials admitted yesterday.
A new accelerated procedure, modelled on the strict deadlines for EC merger
investigations, has been put into effect for joint ventures, and a backlog
of ageing competition dossiers is being cleared.
But the EC competition directorate has taken advantage of a change of
commissioner to delay the imposition of new deadlines in all other cases.
Sir Leon Brittan, who gave up the competition portfolio in January, promised
faster decisions for all complaints from April 1. Sir Leon made the
commitment in a valedictory speech on the future of EC competition policy
last December.
The Commission's reluctance to speed up procedure will disappoint many
competition lawyers, who are frustrated by the sluggishness of some
inquiries into alleged cartels and illegal dominance of the EC market.
