FT  13 NOV 93 / Travel: A slow train ride on the banana line - Mark Hodson
tours the Caribbean coast of Honduras
AS THE train waited to pull out of San Pedro Sula, a ticket inspector with a
Hitler moustache marched dawn the carriage, at his side a gum-chewing
teenager with an M-16.
It was a three-hour ride to the Caribbean coast and the first-class fare was
25p. The seats were made of slatted wood; second-class was the same price
but without the seats. Welcome to Honduras, the original banana republic.
At the station a clerk had tried to persuade me to take the bus, which cost
another 10p but took just 45 minutes. 'This is not like your trains in
England,' he told me.
We pulled away with a fierce jolt, bang on time at 6.45am, and as we crawled
out of the city and an orange sun rose over the shabby suburbs, the driver
leant long and hard on his horn to clear the track of cars, children and
skinny dogs.
Our carriage had been built in 1951 but the line was older, one of those
laid early this century by the US fruit companies to transport their bananas
from their plantations to their boats.
With wheels screaming and windows rattling we passed tumbledown wooden
shacks where fat men in vests lounged on porches and naked toddlers played
with pigs in the dirt. As the train neared the coast the villages were no
longer Hispanic but black, the ubiquitous background salsa beat giving way
to a pounding reggae.
The end of the line was Puerto Cortes where passengers were let off just
outside the container port. The town was seedy and run-down, full of pool
halls with paint peeling from the walls and grim-looking prostitutes.
It was the first town in central America I had seen without a church on the
main square. In the evening I witnessed a real old-fashioned bar-room brawl
complete with flying stools and broken whisky bottles - all tremendous fun.
The morning train going east along the coast to Tela took 4 1/2 hours to
cover 30 miles. We spent the last two hours in a boxcar with a corrugated
tin roof and narrow slits for windows, which was rather like travelling in
an oven.
Tela is laid out along a long beach with white sand and palm trees; stout
black women wander up and down carrying bowls of coconuts which they crack
open for sunbathers with one deft swing of a machete.
A pair of barefoot boys banged out rhythms on upturned buckets and cymbals
made of rusted tin-can lids. Their younger brother shimmied and danced in
the hot sand.
The boys told me they lived in Triunfo de la Cruz, a small village along the
coast which I promised to visit the next day. The people there call
themselves Garifuna and speak a strange cocktail of Spanish, English and
Dutch.
They were brought to Honduras from the Caribbean islands in the 1920s and
1930s to work the plantations, and although some of the teenagers have
discovered rap music and Malcolm X baseball caps, the old men pass their
days playing dominoes or tending their neat gardens.
The houses are well-kept. The women bake coconut bread, their husbands fish
in dug-out canoes. There are no beggars or drunks and everyone looked
well-fed and happy.
On the bus back I sat squeezed between two big mamas who provided welcome
padding when the steering column broke and we veered off the road into a
ditch. We waited an hour in the thick heat, the two ladies chatting
cheerfully over my head, as the driver repaired the damage with the engine
running and the radio blaring.
On the other side of Tela was a newly-designated national park called Punta
Sal, so new that no buses yet went there. I managed to hitch a ride with a
fish salesman and balanced precariously on a freezer in the back of his
pick-up as it bumped down a sandy track.
For an hour we drove along a thin isthmus with the crashing Caribbean sea on
one side and a perfectly still, deep green lagoon on the other. At the mouth
of the lagoon was Miami, a village of two dozen thatched huts built on the
sand. Children laughed and played football on the beach while a man in a
floppy hat carved a canoe out of a tree trunk with an adze.
A fisherman took me out on the lagoon, punting his boat slowly through thick
mangrove swamps where egrets skimmed the calm water in search of lunch.
There were said to be tigers there and white-faced monkeys, but my guide
told me it was too windy for them to come out, or possibly too hot, one or
the other.
Two days down the coast I landed at Trujillo, an old port and former capital
founded in 1525. Overlooking the harbour stood the ruins of a Spanish fort.
It was a bleak spot but clearly a popular one with locals because a sign on
a wall warned: Prohibido los romances.
Above the town in an overgrown graveyard was the burial place of the
American filibuster William Walker who in 1856 successfully invaded
Nicaragua with 56 men. A few miles along the coast stood Puerto Castilla,
the point where Columbus first landed on mainland America and where the
first of many Catholic masses was said. Now there are just rows of filthy
shacks, another banana port and a closed-down shrimping station.
It is said - too frequently - that the effect of tourism is to destroy the
environment, but the scene at Puerto Castilla seemed worse. I longed to see
a monument or commemorative plaque, even a souvenir shop.
But perhaps, amid dust, poverty and hopelessness, it would be too squalid a
place to celebrate the birth of the New World. Or too poignant.
