FT  11 MAY 93 / London Stock Exchange: Tomkins surges
Conglomerate Tomkins shook off last week's gloom and jumped 13 to 236p,
making it the day's best FT-SE performer in percentage terms, after it
issued an upbeat report on the integration of Ranks Hovis McDougall, which
it acquired last December.
The company said the plans meant it would have to make a Pounds 90m
provision, but dealers were cheered by the restructuring proposals for the
bakery group and by confirmation that the final dividend would not be less
than 6.35p, as forecast at the time of the bid.
However, a further advance in the shares was checked by continued caution
from analysts and several said they would wait for this week's meetings with
the company before turning more positive.
UBS was reported to have been the day's big shopper and a hefty 10m shares
had been dealt by the close.
Overseas earners were boosted by the strength of the dollar, with
pharmaceuticals stocks standing out. Glaxo was further helped by a
presentation to leading securities houses. The company's comments yesterday
afternoon that it expected double-digit sales growth over the next three to
four years and 14 per cent profits growth were described as 'moderately
positive' by one analyst. The shares improved 19 1/2 to 613p. Wellcome
advanced 18 to 765p and SmithKline Beecham 'A' was lifted 16 1/2 to 485p
ex-dividend.
BAT Industries continued to recover from weakness prompted by the recent US
cigarette price war. There was also some delayed reaction to Friday's news
that a subsidiary of RJR Nabisco was ending a cigarette price promotion. The
shares gained 17 at 880p.
The threat of an MMC inquiry into the price of compact discs reflected badly
on Thorn EMI, although the shares managed to capture a little of the
recovery mood in later trading. They closed 4 off at 831p. NatWest
Securities, one of the stock's staunchest supporters, moved it to a
short-term hold, blaming the uncertainty that will now hang over the stock
for the several months' duration an inquiry might take.
Several insurers were still clouded by rights issue worries but securities
house Credit Lyonnais Laing prompted buyers of Royal Insurance, Legal &amp;
General and Prudential.
The house published a buy recommendation on Royal and raised its current
year forecast by Pounds 75m to Pounds 165m on the basis that recovery was
arriving faster than anticipated. Royal added 5 at 311p. The house also said
its top of the range current year estimate for Legal was too low and the
shares moved forward 10 to 456p. Prudential, highlighted as an
underperformer, improved 7 to 317 1/2 p.
Meanwhile, General Accident lost ground after last week's gains ahead of
first-quarter results due today. The market expects profits of Pounds 14m
against a loss of Pounds 29.2m last time. The shares were off 8 at one
stage, and although recovering with the market still closed 2 easier at
573p.
Suspension of two stocks in the engineering sector at the companies' request
raised bid speculation. Shares in Arthur Lee were suspended at 142p, while
those of Carclo, which holds nearly 30 per cent of Arthur Lee, were
suspended at 223p. There was talk that Carclo was about to launch a 160p a
share bid for the rest of Lee.
ASW continued to be powered by last week's favourable analysts visit and the
shares gained 16 to 233p.
Continued speculation of further disposals boosted Lonrho and the shares
firmed 2 1/2 to 107p, with sizeable dealings also reported in the traded
options market. International trading group Inchcape rose 8 to 591p after a
recommendation from SG Warburg.
Stores stocks felt the benefit of the recovery mood, among which Dixons put
on 6 at 213p, Kingfisher 7 to 595p and Marks and Spencer 6 to 348p. James
Capel was said to be enthusiastic on the sector.
Supermarket group J. Sainsbury advanced 12 to 468p as NatWest Securities
reiterated its positive stance.
In a perky builders merchants sector, Blue Circle rose 8 to 252p and Rugby
Group 6 to 270p. Both benefited from upgrades by BZW.
