FT  08 DEC 93 / Jewish settlers to fight on as 'vanguard soldiers': 'Peace
agreement is a recipe for civil war' - Fear and hatred in Hebron
Cradling an infant, Mrs Orit Struck, a 33-year-old pregnant mother of six,
talks softly about the fears of Jewish settlers in Hebron, a hotbed of
zionist militancy and a flashpoint of current Arab-Jewish violence.
'Every time I take my children to school I have to try hard to smile at them
because I know that by noon I may not see them ever again,' she says the
morning after Palestinian gunmen ambushed and shot dead a settler and his
son in Hebron. 'That is the most awful thing for a mother.'
Of the Arabs, she says: 'We know they hate us and are our enemies. They tell
us openly as soon as the army leaves they will come and kill us all with
guns and knives. But the worse thing is that there are Jews in the
government standing behind them and giving them encouragement. We are
betrayed.'
So why does she stay in her small apartment complex, surrounded by soldiers,
gun-toting Israeli settlers, wire fences and watchtowers in an Arab town?
Like many orthodox Jews, Mrs Struck, who carries a gun, believes that God
gave the Jews all the land in the West Bank - which they call by the Old
Testament name of Judea and Samaria.
'The places in Judea and Samaria are the roots of Jewish life. It is like a
tree and here are the roots, especially Hebron. Here Abraham brought land
for his sons and King David started his royalty. We are like vanguard
soldiers of the Jewish people. To leave would be like deserting a soldier's
post. Most people, like me, are becoming more stubborn.'
Outside soldiers patrolled the deserted roads of the usually bustling Arab
market town enforcing a strict curfew after Monday's killings which, in
turn, came after Jewish settlers shot into crowds of Palestinians last week
and killed one.
At the scene of Monday's ambush a group of Jewish students erected a
memorial to the two dead settlers out of stones stained with dried blood.
Behind them lay an overturned Arab car and smouldering tyres set alight when
settlers rioted after the killings.
Since the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord was signed in September, the
120,000 Jewish settlers have been increasingly vocal against the agreement
which they fear, ultimately, will mean giving up their homes.
Violence on the settler side has been matched by Islamic fundamentalists who
are also opposed to peace, leaving at least 18 Israelis and 34 Palestinians
dead since September. Yesterday the fundamentalist Hamas movement claimed
responsibility for Monday's killings and said it was changing tactics from
attacking soldiers to attacking settlers.
The settlers, acting under the umbrella of the Yesha Council, have formed a
security organisation called Hashomer - an armed security force of settlers.
They have also threatened a nation-wide campaign of civil disobedience.
Some government ministers have branded Yesha Council 'a subversive
organisation' and the violence 'Jewish terrorism'. One warned that the
government might consider taking away the right of settlers to carry
weapons.
All of this has divided the country and raised the prospect of an upsurge in
conflict.
'We have always said the peace agreement is a recipe for civil war between
Jews and Palestinians,' said Mr Elyakim Ha'Etzni, a right-wing settler
leader. 'The whole country is going to be consumed by civil war and it will
end up with tens of thousands of victims, and hundreds of thousands of Arabs
will be evicted. This is now inevitable. It will be just like Sarajevo.'
