FT  21 SEP 93 / Ex-communist who won over the Poles
MR Alexander Kwasniewski, the leader of Poland's neo-communist Left
Democratic Alliance (SLD), is the kind of man you probably would buy a used
car from.
But it clearly takes more than a smooth line in political patter to persuade
more than 3m Poles to cast their vote for a spruced up model which was
effectively scrapped in elections only four years ago.
At that time Mr Kwasniewski was an aide to Mr Mieczyslaw Rakowski, Poland's
last communist prime minister. He played an important role in hammering out
the details of the 'round table agreement' with Solidarity which led to the
partially free elections in June 1989.
Designed to ensure continuing communist domination of the lower house of
parliament, the agreement blew up in the communists' face when Solidarity
made a clean sweep of all the seats in the senate and the limited number of
seats allocated to non-communist parties in the lower house.
But yesterday Mr Kwasniewski, 39 years old, was busy putting out feelers for
a grand coalition. If it comes off the SLD, by far the largest party of the
new parliament, would sit in alliance with at least one of the three
Solidarity-era parties which managed to pass over the 5 per cent entry
hurdle. That would seal an extraordinary reversal of political fates in only
four years. Even Mr Kwasniewski, whose reputation for strategic smartness
and political class soared during the election campaign, has been taken by
surprise.
Over a press dinner in one of Warsaw's smartest restaurants last week he
explained how the most optimistic of the young ex-communists who put
together the SLD from the ruins of the defunct communist party in 1990
thought it would be 10 or 15 years before it gained acceptance as a
mainstream, European, social democratic party.
But after a spell in a coalition, Mr Kwasniewski, like Willy Brandt of
Germany's social democrats, or more appropriately Spain's Felipe Gonzalez,
could take his SLD into power across the generation gap which Solidarity,
with its ageing, squabbling leaders, failed to achieve.
