FT  04 JUN 93 / International Company News: Satisfactory solution to
Procordia wrangle - The resolution of the dispute between the government and
Volvo
Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's long-serving chairman, was showing something
of his old jaunty self-confidence yesterday as he sat wreathed in smiles
alongside Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish Prime Minister, for the announcement
that the government and Volvo had finally resolved their wrangle over
Procordia, the big food and pharmaceuticals group.
The past 18 months have been tricky for PG, as Mr Gyllenhammar is widely
known in Sweden. Volvo, a few years ago one of the world's most profitable
vehicle makers, has become bogged down in heavy losses, forcing it to close
plants Mr Gyllenhammar designed as model workplaces; last year, Mr Bildt's
conservative-led government blocked Mr Gyllenhammar's attempt to merge Volvo
and Procordia as a way to help Volvo out of its troubles; finally, in April,
PG suffered the indignity of having to disclose his salary and benefits as a
result of pressure from small shareholders restive over his autocratic rule
of the company.
Now, the Procordia issue at least has turned out more or less as Mr
Gyllenhammar originally intended.
In early 1992, Mr Gyllenhammar proposed a merger with Procordia by way of a
reverse takeover of Volvo, which at the time held 39.5 per cent of the food
and drugs group's equity and 42.7 per cent of its voting rights.
But the government, then with 34.2 per cent of the equity but also with 42.7
per cent of voting rights objected, saying, in effect, that its
privatisation plans did not include handing over prime goods at knock-down
prices to the country's largest manufacturer.
Mr Gyllenhammar's strategy of building a new conglomerate in which a
weakened Volvo acquired an additional profitable pillar outside the motor
industry was thrown into doubt, and was little clarified by a later holding
agreement with the government allowing Volvo to remain the largest
shareholder in Procordia.
Yesterday's deal, in which Volvo will become the 100 per cent owner of
Procordia's food and consumer products business, looks to have put the
strategy largely back on track. The wholly-owned chunk of Procordia will add
SKr25bn (Dollars 3.48bn) in annual turnover - expanding Volvo's group
turnover by about one third. More important, it will contribute about SKr2bn
in profits and SKr1bn or more in cash flow to beleaguered Volvo, which
showed a SKr331m loss in the first quarter.
On the face of it, Volvo has given up the chance to take over the
pharmaceutical side of Procordia, with annual profits of around SKr3bn. But
it will almost certainly build up its stake to 35 per cent. Once the
government sells off its stake of around 50 per cent, Volvo will be the
dominant shareholder.
Volvo will have to stump up both for the 26 per cent of the food business
still publicly held and for any additions to its 25 per cent stake in the
drugs side. But, as Mr Gyllenhammar acknowledged yesterday, Volvo in its
present weakened state could not have afforded a straight takeover of
Procordia.
Questions may well still be asked about the overall strategy of diversifying
into Procordia - not least by Renault, Volvo's vehicle-making partner. But
Mr Gyllenhammar can at least argue that the direction is once again clear.
'Volvo is going to be a company with two important elements,' he said
yesterday. 'By far the biggest one is to be an industrial partner in one of
the biggest automotive combinations in Europe, and the other is to have a
non-cyclical business that will be stable and give continuous cash flow to
the parent company.'
