FT  19 OCT 93 / Hungary's privatisation falters after flying start
Nicholas Clegg was the winner of the 1993 David Thomas Prize set up in
memory of David Thomas, a Financial Times journalist killed on assignment in
Kuwait in 1991. This article is part of his research, undertaken with the
prize money, into the way in which Hungary has tackled economic reform since
leaping from the communist era of command economics.
HUNGARY'S economy, partially liberated by a series of pre-1989 reforms,
leapt from the era of command economics with a significant headstart over
its post-communist neighbours. As Poland's fragile government coalitions
repeatedly collapsed and as the 'velvet divorce' sundered Czechoslovakia in
two, the manner of Hungary's move to democratic government also confirmed
its stable political credentials. Foreign investors have given their stamp
of approval by devoting to Hungary around a half of the total investment
which has flowed into central and eastern Europe since the collapse of the
Berlin Wall.
The government, believing that the foreign bounty would continue, came to
depend on foreign capital in its privatisation strategy. Last year alone,
almost 60 per cent of privatisation revenues came from abroad. Suggestions
that Hungary may need to follow a Polish or Czech style Mass Privatisation
Programme, where ownership is distributed directly to citizens at little
charge by way of coupons or vouchers, were consistently dismissed as
irrelevant to the needs of Hungary's developed economy, and unnecessary in
its open and cosmopolitan culture.
Now, however, it seems as if this virtuous cycle of domestic stability and
foreign support may be faltering seriously. As the remaining top-rank
companies are snapped up and investors are drawn to the size of neighbouring
markets - Poland alone has four times as many consumers - and to the
comparatively low-risk privatisations taking place in western countries such
as France and Italy, the pace of continued foreign investment is flattening
out, in spite of expected heavy inflows for telecommunication privatisation.
Voices are already being raised in disillusion. 'Our dream has been
disappointed,' says Andras Giday of the Institute of Privatisation Studies
in Budapest. 'The promise of foreign investment has not been fulfilled.'
At the same time, changes in the domestic political scene have led to an
increasingly chaotic approach to privatisation, confusing both domestic and
foreign investors and threatening the pace of continued reform. The
governing centre-right coalition has split, the opposition Socialist party
and Young Democrats are streaking ahead in opinion polls and the government,
perceived as inept and even corrupt by the electorate, is facing probable
defeat in next year's elections.
The government, pandering to a perceived hostility to foreign ownership
amongst the electorate, has launched a volley of new privatisation
initiatives designed to increase domestic ownership. Lajos Csepi, head of
the State Property Agency, the government body responsible for
privatisation, has taken to publicly stressing the SPA's commitment to the
creation of a broad property-owning middle class. 'Over the last year our
agenda has been dominated by the need to accelerate the process and to
increase Hungarian participation,' says Erszebet Lukacs, a director at the
SPA.
The new initiatives, however, designed for domestic political consumption
rather than as part of a serious strategy of mass privatisation, are too
small to provide a significant boost to the pace of privatisation. The
government's goal to privatise half of all state holdings by the beginning
of the year now looks utopian. According to the State Property Agency
itself, no more than 15-20 per cent has passed into private hands. Some
estimates predict that by 1995 companies representing around 30-40 per cent
of GDP will still be in majority government hands.
Foreign investment, despite the new rhetoric, is still regarded as the main
motor of privatisation. But if foreign investment flows are set to fall, how
will acceleration be achieved? For how long will Hungary be able to resist
the move towards a bolder domestic approach, perhaps emulating the Polish
and Czech mass distribution schemes? Significantly, Poland's new left of
centre coalition government has confirmed its determination to press ahead
with the foreign-managed Polish scheme.
The Hungarian government's policy changes have come in various forms:
State participation. One of the most significant occurred towards the end of
last year when a State Asset Management Company (AVRT), with control over
162 strategic companies in sectors such as energy and telecommunications,
was formed. The rationale was that these companies, crucial to the national
interest, should be properly restructured with continued state
participation. The move was also widely regarded as a palliative to the
supposed popular fear of foreign domination. 'It marked,' according to Erwin
Eichmann, an American-Hungarian lawyer with Shearman and Sterling in
Budapest, 'a significant move in favour of Hungarian ownership.'
Concessions. Hungarian investors have been bombarded with new concessions to
entice them into ownership. Government subsidised loans are on offer,
Ft100bn (Pounds 678m) of tradeable compensation coupons will have been
distributed by the end of the year to those who lost property under the
communists, and Hungarian managers are able to buy companies by way of a
'leasing' arrangement over a period of 10 years.
Voucher schemes. Last week the government announced its plan to offer state
shareholdings worth Ft100bn in 70 companies to small investors on
concessionary terms in an effort to broaden share ownership and speed
privatisation. It hopes to launch the programme during the first half of
next year, with help from the UK Know-How Fund. The scheme, devised by
Schroders, the UK investment bank, allows payment to be spread over five
years and requires no security beyond the purchased shares themselves.
Shares will only become tradeable once the credit is paid back. The schemes
to date have failed to engage Hungarians in significant numbers in part
because of their negligible size. Compensation notes can only be issued to a
limit of Ft5m per person and the Small Investor Shareholder Programme will
cover barely 0.75 per cent of the companies in state hands.
Most compensation note holders are old and come from rural areas and tend to
sell the notes for cash. The take-up of subsidised credits has been
disappointing and has forced the government to improve lending conditions
dramatically.
The Small Investor Shareholder Programme will need to overcome this
reticence if it is to succeed. Government surveys indicate that up to 1m
workers might participate if it includes good companies and offers generous
purchase terms. But Mihaly Csako, a sociologist and trade union activist,
says: 'Workers will think it is not worth buying second-hand Hungarian
companies offered to them through a government scheme.' Coupon holders will
be required to gamble, guessing whether the dividends of newly privatised
companies will provide enough to repay the initial government loan.
Meanwhile, foreign investors, once assured of a warm welcome, are left
guessing. 'It is no longer good enough for a foreign investor to put money
and expertise down on the table' says Eichmann. 'There's now more politics
to deal with.' In the government's 1992 privatisation guidelines it was
stipulated that a Hungarian bidder 'must' be preferred if the offer is an
exact match of its foreign rival.
There have already been cases where foreign bidders have lost to smaller
Hungarian competitors. The multinational giant United Distillers, despite
all expectations, for instance, lost the Hungarian liquor company Buliv to
Zwack, a diminutive Hungarian rival.
The government has even launched a 'review' of some of the early unregulated
privatisations. 'This is dangerous and unnecessary,' says Miklos Szanyi of
the Institute for World Economy. 'It sends out entirely the wrong signal to
foreign investors, that we're going backwards.' Partly to counter this
impression the government earlier this month set up an investment promotion
agency.
Reasons for the government's assumption that there is domestic anxiety about
foreign commercial interests are not difficult to find. Before the
establishment of the State Property Agency in 1990 the process of selling
state assets was largely uncontrolled and abuses soon appeared. Foreign
investors have been accused of cynically buying into Hungary to close down
local competition. There have even been two cases where foreign owners,
alleged to be corrupt, were rejected by Hungarian workers. Yet, in
developing the quasi-populist privatisation initiatives, the government may
be making inaccurate assumptions about public opinion. However negatively
foreign investors are portrayed, the evidence that Hungarians are keen to
reject foreign interests or assume the responsibilities of ownership
themselves is unclear.
Opinion polls on privatisation yield complex, even contradictory, results.
Median, a leading Hungarian independent opinion poll company, recently
conducted a confidential survey for the Alliance of Free Democrats, an
opposition party, about public attitudes towards economic reforms. With a
steady three-way split between those who think that privatisation should be
accelerated, slowed or halted, it shows that attitudes towards privatisation
are ambiguous and highlights the reticence behind the patchy domestic
response to the government's new initiatives.
As for organised opposition to foreign ownership, it is non-existent. 'All
the big trade unions are either uninterested in privatisation or they
support them as part of necessary reforms,' says Csako. 'Hostility to
privatisation is basically absent because it is still an abstraction for
most workers.'
What has changed most in the public's opinion, says Endre Hann, the director
of Median, is the attitude towards growing wealth differentials and
corruption. 'It is a typical reaction in times of transition,' says Hann.
'The egalitarian ethic is the strongest surviving value from the communist
era. People feel very insecure about the changes and increasingly resent the
new wealth and corruption though they still want the benefits of a consumer
society.'
In a country in which corruption has long been associated with the state,
and in which a suspicious hostility to the new-found wealth of the
ex-Communist managerial class is acute, it is the perceived government
mismanagement of the process that is the focus of attention.
The government, however, has moved at a glacial pace to avoid suspicions of
political collusion. The power of government patronage to positions on the
boards of privatised companies with reduced state holdings continues
unchanged. The controversy earlier this year about the way in which a
defector from the Free Alliance opposition to the government was rewarded
with a position on the board of a privatised carpet factory in Sopron is
typical. The secretive workings of the SPA have not helped either.
Unsurprisingly, opposition MPs are quick to highlight a lack of
transparency. 'We need to make the rules of the game clear,' says Balint
Magyar, a leading opposition MP.
Far from rejuvenating the privatisation process, government policy seems to
be leading to confusion among foreign investors, suspicion among domestic
investors and a failure to address the real sources of popular discontent
such as political patronage. It has also done little to accelerate the
privatisation process. As the Hungarian economy sours  - GDP could fall by
as much as 3 per cent this year, inflation is still over 20 per cent, the
budget deficit is 6.8 per cent of GDP - the need for clarity is urgent.
A bolder and more schematic approach, however, is not contemplated even by
the government's critics. The liberal opposition parties, the Alliance of
Free Democrats and the Federation of Young Democrats, hope to accelerate the
process through the expansion of existing domestic schemes and by way of
further foreign investment. The Socialists, leading strongly in opinion
polls, simply stress the need to focus on restructuring prior to
privatisation.
A Mass Privatisation Programme is still regarded as a crude attempt at
'popular capitalism'. 'It doesn't address the central problem of ownership
control over management and it doesn't bring in new capital,' says Szanyi,
voicing a familiar refrain. The Czech experience, in which privatised assets
have been concentrated in the hands of investment funds promising to buy
vouchers from Czech citizens up to 10 times their nominal value, is regarded
with deep scepticism.
The uncertainties and risks involved in Mass Privatisation Programmes
certainly warrant some caution. There is clearly no guarantee that a robust
property-owning class can be successfully forged in the absence of
substantial domestic capital resources.
However, as credit-starved companies languish in state control, as foreign
investment flows decline and as domestic political tensions rise, Hungary
may find itself obliged to join its neighbours in launching some form of
Mass Privatisation Programme. Giving a stake to each individual could cut
through the reticence of the Hungarian population about privatisation and
offer a real choice between domestic and foreign ownership.
