FT  15 MAY 93 / Property Plus: Echoes of the Raj in a colder climate - The
ubiquitous British bungalow
SOME PEOPLE like them, others loathe them. Bungalows have been the butt of
more jokes than parrots and vicars, but they are a big part of Britain's
housing stock. The Halifax building society says that The Bungalow remains
the most popular home name in the UK, followed by The Cottage, Rose Cottage,
The Lodge and Hillcrest. It is also top of the pops for new homes, followed
by Orchard House, The Willows and Fairview. Dunroamin' is well down the
list.
The bangolo was the Bengal peasant's tent-like hut; the British Raj copied
the style and added such refinements as the veranda for greeting guests and
taking tiffin. Back in Britain, many a colonel built a replica of his
bangolo, facing north to avoid the heat of the midday sun - even in
Scotland.
The very word 'bungalow' raises a condescending smile in some company; in
Wales, Dai Bungalow is a term for someone of low intelligence (because he
does not have a lot upstairs). But a seaside or country bungalow in East
Anglia remains the dream for many east Londoners.
Bennett Homes, of Lakenheath in Suffolk, has cornered the market, having
built more than 5,000 of them since 1947. Its chairman, Nigel Parker is the
modern equivalent of the Victorian builder RA Briggs, who became known as
'Bungalow' Briggs; plans of those Victorian buildings show a sophisticated
level of development with cavity walls, wall ties and damp-proofing.
Briggs tempted city dwellers to buy his buildings in the country 'to escape
the grime, bustle and hurry.' He wrote of them: 'A cottage is a little house
in the country but a bungalow is a little country house, a homely place,
with verandas and balconies, the plan so arranged as to ensure complete
comfort with a feeling of rusticity.' Even then, though, the bungalow had
its opponents: one writer believed they stood for 'all that is vile and
contemptible.'
Briggs' designs came at a time of change in rural Britain. Town dwellers
with surplus capital often saw a bungalow as a pleasant investment. The
little buildings gained notoriety among contemporary gossip writers, such
were the (supposed) 'goings-on' behind the French windows. Bungalow building
boomed after the first world war, peaking late in the 1920s, and they remain
popular with many. But, where land is scarce, builders often are reluctant
to construct them: a bungalow really needs a fifth of an acre plot, whereas
a two-storey house can make do with much less.
Land prices in parts of East Anglia allow Bennett the space. The firm has 14
basic designs, each adaptable to individual needs; and although they look
similar from the street, they are bespoke homes within. Bennett, however, is
no sleepy rural builder tucked away in the Suffolk countryside. Its
marketing strategy has won many awards for initiative, not least a 'lend a
home' scheme that enables buyers, for just Pounds 35 a month, to move in
immediately while their own bungalow is built. Potential customers have
travelling costs reimbursed when they visit the firm.
With 6m people in Britain aged between 55 and 65, and more than 50 per cent
of older people owning their home, other builders could do worse than crib
some of Bennett's ideas. Its marketing is aimed at the active over-55s but
its designs also catch the eye of younger buyers, even first-timers. Prices
start at around Pounds 65,000. Its latest development is at Holt, close to
the north Norfolk coast. This little town, not far from Cley (pronounced
Clie) and only nine miles from Cromer, is an anachronism where it is
possible to arrive by steam train and be met by horse-drawn carriage. And
there are proper shops, with friendly staff actually serving the customers.
Not that Bennett has a monopoly on bungalows. Anglia Secure Homes is a
retirement specialist and sales director Ruth Rivers says: 'Many buyers want
to retain a 'house' lifestyle without the problems of stairs and big gardens
but with the extra security of a retirement development. Before designing a
development, we study the local vernacular architecture; if bungalows are a
popular house type there, we are pleased to build them as they provide
variety of choice.'
Among the bungalows on Anglia's books are two-bedroom units at Ashdene
Gardens in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, priced from Pounds 70,950; and others
at Harrison Court, Hitchin, Hertfordshire, at Pounds 83,000.
Crest Homes, in the Midlands, says its semi-detached bungalows in mixed
developments are proving especially popular at present and sales manager
Maureen Haywood reports signs of greater movement in the housing market.
Bungalows in culs-de-sac in the Whitwick area are appealing to older people
moving from homes that were too large for them and which lacked modern
amenities, she says. As with many builders, Crest is offering a
part-exchange scheme, buying in the existing home. Prices of the bungalows
start at Pounds 52,950.
So, the much-maligned bungalow is alive and well. Briggs was right, after
all . . .
Further information: Bennett Homes, tel: 0842-860-765; Anglia Secure Homes,
0206-752-200; Crest Homes, 0827-60-888.
