FT  01 DEC 93 / Budget 93: Tax may raise premiums on vehicles and homes -
Insurance
'Disappointing but in some ways inevitable,' was how Royal Insurance, one of
the country's biggest insurance companies, summed up the impact of
yesterday's decision by the chancellor to impose a 3 per cent tax on
insurance premiums.
The tax, which will apply to most general insurance where the insured risk
is located in the UK, comes into effect next October and is expected to
yield Pounds 775m in its first full financial year. Life and pensions
business, reinsurance, and insurances such as marine, aviation, reinsurance
and export credit are exempt.
Reaction yesterday was muted, partly because the tax brings the UK into line
with practice in most of Europe and the US. 'We stuck out like a sore
thumb,' says Mr Roy Randall, head of corporate relations at Royal Insurance.
However, insurers are concerned about the burden of administering the tax.
They say it could have an impact on premiums for both home and motor
policies bought by individuals and commercial policies bought by companies,
at a time when the industry had been hoping for greater stability following
rate increases over the past two years.
'The cost will need to be passed on to policyholders,' warned Mr Mark
Boleat, director-general of the Association of British Insurers.
However, a number of companies indicated yesterday that they would try to
absorb the extra costs by increasing efficiency. The Prudential, which
provides 2m customers with household insurance, was quick to issue a
statement insisting that it was 'determined not to pass on' the new tax to
its customers.
Mr Barry Holder, general manager, finance at General Accident, the
Perth-based composite insurer, said 'the cost is likely to fall on us
initially. We'd assess it alongside other costs and see whether it was
necessary to increase rates'.
Others predict the tax could lead to fewer people buying insurance. 'It will
inevitably lead to a considerable increase in the number of under or
uninsured,' warned Mr Colin Czapiewski, an insurance specialist with
actuaries Lane, Clark and Peacock.
Insurers can at least take heart from the fact that the 3 per cent rate
compares favourably with premium tax rates elsewhere in Europe, which vary
from 2 per cent in the Republic of Ireland to as much as 30 per cent on some
French fire insurance policies.
