FT  09 OCT 93 / Arts: A way of happening, a way of mouth - Michael Glover
explains the appealing power of poetry and its increasing popularity today
ALFRED Lord Tennyson was very fortunate that the Duke of Wellington died
when he did. It was in 1852, just two years into his Laureateship, when he
was called upon to write an ode on the death of the man who had been
England's national hero since Tennyson's early childhood.
Ten thousand copies of the 'Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington' were
sold to the crowd that made its way to St Paul's on September 14 1852. As
Dickens commented at the time, the nation seemed to have gone 'funeral mad'.
Then, two years later, came the disastrous Charge of the Light Brigade in
the Crimea. By 1862, Tennyson was so prosperous that he turned down an offer
of Pounds 20,000 to do a reading tour of America.
That poetry, albeit of an orotund, drum-beating kind, should have played
such a prominent part in England's national life is quite inconceivable
today. For more than half a century poetry has been in thrall to the
academy, a subject of serious, nit-picking study - but seldom of popular
acclaim. Now there are some telling signs that poetry may be shifting
towards the centre ground again.
Next week, for example, BBC2 is screening a series of innovative poetry
programmes: in Poet's News, a five-minute programme to be screened after
Newsnight every night, poets will be commenting in verse upon the day's
news; Poems on the Box will feature unscheduled appearances by individual
poems between programmes, read by poets, actors and popular entertainers,
including Michael Palin, Ian Dury, PD James and Neil Tennant of the Pet Shop
Boys; and, Re-verse, a 40-minute anthology in documentary form of readings
by and interviews with some of the greatest 20th-century poets, makes use of
much rare archival material: TS Eliot intones majesterially before an
imposing BBC microphone that looks as large as his own head; Stevie Smith,
rocking back and forth in a hammock, and seeming thoroughly mad and
eccentric, reads her tour de force 'Not Waving but Drowning'; WH Auden, face
pouched and puckered like an old walnut, explains how the verbal magic of
poetry is related to other kinds of magic.
Poetry is also beginning to attract the kinds of promotional sponsorship
that literary fiction secured when the Booker was established. Last year the
Forward Prize for Poetry was established with a Pounds 10,000 cash prize for
the best collection of the year, and smaller prizes for the most promising
newcomer and the best individual poet; this year, the Forward is joined by
the TS Eliot Prize, administered by the Poetry Book Society, which will be
awarded in January by Valerie Eliot, TS Eliot's widow - also for the year's
best collection of poems.
Public readings of poetry are on the increase too. In London alone, for
example, there is a poetry reading somewhere every night of the week -
consult the Time Out listings for further details. The Arts Council Poetry
Library at the South Bank Centre, which celebrated its 40th birthday this
year, reports a steady increase in loans in recent years. According to a
recent edition of Cultural Trends from the Policy Studies Unit, there was an
eight per cent drop in public library loans from 1989-90 to 1991-92. Over
that same period loans from the poetry library increased by an average of 10
per cent annually; and since its move to the South Bank four years ago, its
membership has doubled to 11,000.
Yet the most important questions of all still beg for an answer: if poetry
is once again increasing in popularity, what does its revival represent -
and why are people turning up in increasing numbers to hear poetry read in
public?
In primitive cultures, the bard was the embodiment of tribal wisdom, the
repository of the collective memory - and some residue of that attitude
towards the poet and his function remains even today. Consider, for example,
the importance of poetry in Russia in our century. (Metre and rhyme, that
have themselves undergone a post-modernist revival in recent years are, of
course, powerful aids to memory). The poet's current role, in the words of
the Guyanese poet John Agard, this year's first writer in residence at the
Poetry Library, is to 'deal with epiphanies' in language honed, polished and
compressed until words read - and sound - like 'the splendours of speech
newly found'; or, in the words of Robert Graves, the poet 'does a little bit
of magic by . . . putting a ring around a particular experience'. As long as
people require moments of reflection, it seems, they will need poetry (as
was evident in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster when many
sympathisers sent poems of condolence to newspapers) - and this means that
in spite of the enormous changes in the way poetry has been written down the
centuries, it continues to fulfil a time-honoured role: to speak of deeply
felt and often intimate things that cannot be rendered so powerfully or so
effectively in prose.
And yet, it is also true to say that poetry has never had a specific
function. Poems are constructs made of words that are ultimately beyond
paraphrase - dismantle them and you are left with meaningless bits and
pieces strewn about the floor. It merely represents another way of using
language, a way that is often tighter and more powerful than the
narrative-driven novel or the essay; but to define its function is
ultimately impossible.
What is the meaning of music or painting? People find their own uses for
poetry. To some - usually a minority in any society - poetry makes some deep
seated appeal to our questing and imaginative natures; it is almost as if
there is a poetry-shaped hole in some human beings that demands to be
filled. Yet, as WH Auden, one of the greatest of 20th-century poets knew,
poetry is ultimately useless: none of his poems, he once remarked, had saved
a single Jew from the gas chambers; and in the great elegy to WB Yeats that
he wrote soon after Yeats's death in 1939 - the very first poem of Auden's
years of American exile  - he summarised the function of poetry in the way
it can probably best be summarised, in verse:
'For poetry makes nothing happen: it survives/ In the valley of its making
where executives/ Would never want to tamper,/ flows on south/ From ranches
of isolation and the busy griefs,/ Raw towns that we believe and die in; it
survives,/ A way of happening, a mouth . . .'
