FT  01 JUL 93 / Saddam resists sanctions and missiles: The hardships faced
by ordinary Iraqis under a resilient regime
THOUSANDS of Iraqis wait outside the Rasheed shopping centre in Baghdad to
collect their monthly survival packs of government rations. They talk in the
lines of the recent US air attacks on the country, the latest news from
friends and family who have moved abroad, and the success so far of Iraq's
football team in the qualifying rounds of the World Cup.
Many of them like to consider themselves part of Baghdad's well-to-do middle
class. But the 200-300 dinar monthly salaries of many of them, the
equivalent of between Dollars 66 and Dollars 100 before the Gulf war of
1991, now barely reach double figures in dollar terms.
The US missile attack on Baghdad at the weekend came as a blow to these
people who had hoped that the election of President Bill Clinton in the US
might lead to a less belligerent relationship and some easing of UN
sanctions. Instead, the economic pressure seems certain to continue with US
policy aimed at pushing Iraqis to overthrow President Saddam Hussein.
The rationing system has become a means of survival for most of Iraq's 18m
people. Its food basket consists of wheat, rice, sugar, oil and tea but it
provides only 68 per cent of the minimum daily energy requirement. Many
families have to seek other sources of income.
Aid agencies in Baghdad claim that malnutrition is becoming a real problem
among the poor and vulnerable, especially in the north and south of the
country.
With little means of earning hard currency, and a limited and inefficient
agriculture sector, the government is forced to play a precarious balancing
act of supply and demand with its strategic reserves and the goodwill of a
few remaining countries. The success of the system so far is fundamental to
the regime's stability.
Diplomats and aid agency officials in Baghdad say some countries are
providing large quantities of food on a credit basis. Countries in
South-East Asia provide rice, Sudan exports meat, and Malaysia supplies palm
oil on credit.
Vietnam is repaying old debts in food subsidies, and Jordan has a tacitly
UN-approved agreement whereby it supplies goods in exchange for oil. The
kingdom imports about 8,500 tonnes of Iraqi crude oil and 2,000 tons of
light oil and fuel per each day. Less legitimate barter deals are reported
to be carried out with Iran and Turkey.
Where food is actually paid for, the government has been forced to use some
of its gold reserves to preserve its limited hard currency. Hard currency
earned from private Iraqi investment abroad is also believed to be
channelled into government funds in times of severe food shortages.
The fact that the regime, with extensive help from the UN and aid agencies,
has survived is a cause for frustration to those who predicted sudden
economic collapse when sanctions were imposed.
What is more, should a total breakdown in the system appear likely, the
Iraqi government is permitted under UN Resolutions 706 and 712 to sell
Dollars 1.6bn of oil to finance emergency humanitarian relief.
Attempts to control the free market economy, such as the ban last year on
luxury goods and the withdrawal of the prized old 25 dinar bank note in May,
have failed to curb inflation or stabilise the dinar. But the rationing
system has kept a large number of Iraqis from starving.
It is difficult to gauge the true level of popular support for Mr Saddam,
but despite the hardships he remains firmly in power. At least one western
ambassador in Baghdad argues that the idea that the US air attack on the
capital last week should serve as a catalyst for Mr Saddam's overthrow, as
US defence secretary Les Aspin has implied, is a misreading.
Military confrontation with the west has been shown to consolidate anti-west
feeling in Iraq and, therefore, support for the regime and it makes the
possibility of a political solution to the problem all the more difficult.
While there continues to be no settlement and sanctions remain, it is the
poor and vulnerable who suffer.
