FT  09 OCT 93 / Lucas wants Rover chairman as its new chief executive
LUCAS Industries, the troubled UK automotive and aerospace components
company, has offered the post of chief executive to Mr George Simpson,
deputy chief executive of British Aerospace and chairman of Rover Group, its
vehicles subsidiary.
Lucas had hoped to be able to announce his acceptance to coincide with the
presentation of its annual results on Monday, but it is understood that Mr
Simpson has still not decided to take the job.
Lucas, which reported profits down from Pounds 83m to Pounds 22.5m last
year, promised in March that it would appoint a new chief executive as soon
as possible and hoped a new non-executive chairman would be nominated to
take over from Sir Anthony Gill, the group's chairman and chief executive,
by next month's annual general meeting.
The direction of Lucas's management has been in doubt for some time. Last
year Mr Tony Edwards, head of the group's aerospace division, was made chief
executive designate. Mr Edwards was later told that the board did not
consider him suitable for the job and he moved to rival TI Group.
Mr David Hankinson, Lucas's finance director, left earlier last year, when
he lost out to Mr Edwards in the race to become chief executive. Sir Anthony
had been due to retire last year, but agreed to remain until the succession
was sorted out.
Mr Simpson, who has spent most of the past 24 years with Rover (previously
British Leyland and BLMC), has been instrumental in transforming the
fortunes of the previously lossmaking UK carmaker.
The dilemma he faces is whether to leave Rover at the point where the hard
work of previous years appears poised to yield significant profits, and the
possibility has been created that it could again become an independent
company, floated off by BAe. Mr Simpson would be the obvious candidate to
lead the company.
At Lucas he would again face an uphill struggle to turn around a group
fighting for a place in the competitive automotive and aerospace components
market.
See Lex
