FT  12 MAR 93 / People: Priestley; 'investment in his life-blood'
One by one the familiar faces at Henderson Administration, one of the City's
best-connected fund managers, are bowing out. Hugh Priestley, 50, the
longest-serving member of Henderson's top team, is joining Laurence Keen, an
old-established private client fund manager.
Priestley started as a young reporter on The Times, and joined Henderson in
1966 when it was still best known for 'administering' the private fortunes
of the descendants of Alexander Henderson, the first Lord Faringdon. The
firm was not floated on the stock market until 1983 and its biggest
shareholder is the Witan Investment Company formed in 1909 to handle the
Henderson family's finances.
Witan remains Henderson's investment flagship and is still chaired by a Lord
Faringdon, a partner of Cazenove &amp; Co. But it has grown into Britain's fifth
biggest investment trust with over 8,000 shareholders and assets of Pounds
850m. For the past 12 years it has been managed by Hugh Priestley, who has
become one of the pillars of the investment trust establishment.
However, it is unusual to leave a manager in the same job for such a long
time. Michael Hart at Foreign &amp; Colonial and Lyndon Bolton at Alliance
Trust, are the obvious exceptions. Hence when Christopher Clarke, another
Henderson veteran, took over Witan at the start of the year, Priestley says
that he felt his role had been 'downsized'.
He stresses that his departure is amicable and has nothing to do with
Henderson's recent acquisition of Touche Remnant which created the UK's
leading investment trust manager. But his move to the 178-year-old Laurence
Keen, which manages around Pounds 1.5bn, suggests that he is better suited
to life in a business more akin to the old Henderson family firm.
Hamish Buchan, NatWest Markets' investment trust guru and a big fan, says
that Priest-ley has never been keen to advance his career by moving into
general management. 'To his eternal credit he has stuck to his last. He has
investment in his life-blood.'
