FT  10 JUL 93 / Travel: An aircraft of one's own - Chartering aircraft for a
cross-Channel jaunt
'LET'S GO to Paris for lunch.' That is what my wife said to me at 7.30 on a
sunny Sunday morning, writes William Vidal.
It sounded like a throwback to the roaring 1980s. Perhaps she thought she
was cheering me up. If so, it worked.
I called British Airways: Pounds 182 a head was the cheapest day return
fare. Add to this Pounds 6 for 12 hours' parking at Gatwick and around
Pounds 10 for petrol (we live in east Kent) and you get Pounds 380 for two,
not counting the taxi from the airport to central Paris.
Then consider the time factor. Leave home by 8:30 am, arrive Gatwick 9:45,
park car (short-term car park), check-in by 10 for the 10:25 flight (no
luggage).
Arrive Charles de Gaulle 12:40 local time. Quick taxi to Boulevard St
Germain (fairly fast on a Sunday) and, with luck, we might have napkins
round our necks by 1:30 pm.
Then I had a brainstorm.
I called my local little airport and, yes, they would happily provide an
aircraft and pilot for the day, a six-seater Piper Seneca (five passengers)
at Pounds 759 or a 10-seater (nine passengers) Piper Chieftain at Pounds 972
all in.
I called some friends, just as crazy as us.
'Want to go to Paris for lunch?' 'When?' 'Now.' 'How are we getting there?'
'I chartered a plane.' 'What?'
By 9 am the four of us were at Lydd airport, eight miles away. By 9.15 we
were taking off, having left our car in the free car park and brandished our
credit cards.
We climbed over the Channel and settled at 8,000 ft, taking in the beauty of
the French countryside while our charming captain, Caroline - holder of an
ATPL, the highest form of pilot's licence there is  - pointed out the
landmarks revealed to us with a clarity unavailable from 30,000 ft to those
travelling in airline jets.
Seventy minutes later we were on the ground at Le Bourget, the old Paris
airport (even older than Orly) now dedicated almost entirely to private
aircraft. Thirty minutes later (customs and immigration were virtually
non-existent), we were sipping aperitifs, having first dropped in at Chez
Monique and booked a table for 1 pm.
We had beaten the jets by one hour and saved Pounds 1 on the travelling cost
(not counting the airport taxi, which was considerably cheaper from Le
Bourget). And we had the luxury of an empty seat.
Our charter cost of Pounds 189.75 each would have been reduced to Pounds 152
a head had we been able to enlist a fifth luncheon partner.
Furthermore, the aircraft was ours for the day, allowing us ample time for a
magnificent Sunday lunch followed by a short cab ride and an afternoon
stroll in the Bois de Boulogne. Had we had nine similarly-minded people
available, the outing would have been even more attractive financially.
Taking the big Chieftain at Pounds 972 would have meant Pounds 108 a head,
or a saving of more than 40 per cent on BA's lowest fare.
Before you say that we are lucky to live eight miles from an airport, let me
suggest you do some local research: the Air BP Guide to flying clubs lists
218 organisations in the UK, from Jersey to Inverness, from which an
aircraft might be hired.
On the figures we were quoted, the Chieftain worked out at Pounds 6 a mile
for nine people (65p each) and the Seneca at just under Pounds 5 for five
(95p each). That would take five people from Southampton to Deauville and
back for Pounds 127 each, or nine people from Manchester to Dublin return
for Pounds 100 each.
Moreover, all the above trips have one factor in common: they involve a
flight over water, and Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) regulations require
that commercial flights  - those carrying fare-paying passengers  - should
be carried out by multi-engined aircraft.
If, however, you undertook a trip of the same duration but flew only over
land  - say, Birmingham to Brighton  - a single-engined aircraft could be
used and the cost per mile would be roughly halved. A six-seater Piper
Saratoga could probably do such a return journey at a total cost of Pounds
360, or Pounds 72 for each of five passengers.
We went to Paris for fun, but there is no reason why one could not apply the
same rationale to business trips. If you thought that chartering a private
aircraft was the exclusive domain of the very rich, think again. Air
charters can save money. They definitely save time; and if your ultimate
destination is other than a city with an international airport, then the
charter option wins hands down.
Since January, it has been possible to fly to EC destinations from any UK
airfield  - not just those with customs and immigration facilities - and
return the same way, as long as you give four hours' notice. The French are
not as relaxed yet but, almost invariably, they will arrange Customs
clearance for you at most destinations.
The next time the sun is shining and you feel the need to cheer yourself up,
pull out a map, pick a spot and telephone your local little airport.
