FT  14 OCT 93 / Kenya gets a lookover before foreign creditors meet: Leslie
Crawford on the visit of a World Bank team to assess whether Moi's
government has mended its financial ways
A WORLD Bank team was due in Kenya yesterday to begin assessing whether the
country has mended its financial ways sufficiently to merit the resumption
of international aid.
Kenya's chances of repairing relations with the donor community look better
now than at any time since the suspension of aid in November 1991.
President Daniel arap Moi's government has moved to curb the worst cases of
fraud and corruption in the banking and export sectors; fresh teams at the
treasury and central bank appear determined to fight inflation and restore a
measure of probity to government accounts; and economic reforms are moving
ahead.
'I believe enough has been done in terms of the basic framework to justify
the re-opening of a dialogue,' a World Bank official says. His cautious
remarks, however, speak volumes about the chasm of distrust that still
separates them.
Only six months ago, President Moi accused the World Bank and International
Monetary Fund of forcing 'dictatorial and suicidal reforms' on Kenya. But as
the aid squeeze took its toll, the president recanted.
The World Bank has agreed to chair a consultative group meeting of donors in
Paris next month. An IMF team is due in Nairobi soon to discuss the details
of a three-year economic reform programme which would form the basis of an
appeal for renewed assistance at the Paris meeting.
The World Bank is warning Kenya not to expect the aid floodgates to open
wide. 'A return to normal aid flows will depend on the delivery of results,'
says one World Bank economist.
'Kenya's relations with donor governments are so badly damaged that it will
need to establish a track record of sound economic management.'
What cannot be delayed for much longer, however, is a rescheduling of the
country's Dollars 7bn (Pounds 4.57bn) foreign debt. Kenya has dealt with the
lack of external assistance by accumulating more than Dollars 500m in
debt-servicing arrears - the equivalent of about five months of export
revenues.
'Debt arrears are a millstone around our neck,' says Mr Micah Cheserem, the
central bank governor, who was appointed in July. 'We need creditors to
write off at least part of the arrears.' The 44-year-old governor, a former
accountant with Unilever, believes Kenya deserves a measure of debt
forgiveness, as debt service now consumes 30 per cent of export earnings.
The aid freeze has also left its mark on the once-vibrant economy, which has
in effect stagnated over the past two years and creates formal sector
employment for only a small fraction of the 400,000 job seekers entering the
labour market each year. The result has been rising crime, child beggars on
the streets of Nairobi, and hunger in the Rift Valley, where drought has
blighted the maize crop.
Kenyans are also suffering the aftermath of financial scandals that rocked
the banking system this year. Unsecured loans by the central bank to local
banks with ties to influential politicians led to a massive expansion of the
money supply and fuelled inflation.
In July, the government closed four of the scandal-tainted banks and started
placing high-interest treasury bills on the market to mop up excess
liquidity and curb inflation.
Inflation, however, is still running, on some estimates, at an annual rate
of 54 per cent, compared with 27 per cent at the end of 1992. The rate is
expected to fall only towards the end of the year.
'Nineteen ninety-three will not be a great year,' says Professor Terry Ryan,
an economic secretary at the treasury. The only bright spot, he says, is the
export sector which has benefited from devaluation of the shilling.
Estimates of Kenya's economic performance in 1993 vary from a contraction of
2 per cent to expansion of 2 per cent. Kenya's population grows by 3.4 per
cent a year.
But if Kenya is to reach agreement with the IMF, more unpalatable reforms
lie ahead: job losses in the civil service, parastatal reform, and the
abolition of the government's maize-marketing monopoly, with the attendant
loss of the government's ability to dispense political favours.
Mr Cheserem and Mr Musalia Mudavadi, the finance minister appointed in
January, say they are committed to an IMF-style structural adjustment
programme.
'I want to divorce politics from economic management,' Mr Cheserem says,
'and reduce opportunities for graft.'
Opposition economists, however, believe the new economic team lacks the
political clout to sustain painful reforms.
'Will (President) Moi find the political costs too high?' asks Mr Mwai
Kibaki, leader of the opposition Democratic party and a former finance
minister. 'Under pressure, Moi will promise many things, but he will not
change.'
Even Mr Cheserem admits that his independence depends on the president's
goodwill. He calls Mr Moi the country's 'chief economist' and says the
president wants policies that will generate employment. Given that IMF
programmes rarely create jobs in the short run, difficult negotiations lie
ahead.
Mr Moi told Kenyans on Sunday to be wary of foreign handouts. 'We cannot
risk relying on foreigners to develop our country because at most times,
their priorities are different from ours,' he said in an address to
celebrate 'Moi Day' and his 15 years in power.
In Paris next month, donors will be trying to establish exactly what those
priorities are.
