FT  08 NOV 93 / Loyal Kohl lieutenant maps out vision: Personal trial seems
to have deepened Wolfgang Schauble's ability to examine and expound the
crucial issues facing united Germany
MR WOLFGANG SCHAUBLE, effectively second-in-command in Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's Christian Democrat party, gently ducks a question on whether his
health would permit him, one day, to become the leader of Germany.
Mr Schauble, confined to a wheelchair after an assassination attempt three
years ago, says he never thinks about the question. The man named in 1991 by
Mr Kohl himself as his heir apparent says he 'loves' his present job as
chairman of the conservative parliamentary group in the Bundestag.
Despite the struggle faced by the CDU in next year's elections, Mr Schauble
says 98 per cent of the party is behind Mr Kohl. 'Some may find this boring,
but this is a form of boredom I am glad to live with.'
For all his self-deprecation, Mr Schauble, in an hour-long interview with FT
editors during a visit to London last week, underlined his credentials as
the most incisive and intellectually capable member of Mr Kohl's governing
team.
His personal trial seems to have deepened his ability to examine and expound
the crucial issues facing united Germany. This talent may stand him and his
party in good stead during the gruelling run-up to general elections in
October 1994.
Asked about the competitive challenge for the German economy, burdened by
recession and reunification, Mr Schauble says: 'There is justification to
the criticism that we didn't understand soon enough (after unification) how
difficult the changes would be. . . . But the people now understand that
changes are inevitable, that we have to become more competitive.'
Unpopular government moves to cut budget outlays on social security, or to
deregulate the labour market, are bound to cause 'a great deal of
resistance' in the election campaign. 'In some ways that will help us to
make clear to people what this election will be about.'
One of the most divisive political issues is Mr Kohl's backing of Mr Steffen
Heitmann, justice minister from the east German state of Saxony, in the
election for federal president next year. Mr Schauble takes care not to
register any distaste for the choice. 'Heitmann is our candidate (for the
presidency). We do not change our candidate every four weeks.'
But he also hints at readiness to compromise with the opposition Social
Democrats. 'If the SPD would say they withdraw their candidate (Mr Johannes
Rau, the prime minister of North-Rhine Westphalia) we would not say we were
not ready to talk to them (about a joint candidate). But this is a fully
unrealistic assumption."
On European integration, Mr Schauble says economic and monetary union (Emu)
is still 'practicable'. The EC's choice of Frankfurt to host the forerunner
of the European central bank was 'very important' in improving the German
electorate's readiness to give up the D-Mark, he says.
Emu is, however, likely to remain difficult to accept for the German people
so long as Europe fails to deliver conclusive evidence that it is 'useful
and necessary.' The conflict in former Yugoslavia has made the Germans more
sceptical about European co-operation. 'How can I tell people at home we
should abandon the D-Mark for a currency union, when Europe is not in a
position to stop a war?'
Whatever form the European Union eventually takes, Mr Schauble says EC
members will not lose their 'state-like quality'.
Mr Schauble emphasises his agreement with Britain in matters like the need
to streamline the Commission and to make decision-making in the council of
ministers more effective after new members join the EC.
Asked to outline his best hopes for Europe in 2000, he spells out four
essential themes. The former Communist countries in eastern Europe should be
sufficiently developed, in economic and political terms, 'so as not to pose
a danger for European stability.' He is confident that the EC will have
improved its economic competitiveness.
He hopes the security partnership with the US will remain intact. And -
'here I stretch my optimism to the limits' - he hopes for 'positive news on
the development of democracy' in Russia.
Intriguingly, in his four-point end-of-the-century vision, economic and
monetary union does not get a mention. Surely not merely because he gave it
in London, Mr Schauble's answer could have come from Mr John Major.
