FT  05 NOV 93 / World Trade News: Japan carmakers in slow lane to China - A
huge market beckons
JAPAN's carmakers owe much of their impressive growth in the past to the
efforts they put into building up markets abroad.
But, in spite of the setback they face at home and in western markets,
Japanese carmakers have been curiously slow to move into one thriving market
that is not only geographically close but which offers strong growth for the
foreseeable future.
China's growing demand for passenger cars has so far failed to attract much
investment from its Asian neighbour which could risk falling behind western
rivals in the race to win over one of the fastest growing markets in the
world.
In a bid to make up for lost time, next Sunday the Japanese government and
car industry are sending a joint mission to China which they hope will help
pave the way for stronger ties.
The mission of over 60 members representing all the large Japanese car and
car components makers and bureaucrats from the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, is the first of its kind to China. It will be headed by
Mr Yutaka Kume, chairman of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association
and of Nissan.
The official reason for the visit is to exchange views on industrial policy,
possible future co-operation and other bilateral issues. The Japanese are
keen to get to know their Chinese counterparts in industry and government
and to get a better picture of China's policy regarding its car market.
China feels that Japan has not been eager to invest in their car industry,
says a Miti official. 'But that is not the case. Because Japan is close to
China, their expectations are high,' he explains.
While western companies from Volkswagen to Chrysler have been setting up
manufacturing joint ventures in China, large Japanese makers have been
conspicuously absent from the eight car manufacturing projects given
official blessing of China's government.
Of the three large-car and three small-car projects approved by the Chinese
authorities, only Suzuki has set up a joint venture for mini-car production.
Daihatsu and Fuji Heavy, meanwhile, have formed technology transfer
agreements.
The potential for growth in Chinese car ownership is huge. The market is
expected to grow from 1.1m units last year to 3m units by the year 2000,
according to Chinese estimates.
Exports of Japanese vehicles to China have surged from 20,673 in 1990 to
96,953 last year. In the first few months of this year, exports rose from
7,940 units in January to 21,044 in March. And Japan already has six
commercial vehicle joint ventures and two technology transfer accords with
China.
However, the Japanese are finding China's market managing measures
irritating. One Miti official laments that 'their basic policy is to build
the cars themselves.'
Industry officials complain about political uncertainty and limited
infrastructure. They are also finding it difficult to swallow the terms set
by the Chinese.
Partly as a result of these hurdles, the large Japanese companies find their
interest in new markets diverted to South East Asia, where motorisation is
far more advanced than in China.
With Japanese vehicle exports to China having fallen dramatically as a
result of moves to cool the economy, the mission will be looking for any way
to bridge the gap.
