FT  15 MAR 93 / Victorious Keating begins big reshuffle
AUSTRALIA'S Labor prime minister, Mr Paul Keating, yesterday began work on a
wide-ranging ministerial reshuffle after unexpectedly retaining power in
Saturday's federal election.
With five seats still in doubt late last night, Labor was expected to win an
overall majority of at least seven seats in the 147-seat House of
Representatives. It had a majority of six in the last parliament.
The victory gives Mr Keating substantial freedom to introduce fresh faces
into the ministerial team he inherited after defeating Mr Bob Hawke, the
former prime minister, in a 1991 leadership battle.
Mr Bob Hogg, Labor's national secretary, said there was likely to be 'a fair
turnover' in the cabinet. However, Mr John Dawkins, the treasurer (finance
minister), is expected to retain his post.
The government also signalled during the campaign that it would approve a
cut in interest rates soon, unless the Australian dollar failed to maintain
its recent recovery.
Mr Dawkins forecast yesterday that economic growth would accelerate from 2.4
per cent to 3-4 per cent by the end of the year, helped by recovery in other
developed countries.
Labor's victory followed a late surge of support, not identified by
published opinion polls until election day. Labor's private polling also
failed to identify the swing.
The main factor was Mr Keating's attacks on the coalition's plans for
radical reform of industrial relations and tax, including the introduction
of a goods and services tax.
The result was a triumph for Mr Keating, who was one of only a handful of
Labor leaders who believed Labor could win in spite of high unemployment and
slow economic growth.
'This is the sweetest victory in the world. This is a victory for the true
believers; the people who in difficult times kept the faith,' he told
supporters at his Sydney headquarters.
Mr John Hewson, the Liberal/ National party coalition leader, announced a
review of opposition policies and forecast that the GST plan would be
dropped. He said he was sure of 'strong support' in a leadership election to
be held shortly.
