FT  04 JUN 93 / Volkswagen aims to return to profit in third quarter
VOLKSWAGEN, Germany's troubled motor manufacturer, hopes to be back in
profit by the third quarter of the year, after a record DM1.25bn (Pounds
.50bn) loss in the first three months, shareholders were told yesterday.
Radical cost-cutting, including short-shift working in many parts of the
company, brought it to the brink of break-even during one of the months of
the second quarter, Mr Werner Schmidt, the group's chief financial officer,
told the annual meeting in Hamburg.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, chief executive, said production had been cut back by
200,000 units in the January-May period, compared with a year earlier, to
reflect falling demand, especially in the German market.
He confirmed the gloomy figures for 1992, in which VW boosted its turnover
by 11.9 per cent to DM85.4bn, increased output 8.1 per cent to 3.5m
vehicles, and productivity 9.6 per cent, and yet saw pre-tax profits slump
66 per cent to DM602m.
He said that in the first four months of 1993 the total car market in
Germany shrank by 20 per cent and by 17 per cent in the major European
markets. Although the market in the US declined by only 0.1 per cent during
the same period, VW saw its own sales fall 8.8 per cent.
The major cause was a delay in production of the new Golf from the company's
Mexico plant, after a strike in 1992.
Overall, the group saw a decline in sales of 11.7 per cent, or 144,000
vehicles, with the Audi and Spanish-manufactured Seat models suffering
disproportionately, while VW brands lost only 8.5 per cent. The one piece of
good news he reported was an increase in sales of Czech-manufactured Skoda
cars, which increased by 22.9 per cent.
As a result, the company was unable to meet the full extent of demand with
its current capacity, he said.
Mr Piech spelt out the cost-cutting measures he had already implemented,
including 'massive' short-time working, rationalisation of production,
reduction of purchasing prices for suppliers, and personnel cuts in all
departments.
'We have done everything necessary to ensure that Volkswagen returns to the
black as soon as possible,' he said.
'That will not be the case in the second quarter, but we believe we will
achieve the turnround by the third quarter.'
