FT  23 NOV 93 / Arts: Low rent but high brow - Lynn MacRitchie admires the
video installation works of Gary Hill
The work of Gary Hill, now showing at the Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, and
that of Bill Viola which follows next month at the Whitechapel Gallery,
London, should convince anyone still in doubt that video, for all its low
rent, low brow connotations, can be used to create beautiful, thoughtful
works of art.
Hill, born in California in 1951 and originally trained as a sculptor at the
Art Students League, Woodstock, New York, has been working with video for 20
years. His installations created in the last three have won him a reputation
of world standing, sealed by the acclaim accorded 'Tall Ships' at Documenta
9 in Kassel last year and repeated at the Whitney Biennial in New York
earlier this, which is one of the five works featured at Oxford.
He has succeeded in using a medium which has often been dismissed as
peripheral to the artistic mainstream to create artwork of beauty and
profundity. Looking at his work is not quite so straightforward as looking
at a painting, however. Three installations, 'I Believe It Is An Image In
Light Of The Other,' 'Tall Ships' and 'Learning Curve' all require the
spectator to become part of the piece, whether stepping in to a dark tunnel
to activate the ghostly figures which animate 'Tall Ships', threading
through the hanging cathode ray tubes of 'Image in Light of the Other' or
sitting at a modified school desk to gaze at the endlessly crashing wave of
'Learning Curve.'
But participation by the viewer does not seem, as it can do in some
interactive pieces, strained or uncomfortable. Instead, physical engagement
becomes part of the process of understanding the works, revealing the
complexity of their formal organisation and also contributing to their
impact. The viewer must step into a dark enclosure to trigger the
projections in 'Tall Ships', a series of figures which come forward and
return the spectator's gaze before finally turning away, as if unsatisfied
with the encounter. The cathode ray tubes of ' . . . in Light of the Other',
1991-92, are the only source of light in the installation and viewers must
weave through their electric glade to read the texts on the books spread on
the floor beneath.
Hill has developed these complex works by using video to examine the
relationship between image and text, initially in single screen tapes such
as 'URA ARU', where words are run backwards and forwards over the visual
image. The power of the installations, however, lies in his way of opening
out his video work from the the single screen to become part of mixed media
compositions with a wider reference to traditional painting or sculpture.
The figures in 'Tall Ships', for example, could be a living mural while his
use of the naked body as subject is part of the long humanist sculptural
tradition. His chosen tool, the video camera, allows that tradition to move
into the era of the electronic image.
In 'Inasmuch as it is Always Already Taking Place', 1990, for example, 16
cathode ray tubes of various sizes are tumbled together in a specially built
wall niche. Each is the size of the part of the body which is shown on the
screen, normal television size for the stomach, tiny for the tip of a
finger. They sit in their alcove glowing blue, mysterious, like the bones of
a saint. This is no desiccated memorial, however, but living flesh, rising
and falling as it breathes, the separate parts combining to create a
metaphor for, in Hill's words, 'the meeting ground of the physicality of the
body, space and time.'
Another physical experience, that of surfing, underlies the concept of
'Learning Curve,' 1993, specially commissioned for this exhibition. In his
California youth, Hill was a keen surfer, and wanted to explore the
experience of riding 'the perfect wave', dependent on a momentary harmony of
mind, body and nature, as a symbol for the 'opening out' of the mind
immersed in the flow of thought. Hill has adapted a school desk so that its
surface stretches out some 15 or so feet in front, sloping gently upwards.
At its highest point rises a low horizontal screen, on which is projected
the video image of a constantly breaking wave.
The piece is a departure from the other works, inviting the viewer to
contemplate not the image of a thinking body but the concept of thought
itself, 'feeding back to the viewer,' Hill explained to me, 'in the endless
becoming of the wave.' Hill's work is remarkably successful in juggling with
philosophical concepts expressed through technology.
This is perhaps because he is prepared to be as ruthless with his medium,
stripping down the complexities of the video monitor to a few fragile glass
tubes, as he is with his own body, which he subjects to his camera's
unflinching gaze. This old fashioned artistic honesty, in which both subject
and technique are pushed to their limits in the attempt to achieve a
successful formal resolution, results in works of power and conviction, as
well as beauty.
Gary Hill: In Light of the Other until January 9; Museum of Modern Art, 30,
Pembroke Street, Oxford OX1 1BP. Tel 0865 722733. In association with the
Tate Gallery, Liverpool, where the show can be seen from February 26 - May
2, 1994.
