FT  08 JUN 93 / Italian polls boost reform drive: Municipal elections
confirm political shake-up
THE outcome of municipal elections in Italy over the weekend places renewed
pressure on parliament to reach a quick agreement on new electoral laws for
early fresh elections. And it puts the five-week-old government of Prime
Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi in an even more anomalous position regarding
its parliamentary support.
The election results confirmed the dramatic shake-up in the country's
political geography as a result of the corruption scandals and the
discrediting of the traditional parties.
The populist Lombard League of Mr Umberto Bossi established itself as the
dominant force in the rich industrial north of the country. Everywhere
voters shied away both from the ruling parties and from what has been the
centre ground.
The only groups, apart from the League, to increase their vote over that of
general elections in April 1992 were those with more radical and aggressive
messages such as the Network (La Rete), the Sicily-based clean government
movement, and the hardline members of the former Communist party,
Reconstructed Communism.
However, the bulk of the former communists, recycled in the Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS), managed to hold their vote well, despite being
tainted by corruption, and remain in control of the old 'red belt' in
central Italy.
The four-party coalition on whom Mr Ciampi's predominantly technocratic
government relies still provides a majority in both houses. But if the
results of the election on Sunday are projected in a national vote the
collapse in support for the Christian Democrats, Socialists, Social
Democrats and Liberals is such that between them they would muster less than
20 per cent.
The Socialists in the previous municipal elections of 1990 obtained more
than 17 per cent of the vote but their support has slipped to virtual
annihilation with only 2 per cent. The two minor coalition partners are
close to oblivion; while the Christian Democrats have slipped back to 17 per
cent in the centre and north of the country.
This still leaves them the largest voted-for party, with a bigger share of
the vote in the south. But there is no evidence the Christian Democrats'
decline has halted.
The elections involved a representative cross-section of the country
covering nearly one in four of the electorate with almost 11m voters in
1,092 towns, six provinces and the region of Friuli-Venezia-Giulia. Laws
approved in March introduced a direct vote for the mayor in towns of more
than 15,000 and allowed the leading parties or coalitions a dominant say in
forming new municipal administrations. To ensure a clear-cut result, the
laws allowed for a second round run-off between the two leading candidates
in the mayoral race.
Since only two mayors achieved the necessary majority on Sunday, the final
picture of the new political map will not emerge until after the second
round on June 20. But with separate votes cast for the mayors and party
municipal lists, the League's triumph is clear.
It has become the first party to obtain 40 per cent of the vote in Milan and
rally 37 per cent for its mayoral candidate Mr Marco Formentini. Mr Bossi
had staked out the hard-working electorate of Milan as the symbol of League
power, and with the city at the epi-centre of the corruption scandals, his
and the party's credibility depended upon victory.
A striking new element has been the way in which electoral alliances were
formed for these polls. The alliances were often across traditional
ideological barriers. But the most successful ones were those where the
'left' parties plus the Greens and The Network banded together. Even where
they formed two separate camps, as in Catania and Turin, their mayoral
candidates did best.
The way in which the second round alliances in the mayoral elections are
formed and their outcome will influence the debate on whether general
elections have a similar run-off. This is the most divisive issue in
formulating the new electoral laws.
