FT  06 OCT 93 / Government to provide extra short-term export insurance
THE government is to provide extra short-term export insurance cover worth
Pounds 1.4bn for the remainder of 1993 in a move aimed at protecting
Britain's export drive in fast-growing markets, particularly in the Pacific
rim.
The move marks an important breakthrough for private sector insurers, which
have been warning the government since early this year that they could not
cover exporters' needs. This was due in part to the fragile state of the
reinsurance market and in part to a surge in exports from the UK following
the devaluation of sterling in September last year. Exports to China, for
example, were 90 per cent higher in the first half of 1993 than in the first
half of last year.
Mr Colin Foxall, chief executive of NCM Credit Insurance, the
Dutch-controlled company which accounts for 80 per cent of short-term export
credit cover in the UK, yesterday welcomed the development.
He emphasised that the private sector would continue to meet more than 80
per cent of the export insurance needs of UK exporters. The Pounds 1.4bn in
additional cover will be of greatest value in 'concentrated markets' where
high levels of exposure have arisen because of strong export growth. Key
markets are Turkey, South Korea, Malaysia, China, Indonesia and Thailand.
When the UK government privatised the short-term export insurance arm of the
Export Credits Guarantee Department in late 1991, its stated aim was to
withdraw completely from the reinsurance of short-term risks - generally,
exports where payment is due within two years.
A crisis arose early this year, when NCM revealed that at least Pounds 1bn
of exports were in jeopardy because the private sector did not have the
capacity to reinsure the risk. Exporters were having to use expensive bank
letters of credit to cover themselves against the risk, or risk losing the
business altogether.
The government moved to answer this shortage in June, when it announced that
'top-up' reinsurance to bridge the gap would be extended to 1997.
