FT  24 SEP 93 / Crisis in Russia: President ready to fight election next
June
PRESIDENT Yeltsin yesterday named June 12 next year as the date for
presidential elections and indicated he would be a candidate.
Mr Yeltsin said the election was 'really inconvenient ..nevertheless
essential'.
The president was elected in 1991 for a five year term, and until last week
he said he would complete the term and then retire from politics. He now
clearly believes, as he said in April at the summit in Vancouver with
President Bill Clinton, that 'there is no alternative to me as president -
there will be, but not yet'.
While at 62 he is no great age for a politician, Mr Yeltsin's health has
been erratic. He has persistent heart trouble.
Mr Yeltsin's arch-rival in Moscow, General Alexander Rutskoi, is a likely
challenger. Gen Rutskoi, 46, claimed the presidency after Mr Yeltsin
dissolved parliament and he was subsequently appointed president by the
Supreme Soviet. Yesterday he said he would not run for the presidency, but
he is thought to be bluffing.
Gen Rutskoi was elected vice president on the same ticket as Mr Yeltsin  -
chosen for his links with the army, his leadership of the Democratic
Communists (now called the Party of Free Russia) and his influence with
centrist deputies in the then Russian parliament.
Since then, Gen Rutskoi has become deeply antagonistic to Mr Yeltsin. He has
revealed himself as a strong Russian nationalist, and deeply regrets the
loss of power and prestige which the collapse of the Soviet Union brought.
He has, progressively, become more conservative in his economic views -
passing from moderate reformism to espousal of a command system. He has,
however, never taken extreme nationalist or communist positions, and
recently protested when anti-semitic slogans appeared in a cemetery.
Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, 41, a former Russian deputy premier, made a surprise
announcement of his intention to run for the presidency earlier this year.
One of the last Soviet deputy premiers in the closing months of the
Gorbachev regime, he has recently seen his popularity rating match, then
surpass, that of Mr Yeltsin's himself.
He became known in the west for his authorship and espousal of the 'Grand
Bargain' - an economic reform programme, written with Mr Graham Allison (now
assistant secretary of state at the Pentagon), and Professors Jeffrey Sachs
and Stanley Fischer.
Since leaving government on the collapse of the union, Mr Yavlinsky has
built a reputation as a consultant - mainly to regional governments, and to
former Soviet republics - and as an occasional commentator on current
events.
Mr Yavlinsky has carefully kept himself free of entanglement with any
political faction. In a press conference on Wednesday, he damned both
parliament for being obstructive and the president for the risk he was
taking with the country's stability. His opponents question his competence
as an economist and say he is more politician than thinker. No one doubts
his intelligence, nor his self confidence.
Mr Sergei Shakhrai, 37, did not just announce he would stand for president
earlier this year, he said,in a radio interview, that he 'would be'
president at some time. 'The only question,' he said later 'is when.' But
yesterday, Mr Shakhrai seemed to indicate that he would not stand in June if
Mr Yeltsin did.
Trained as a lawyer, with a deliberate and thoughtful manner, Mr Shakhrai is
credited with much of the tactical thinking in the Yeltsin camp. His current
post, deputy prime minister in charge of nationalities policy, keeps his
profile high and his contacts with the republics and regions fresh. He has
recently founded his own party, based on regional support, and is regarded
universally as a serious candidate for high office.
Mr Mikhail Bocharov, 52, a successful businessman who was almost Russia's
prime minister (in 1991) announced his intention to stand for the presidency
in July - to no great reaction. Though credited with competence and
influence, Mr Bocharov's political star has waned: he has thrown his lot in
with centrist forces, and published an economic programme 'Resurrection',
which sees market development being guided by a strong state.
The only other declared candidate is Mr Vladimir Zhjirinovsky, 47, leader of
the Liberal Democratic Party, Russia's best known and most vocal fascist.
