FT  01 JUL 93 / Technology: Telecoms gets in on high-wire act
A radio-controlled robot, looping along the power cables between electricity
pylons, is helping the UK's power distribution company, National Grid, to
build a nationwide telephone network in record time.
Energis, the telecommunications arm of the National Grid, expects to offer a
long-distance phone service to 70 per cent of the population of England and
Wales by April next year, only 11 months after being awarded a
telecommunications licence.
Energis does not have to dig up the roads to lay the cable, nor get planning
permission for telephone poles or ducts. Instead, it is exploiting its
investment in the electricity pylons - or 'towers' as they are known in the
trade - which span the country.
Fibre-optic cables, which will form the backbone of the new network, are
being wound around the earth cable - also known as the ground wire  - which
is the cable looped from the top of the pylons. Heath Robinson-like machines
which lash the fibres around the cables move at the rate of one metre per
second, providing swiftest installation.
Focas, part of the Cookson Group, which is the major supplier of the
wrap-around fibre, is supplying similar systems to electricity generating
companies as far afield as Scotland and Hong Kong, the US and Scandinavia.
They are being used by the electricity companies either to carry their own
internal communications or for services to sell on to customers.
Focas managing director Ray Grimwood believes it is the regulatory
environment and the culture, not the technology, that is preventing other
electricity suppliers from following suit. As well as providing rapid
competition to monopoly phone companies, such systems could also provide
phone services to any rural area with a power supply. Eastern European
countries and China, for example, could be big beneficiaries.
Electricity suppliers have three technical options in choosing a phone
network to link in with their electricity supply. The first is to wrap the
fibre round the earth cable, which is a swift and relatively cheap option if
the earth wire is new and will remain in place for several years.
If the earth wire is old and due to be replaced, power companies often
prefer the second option: replacing the earth cable with one which
incorporates the power wire and the phone wire in the same plastic sheath.
Such systems are also useful if the electricity company is extending its
power network or in countries which lack both electricity and phone
services.
The third option is to drape the optical fibre cables between the pylons.
The simplicity of this scheme brings its own problems, despite years of work
on the technology by optical fibre companies. Energis, for example, rejected
the self-supporting draped cable because it believed that the cable would be
physically damaged if used in close conjunction with its high-capacity
transmission lines.
Developing the wound cable was not easy either. Looped round the earth wire,
the cable has to withstand ultra-violet radiation and snow. The earth wire
is also designed to take lightning strikes, when the temperature can rise in
a flash to 200'C or 300'C. So Focas had to develop a specially cured
cross-linked polyethylene jacket to ensure that the weather does not affect
services.
Today each fibre installed by Focas can carry 565Mbit/s of information -
enough to allow, say, 8,000 simultaneous voice conversations, 8,000 pages of
text a second and 10 colour video signals to be sent on a single pair of
cables.
