FT  03 NOV 93 / Survey of Morocco (11): Recession in Europe hits industry -
After a tough year, the government's passive attitude is under attack
AT THE implausibly named Bogart factory in the industrial zone just outside
the centre of Casablanca, the Made in Morocco label is diligently stitched
into children's Levi denim clothes destined for France. Mr Mohamed Tamer,
the factory's owner, says that he has been fortunate in the current
recessionary climate to have experienced stagnant rather than falling sales.
Morocco's industrialists have had a tough year. The country's gross domestic
product fell in 1992 in real terms compared to the previous year, while
total exports experienced a 9 per cent drop to Dh33.6bn (Dollars 4bn). The
government expects exports to fall further in 1993 although gross domestic
product should grow by 3 per cent. The second year of drought has taken its
toll on production and on domestic purchasing power while exports have
suffered because Europe, which is Morocco's main market, has been in
recession.
Members of the Office of the Federation of Industry set out their grievances
to the government, in the shape of Mr Abder- azzak Mossadeq,
secretary-general of the Ministry of Commerce, at a seminar in May.
The main complaints were the progressive removal of tariffs against imports,
the high cost of energy (including periodic power cuts which are
particularly disruptive to textile manufacturers) and high interest rates.
Externally, the industry representatives were unhappy about the trend
towards increasing protectionism in overseas markets, depressed worldwide
demand and competition from smuggled goods.
While acknowledging the grievances of the industrialists, Mr Mossadeq
inclines towards the opinion that there is not much that the government can
do. He says that real rates of interest are about 10 per cent and the
government itself is bor- rowing money from the World Bank at 10 per cent.
Though he admits that the cost of energy is high, that is a problem which
everyone faces in Morocco, which does not have the fortune to be a part of
the oil-rich Arab world.
With privatisation a buzzword, the state in Morocco is distancing itself
from the industrial sector. Mr Mossadeq says that the government no longer
has an industrial strategy because that implies dirigisme. Things have
changed since the 1960s when it was forced to intervene because of the lack
of a private sector.
'I was at an African ministers of industry meeting recently and everyone was
talking about privatisation. But you need a private sector before you can
privatise which is why the state first invested in industry and is now
retreating,' says Mr Mossadeq.
Although the government would like to see greater vertical integration,
part- icularly in the textile and garments sector which is heavily dependent
on the import of raw materials, Mr Mossadeq says that the government can
only try to create the conditions in which industry might prosper by
measures which include providing technical centres to improve the skill of
the labour force.
The manufacturing sector is the second largest contributor to the country's
gross domestic product, accounting for over 18 per cent in 1992 and
overshadowed only by commerce with a contribution of 21.4 per cent to GDP.
The main industries are agro-industry (food-processing), textiles,
chemicals, metallurgy/mechanics and electrical/electronics. Of these, the
agro-industry and chemical industries contribute the most to industrial
production, with a share of roughly 32 per cent each in 1991 but textiles
and leather are the largest industrial export, accounting for 38 per cent of
industrial exports in 1991.
With 180,000 employees, the textile and leather industry is also the largest
industrial employer, accounting for one third of all those employed in
industry.
The industry's labour costs are the lowest of any Mediterranean country with
privileged access to the EC. It also has the advantage over its south-east
Asian competitors of proximity to Europe, which means lower transportation
costs.
Manufacturers, however, are worried by increasing protectionism in Europe
since they are heavily dependent on the European market for exports. Some 50
per cent of goods manufactured in the textile industry is exported and 80
per cent of these exports are to France.
Mr Mohamed Lahlou, vice president of Manatex, one of the country's
longest-established textile companies, and president of the Moroccan
Association of Textile Industries, says that the industry has suffered as a
result of the devaluation of some European currencies, notably the Spanish
peseta, the Italian lira and sterling. The leather industry saw a 10 per
cent fall in exports in 1992, with shoe sales performing particularly weakly
with a drop of over 20 per cent.
Investment in the whole sector fell in 1992 for the second consecutive year,
partly as a result of high interest rates, and Mr Lahlou has criticised the
government for its passive attitude towards the problems facing the sector.
By contrast, the sector which enjoys the largest investment is the chemical
and pharmaceutical industry which accounted for 38 per cent of all
industrial investment in 1991. The sector includes the phosphate industry,
controlled by the influential state monopoly, the Office Cherifien des
Phosphates (OCP).
Phosphate exports dropped to Dh8.48m last year from Dh10m in 1991 and are
expected to fall further to Dh7.7m this year. The industry has not been
aided by a drop in international prices from Dollars 42.5 a ton at the
beginning of 1992 to Dollars 38 in May this year.
Despite a fall in the phosphate sector's share of total exports from 43 per
cent in 1983 to an estimated 24 per cent in 1993, Morocco remains the
largest exporter of phosphates in the world and the proprietor of the
world's largest phosphate reserves.
The most optimistic industry is the metallurgy, mechanical, electrical and
electronic sector which has seen production increase from Dh13.2bn in 1988
to Dh20.3bn in 1991, on the back of strong investment which has almost
doubled over the same period while exports have risen almost threefold. The
industry is hoping for further growth this year.
Although some industrialists are calling for a devaluation of the dirham to
help exports and the reimposition of higher tariffs to protect domestic
industries from outside competition, the government appears unlikely to
adopt either measure.
Industry will have to weather the recession both at home and abroad and hope
that the trend towards lower domestic interest rates will continue in order
to aid both production and investment in the coming years.
