FT  19 NOV 93 / Survey of UK Leasing and Asset Finance (3): Whether to
lease, whether to buy - Peter Carty examines a typical dilemma
COMPANIES planning acquisitions of new capital items are typically faced
with the dilemma of whether to lease an asset or to take out a bank loan and
purchase it.
The extra security afforded to a lessor by potential repossession of the
leased asset should mean that more favourable terms are on offer than those
for a bank loan. In practice, a bank may obtain a charge over a capital item
bought through a loan, negating this apparent advantage.
In addition, many leased items depreciate rapidly and provide limited
security. 'The lessor is taking very little asset risk,' says Mr Paresh
Mashru, head of management consultancy Arthur Andersen's asset finance unit.
'For that type of lending really what he is doing is taking a credit
decision. On the margin the comfort that a leasing company looks for when it
leases is not dissimilar to what a bank looks for when it makes a
medium-term loan.'
In particular, high technology items such as computers do not give lessors
good asset backing. 'We take more of a lending approach rather than an asset
finance approach there,' agrees Mr Derek Pridmore, marketing director of
Barclay's Mercantile Business Finance. 'They will mostly be finance leases.'
Leasing can display other similarities to loans and other credit facilities.
A lessor might look for a large up-front payment, most commonly with smaller
companies, say a third of the value of an asset, in much the same way as for
a hire purchase transaction. It may not feel comfortable with the lessee's
credit rating for the item's whole cost.
Although leases sometimes may not offer superior payment terms for rapidly
ageing asset categories, this can be more than compensated for by their
potential flexibility. The lessee can avoid being lumbered with obsolescent
equipment by taking out a lease with built-in upgrading clauses.
This facility cannot be so extended through a loan which only enables a
one-off purchase - there are some swiftly depreciating capital items which
do offer good asset backing, so that leasing should give a marginal
advantage. 'The average period for leasing cars is just over 30 months.
Residual values for cars at three years are typically 35 to 40 per cent of
original face value, so there is good security of value in the asset
itself,' confirms Mr Pridmore.
Assets with longer lives which are easily removable and re-marketable are
commercial vehicles, machine tools, printing presses, agricultural
machinery, production lines and aircraft. 'If it's a genuine asset-based
decision then I think the leasing company might well be cheaper,' says Mr
Mashru.
A crucial factor in the lease or buy decision is, of course, tax - and in
particular, capital allowances. At present many companies emerging from a
lengthy recession may not have profits against which to set off capital
allowances. 'If you don't pay any tax that benefit is just lost to you,'
says Mr Mashru. A lessor can utilise the allowances and pass them on to the
lessee. This is a permanent source of advantage to some non-profit making
organisations such as local authorities.
Leasing can also offer a source of additional funding that may not be
available through bank loans. Assets acquired under operating leases can
often go off-balance sheet so that key ratios do not deteriorate and banking
covenants remain unbreached. The scope of this practice may be soon
restricted by the Accounting Standards Board.
Another factor to weigh up in the lease or buy decision are the perks that
are often built into the leasing contract. These can include servicing and
maintenance. A wider variety tends to be available for computers frequently
encompassing installation, training and help hot-lines.
Finding the notional cost within the lease of each extra for comparison
purposes can be problematic. 'If they're bundled, it's difficult to
determine what the individual elements are,' says Mr Alan Jones, managing
director of Copernicus, a company producing lease evaluation software.
Disentangling the charges for the extras from the actual cost of the
equipment under a lease is made more difficult because the lessor may be
able to buy it on more preferential terms from the manufacturer than the
lessee. Of course, if the lessor does get a manufacturer's discount, the
benefit can be passed on to the lessee.
Leases have become more sophisticated and often incorporate treasury
instruments for big ticket items. Variable rate leases can be hedged with
various instruments so that they have a fixed repayment profile. But
treasury instruments can be dangerous in the hands of the inexperienced.
'Like anything else, it can be effective if it's properly managed,' comments
Mr Mashru, emphasising the importance of laying down clear objectives for
the use of instruments.
A disadvantage of leasing is that lessees can lose out on government grants.
If they do not have legal title in the asset, they may not be eligible for a
relevant award. It may not be available to the lessor, so that benefits
cannot be passed on.
It is on the spreadsheet that many lease or buy decisions are made. The two
common quantitative evaluation techniques both compare the cash flows from
alternatives. The net present value (NPV) method involves discounting the
flows back to get amounts of money representing equivalent values at the
inception of the lease or loan. Under the internal rate of return method
(IRR), the discount rates which give NPVs for each decision of zero are
compared and ranked.
Occasionally it is not possible to calculate an IRR for some cash flows and
others might have more than one IRR. Many companies also feel more
comfortable with aggregate amounts rather than rates and opt for the NPV
method.
'The point about the NPV is that you can get a value in today's terms, it
gives you a total,' comments Mr Jones of Copernicus. 'The IRR might be a
rate applied to a small amount in which case the interest element is small,
but if you've got a present value you can see that leasing in today's terms
costs you, say, Pounds 100,000 and buying costs you Pounds 105,000.'
It may be easier, but many financial professionals use incorrect discount
rates when comparing the cash flows. A common error is to insert a
before-tax discount rate into the spreadsheet rather than the after-tax
rate. 'It's amazing how unsophisticated some corporates are, particularly
the small to medium-sized,' says Mr Mashru.
