FT  22 MAR 93 / Telegraph directors to decide on Southam stake
MR CONRAD Black, chairman of Hollinger Group and The Telegraph, yesterday
said he was confident that independent directors of the UK newspaper group
would not change their recommendation to buy a stake in Canada's Southam
newspaper group.
The Telegraph's board will meet on Thursday following news that Power
Corporation, the Canadian newspaper group, is buying shares in Southam more
cheaply than the UK newspaper group.
Some of the Telegraph's independent directors are concerned that Mr Black
agreed to Southam's issue of 13m shares to Power at a price of CDollars 14
each, days after they recommended that the Telegraph should pay CDollars
18.10 a share for half of Hollinger's 22.5 per cent stake.
Mr Black said he understood the 'sensitivity' surrounding the sale. However,
he said that without Power's involvement he could not have 'emasculated the
so-called poison pill' which effectively prevented Hollinger from increasing
its stake above 23.5 per cent in Southam without making a full bid.
Power and Hollinger will now be able to take their combined shareholding up
to 47 per cent and to any percentage after two years. Mr Black said Power
and Hollinger were 'longstanding corporate friends and on occasion allies'.
Mr Black believes the poison pill arrangements could have curtailed
Hollinger's and The Telegraph's ability to be a constructive influence at
Southam. 'Somebody had to break the ice' said Mr Black.
After Thursday's board meeting, NM Rothschild, the merchant bank which
handled The Telegraph's flotation last summer, will write to shareholders
explaining the background to Power's involvement. The Telegraph has
rescheduled the extraordinary general meeting, at which shareholders will
vote on the purchase, from March 30 to April 5.
Lord Swaythling, an independent director, said: 'The Telegraph's purchase of
Southam's shares was an excellent deal at the time Hollinger asked us to
participate and it is no less of a good deal since Southam's share price
fell on news of its results which enabled Power Corporation to pay less for
its shares.'
Letter, Page 12
