FT  14 MAY 93 / GPA Group - The Refinancing: Mixed reaction while
uncertainties exist
THERE HAS been a mixed welcome in the Irish Republic to the planned takeover
of GPA by GE Capital, as the uncertainties still surrounding it have raised
questions about whether the 'white knight' might end up getting a much
better deal than existing shareholders.
Mr Ruari Quinn, the minister for enterprise and employment, welcomed the
plan saying: 'It removes the uncertainty that the entire market was facing
and it does secure, it would appear at this stage, the future for GPA.'
He added that the complexity of the deal 'is going to require the skills of
a lot of people in GPA to put in place'.
The government's earlier offer to invest Dollars 20m (Pounds 13m) in GPA
through the Shannon Development Agency, was still on the table, Mr Quinn
said, subject to its being made 'on sound commercial grounds'.
The government has two principal concerns.
Firstly it wishes to salvage its existing investment in GPA. Through Aer
Lingus, the national airline, it has an 8.8 per cent holding, which prior to
the aborted flotation in 1992 was valued in Aer Lingus's books at about
IPounds 100m (Pounds 98m).
Secondly, GPA through its joint ventures in Shannon Aerospace and Shannon
Turbine Technologies in the Republic, has played a pivotal role in
establishing an aviation-related industrial park, which is planned to create
some 11,000 jobs over the next decade.
Brokers in Dublin, however, have been more circumspect. They say that the
key uncertainty surrounding the deal is the undisclosed price at which GE
plans to buy up to 80 per cent of GPA through new equity issues exercisable
until March 1997.
Irish institutional shareholders were unwilling to comment yesterday.
However, privately they were expressing concern that it would substantially
dilute their existing shareholdings and that it was too early to take a more
positive approach.
There are also worries that GE, by obtaining 45 of the most modern aircraft
in GPA's fleet, had taken control of some of the company's best earning
assets, but had not taken on any exposure to the company's liabilities in
the short-term.
'The key question is when will GE exercise its options to take a stake in
the company,' said one broker.
Irish investors in GPA, including Mr Tony Ryan, the chairman, hold about 20
per cent of its shares.
Mr Ivan Yates, the opposition finance spokesman for the Fine Gael party
said: 'I am pleased that GPA has avoided examinership or receivership, but I
see no reason whatsoever now for the state to be investing further in GPA
and risking taxpayers' money.'
