FT  20 DEC 93 / A spur for the gene hunters: The mapping of mankind's
genetic make-up sets a medical landmark
Annual fund-raising telethons, added to a Dollars 10m bequest, have financed
an astonishing tour-de-force for French science: the first 'map' showing the
entire genetic make-up of mankind. It will help researchers move more
quickly to identify the genetic causes of thousands of diseases.
Last week's publication of the 'physical map of the human genome' by the
Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (Ceph) in Paris is a landmark in
medical research. And it rounds off a golden year for genetics - the most
productive since 1953 when James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the
double-helix structure of DNA, the chemical that encodes genetic
information.
During 1993, the world's researchers have found the precise genetic cause of
scores of inherited diseases, including Huntington's chorea, a type of
dementia, and several forms of cancer. Ceph says its map will enable gene
hunters to move 10 times faster in future. There is now a real prospect of
deciphering all 3bn chemical 'letters' in the human genetic code - known
collectively as the genome - by 2000.
'Before today, a physical map existed for only two per cent of the human
genome; our map covers about 90 per cent,' says Dr Daniel Cohen, the
ebullient director of Ceph. He is a natural performer - whether explaining
genetics or playing the piano at the annual telethon, sponsored by the
French muscular dystrophy association, which raises Dollars 12m a year for
gene mapping at Ceph and its daughter laboratory, Genethon.
American gene mappers, who receive Dollars 165m a year from the US
government's grandiose Human Genome Project, have been amazed by the rapid
progress at Ceph and Genethon. But they were happy to swallow national pride
and acclaim the French achievement. Dr Francis Collins, head of the US
National Centre for Human Genome Research, calls the map 'an enormous
practical boost to gene hunters'.
'This will allow scientists throughout the world to discover more quickly
the genes that cause diseases such as muscular dystrophies, epilepsy,
diabetes, asthma, cardiovascular (heart) disease and certain cancers,' says
Dr Glen Evans, director of the Salk Institute's Human Genome Centre in
California.
Researchers looking for the cause of an inherited disease search first for
'genetic markers' - stretches of DNA near the target gene that are present
in patients but not in other people. Now, they should be able to find these
markers like landmarks on the new map and home in quickly on the gene
responsible.
Researchers can produce a diagnostic test for a inherited disease as soon as
they know the genetic cause. A treatment takes much longer to develop. Take
for example cystic fibrosis, the lung disorder, for which the gene was
identified in 1989. Widespread testing for CF started in 1991, but the first
clinical trials of CF gene therapy - delivering correctly functioning copies
of the defective gene to patients' lungs - did not begin until this year; at
least five years further clinical development will be required before this
treatment becomes widely available.
Asked why his team was first in the world to produce a genome map, Dr Cohen
points out that he started before anyone else: 'I founded Ceph in 1983 with
Jean Dausset (a Nobel-prize winning geneticist) using a Dollars 10m bequest
from a French art collector. So we had six years experience before the Human
Genome Project was launched in the US in 1989.'
Others attribute Ceph's success to Dr Cohen's single-minded enthusiasm. 'He
created a unique environment in which to carry out such a large-scale task,
at a time when it was not possible anywhere else,' says Dr David Bentley,
head of human genetics at the Sanger Centre near Cambridge in the UK. 'He
identified the best techniques and automated them very effectively.'
Ceph and Genethon operate 30 robots to do much of the work performed by
scientists and technicians elsewhere - an unprecedented level of automation
in biology research. The essential technology for labelling and detecting
DNA fragments was developed in collaboration with Amersham International,
the UK life sciences company.
Creating the map is like solving an immensely complicated biological jigsaw
puzzle - cutting up DNA in different ways with enzymes and fingerprinting
the fragments to see how they overlap and fit back together.
The French scientists do not work with raw human genes. Instead they have
refined a trick originally invented in 1987 in the US. They cut the human
DNA into large pieces and transfer them into yeast cells. As the yeast grows
and divides, it produces clones of the human DNA, known as yeast artificial
chromosomes. These YACs are then sliced into smaller fragments for detailed
analysis.
Dr Francois Gros, the geneticist who is secretary of the French Academy of
Sciences, describes the resulting physical map as 'a continuous ordered set
of DNA fragments, essentially a guidebook to the genome'. But to the
untutored eye, it looks like an incomprehensible jumble of overlapping
horizontal lines and vertical bars of different lengths, labelled with long
strings of letters and numbers.
The data would form a pile of paper as high as the Eiffel Tower, if printed
out in full. A 'condensed' version will be published as a 300 page book
early next year. But any researcher wanting to use the map will have access
to it on the Internet computer network, which connects scientists around the
globe.
'We have introduced a new style of communicating data,' Dr Cohen says. 'We
have tested the database with some of our international collaborators but I
guess it will take a few months before everyone gets used to it.'
As a point of principle, Ceph and Genethon will not try to patent the map or
any of the information in it. But they recognise that, under the present
rules, researchers elsewhere could use the map to identify specific genes
and then patent them for diagnostic or therapeutic applications.
International collaboration on a large scale will be needed to fill in the
gaps in Ceph's map, find inaccuracies and improve its resolution. The aim is
eventually to decode all of the estimated 100,000 human genes and know
precisely where each gene lies on the 23 chromosomes that make up the human
genome. This is likely to be achieved in the first decade of the next
century.
Dr Cohen promises the excitement of genetic research will feed through to
patients, in the form of improved treatments and eventually cures. 'In 10 to
20 years most of the diseases caused by single gene defects, like cystic
fibrosis, will be cured,' he says.
The most serious ailments of western society, such as heart disease, mental
illness and cancer, result from a far more complex interaction between
multiple genes and the environment in which we live. But, Dr Cohen says, 'in
50 years most of these serious diseases will also be cured - and 50 years is
almost no time in the history of medicine'.
