FT  04 NOV 93 / Technology: Focus on Xerox's new film star - Andrew Fisher
reports on a new silver-free imaging process
When Xerox Corporation announced its new technology at the start of this
week to replace silver compounds in film for the graphic arts market, the
precious metals market caught a bad case of the jitters.
Yesterday, these had not entirely disappeared, although it had become clear
that the breakthrough would affect only a small part of the film market.
Xerox's VerdeFilm is a digital imaging film, which needs strong light and
equipment that would be too bulky for ordinary cameras. The US company says
it has no plans to introduce its new film to the consumer market.
Even so, any suggestion that silver could be displaced, however marginally,
from its biggest market is bound to set the industry wondering what could
come next. Last year, 186m troy ounces of the precious metal were used in
photography, 31 per cent of total industrial demand; of this, commercial
photography accounted for 82m ounces.
Until the Xerox product, developed by its research centre in Canada, is on
the market, potential users will not be able to assess its qualities fully.
They will be waiting to see if the resolution of VerdeFilm, which dispenses
with silver halide and the need for chemical processing in the making of
commercial printing plates, is sharp enough for their needs.
Xerox, which highlights the cost and environmental advantages of VerdeFilm,
is acting fast to bring its new dry processing film into production. Its
researchers only discovered the process six months ago. Having studied its
applications, says Edward Ernst, general manager of VerdePrint Technologies,
the Xerox unit marketing the film, 'we moved very quickly to get to this
point'.
After further operational testing, he expects VerdeFilm to be in production
next summer. To speed its introduction, Xerox has contracted Rexham Custom,
a US subsidiary of Britain's Bowater, to make VerdeFilm.
The new film's images are created with a thin layer of minute particles of
selenium (a by-product of copper refining and used in photocopier imaging)
encased in polymer; these are charged, exposed and developed.
The process, using heat, causes the selenium molecules to move deeper into
the polymer and create an image. It is, says Xerox, 'no more complicated
than feeding paper into a fax machine'.
Existing image-setters and scanners will have to be modified. Ernst says
this would cost around Dollars 500 (Pounds 331) for machines whose price
runs into thousands of dollars. Agfa, part of the Bayer chemical group of
Germany, will talk with Xerox about modifications of its image-setters to
take VerdeFilm.
As a provider of film and equipment for the Dollars 1.8bn a year graphic
arts market, Agfa is both a competitor and potential partner for Xerox.
However, Mike Austin, group marketing manager of Agfa UK, says of VerdeFilm,
'we don't see this (VerdeFilm) as a major threat'. This is because it will
be aimed at the top end of the sector for high-quality uses such as
advertising.
Xerox has prepared its ground by lining up partners. As well as Agfa, it
plans talks with Fuji Photo, a much smaller player in this market. The two
companies are already linked through Fuji Xerox in photocopiers and Ernst
says talks have been held about possible co-operation on VerdeFilm - 'it's
still an open discussion'.
No comment was available from Eastman Kodak, a big film supplier in the
graphic arts field. Also in this market is Du Pont chemicals. Among
image-setting equipment manufacturers with which Xerox has developed
alliances are Quebecor Printing of Canada, Business Link Communications of
the US and Ultre, part of Germany's Linotype-Hell.
Ernst believes printers using VerdeFilm could make significant savings in
their operating cost. Much of this would come from the absence of chemicals.
