FT  23 JUL 93 / The Maastricht Vote: Unionist deal turns on 'accountable
democracy' for Ulster
THE CRUX of the understanding reached last night between the Ulster Unionist
party and the government was an apparently vague commitment to restore
accountable democracy to Northern Ireland.
But the party's MPs made clear that they expected concessions to flow over
the next few weeks, after they supported the government in both of last
night's votes.
The party's nine MPs said they looked to the government 'to fulfil its
pledges and restore accountable democracy to the people of Northern
Ireland'. There were no specific concessions announced and government
ministers said none had been offered.
The deal appeared to fall well short of expectations. It was thought that a
Northern Ireland select committee was regarded as the absolute minimum that
Mr James Molyneaux, the party leader, would demand.
But Mr Molyneaux, a canny Westminster operator who has shunned publicity
this week, seems to have tried to take a longer-term view and to hammer home
to the government how it must now always bear in mind the views of the
Ulster Unionist party. The message last night was that Northern Ireland's
place in the UK had to be reinforced.
With the Irish government anxious that Britain should balance the demands of
Unionists and nationalists in the province, Anglo-Irish relations will only
be undermined.
Steps had also been taken to give locally elected representatives real power
 -rather than the present system of direct rule from Westminster, the Ulster
Unionist MPs said. A Northern Ireland select committee in the Commons looked
set to be the first result of the deal.
More broadly, the Ulster Unionists seem to have decided that their interests
lay in helping the Conservatives, rather than the Labour party. They have
been encouraged by Mr Major's recent attacks on Labour's ideas for joint
Anglo-Irish sovereignty for the province - and clashes between London and
Dublin on similar proposals.
The Ulster Unionists were clear last night that they will support the
government in today's confidence motion. The appointment of Mr Kevin
McNamara, Labour's nationalist Northern Ireland spokesman, as secretary of
state, holds far more horrors for Unionists than Maastricht's eventual
ratifi-cation.
The Irish government last night reserved comment on the apparent deal, but
ministers in Dublin were known to be concerned about the implications of the
accord and its consequences for continuing efforts to restore an
inter-party, cross-Irish border political dialogue on the future of Northern
Ireland.
Official sources in the Irish capital said urgent efforts would be made to
discover the details of any pact made, or assurances received by the
Unionists.
