FT  08 JUN 93 / Hard realities behind the worries of Britain's top managers:
Executives' fear of redundancy is growing even though the economy is
recovering
BRITAIN is not going to return, this side of the year 2000, to the sort of
job market conditions that professional and managerial people took for
granted in the 1980s, headhunter Mr Nigel Humphreys claims.
Mr Humphreys, managing director of Tyzack Accord, is trying to find an
explanation for the latest dive in confidence over job prospects among the
highest levels of British management.
About 100,000 people may have lost their jobs in the City of London alone
since the recession began and, by the end of last year, nearly 300,000
professional and managerial people were registered as out of work.
Now the worst is supposed to be over, with recession giving way to a slow
and hesitant recovery.
April saw the third consecutive fall in the number of jobless, while many
companies have started to sound more optimistic about business prospects for
the year ahead.
Yet, in the past few weeks, fears of redundancy have been rising again among
many top-rank corporate managers and other professionals, according to a
Mori survey published last week by the Financial Times. The survey reported
a sudden and marked loss in confidence over job security among social groups
A and B, which include solicitors, senior civil servants, business
executives, bank managers, middle managers and heads of local-government
departments.
Mr Humphreys, like many others in his profession, finds the most recent loss
of confidence initially puzzling, because the executive shake-out is largely
finished.
'There has been a quite definite surge in recruitment activity at management
level and it is not just people already in jobs moving to new ones.
Previously unemployed executives are again in work.'
The key to the puzzle may be what Mr Humphreys sees as an important change
in companies' attitudes, with businesses adapting to what he calls the 'new
normality'. New ground rules may mean that many of those managers still in
work have good cause to worry about their future.
Mr Humphreys adds: 'Managers in highly competitive markets will need skills
and abilities different from those which sufficed in the boom years of the
1980s. If they cannot adapt, they will not easily fit in.
'It is no good believing that when companies, this time, emerge from
recession, they will explode like corks out of a champagne bottle. There is
going to be a great deal of care and caution when hiring - and retaining -
at all levels.' Neither are managers likely to be required in the same
numbers. A survey by Reed Personnel Services suggests that managers will be
in least demand as business conditions improve, thanks to fundamental
corporate restructuring already undertaken. The outlook is for a surplus of
middle and senior managers over the next five years.
'An awful lot of job losses are simply not directly linked to the
recession', says Mr Paul Charlesworth, development director of Coutts Career
Consultants. 'There has been plenty of de-layering and restructuring,
leaving behind a core of people who are promised continuing job security but
who do not necessarily believe it.'
Companies, he reports, are also increasingly moving towards a pattern of
short-term, interim management for filling posts. The tendency to contract
out important elements of the business also raises the prospect of fewer
internal jobs.
Prospects in the public sector are unlikely to inspire much confidence, with
local authorities, health authorities and the armed services all undergoing
restructuring that involves job shedding at the highest levels.
'When you see surgeons seeking outplacement services, you appreciate the
extent of the revolution under way,' Mr Charlesworth says.
The government's enthusiasm for market-testing many of its core functions
provides another cause for uncertainty.
Mr Charlesworth adds: 'There is no longer any such thing as a job for life.
People will have to be more mobile and employers may take a more cavalier
attitude to staff, becoming less reluctant to offload them.'
However, some outplacement specialists believe that the new wave of
pessimism may be overdone. Mr Ian Bell, a senior consultant at Sanders &amp;
Sidney, the outplacement consultancy, says: 'It would be misleading to say
employment prospects for higher and middle management are improving. The
situation has without doubt stabilised after one hell of a shake-out,
although a general nervousness and uncertainty remains.'
Mr Peter Trigg, managing director of Drake Beam Morrin, another outplacement
specialist, believes the immediate jobs outlook for managers has
significantly improved in recent months.
DBM has some good news for executives searching for jobs. A survey of its
own clients showed that most found another suitable post within seven
months.
