FT  10 FEB 93 / Parliament and Politics: MPs seek further reversals in Army
manpower reductions
A CROSS-PARTY Commons committee yesterday demanded further changes in the
government's plans for reducing the size of the Army.
The defence committee, triumphant after the partial climbdown last week by
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, called for the cancellation of
further plans to merge or disband infantry regiments.
Sir Nicholas Bonsor, Conservative chairman of the committee, said members
were unanimous that Mr Rifkind's decision to restore 3,000 Army posts and to
cancel two regimental amalgamations was not enough.
Last week's change increased the target for Army personnel in the mid-1990s
from 116,000 to 119,000 compared with about 145,000 at present. Mr Rifkind
told BBC radio that a further increase was highly improbable. But Sir
Nicholas said: 'We are an extremely dogged committee, and we don't take no
for an answer.'
The number of infantry battalions - excluding the Brigade of Gurkhas - has
been reduced since last July from 50 to 45. Under the government's original
Options for Change plans it was due to be reduced to 36. The revised
government plan means two more will be retained, but the committee is
arguing for the number to be kept at 45.
The committee attacked the government's decision to make cuts in other areas
of its defence budget to pay the Pounds 80m annual cost of its revised plan.
Sir Nicholas said it was 'not unrealistic' to ask the Treasury to review
reductions in defence spending set out in last November's public spending
round.
The committee's report, prepared before the change in Army plans, warned of
'chronic overstretch' and attacked the restructuring plans as 'inappropriate
and ill-advised'.
In contrast to the Army, the RAF is expected to make more drastic cuts than
foreseen in the Options for Change review, to fewer than 70,000 instead of
the expected 75,000. RAF chiefs aim to cut support services to a minimum in
a move to preserve front-line units and safeguard equipment plans.
Mr Rifkind yesterday moved to deflect some of the fallout from the
committee's report by attacking disarray in the Labour party over defence.
In the Commons he attacked Mr John Reid, a Labour frontbench spokeman,
telling him to 'start converting' his own party supporters before seeking to
give instructions to Conservative MPs. Mr Reid claimed the committee's
report showed that the government had no strategy on defence, no policy on
security and 'no idea where it is going'.
He suggested that instead of indulging in U-turns and staggering from pillar
to post over the amalgamation of regiments the government should instigate a
full defence review as advocated by Labour leaders.
Defence Committee, Britain's Army for the 1990s: Commitments and Resources:
HMSO, Pounds 14.70.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
