FT  02 JUL 93 / Parliament and Politics: Carlile demands investigation into
SFO
MR ALEX CARLILE called yester-day for an inquiry into working practices at
the Serious Fraud Office.
The proposal by the Liberal Democrat parliamentary spokesman on employment
came in the middle of a day of complicated statements and counter-statements
that ended with Mr George Staple, SFO director, announcing that he had
instructed staff to use 'the utmost care' in dealing with the press.
Mr Carlile referred to documents which he said provided 'strong
circumstantial evidence' that the SFO or police officers working for it had
tipped off the press about raids related to the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International inquiry carried out in October 1991. Mr Carlile said the
documents left 'genuine public concern' about working practices at the SFO.
The SFO retorted that documents prepared on the day of the raid were not
press releases to be issued to journalists, but internal briefing papers.
Their purpose had been to help staff in briefing reporters after the raid.
The SFO also tried to distance itself from a controversy surrounding a
forged letter purporting to come from the former Liberal leader Sir David
Steel, by passing the blame to the City of London Police.
The move came as Mr Carlile said he had been told there was a second forged
letter relating to the same inquiry. Mr Carlile said the second letter
purported to be from Mr David Freeman, a London solicitor. He had not seen
the letter, but was given to understand it was dated April 1.
Mr Staple said last night that he had asked the police 'to ensure that no
occurrence of this type would occur in the future'.
He emphasised that 'no SFO lawyer or other member of the SFO' was involved
in the forgery of the 'Steel' letter which was found to have been sent as an
April's Fool joke last year.
'The letter was written and sent by an officer or officers of the City of
London Police who had been working in conjunction with the SFO on the BCCI
investigation,' Mr Staple added.
The SFO said the second letter mentioned by Mr Carlile was not a letter but
a fax cover note attached to the 'Steel' letter 'as part of the same
misguided April fool joke'.
The SFO confirmed that on April 1 last year a senior lawyer working on the
BCCI investigation received a faxed copy of the letter which appeared to
come from Sir David. It was written on House of Commons paper and said that
Sir David would be attending court later that day in relation to a
defendant's bail application.
According to Mr Staple's statement the senior SFO lawyer believed the letter
to be genuine and showed it to the defendant's lawyers.
The City of London Police said last night that the forged letter had been
sent by one of its officers who was on secondment to the SFO. The force said
its own inquiry 'did not result in any disciplinary proceedings'.
Mr Carlile said both forged letters were prepared by officers of the City of
London police who were then working 'with or as part of' the SFO.
Mr Carlile said it was 'outrageous' that those responsible for the letters
had not been demoted 'at the very least'. He would be 'reluctant to see
police officers who do this kind of thing even arresting a shoplifter in
Boots'.
