FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of World Car Industry (18): Optimism remains despite
sharp slowdown - Most car companies assume that economic growth will pick up
/ Mexico
AFTER steady growth over the past five years, Mexico's car and truck
industry is now suffering from the country's sharp economic slowdown.
In the five months to May, domestic and export sales reached 445,768; a drop
of 3.1 per cent on the same period last year. The market had been expecting
growth of at least 5 per cent, after last year's increase of 8.8 per cent,
and double-digit growth of previous years.
The contraction is largely due to a 22.5 per cent reduction in van and lorry
sales as small and large businesses have cut purchases in an environment of
low economic growth. Car sales increased by a modest 3 per cent, while
exports were flat.
The reduction comes just as Mexico's car industry is preparing itself for
the North American Free Trade Agreement, scheduled to come into force by
January 1 1994. The treaty is likely to intensify the integration of
Mexico's car industry with those of the US and Canada, enabling car
companies to rationalise plants in the Americas, concentrating production in
the most efficient factories in the region.
Under Nafta, Mexico will gradually dismantle barriers to imports, breaking
the complex link between permitted imports into Mexico and a car company's
exports and domestic sales. But the US will eventually eliminate its 25 per
cent tariff on light trucks, its 2.5 per cent tariff on Mexican cars, and
consider Mexican cars as North American for purposes of CAFE, a regulation
that encourages car makers to make fuel-efficient vehicles in the US or
Canada.
On one level, the removal of Mexican trade barriers means that US car
companies will likely take advantage of economies of scale in US plants, and
excess capacity, by exporting from the US to Mexico. New US exports to
Mexico could hurt Volkswagen and Nissan which between them control the
compact and sub-compact market in Mexico. GM reckons that as a result of
greater US exports to Mexico, the US automotive deficit with Mexico of about
Dollars 2bn a year will turn to a surplus.
In June, General Motors gave a possible signal of events to come when it
announced it was going to move production of US and Canadian-bound Cavaliers
from Ramos Arizpe to Lansing, Michigan.
But Mexico's low wages, special status under Nafta, and the high
productivity of its workers make it an attractive location for new plants.
GM has said it might start production of a compact car in its Ramos Arzipe
factory, and Mercedes-Benz is exploring the possibility of exporting luxury
cars to the US from Mexico.
Volkswagen has no factory in the US, and eventually expects to supply part
of the US market from Mexican plants rather than, as now, from those in
Germany. Other non-US companies, such as Honda and Toyota, may also set up
in Mexico to take advantage of its access to the US.
Nafta also forces car companies to meet a stiff North American rule of
origin requirement of 62.5 per cent. While the US companies easily meet this
target, VW and Nissan are having to persuade German and Japanese parts
suppliers to set up in Mexico so as to comply.
Troubles in the car industry have caused lay-offs and provoke talk of a
crisis. On June 15, Ford Mexico fired 680 workers after it cut back
production at a plant in northern Mexico City from about 500 to 400 vehicles
a day. When announcing the cut-back, Ford said it had been expecting
industry domestic sales of 720,000 this year, but it now reckons sales will
be about 600,000.
The car companies are blaming weak sales on high interest rates, which have
cut demand for credit, and the newly privatised banks which, after seeing a
rapid increase in underperforming loans, have become much more cautious in
giving out loans.
The elimination of tax deductibility for company vehicles last year also
seems to be having an impact.
The worse performing companies have been the US Big Three - Ford, General
Motors and Chrysler - partly because they are the biggest producers of
trucks and vans, and also because they have not recently invested heavily in
new capacity. In the first five months, domestic sales at Chrysler fell 24.2
per cent, at GM by 14.6 per cent, and at Ford by 11.4 per cent. Volkswagen,
boosted by sales of its new Jetta, improved by 17.1 per cent, and Nissan was
up by 4.5 per cent.
Exports have held up better, thanks to the recovery of the US economy and
increased capacity. Nissan has started exporting from its new Aguascalientes
plant, pushing exports up by 80 per cent, while VW exports increased by 18.1
per cent. However Ford, last year the largest exporter, saw exports fall by
13 per cent and has had to eliminate shifts at its Hermosillo export plant,
which produces Escorts and Mercurys for the US market.
Despite this year's problems, the car companies are still optimistic about
prospects in Mexico because most assume that economic growth will pick up
from the lucklustre 2.4 per cent of the first quarter this year, and
interest rates will continue falling.
The Economist Intelligence Unit predicts domestic sales will reach 1.1m by
1996 from 706,914 last year. Exports are predicted to rise to
600,000-700,000; almost double last year's figure of 383,374.
