FT  11 FEB 93 / Italy's Socialist justice minister quits
ITALY'S fragile coalition government yesterday suffered its most serious
blow when Mr Claudio Martelli, the Socialist justice minister, announced his
resignation after becoming the latest casualty in the country's growing
corruption scandal.
Mr Martelli's resignation came after he was told that he was under
investigation for corruption related to a secret Swiss bank account alleged
to have been used to siphon bribes paid to the ruling Socialist party.
The party, which now has only six ministers left in the 24-strong coalition
government, is due to open a special two-day assembly today to find a
successor to Mr Bettino Craxi, whose job Mr Martelli was eager to secure.
Last night magistrates issued a sixth warrant against Mr Craxi. Earlier,
Milan magistrates said they had prepared a fifth warrant advising him he was
under investigation for alleged corruption and illicit party financing.
The latest warrant against the Socialist party chief in the unfolding
scandal which broke last February is connected with similar allegations made
against Mr Martelli. These relate to the fraudulent bankruptcy in 1982 of
the Banco Ambrosiano.
Both the Socialists and the Christian Democrats, which dominate the
coalition, last night appeared determined to prevent the crisis leading to
the downfall of the six-month-old government.
Mr Martelli, 49, was deputy head of the previous government and one of the
most ambitious of the younger generation of politicians. His resignation
knocks one further nail in the coffin of the existing political parties,
whose discredit grows almost daily as magistrates carry out new arrests and
make fresh charges in their investigations into corruption.
Mr Martelli resigned as he was about to be served with a warrant by Milan
magistrates which said he was under investigation for allegations made by
witnesses who confessed to collecting illicit party funds in the municipal
corruption scandal.
Mr Martelli has consistently denied newspaper allegations of involvement in
the corruption scandal and links to an account at the Lugano branch of the
Union de Banques Suisses held by the Socialist party.
Although three ministers in the current government have been served with
notice of being under investigation by magistrates for a variety of alleged
offences, Mr Martelli is the first to resign.
World Stock Markets, Page 37
