FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (30): Hope amidst the misery - The squalor
and splendour of Bombay
ON THE seafront road outside the Taj Hotel, the grandest of Bombay's
Victorian palaces, small boys in rags run around passers-by selling
postcards. To single men, they offer their bodies. 'Just Rs200, sir. Rs100,
sir. Please, sir.'
Bombay combines the best and the worst of the changes which economic
modernisation is bringing to India. As the city has swollen into the
country's largest, so it has also become its richest. Land prices in central
Bombay are as high as Tokyo's. It has traffic jams to match.
Bombay has brought enormous wealth to the few. For others it has brought
nothing but misery. But even the poorest rarely go home because Bombay is
still a city of hope. In the villages from which people still pour into the
city there is often no chance of a paid job, no chance of betterment. In
Bombay, there is at least the possibility of work.
Even in the city's largest public laundry, where 5,000 washermen daily pound
clothes against stones with their hands, people think of the future. Mr
Bhachan Ram Kanojia, aged 35, says he has made enough money to send his 11
children to school. 'I am a dhobi (washerman). My father and my grandfather
were dhobis. But my children will do something better.'
Since independence, Bombay's population has soared from 2m to at least 9m -
the official total. Unofficial estimates put it at 11m. No-one can count
precisely the millions living in putrid slums or the tens of thousands who
sleep on pavements. As well as the people born in Maharashtra who lay first
claim to Bombay, the city is home to immigrants from all over India.
Bombay's heroes tend to be self-made men - entrepreneurs, criminal gang
lords, film stars. The city often turns a blind eye to dishonesty in the
knowledge that it is almost impossible to remain honest and become rich,
powerful or famous. Take for example Mr Harshad Mehta, the stockbroker at
the centre of last year's financial scandal, who has won and lost billions
of rupees. Once he had a sea-front flat with a mini-golf course and a fleet
of 29 cars. Now he has nothing. Yet when he was released from prison after
months of interrogation, crowds surrounded the jail gates to welcome him. He
is still planning his comeback.
Until this year, Bombay's people mostly believed that the city's enormous
energy would always pull it through the gravest hardships. But the
inter-religious riots which hit Bombay after the sacking of the Ayodhya
mosque tore through this complacency. A city which prided itself on its
cosmopolitan character was ripped apart by violence in which at least 700
died. A further 230 were killed by bombs in the world's biggest urban
terrorist attack.
Studies showed that as well as an explosion of Hindu-Moslem hatred, the
disturbances were fuelled by criminal and political groups trying to take
advantage of the unrest. Shiv Sena, a local militant Hindu political party,
was found to have played a part in organising the unrest. Moslem-led
underworld figures orchestrated the bombings.
In the aftermath of the violence, the police launched an unprecedented blitz
on the underworld, using the investigation into the bomb blasts as a
pretext. Mr Sharad Pawar, the chief minister of Maharashtra state which has
Bombay as its capital, has pledged to clean up the city, including the murky
links between politics and crime. But few Bombayites believe these ties will
completely disappear. Crime is too deeply embedded in the city's legitimate
business life.
Beyond the unease about politics and crime, the city also falls prey to
economic uncertainty. Even as high-speed growth in finance, in international
trade, advertising and other commercial services is creating white-collar
workers, the city's industrial employment is shrinking. With its high cost
of living, Bombay has become too expensive for factories. The number of
industrial workers in Bombay and its hinterland actually fell in the 1980s
by about 2m to 6m. With the closure of textile mills and other large plants,
registered unemployment in Maharashtra has soared to 3m, 20 times more than
in the 1960s.
Even foreign banks are finding Bombay too costly for their back-office
operations. ANZ Grindlays is transferring its computer centre and other
support departments to Bangalore and Madras because office space and housing
in Bombay are too expensive.
Cities in the developed world have passed through similar painful
transitions; London, New York and Paris all have problems with growing
numbers of low-skill unemployed. But in Bombay these problems are so much
more intense: people still go hungry.
Yet, Bombay would not be the city that it is if its residents dwelt long on
its dark side. Eight months after the riots and six months after the bomb
blasts, workmen are repairing the damaged buildings, the stock market is
strong, businessmen have returned to making money.
Life is as chaotic as ever - but normal. The talk of the financial community
this month has been plans by Reliance Industries, the textiles and chemicals
group, to launch India's biggest-ever share issue, Rs21.72bn, for a new
petroleum company.
The city fathers are planning to make their largest recent public investment
with water control barriers to prevent the floods which strike during almost
every monsoon. Even this huge project pales in comparison with the
investment the city actually needs in its buildings, roads, railways and
water pipes. But at least, a start is being made.
There will also be a hotel. And Bombay would not be Bombay if little boys
did not one day gather outside it as they do outside the Taj.
