FT  07 SEP 93 / Technology: A renaissance in treatment - New drugs to treat
schizophrenia are finally becoming available
A few years ago, tales of a miraculous new drug on the market to treat
schizophrenia began to make their way around hospitals and psychiatrists'
offices in Europe and the US. The stories told of patients debilitated by
mental illness, sinking desperately into hallucinations and paranoia, then
suddenly rehabilitated and living a normal life.
The success of the drug, clozapine, which was launched by Sandoz of
Switzerland in the US in 1989, awakened a long-dormant interest in
developing treatments for schizophrenia.
Encouraged by the clozapine experience, pharmaceutical groups are now
producing a new generation of drugs to alleviate schizophrenia.
Among the most promising are risperidone and bromoperidol, both manufactured
by Janssen, a Belgian subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson, and remoxipride, made
by Astra in Sweden. The UK pharmaceutical group Zeneca is expected to launch
a competing treatment by late 1995 and Merck of the US and Kabi of Sweden
are also developing candidates.
Schizophrenia, a serious mental illness involving hallucinations and
paranoia, and in rare cases 'split personality' syndrome, is a relatively
common disease, affecting about 1 per cent of the population. It usually
appears in late adolescence, when the frontal lobes of the brain are
developing rapidly, and its impact is devastating. If untreated, the
afflicted lose touch with reality and often drift into extreme poverty.
Nearly one-third of the homeless population in the US is thought to suffer
from the disease.
The drug market for schizophrenia is already substantial, with total annual
sales amounting to about Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1bn), according to Ian Smith,
a pharmaceuticals analyst with Lehman Brothers International in London.
It is also one of the faster-growing areas in the industry, with sales
expanding at a rate of about 9 per cent a year. Moreover, with the large
number of new drugs for schizophrenia coming on to the market, these numbers
could balloon.
'We are finally starting to see a wide range of drugs developed for
schizophrenia,' says Peter Tooley, head of medical affairs for Janssen in
the UK. 'After 30 to 40 years of studying the disease, we're starting to get
a handle on the disease.'
Schizophrenia, which has long been a mystery to scientists, is now known to
involve errant chemical messages making their way through the brain.
'Dopamine receptors' are thought to play an important role in this mental
game of telephone, and almost all schizophrenic drugs on the market -
referred to as neuroleptics - inhibit different classifications of these
receptors.
Prior to the current generation of neuroleptics, the development of
schizophrenic treatments depended more on luck than science. The first drug
used in treating schizophrenia, thorozine, was discovered by accident.
A doctor in Vietnam noticed that the compound, used at that point as a
sedative, was effective in ridding patients of hallucinations. Psychiatrists
began to use the product to treat schizophrenia and similar drugs were soon
widely available.
Support for neuroleptics as the primary treatment for schizophrenia has been
growing ever since, and is now embraced by the majority of psychiatrists.
Despite the growing faith in drugs to alleviate mental disease, the market
for schizophrenia drugs is just emerging from a dry spell which spanned
nearly 30 years.
'After the first drug came out, all we saw were variations on that
treatment,' says John Kane, chairman of psychiatry at the Long Island Jewish
Medical Centre, New York. 'That's why it's so exciting now to see a
renaissance in drugs for the disease.'
Doctors are particularly anxious for alternatives because past treatments
have been far from perfect.
Drugs introduced prior to clozapine were extremely effective in controlling
the hallucinations and paranoia, but they left patients depressed, apathetic
and socially inept.
They had no effect at all on large numbers of schizophrenic patients and
provoked disturbing side-effects: a clumsy gait, compulsive foot tapping and
an irreversible neurological syndrome, 'tardive dyskinesia', characterised
by twitching of the facial muscles and tongue.
When it hit the market, clozapine was unique in that it did not cause muscle
spasms. It was also effective for many patients who had failed to respond to
traditional treatments. 'For many of my patients, clozapine has seemed like
a miracle,' says Robert McDivitt, trustee of the American Psychiatric
Association.
Clozapine has its own problems, though. Its effectiveness in treating
schizophrenia had been documented 20 years before its 1989 launch, but was
withdrawn from the market due to a risky, though rare side-effect:
agranulocytosis, a white blood cell deficiency.
Agranulocytosis can often prove fatal. However, the drug was finally
approved for market because so few patients taking the drug - around 1 per
cent - develop the affliction, and because the risk of the disease can be
greatly reduced through regular blood tests. The drug's approval also
reflected the desperate circumstances of many schizophrenic patients.
Clozapine has not been completely effective in improving patients' social
skills.
'Clozapine is a dirty drug, by which I mean that it affects a number of
different dopamine receptors,' says Peter Jager, international product
manager for the drug. 'The new generation of drugs will be addressing
specific receptors, and will therefore be much cleaner.'
Neuroleptics such as risperidone have generated a great deal of interest
because they seem to deal with the sociability of the patient as well as the
more serious problem of hallucinations. The drug can cause muscle spasms,
although the problem is much less severe than with traditional treatments.
The medical community is waiting anxiously to acquire the new drugs, several
of which have been approved in Europe but not in the US.
'I have one patient who is just hanging on until she can get risperidone,'
says Jerome Rogoff, a professor at Harvard Medical School and assistant
chief of psychiatry at the Faulkner Hospital in Boston. 'It may make a
difference.'
Despite progress in research on schizophrenia, a great deal of mystery still
shrouds the disease. 'No one knows, for instance, why the drugs have an
impact on the receptor cells within hours, but no effect on the patient for
weeks,' says Donald Klein, a professor of psychology at Columbia University.
'It may be that the receptors are just the first domino in the chain, and
once the other dominoes are understood, that would pave the way for new
drugs.'
It is also unclear why neuroleptics now on the market are effective in
treating some patients and not others. Some scientists believe it is a
question of narrowing the search down to a single, specific receptor. Others
believe schizophrenia is not a single disease, but a group of diseases,
which require distinct drug treatments.
Even if researchers come up with a perfect drug, doctors say it will not
eradicate the disease. Patients usually suffer a relapse if they stop taking
medication. 'Patients with no mental illness will stop taking their pills
once they feel well,' said Rogoff.
'With schizophrenic patients this is an even greater risk. I have some
patients who refuse even to try certain drugs because they say a voice has
told them it's poisonous.'
Still, the wider choice of drugs on the market will be a boon, not only to
schizophrenic sufferers, but to researchers as well. 'With the new
treatments, we will be able to monitor the side-effects, and improvements in
patients' condition, and get a better understanding of the role of the
dopamine receptors,' says Jager. 'The key has not yet been found, but we are
coming closer every year.'
