FT  20 DEC 93 / Management: . . . and still relevant from 1908
A slim 64-page volume, written 85 years ago by a frustrated university don,
seems an unlikely text for modern managers.
That, though, is just how a tiny publishing house Mainsail Press has been
promoting its new hardback edition of Francis Macdonald Cornford's
Microcosmographia Academica, newly subtitled Cambridge's classic guide to
success in the world.*
In a forward penned in 1949 the classicist WKC Guthrie said that just before
the second world war he had 'tried the book on the head of an engineering
firm, and he assured me that the business world was in urgent need of its
counsel'.
The enterprising Mainsail has gone even further, soliciting from BT's head
of strategy development the generous plug on its back cover that 'every
young MBA in a hurry' should read it.
This is perhaps going a bit far. But it is not an exaggeration to say that
many of Cornford's pithy, if somewhat cynical, observations have stood the
test of time.
The words of Cambridge's first professor of ancient philosophy - inspired by
his experience of the tortuous ways in which academic bodies reach (or avoid
reaching) decisions - were originally directed at ambitious young academics.
Today one could imagine him addressing business graduates about to embark on
a career in a large organisation.
Disillusioned by those who sought to avert change, Cornford's ideas were
intended as a warning for those who fail to understand human nature and, as
he saw it, man's inbuilt inertia. 'There is only one argument for doing
something; the rest are arguments for doing nothing', he wrote.
Among the principles of practical politics he explores are those of the
wedge (that 'you should not act justly now for fear of raising expectations
which you are afraid you will not have the courage to satisfy'); the
dangerous precedent (from which 'it follows that nothing should ever be done
for the first time'); and unripe time ('Time, by the way, is like the
medlar; it has a trick of going rotten before it is ripe').
Cornford also recommends for delaying action 'another sport which wastes
unlimited time', namely comma-hunting: 'Once start a comma and the whole
pack will be off, full cry, especially if they have had a literary
training'.
More constructively perhaps - but just as Machiavellian - is the passage on
squaring, which might be interpreted today as I'll scratch your back, if
you'll scratch mine, while not formally admitting that this is the case.
Cornford says that the practice of squaring can be carried out over lunch,
but that the 'proper course' in his day was to meet 'accidentally' between
2pm and 4pm on King's Parade, Cambridge, 'talk about indifferent matters for
ten minutes', and then observe a procedure which emphasises 'the fact that
there is no connection whatsoever between my supporting your job and your
supporting mine. This absence of connection is the essential feature of
squaring'.
The most famous passage in the book is probably the definition of propaganda
in Cornford's preface to the 1922 edition. It is 'that branch of lying which
consists in very nearly deceiving your friends without quite deceiving your
enemies'.
* Available from Wayne Hill, c/o Queens' College, Cambridge CB3 9ET. Tel/fax
0223-350818. Price Pounds 8.99
