FT  15 APR 93 / World Trade News: Boeing looks for more lift from Chinese
orders
BOEING is trying to follow last week's Dollars 800m aircraft sale to China
with further orders of a similar size.
The Clinton administration is nearing a decision on its Most Favoured Nation
status trade policy towards China while the soaring US trade deficit with
China remains an intractable problem. For China to lose MFN status would
make imports more expensive, and China sees aircraft purchases as a way to
buy political goodwill.
Boeing, too, has a strategic need to sell to China. While loss-making
western airlines are cancelling orders, China has the world's
fastest-growing aviation market. Air travel rose last year by about 30 per
cent, and there has been a surge of smaller regional airlines. Over the next
decade, experts forecast China will need 50 aircraft a year to meet
passenger demand.
That demand has already led to a series of orders by Beijing for Boeings.
The Dollars 800m contract was for 20 737-300 aircraft and one 757-200.
Boeing is hoping Beijing will now buy wide-bodied 767 aircraft, which can
carry 260 passengers, as well as its yet-to-be launched, longer-range 777
aircraft, which seat 380 people. In principle, Air China of Beijing would
acquire the 777s and China Southwest would purchase the 767s.
Whether Beijing goes through with another bloc purchase of Boeings, however,
will depend on whether it believes such a step will reap it political
dividends. 'If they are not buying the goodwill they had hoped, they will go
to Airbus,' said one aviation analyst. Airbus - the European consortium of
French, German, British and Spanish companies - is number two in the world
market for commercial passenger aircraft.
The Chinese buying mission to the US, led by Gan Ziyu, vice-chairman of the
State Planning Commission, has become a yearly event, as Beijing seeks to
persuade the US to continue granting it MFN status, which allows Chinese
exports to qualify for the lowest US tariffs.
This is not the first time Beijing has sought to use aircraft buying as
political leverage. With its recent purchase of 12 Airbuses and options for
more through Germany, it showed it could by-pass France, the headquarters of
Airbus. China has tried to blacklist French makers over the sale of Mirage
jets to Taiwan last year.
Both Airbus and Boeing want Chinese sales to plug the gap in aircraft
deliveries over the next two to three years until profits at western
airlines recover. The stage is set for a tough battle,but the winner could
emerge through a political decision in Washington in June.
