FT  05 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Major's maverick saviour - David
Owen profiles deputy Speaker Michael Morris, who yesterday helped the
Maastricht bill clear a difficult hurdle
THE AIR of relief on the government front bench was genuine. After all, the
man responsible for the ruling which got Mr John Major and ministers off the
hook on Maastricht was never the sort of MP on whom successive Tory
governments could rely for unquestioning loyalty - even before he was made a
deputy speaker.
In his 19 years in the Commons Mr Michael Wolfgang Laurence Morris has
quietly built up a reputation for independent-mindedness on issues close to
his heart, while managing until recently to keep out of the limelight.
Perhaps his best-known act of rebellion during a long backbench career was
in twice opposing the Moore-Clarke National Health Service reforms in late
1989 (his wife is a general practitioner). But his dissent was not confined
to a single issue. A study of divisions in the 1989-90 parliamentary session
put him ninth equal on the list of Tory rebels.
The key role in Maastricht proceedings he has been given by virtue of his
chairmanship of the ways and means committee has finally forced him out of
Westminster's shadows. His trademark bow-tie is fast becoming as well-known
as Mr Tristan Garel-Jones's cape or Mr Kenneth Clarke's Hush Puppies.
Few would claim that his independence has been compromised, however. 'I
think he has been tough, but he has been tough on all sides,' says Mr Jim
Cran, one of the Tory Euro-sceptic leaders, speaking before yesterday's
ruling. Mr George Robertson, Labour's European affairs spokesman, said: 'He
has now found his moment and is doing superbly well.'
By common consent the MP for Northampton South has handled the sometimes
tortuous series of Maastricht debates with wit, skill and imperturbable
authority.
His initiative in meeting MPs with a particular interest in Maastricht
before the beginning of the committee stage to establish ground-rules and
assure them of his good faith, is seen as typical of his high level of
preparation. Mr Morris is also credited with the decision to divide the
copious amendments to the tiny three-clause bill into easily manageable
groups to help ensure all subjects were adequately debated.
Before yesterday's ruling his stock had risen particularly high among
opposition and Euro-sceptic MPs after he consented last month to allow a
debate on the government's embarrassing u-turn over its legal advice.
But a 13-year stretch on the powerful cross-party public accounts committee
of MPs has evidently helped to instil in him an aversion to humbug. He has
been prepared to put protagonists on both sides of the Maastricht divide
firmly in their place when his patience has been taxed.
A marketing specialist, Mr Morris began his professional career with Reckitt
&amp; Colman and is a past leader of Islington council. His south Midlands seat
 -now ultra-safe - was marginal when he won it.
His sole taste of government came in a two-year stint as parliamentary
private secretary in the Northern Ireland Office more than a decade ago. He
subsequently underlined his independence in 1982 by opposing the Northern
Ireland Assembly Bill to set up a locally elected forum.
A former captain of the parliamentary golf club and landowner who lists 250
acres of woodland in the register of members' interests, he is probably the
only MP to include budgies in his Who's Who entry for recreations.
