FT  31 MAR 93 / Final search for the missing link: The case for the Channel
tunnel rail link is persuasive, but who will fund it?
Once, Britain led the world when it came to building railways. Early
Victorian entrepreneurs criss-crossed the land with tracks while most of the
rest of civilisation languished in the age of the horse. By the middle of
the 19th century, nearly all the most important bits of Britain's modern-day
system had been built.
Today, the roles are reversed. Britain has been left behind in the new
railway race, at least by its Continental neighbours. France has opened
nearly 500 miles of high-speed lines in the past 10 years and is planning
for a network of 3,000 miles by 2005. Germany will have built some 1,500
miles of high-speed lines by the same date. Italy and Spain are building
more than 700 miles each. In Britain, no new main line railway has been
built since 1899.
Still, a small catching-up exercise appears to have been initiated with last
week's go-ahead for a rail link between London and the Channel tunnel.
Admittedly, the line is not expected to open until the turn of the century.
Its maximum speed is only 140 mph - slow compared with its Continental
rivals. And it will be only 68 miles long. But at least it is a start.
Or is it? In spite of the government's attempt to portray the line as a
certainty, few have been fooled. The project, it has been widely noted,
suffers from a potential flaw: there is not actually any money available to
fund it. Not, that is, unless the private sector is prepared to help
shoulder the burden.
In the old days, this would not have mattered a jot. Almost all that was
needed to build a railway line in the 19th century was the idea. With
construction costs low and other forms of transport offering little
competition, railways were a licence to print money. Investors' money
showered down on them like confetti.
Now, however, the economics of railways have changed. Construction costs
have soared, not least because of the growing need to design projects that
minimise noise and nuisance. More seriously still, railways have lost many
of their competitive advantages: road transport is cheaper over short
distances, and air transport faster over long ones. These days, there is
barely a railway project in the world that stands up as a commercial
proposition.
The Channel tunnel rail link is no exception. The 108-page report on the
project published last week is thin on financial detail, but there is enough
to show that six years of vacillation over the line have done little to
improve its viability. Even with costs whittled down from Pounds 3.5bn last
year to Pounds 2.5bn, forecast revenues are expected to produce a real rate
of return on the investment of only 4 per cent - far short of the rate of
return the private sector is likely to require.
This is a pity, because there are persuasive reasons for building the line
that go beyond purely commercial considerations. One is that capacity on
existing lines between London and the Channel tunnel is expected to run out
around the turn of the century, so raising the prospect of embarrassing
scenes as high-speed international expresses from Paris and Brussels queue
behind British Rail commuter trains for access to the capital. Another is
that the new line will bring benefits which cannot necessarily be captured
through revenues: for example, big improvements in journey times for people
using the commuter trains that will share it. If a value could be put on
these, the economic return on the scheme would increase to 11 or 12 per
cent.
If Britain were France, this would be reason enough for letting the public
sector take the project forward. But Britain cannot afford it: so instead it
is hoping that the private sector can be persuaded to build the line with a
contribution of public sector cash in recognition of the wider benefits it
would bring.
The trouble is, the government has tried this before, and it didn't work. In
spring 1990, a joint public and private sector called European Rail Link
devised a plan for a rail link producing roughly the same returns as the
current scheme. In that instance, the sums of public sector cash needed to
make the project viable were so large that the government angrily rejected
the proposal. With constraints on public spending even tougher now than they
were then, why should things be any different this time?
The main source of hope lies in the government's new-found determination to
see more joint funding of infrastructure projects. Treasury guidelines
issued a fortnight ago envisage the sort of scheme where the private sector
gets its returns through charges to users while the public sector gets its
returns in the form of wider social benefits.
In the past, the Treasury's objection to this kind of arrangement has been
the belief that it amounts to using taxpayers' money to subsidise private
sector profits. Now, however, it has undergone a conversion: it is prepared
to accept such a deal provided value for money is secured by selecting the
private sector partner through competition.
From there, it becomes possible to envisage a simple way forward for the
Channel tunnel link. At the end of the public consultation exercise on the
route this autumn, the government could hold an auction for the ownership of
Union Railways, the British Railway subsidiary in charge of the rail link
project. The winner would be the private sector entity wanting the smallest
dowry to acquire the company and take the project forward.
One weakness with this appealingly simple idea, however, is that the private
sector would require a very high rate of return at this stage of the project
because the next phase - legislation - would bring the risk of redesigns and
soaring costs. The level of grant demanded by the private sector would in
all likelihood be far beyond the public purse.
But things might look very different in September 1995. By then, with luck,
the necessary legislation will be in place. Significantly, too, the
international trains between Britain and the Continent - due to start
operating in June 1994 - should have been running on existing tracks for
more than a year, so there will be much more certainty over revenues. The
only big risk left then will be the construction risk, so the private sector
should settle for a much lower rate of return.
There is another wrinkle, too. With the international trains already in
operation, they will be producing a stream of income for British Rail. That
stream of income will automatically switch to the rail link's owners when
the new line opens at the turn of the century. But suppose the government
offers to hand that stream of income over to the private sector from day
one. Based on the government's expected rate of return on railway
investment, it would appear that British Rail hopes to recoup at least
Pounds 600m between now and the end of the century from the Pounds 1.4bn it
is investing in its international passenger business. That would be a
significant contribution towards the cost of building the new rail link.
And yet, as last week's project report shows, even if the whole of this
Pounds 600m income is made over to the rail link and BR's Pounds 1.4bn
capital investment is written off, the financial return on the rail link
still only rises from 4 per cent to 10 per cent. To get the return up to the
sort of levels the private sector would require - assumed in the document to
be 12 1/2 per cent at this stage - the government would still have to offer
a big grant. To give an idea of how big, the report shows that a grant
reflecting all Pounds 1.1bn of commuter benefits would push the return up to
15 per cent at best.
Will the Treasury really stomach a write-off of Pounds 1.4bn worth of
existing public sector investment and an outlay of up to Pounds 1.1bn in
public sector funds to get the Channel tunnel rail link built? If it does,
it will have to swallow hard. And at the very least, it is likely to insist
on a concessionary agreement that requires the line to be handed back to the
public sector at the end of an agreed period.
The private sector, meanwhile, may have reservations of its own. The last
time anyone set out to build a high-speed route to the Continent was when
Sir Edward Watkin, the Victorian entrepreneur, started work on a route from
Manchester to Paris in the 1880s. His Great Central Railway only ever got as
far as London, proved hopelessly uneconomic and never paid a dividend. Today
only grassy mounds remain where the tracks once lay.
