FT  20 NOV 93 / Capital Spending (11): My dear, you can smell the money -
Josephine Fairley monitors the Loughley-Cash family on a spending spree
after a big insurance payout
ARAMINTA Loughley-Cash's mother had always instilled in her that every cloud
has a silver lining. 'Positively platinum - in this instance,' mused
Araminta, fingering the generous insurance cheque intended to replace every
last stick of inherited furniture, hideous ancestral portraits and demode
jewels which had so recently gone up in smoke.
Luckily, nobody had been hurt (although Lloyd's, it appeared from the number
of zeros on the end of cheque, had been somewhat singed). As it turned out,
Araminta and Harry Loughley-Cash had overnight become the envy of their
Kensington contemporaries, who rather yearned to throw off their Puffa
jackets, chuck out the chintz and have carte blanche to reinvent themselves
in the fashionably minimalist 1990s.
Araminta planned to begin in Bond Street, with her eldest daughter,
21-year-old Eloise, in tow. They would start, she vowed, with Gucci, where
Araminta had her eye on a chic half-moon shaped Mezzaluna shoulder-bag in
butter-soft black suede, before progressing on to Chanel.
Eloise, who usually shared her generation's nonchalance about timekeeping,
had grown positively punctual at the prospect of acquiring Chanel's newest
status timepiece: the square-faced, quilted-strap Mademoiselle. For her son
Caspar, Araminta had earmarked Tiffany's stainless-steel-strapped
Streamerica watch, with time zone windows enabling him to work out precisely
when to call his globetrotting friends. But in the time-keeping department,
10-year-old Celeste was easiest (not to mention cheapest): a Beauty &amp; The
Beast Disney special, which would have her contemporaries in the Lower Third
aching with envy.
How grateful Harry had been when Araminta had offered to re-equip their
life, and the empty modern Chelsea Harbour apartment they had rented.
Personally, after a life-time spent rearranging bibelots, Araminta would
have been happy with a Futon Company mattress on the floor, a Baccarat
crystal bud vase and a single rose (from Ken Turner), but she quite
understood that her family's comfort threshold soared way above her own.
Nevertheless, since they were indeed camping for the moment, what better
excuse to invest in Hermes 'Pippa' campaign wood-and-leather beds for the
family, with a portable folding writing desk for Harry? (And so practical,
later, for the occasional family safari to the Masai Mara). Who knows,
perhaps Harry might finally get round to writing that detective novel he had
always dreamed of? So, just in case, she treated her husband to Mont Blanc's
limited edition 'Agatha Christie' Meisterstuck, with its silver serpent
snaking up the shiny black cap.
Of all their losses, Araminta most lamented that of the crisp, crested
family sheets, but cheered up enormously on discovering that Thomas Goode
could have personalised Irish linen replacements for her in a week. She
could not resist the aptly-named Cocoon bed linen, at Harrods, either; how
recklessly extravagant (and a tad impractical) to have an all-silk duvet,
but frankly, Araminta had tired of hospital corners.
Harry, meanwhile, had been mainly despondent about his collection of hunting
and dog pictures, and that very afternoon had an appointment with Dover
Street dealer Richard Green, swiftly followed by Kensington Church Street's
Lucy Campbell, to peruse some equine replacements. This, Araminta divined,
could prove the source of some connubial conflict, since - having trawled
Cork Street - she rather fancied a complete change, something large and
splashily abstract from Waddington's, or some pencilled nudes from The Fine
Art Society in Bond Street.
Not for Harry, then, the total image overhaul Araminta had planned for
herself. Wardrobe-wise, it was to be pyjamas from Sulka, socks and boxers
from Dunhill and 24 soberly-striped Sea Island cotton shirts from Turnbull &amp;
Asser. As usual. She hoped he would like the positively daring paisley ties
from Etro that she had picked out. Harry, who knew what he liked and liked
what he knew, had wasted no time making a Savile Row appointment with
Huntsman for his suits and Gieves &amp; Hawkes for a blazer., Then he had hopped
in a cab to Farlow's in Pall Mall for a new fly-reel, picking up a
replacement Barbour on the way. 'Can't let a little hiccup like this get us
down,' chirped Harry, with the fighting spirit that had first attracted her,
over mah-jong, a quarter of a century before. All of which reminded Araminta
. . . 'New playing cards and bridge scoring books, from Smythson's,' she
scribbled, on the back of the insurance company's envelope.
Their 18-year-old son Caspar, presently studying for Oxbridge at Harrow and
rather more Gatsby-ish than his father, planned a weekend raid on Gianni
Versace and Emporio Armani (with a pit-stop at Cutler &amp; Gross for
sunglasses, having lately shocked his schoolmasters with his godfatherish
taste in clothes).
He had patiently informed his computer illiterate parents that to replace
his precious (now melted) stereo, he simply had to have an Apple Mac Quadra
computer with its own CD player. (Araminta was rather relieved to discover
that the 'turbo-mouse' he'd also specified wouldn't need a cage).
Meanwhile, Eloise, heavily influenced by the Superwaifs, was fantasising
about her autumn wardrobe, planned to the last detail: brown velvet
wide-legged pants from Ralph Lauren, a suede button-through waistcoat from
Miu Miu (the 'baby sister' line from top Italian accessories empire Prada)
and suede high-heeled clog boots by Manolo Blahnik.
At these, Araminta rolled her eyes in despair, although she was considerably
more cheered by the prospect of a splash-printed, cosy velvet scarf from
Georgina von Etzdorf and - to complete the Upper Crustie look - a pair of
Cartier's hippyish rimless Madison glasses.
Araminta consoled herself with the thought that Celeste, her youngest,
leaned sartorially more towards the sweetly smocked velvets on offer at The
White House and Patrizia Wigan, and was positively pining for a
velvet-collared cashmere overcoat, from Anthea Moore Ede.
Personally, Araminta had always yearned to indulge herself with couture, but
had rarely ventured further afield than dear old Jaeger. This, however,
seemed an unmissable opportunity to compromise with the clean lines of a
made-to-measure suit (or five) from Robinson Valentine, the design duo
responsible for Viscountess Linley's charming going-away outfit, currently
luring half of Kensington to cross the river to Wandsworth in quest of
perfect tailoring in velvet and satin-backed crepe.
She also lusted after an unstructured Armani jacket, a frock coat from
Georges Rech and, for evenings, a perennially stylish Saint Laurent
'smoking'.
Then on to Catherine Walker for serious after-dark wear, Janet Reger for her
new silk smalls (very smalls, she noted), and a swift, painless Pounds 200
on opaque and black lace Fogal tights. In her comfortably elegant Ferragamo
heels, Araminta was beginning to feel quite wicked, not at all a familiar
sensation in a mother-of-three no longer in the first (hot) flush of middle
age.
She hoped that Harry would look up from the cricket reports long enough to
notice, and nipped into Les Senteurs for a new fragrance, settling upon
Patricia de Nicolai's appropriately sinful-sounding Sacre Bleu.
Replacing the ghastly Victorian family jewels would of course be a piece of
cake. Besides, nobody wore tiaras any more. Araminta rather craved a simple
cabochon sapphire ring (to match her new navy suit) from Bulgari, a single
string of South Sea pearls seen in Garrard's window and a stunning hematite
choker from Annabel Jones (where she could not resist indulging Harry with a
pair of bee-shaped cufflinks). This, Araminta mused, sipping a pit-stop
capuccino at The Berkeley, was proving rather a whizz.
When it came to shopping for their new home - so chic to rent, she thought,
now that Princess Anne's doing it - Celeste came along to 'help', although
it was not long before Araminta gave up struggling to divert her attention
away from her Nintendo Gameboy, all the rage in the Lower Third.
To Wedgwood for china - the all-white, basket-effect Nantucket dinner
service so restfully understated - and Asprey's, for crystal and cut glass.
She had a brief pang about the loss of Great Aunt Eglantine's much-loved
picnic hamper, but even Celeste got (temporarily) excited enough in Fortnum
&amp; Mason's to abandon Sonic the Hedgehog and pick out a replacement; complete
with a tartan rug the size of Rutland.
Upon returning home to their stark chrome and glass abode in Chelsea,
Araminta was relieved to find that Harry, ever the good scout, had assumed
control in the luggage department. She was thrilled, though not in the least
surprised, to discover two huge Louis Vuitton steamer trunks sitting in the
middle of the limed wood floor, exuding the delicious smell of new saddlery,
containing compartments enough for all her purchases and acting as the
perfect temporary wardrobe-cum-dining table. Sweetly, and so like dear
old-fashioned Harry, he had even set them with sleek silver candlesticks she
had bought from Georg Jensen, and laid out an impromptu supper from The
Caviar House.
Eloise was out on a date. Celeste snoring lightly on her campaign bed in the
bedroom. It all seemed such a blissfully long way from leafy Kensington, and
slaving over a hot Aga. Harry looked up. 'You look topping, Minty,' he
beamed. Araminta had a temporary crisis, realising she could never again
lie: 'Oh, this old thing? I've had it decades.' Her husband sniffed at the
air. 'And what's that wonderful smell?' Araminta smiled enigmatically and
whispered to herself: 'It's money, Harry. Money.' Mummy had been right.
