FT  08 NOV 93 / UK Company News: Genetically engineered promises -
Celltech's forthcoming Pounds 180m flotation
CELLTECH, the biotechnology company, today issues a pathfinder prospectus
for a flotation that will value the group at over Pounds 180m.
The company is raising about Pounds 35m to fund existing projects and some
new products entering development.
The Slough-based company has no products ready for market and does not
expect any of its developments to get there before 1996 at the earliest.
Unlike other emerging companies, however, Celltech has been able to slow the
rate at which cash resources are depleted by the research and development
programme, not only by collaborations with large pharmaceuticals companies -
a fairly common practice - but through its contract manufacture of
monoclonal antibodies, notably for Roche.
The flotation will take Celltech ahead of British Bio-Technology Group in
terms of size among the emerging drug discovery and development businesses,
but leaves it smaller than many bio-tech companies already floated in the
more mature US market.
Celltech has unusual roots and parentage. Founded in 1980 by the National
Enterprise Board and the Medical Research Council, it developed technologies
to modify the structure of antibodies, the proteins produced by the body's
immune system.
Alongside this research base, Celltech commercialised its technology and
laid the foundations for its Celltech Biologics business, now one of the
world's largest contract manufacturers of antibodies for therapeutic use.
On the way, Celltech also picked up an unusual shareholder in the form of Mr
John Gunn's British &amp; Commonwealth, the failed conglomerate. Administrators
for B&amp;C will be the biggest seller among existing shareholders who
collectively are realising Pounds 35m in the float.
Celltech's most promising product is a genetically engineered human
antibody, CDP571, which aims to reduce septic shock, the life-threatening
condition that can lead to rapidly falling blood pressure and failure of
body organs.
Bayer, the German company, is most advanced in developing a mouse antibody,
BAY X1351, to deal with septic shock. But as part of a collaborative R&amp;D
alliance, Celltech has exclusive rights in some EC countries to market the
Bayer product.
What is unusual about the arrangement is that Bayer has exercised an option
to license the Celltech antibody but the British company has retained
substantial marketing rights in a number of European countries including the
UK and France. Bayer paid a second Pounds 4m milestone payment to Celltech
in October for the privilege.
Mr Peter Fellner, Celltech's chief executive who was research director and
then chief executive of Roche UK, says this link with Bayer is unusual and
encouraging. So are the results from trials.
'Bayer's results enhance the probability of our septic shock product
reaching registration,' he says.
Bayer's product is in the third phase of clinical trials and a larger phase
III study to gain regulatory approval is to be launched in the US 'shortly'.
Celltech's product would come onto the market a year after Bayer's.
Bayer's exercise of an option would suggest it expects Celltech's CDP571
product to be an improvement on its own antibody, which can only be
administered once.
Celltech's products further back in the development pipeline, include a
treatment for inflammatory bowel disease, also based on the CDP571 product,
an antibody to treat acute myeloid leukaemia and a treatment for rheumatoid
arthritis.
Like all the other new drug development companies, Celltech's lack of
products or profits make it a substantially riskier investment than many new
flotations. If the company were to be floated in the US, the cover of its
prospectus would carry prominently what amounts to a serious health warning.
The US experience, however, is that the rewards are commensurately large for
those biotechnology companies that do successfully bring new drugs to
market.
What's more, Mr Fellner argues with some justification that the risks in
Celltech are lower for a number of reasons:-
The company's cash burn rate is modest. In the last three years the
company's operations used Pounds 18.4m compared with an R&amp;D investment of
Pounds 37m. This is partly because Biologics has positive cash flow and in
the year to September 30, 1993 increased operating profit fourfold to Pounds
2m on sales up 15 per dent at Pounds 14.2m. (After R&amp;D, Celltech's loss for
the year fell from Pounds 7.5m to Pounds 5.9m).
Collaborations have also brought in cash. Celltech has already received
Pounds 8m of Pounds 26m in milestone payments from Bayer; American Cyanamid,
which is jointly developing antibody-based cancer therapies subscribed
Pounds 3.5m in preference shares; and Roche, for whom Celltech Biologics is
manufacturing a series of antibodies, subscribed Pounds 5m in preference
shares in September.
As a result Celltech will emerge after the float with cash of Pounds 50m,
enough to keep current projects fully funded for substantially longer than
two years.
The slow cash burn may not reduce the risk inherent in any drug development,
nor the statistical probability that a programme will fail or produce a drug
that is no more effective than others available.
But it should be considerable comfort for those investors looking to select
a portfolio of the emerging drug companies, that Celltech is unlikely to be
knocking on their door for more funds before they have a strong new story to
tell.
Barings is sponsoring the share issue and Cazenove is the broker.
