FT  04 MAY 93 / Judge reopens an explosive case: Jimmy Burns and David Owen
preview the arms-for-Iraq inquiry
RENEWED allegations by a former civil servant that ministers connived in the
export of weaponry to Iraq have served as a curtain-raiser to Lord Justice
Scott's public hearings which start today.
Lord Justice Scott was appointed last November by the government to hold an
inquiry into whether ministers sidestepped the government's own guidelines
on defence-related and dual-use equipment to Iraq in the five years leading
to the invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
The inquiry team has also set itself the task of re-examining the legitimacy
of ministers' use of public interest immunity certificates to restrict
access to information about certain government activities.
The two issues arose during the controversial trial of the three directors
of Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based machine-tool company alleged to have
supplied parts for Iraq's so-called supergun.
During the trial documents emerged suggesting a secret policy to promote UK
exports of defence-related equipment had been followed until weeks before
Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait under the former government of Mrs Thatcher.
Four ministers serving in the present government - Mr Michael Heseltine, Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, Mr Kenneth Clarke and Mr Tristan Garel-Jones - argued, with
the support of Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney general, for the documents
to be suppressed on grounds of national security.
While Matrix Churchill provides the starting point of the Scott inquiry, the
judge has made it clear in recent weeks that his investigations are not
limited to the company, which accounted for about 3 per cent of UK exports
to Iraq in the 1980s.
Since the start of the year Lord Justice Scott has been examining thousands
of government documents and pieces of written evidence. These are believed
to identify a range of officials, companies and banks involved not only in
direct trade with Iraq but also through third countries such as Jordan.
The judge has confirmed that International Military Services, a defence
company at one time owned partly by the government, is a subject of his
inquiry.
Those initially giving evidence in public, such as Sir Richard Luce, former
minister of state at the Foreign Office, and other former officials at the
Ministry of Defence and the Export Credits Guarantee Department, will be
expected to spell out government policy and how it was interpreted by
ministers. The officials were in office when the guidelines were first
announced to parliament by Sir Geoffrey Howe in 1985.
Public interest in the hearings is likely to increase as the judge calls
senior politicians, such as Mrs Thatcher and perhaps Mr John Major, to give
evidence.
Lord Justice Scott's forthright approach to his inquiry has left few people
either in or out of government with any doubt that he is determined to use
all the powers given to him as 'inquisitor' to penetrate the morass of
Whitehall and business secrecy.
One lawyer close to the inquiry said: 'Scott is a very, very sharp cookie
and has the bit between his teeth. Unless he is frustrated by 'outside
forces' he is determined to get there.'
Some Tory MPs hint privately that the judge's efforts to get to the bottom
of the clandestine trade may be helped by Mr Major's move to distance
himself increasingly from his predecessor.
If they are right, the acid-test of the inquiry's effectiveness may come if
it uncovers evidence of involvement by ministers still inside the cabinet.
Lord Justice Scott established his reputation as a member of the 'liberal
wing' of the English judiciary when he presided over the first Spycatcher
hearings in 1987 and refused government injunctions banning newspapers from
publishing extracts of the book by the former M15 officer Mr Peter Wright.
In the approach to the public hearings he has enhanced this reputation
further by blocking an apparent attempt by Sir Robin Butler, head of the
Civil Service, to have a virtual government veto on what is published once
the judge finishes his inquiry towards the end of the year.
In an exchange of letters to Sir Robin released publicly by Lord Justice
Scott last month, the judge makes clear that the test he will use in
deciding whether to conduct a hearing in closed session is whether
disclosure would 'cause serious injury to the interests of the nation'.
The government has been encouraging more openness at one level by telling
its civil servants they will be immune from prosecution under the Official
Secrets Act and contracts of employment.
Meanwhile the judge is confident that although witnesses will not give
evidence on oath, he will not be lied to.
What remains to be seen is whether the inquiry will produce significant
political fall-out or, to use former defence minister Mr Alan Clark's
phrase, prove as relevant as an old bag of chips.
