FT  09 JUL 93 / Recovery 'hampered' by rising personal debt
THE PROPORTION of con-sumers getting into debt rose in the second quarter
with households in the south-east suffering the sharpest deterioration in
personal finances, a survey published today shows.
The latest Gallup/Business Strategies regional consumer survey suggests that
spending is still constrained by poor consumer finances.
Mrs Bridget Rosewell, joint managing director of BSL, said: 'With debt
increasing and finances worsening in the south of the country, which is such
a large part of the whole economy, it is hard to imagine how spending will
be able to take off.'
Caution among consumers is bad news for the recovery, BSL said, as 'the
ability and willingness of individuals to buy goods and services is a key
element in producing demand for UK businesses'.
A quarter of respondents said their financial situation had deteriorated
over the last year, a worse result than in the previous quarter and weaker
than a year ago.
Only households in the north of England, Yorkshire and Humberside, East
Anglia and the west Midlands said their financial situation deteriorated
less than it did in the last three months. Greater London, the north-west
and Scotland showed the biggest declines.
BSL says although spending is held back by financial problems, 'there is
little doubt that consumers recognise the improvements to the economy that
are taking place'.
The south-west, the east Midlands and the south-east excluding London are
considerably more optimistic about the next 12 months, while Yorkshire and
Humberside and Wales are less so, reports BSL. Greater London and the
north-west showed no improvement.
Results from a Dun &amp; Bradstreet survey of business confidence show a similar
variation.
The business information company concludes that confidence is continuing to
improve slowly. Two out of three companies surveyed expect sales to improve
compared with a year ago, against just one in six foreseeing a decline.
Manufacturing is the most confident sector with 73 per cent of non-durables
manufacturers forecasting sales increases over last year against 11 per cent
expecting a decline.
Dun &amp; Bradstreet also reports that companies are expecting to take on more
staff. For the second successive quarter more companies forecast rising
employment needs rather than falling needs.
Gallup/BSL Regional Consumer Survey, July 1993. BSL, 192 Vauxhall Bridge
Road, London NW3 6EH.
Business Expectations Survey. Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Holmers Farm Way, High
Wycombe, Bucks HP12 4UL.
