FT  08 JUN 93 / Lloyd's plan may win extra Pounds 500m
LLOYD'S of London could attract up to Pounds 500m in fresh 'incorporated'
capital by the beginning of next year, according to an official working on a
rulebook for corporate investors at the insurance market.
At the end of April Lloyd's announced that it was seeking to attract new
corporate investment to compensate for the recent fall in the number of
Names, the individuals whose assets traditionally provided the market's
capital base.
A draft of the rulebook, which sets out the legal, accounting, regulatory
and tax implications for 'incorporated Names', should be sent to Lloyd's
agencies by the end of this month, with a definitive version set to be
completed by mid-summer.
'It's a tough timetable,' said the official, who added that the need to
obtain the approval of the tax authorities could delay matters.
Lloyd's has already decided to modify its scheme to auction capacity for
incorporated Names, which was part of its business plan published last
April. In a letter to market practitioners last week Mr David Rowland,
chairman, said it was 'inappropriate' to continue with these plans, although
the market's governing council would continue to monitor demand carefully.
Mr Rowland said he was also proposing to offer 'pre-emption' rights to Names
wishing to increase their capacity at some future stage. Lloyd's now expects
most of the incorporated to come from institutions and investment funds,
rather than from existing Names choosing to form new limited liability
companies.
Failure to finalise the rules would lead agencies to make greater use of
reinsurance and consortium arrangements (in which outside insurance
companies support syndicates).
In a separate development, Lloyd's said yesterday that it is to hold an
extraordinary general meeting on July 5 following requests from two groups
of Names. Names will be asked to vote on three motions.
The first and second motions were submitted by supporters of Mr Claud
Gurney, a Lloyd's Name critical of the market's administrators. The motions
say that Lloyd's owes a fiduciary duty of care to its members and call on
Lloyd's to insist that new corporate Names compensate existing Names for
past losses in return for a share of the assets and goodwill of the
Corporation.
The third motion is understood to be linked to the Association of Lloyd's
Members, the biggest organisation of Lloyd's Names. It expresses support for
the Lloyd's council and its recent business plan.
