FT  26 OCT 93 / Government Bonds: European investors switch into shorter
maturities
AFTER last week's sweeping round of rate cuts, most European yield curves
continued to steepen yesterday as investors took profits at the long end and
shifted into shorter maturities.
US Treasuries' continued weakness added to the markets' soft tone and
compounded the pressure on longer-dated bonds.
GERMAN bonds were damped by somewhat disappointing regional September
inflation data. Consumer prices in Baden-Wurttemberg rose 0.3 per cent on
the month and 4.1 per cent on the year, above market forecasts for 0.2 per
cent and 3.8 per cent. Numbers from North Rhine-Westphalia - at 0.2 per cent
and 3.7 per cent, respectively - were more in line with expectations.
'The numbers weren't really all that bad, but they provided a good enough
excuse for long-overdue profit-taking,' said a Frankfurt trader.
The December bund contract fell by 0.49 point to 90.97 and is expected to
test key support levels at 90.90 today.
The German railways issued DM2.35bn 10-year 6 1/8 per cent bonds at an
average 6.05 per cent yield. A second portion of the bonds will be sold
today via a US-style auction.
FRENCH government bonds followed bunds lower. The notional bond contract
fell 0.26 point on the day to 124.66 and slipped another 0.12 point in
after-hours trading.
UK gilts eased across the curve, with the short end damped by receding hopes
for a rate-cut before the November 30 Budget and longer maturities pressured
by profit-taking.
Medium maturities were restrained ahead of tomorrow's auction of Pounds
3.5bn of 6 per cent gilts. Retail activity has been scant in recent days and
this had some traders worrying that the bid-to-cover ratio might be
disappointing. But according to one gilts salesman, 'the issue has cheapened
up quite nicely and that should attract some good demand'.
AFTER being Europe's top performers in recent weeks, the high-yielding
markets posted the sharpest losses on heavy profit-taking.
The Italian BTP futures contract dropped 1.10 point to 117.35 and is
expected to test key support at 117 today, with the next target seen at
116.50.
The Spanish bond contract on Madrid's futures exchange fell 0.49 point to
103.52. Market sentiment was subdued by warnings from the International
Monetary Fund that Spain should be cautious on further rate cuts until price
stability and structural economic reforms had been achieved.
BELGIAN bonds held up relatively well despite the breakdown on Sunday of the
social pact talks between the country's unions, employers and the
government.
While the Belgian franc weakened against the D-Mark, Belgian bonds' yield
premium over bunds widened by only one basis point from Friday to 121 basis
points.
THE sell-off in the US Treasury market continued yesterday as long-term bond
yields rose back above 6 per cent in the wake of economically bullish
comments from senior government officials.
In late afternoon trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down
17/32 at 103 7/32 , yielding 6.011 per cent. At the short end of the market,
the two-year note was down  1/32 at 99 29/32 , to yield 3.908 per cent.
After last week's declines, investor sentiment was shaky when trading
opened. It was no surprise, therefore, when prices nosedived mid-morning
after Mr Robert Reich, the Labor secretary, made bullish comments about the
economy, predicting fourth-quarter growth of more than 3 per cent.
Prices were also pressured lower by a relatively robust September home sales
report, by rumours of heavy selling by a large hedge fund, and by a
stronger-than-expected mid-October car and truck sales report.
CANADIAN government bonds fell more than  1/2 point in early trading,
dragged lower by the sell-off in US Treasuries.
While market sentiment was nervous ahead of last night's elections, most
traders were discounting a majority win by the Liberal party, which was
widely seen to be positive for the market.
