FT  14 JUN 93 / EC aims to head off Bonn dispute
THE European Commission is counting on quiet diplomacy to head off a
damaging dispute with Germany after disclosure of a secret non-aggression
pact on telecommunications between the Bonn government and the US.
EC officials believe the bilateral understanding forswearing trade sanctions
was struck by the economics ministry without the knowledge of the German
foreign ministry.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC commissioner for external economic relations, has asked
Bonn for an explanation and Brussels officials yesterday described the
German move as a direct challenge to the single European market and said it
could jeopardise EC unity in the Gatt trade talks. 'If the German government
sticks to its position, it is a very serious matter,' said a senior EC
official, referring to the political damage ahead of next week's EC summit
in Copenhagen.
The understanding on telecommunications and other service industries was
reached between Mr Gunter Rexrodt, federal economics minister, and Mr Mickey
Kantor, US Trade Representative, apparently in the margins of this month's
annual meeting of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development.
Mr Rexrodt indicated that Germany would not pass into law Article 29 of the
EC's Utilities Directive which gives a 3 per cent price preference for EC
companies.
Mr Rexrodt also pledged not to apply discriminatory trade sanctions against
the US which earlier imposed a ban on bids from EC companies for Dollars 19m
(Pounds 12.3m) worth of public procurement contracts, in protest against
Article 29's restrictive provisions.
The German move challenges the decision by 12 EC foreign ministers to impose
a Dollars 15m sanctions package in retaliation against the US on June 8 in
Luxembourg. It seems to contravene the Rome Treaty which awards sole
competence in trade policy to the European Commission.
Last Friday, the German Economics Ministry defended its moves, declaring
that Germany was bound by a 1954 friendship treaty with the US which forbids
trade discrimination. It also insisted that the Utilities Directive was
drafted deliberately loosely, so that the EC 'may apply Community
preference' and that any agreement was 'not withstanding existing
commitments to third countries'.
EC officials hope that Mr Rexrodt will come under pressure from colleagues,
nervous about the political reaction.
