FT  05 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Futures lead 28 point FT-SE advance
THE UK stock market advanced strongly yesterday as President Boris Yeltsin's
re-establishment of his authority in Russia enabled investors to turn their
attention back to the underlying investment fundamentals in London stocks.
The lead came from stock index futures, where the December contract on the
FT-SE Index closed within eight points of the all-time high reached at the
end of August.
Market strategists were surprised by the 28 point rebound in the Footsie
Index. However, they pointed out that yesterday was the first day of a new
equity account which features Thursday's speech to the UK Conservative party
conference by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor of the exchequer.
While the City of London expects that any cut in domestic base rates or
similar economic boost is likely to be postponed until the budget in
November, it still hopes that Mr Clarke will deliver a confidence-boosting
speech this week.
Mr Marcus Grubb at Salomon Brothers International expects the chancellor to
cut rates by as much as 1 per cent to offset revenue raising in the budget.
'UK equities now represent good value compared to other international equity
markets,' he says. Salomon is switching to an overweight position in the UK
and raising its year-end Footsie target to 3,200, catching up with several
other UK equity analysts.
Equities opened lower, restrained at first by ex dividend quotations in a
number of leading stocks but also by the increasingly ominous reports of
military clashes in Moscow. However, the relatively calm reaction from other
European bourses, as well as the oil and currency sector, helped London to
steady and then to improve as stock index futures opened.
Turnover was sluggish at first, and share gains were modest until
mid-session, when the stock market responded vigorously to a soaring premium
on the Footsie December future and also firmness in UK government bonds.
Good M0 money supply and consumer lending data also helped confidence.
London was undeterred by a slow start on Wall Street or by a lower dollar
which restrained the blue chip internationals. Neither oils nor
pharmaceuticals could maintain the strength shown last week, although there
was heavy arbitraging between stock index futures and the underlying blue
chip stocks. Leadership of the market was taken up by the banking and retail
sectors which have most to gain from lower interest rates.
At the close, the FT-SE Index was 28.4 ahead at 3,067.7 after its best daily
performance since August 25. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, covering the range of
smaller stocks, closed 12.6 up at 3,439.3.
In spite of the quickening of pace in the second half of the session, Seaq
trading volume, at 552.3m shares, remained well short of Friday's total of
just over 636m. The focus on blue chip arbitrage dealing reduced to around
55 per cent the contribution to the total of deals in non-Footsie stocks.
With the dramatic news from Moscow taking up most of the attention in the
dealing rooms, there were fewer individual stock features than the rise in
the market suggested. But a good take-up for the Pounds 324m rights issue
from Cadbury Schweppes indicated a buoyant undertone.
