FT  25 AUG 93 / Business and the Environment: Trying its water wings
When Lufthansa pulls in its aircraft for regular checks and overhauls every
six years or so, it no longer douses them with powerful paint stripping
agents that contain harsh chemicals such as dichloromethane and phenol.
Instead it gives them the water treatment. At the national carrier's new
DM230m (Pounds 90m) paint hangar in Hamburg, a stream of high-pressure water
is directed at each aircraft. This forces itself under the paint layers and
peels them off.
The paint has to be removed so that aircraft can be inspected for cracks and
corrosion.
Before Lufthansa perfected its robotically operated Aquastrip process, which
it will make available to other airlines, stripping one of its Airbus A300s
needed some 2.5 tonnes of unpleasant chemicals and left 10 tonnes of liquid
waste.
With Aquastrip, lukewarm water is shot towards the aircraft at a shallow
angle from a rotating nozzle. Turning at 6,900 revolutions a minute, this
creates a fan-shaped stream of water so fine that it does not damage the
aluminium skin of the wings and fuselage.
Aquastrip works precisely enough for the three coats of paint to be peeled
away separately.
Each nozzle sprays water at the rate of 37 litres a minute. This water is
then recovered and cleaned of the paint particles. Lufthansa engineers hope
to be able to recycle 97 per cent of the water. The particles are burned in
a special waste incinerator.
Before deciding on Aquastrip, Lufthansa, which has around 220 aircraft,
tried other non-chemical methods of paint removal. One was blasting with dry
ice; the paint layer was broken up by the temperature shock and then ground
away by the sharp-edged crystals. However, this method put a heavy stress on
the thin aircraft skin and could therefore be used only once in its service
life. It also consumed a large amount of energy.
Lufthansa has found that Aquastrip not only helps the environment. It is
even quicker than the old chemical techniques.
