FT  07 MAY 93 / World Trade News: Claims accord aims to boost ship financing
A NEW international convention on maritime liens and mortgges, adopted
yesterday by more than 60 maritime nations, is expected to encourage ship
financing by giving mortgage lenders improved security on their investment.
The convention defines a restricted list of maritime liens that can take
priority over registered mortgages. It was adopted by a plenipotentiary
conference in Geneva convened by the UN Conference on Trade and Development
and the International Maritime Organisation.
In the event of a forced sale of a ship, the claim of the mortgage lender is
currently subordinated to a host of maritime liens - claims against the ship
which have priority over all others and which travel with the ship
irrespective of owner or flag. They are enforceable in law, making it
possible to arrest and sell the ship to satisfy the claim.
Maritime liens vary from country to country and are not necessarily
recognised by others, so that creditors cannot be sure that claims will be
recognised and in what order of priority. Unctad officials believe this lack
of uniformity has handicapped ship financing and fleet development,
especially in developing countries.
The maritime liens entitled to priority treatment under the convention
cover: wages owed to the master and crew; death or injury claims against the
vessel; salvage rewards; pilotage, port, canal and other waterway dues; and
claims for physical loss or damage against the ship, other than damage to
cargo, containers or passenger effects.
Countries can grant other maritime liens on a vessel but they will rank
below registered mortgages in priority for claims. In addition, holders of
such maritime liens cannot benefit from payments of 'hull insurance' if the
ship sinks, and their claims lapse within certain short fixed time limits.
The convention opens for signing in New York in September and will come into
force six months after 10 states have agreed to be bound by it.
