FT  10 JUL 93 / Property: Self-build - the way to save money / A look at the
sector that has become the biggest player of all
AFTER many false dawns, the green shoots of real recovery are at last
sprouting from the compost heap of Britain's house-building industry.
Fairbriar Homes has shown the door to the administrators, proving there is
life after near-death, while David Goldstone has seen off the vultures that
were hovering above struggling Regalian. And a development of 38 detached
houses called Windmills around the tower mill at Shirley, Surrey, has proved
so popular that Cala Homes (South) has had to advance its building programme
from two years to one.
Throughout the seemingly endless recession in the building industry, though,
one sector has emerged as the biggest player. Self-builders now account for
at least 15,000 new homes each year, and the number is growing all the time.
Most self-builders do not mix the mortar and lay the bricks themselves.
Christopher Heath, of Redhill-based Custom Homes, says: 'Some of our
customers hand over to a site agent who organises sub-contractors; a
contractor of this kind is responsible for the inter-mixing of the various
trades. Even greater savings can be made if they organise the
sub-contractors themselves.
'We recommend timber frame construction, not only because of its high energy
efficiency but because most companies will quote for supply and erection to
a stage that is ready for roof tiling, so tradesmen can very quickly move in
to get on with their work.'
There is a growing awareness of the advantages of self-building. The savings
can be huge: 40 per cent or even more for those who roll up their sleeves
and help with the actual building. And they get the house that they want,
where they want it, rather than the one the builder thinks they ought to
have.
The curious thing is the time self-build has taken to catch on. In most
countries, a high proportion of home-owners choose both the location and the
design of their home; only in Japan are people less inclined than the
British to take a major part in building the family home.
Jeremy Fermo and his wife, Shirley, who retired to Sydney, Australia, a few
years ago, yearned for 'something beamy' in Hampshire when they came back.
After a long search, they bought a plot and built one of Potton's Tudor
look-alikes, with plenty of beams but no head-banging - Tudor without tears.
The beautiful home, with 2,500 sq ft of floor area, cost them only Pounds 44
a sq ft to build.
Katie Fontana and her friend, Tony Niblock, saved even more money by doing
much of the work on their Suffolk long-house. As a result, this 2,100 sq ft
home cost them only Pounds 35 a sq ft to erect. 'I scoured the Suffolk
countryside studying architectural features and looking for old bricks and
tiles,' says Fontana. 'Tony did the plans and we lived in a caravan on the
site while we built the house. We were a bit cold in the winter but there
was only one tantrum.'
Potton has now provided budding self-builders with their own Mecca - three
magnificent show houses at St Neots, in Cambridgeshire, close to the Al. Two
are in the well-established Potton Tudor style, with inglenooks and beams,
while the third, a 3,000 sq ft Georgian-style house, is called The
Milchester.
Kits for these houses cost between Pounds 25,400 and Pounds 47,600; to
build, with all the fittings seen at the show houses, will set you back
between Pounds 70,000-Pounds 120,000. All you need is the land on which to
place them.
Further information: Potton: tel. 0767-260348; Custom Homes: tel.
0737-767213.
