FT  04 NOV 93 / European banks sceptical on monetary union targets
EUROPEAN banks are highly sceptical about the EC's ability to forge a single
currency by the end of the century, according to a continent-wide survey
published yesterday.
Most banks confess that economic and monetary union (Emu) would not be in
their interest, since they hope to increase profits during the next few
years from dealing in financial instruments and securities in individual EC
currencies.
The survey highlights a drive to cut costs and bring in new technology
particularly in retail banking.
It suggests that banks in 21 countries will reduce employment by 250,000 by
the end of the decade, with a total of 20,000 branches likely to be closed.
Banks in the UK, Germany and France - all with large financial centres with
heavy interest in foreign exchange and interest rate trading opportunities -
are particularly sceptical about Emu.
UK respondents are the most dismissive, with some 95 per cent ruling out the
possibility that all of the EC countries will move to a single currency by
the year 2000.
Among the 400 banks and institutions surveyed, 86 per cent thought this goal
was unlikely. A total of 50 per cent termed as improbable the less ambitious
objective of full participation by all EC currencies in the 'narrow band' of
the exchange rate mechanism.
Underlying how banks intend to shift towards more sophisticated activities,
profits growth is seen highest in areas like derivatives, insurance and bond
and equity trading.
In contrast to EC hopes of smaller financial market fluctuations in the
future, banks in Germany, Spain, Austria, Norway and Luxembourg expect
greater exchange rate volatility within the EC.
However, banks in France, Belgium, Italy, Portugal and Den - mark - whose
governments are all committed to currency stability within the ERM - expect
lower volatility in the foreign exchange markets in coming years.
'90s fitness regime, Page 19
European banking and capital markets by Arthur Andersen consultants. From
Economist Intelligence Unit, 40 Duke Street, London W1A 1DW. Pounds 195
