FT  17 JUL 93 / Complex search for a 'gay gene'
THE discovery announced this week by US scientists that homosexuality may be
inherited is only the latest success for a genetic research technique called
linkage analysis.
It is a method that combines modern technology with a Sherlock Holmes-like
devotion to deducing the possible. The human body is made up of cells. Each
cell has within it 46 chromosomes, half from each parent. The chromosomes
consist of millions of pairs of molecules in long chains, called DNA.
Humans have 99.9 per cent of their DNA in common. Linkage analysis, like the
genetic fingerprinting used by the police, concentrates on the remaining 0.1
per cent.
To determine if homosexuality is inherited, researchers at the US National
Institute of Health needed to compare the parts of the DNA of gay men which
ought to differ but perhaps did not.
The task was immense. Even 0.1 per cent of human DNA leaves many thousands
of points on chromosomes to examine and compare.
The solution came from figures on the incidence of homosexuality. The
researchers took a sample of gay men and found a 13.5 per cent chance that a
brother was gay too. They worked on the conservative assumption that the
male homosexuality rate is about 2 per cent.
Then they looked at close relatives and found that male relatives on the
mother's side were also more likely than the average population to be
homosexual, while those on the father's side were not.
This allowed them to eliminate all the chromosomes but one from their
search, the one exclusively inherited from the mother, the X-chromosome.
Then began the laborious process of comparing the DNA of gay siblings.
Even concentrating on the small proportion of DNA that ought to differ
between brothers, there are areas that may be in common, such as colour
blindness, inherited on the X-chromosome. But by comparing their findings
with those from other pairs of brothers, the scientists were able gradually
to eliminate the other variables.
By the time their study was completed they had identified a single area on
the X-chromosome common to most homosexual men with a one-in-10,000 chance
of being wrong.
The research also indicated a different genetic area connected with female
homosexuality.
The study is far from conclusive. Three quarters of men with this area of
genetic material associated with homosexuality are not gay. And a minority
of gay men seem, in the study, not to have the material.
In common with previous research that links behaviour with genetics, there
are grey areas which prevent rigid rules being applied.
Nevertheless, the same research technique has had striking successes in the
past. It identified the genes for for inherited diseases such as cystic
fibrosis and Huntingdon's chorea.
