FT  24 JUL 93 / Arts: Lost in the Louvre - Patricia Morison braves the
crowds in France's treasure house
IF YOU plan to be in Paris this summer, a word of warning about the current
plight of the Louvre. It is almost exactly two centuries since, on August 10
1793, the former royal palace of the Louvre opened its doors for the first
time to the French public as a museum of art. Just now, however, the Louvre
is in a royal mess.
Of course, il faut souffrir pour etre beau, and with every day the
realisation of President Mitterrand's Grand Louvre project comes a little
nearer. On November 18 the public will be admitted to the refurbished
Richelieu Wing, formerly the Finance Ministry, which stretches along the Rue
de Rivoli. The size of the Louvre will be effectively doubled, although that
will not mark the end of the museum's travail. Reorganising the collections
and galleries in the 'old' part of the Louvre will take another four years.
For the moment, most of the outside of the Louvre is a huge building site
and so, for good measure, is the Tuileries Gardens. Inside, signs of brutal
disruption are all too evident. Dust lies on the black marble thighs of the
antique statue of Socrates expiring in his bath. An unbelievable number of
paintings are on temporary display, including the entire early French
collection and the Mona Lisa. Poor thing, she always was mobbed in summer
months. Now she creates a major traffic-jam in the Grande Galerie, which for
the remainder of its once glorious length has turned into a rat-run.
Many antiquities are currently not on view and the cabinet rooms of the
Flemish and early Dutch collection are closed. To add to the public's
discomfiture, the Louvre's colour-coded ground plan, fiendishly difficult to
use at the best of times, is now largely irrelevant.
The inevitable crush of summer visitors makes the Louvre a wilting
experience - or worse, if you fall victim to the pickpockets who gleefully
work the Pyramid. Last week was my first experience of Pei's grand gesture
in peak season and I was struck by how different it is from the traditional
entrance to a temple of high culture. There is not a work of art to be seen.
Instead, the concourse of the Pyramid resembles a busy airport terminal or a
shopping mall. It is a place of light, heat, bustle and hubbub.
The din is largely contributed by teenagers of many lands, who evidently
find the Pyramid an exhilarating experience not dissimilar from the
underground shopping at Les Halles. Herded in and then abandoned by their
guides, they are surprised to discover that the Palais du Louvre is not in
the least stuffy and boring. It is, in fact, a terrific place to shout and
run about. They are delirious by the time they ascend to the galleries.
I admit with shame that many years ago, I was expelled from a Paris museum
by a warder who considered that my bare feet demeaned the dignity of his
institution. It would be interesting to know how far you would have to go in
today's Louvre before anyone would take notice, let alone chuck you out. The
Louvre appears to field remarkably few warders, which means that there is no
one to help you find your way. More seriously, it gives the signal that the
authorities have given up any attempt to enforce what were once seen as the
proprieties of museum visiting. If this is to be the shape of the new,
thoroughly egalitarian, non-elitist Grand Louvre, then I at least will mourn
the passing of the old.
If you are minded to brave the Louvre (and next week I shall report on the
summer exhibitions), there is one really useful piece of information,
although people in the know will kill me for mentioning it. No one can quite
credit that Pei's Pyramid has just a single revolving door as the only means
for giving the millions access. Ah, but it is not] Before 5pm it is possible
to enter the Louvre via the little-used Porte Jaujard in the Pavilion de
Flore at the end of the south-western wing whose facade is now obscured by
building mess in the Place du Carrousel. It is most easily accessible from
the Quai des Tuileries.
Another dodge to make life more bearable, not just at the Louvre but at the
Musee d'Orsay and other cultural bottlenecks, is to buy the Carte Musees. It
gives admission to 65 museums and monuments in Paris and the region,
including the Arc de Triomphe and Versailles. It is said you will not have
to queue. One day costs Pounds 7.50/FFr60; three days, Pounds 15/FFr120;
five days, Pounds 21/FFr170. It must be used on consecutive days. (Entry
prices range from FFr25 to FFr40.) It can be bought in museums and metro
stations, and in the UK is sold by Voyages Vacances Internationales (071-287
3171.)
