FT  13 AUG 93 / German car chief warns of further 100,000 job cuts
THE GERMAN automotive industry must shed a further 100,000 jobs and cut
costs by between 20 and 30 per cent in the next two years if it is to
survive, according to Mr Achim Diekmann, chief executive of the VDA motor
industry association.
If vehicle and component makers did not regain competitiveness quickly, they
would disappear, he said.
The association could see no signs of recovery. German car output was
expected to drop by 18 per cent this year, compared with forecasts last
winter of a 10 per cent decline. This implies a fall from record production
of 4.86m cars in 1992 to about 4m.
The industry's expectations had been based on hopes of recovery in France
and Italy but new registrations in the first seven months of this year have
dropped by 24 per cent in Italy and 17 per cent in France.
German sales, expected to fall 20 per cent, are down almost 25 per cent so
far. In an interview with a German news agency, Mr Diekmann said the
domestic market would be hit again in early 1994 by a 16 pfennigs a litre
increase in petrol taxes.
This, the third increase within a short time, had come at the wrong moment
for the motor industry, he added.
German vehicle and component makers had already cut 95,000 jobs in the two
years to the end of June and were halfway towards the optimum workforce, Mr
Diekmann said. Extra demand from the former East Germany had disguised the
underlying downward trend and delayed structural changes.
Mr Diekmann said that in the first half of this year, when German factories
produced 2.1m motor vehicles of all types, a further 1m bearing German
brands were manufactured abroad.
Plans by BMW and Mercedes to open factories in the US and Volkswagen's
projected doubling of capacity in China foreshadow an acceleration in this
trend, industry officials noted.
At the same time, German components manufacturers are increasingly using
capacity outside Germany to supply transplant factories.
Mr Diekmann named no companies, but his opinions clearly matched those of
Volkswagen, currently embroiled in a spying controversy with Opel, German
subsidiary of General Motors.
VW, the second biggest industrial concern in Germany, is engaged in cutting
its domestic workforce by about 15,000 to 100,000 by the end of 1997.
Mr Diekmann's latest forecasts related strictly to the automotive industry
which employed 693,000 at the end of May.
