FT  04 MAR 93 / World Trade News: Trading with purpose - Kevin Brown looks
at Australia's promotion effort
DO trade promotion organisations boost exports by improving access to
overseas markets or do they impose a bureaucratic barrier between businesses
and potential customers? Under pressure to improve performance and cut
costs, the Australian Trade Commission (Austrade) is trying to find out.
Austrade was set up in 1986 to combine several government organisations in a
'one stop shop' to provide assistance to Australia's export effort. But a
1991 review by McKinsey, the management consultants, suggested the
experiment had failed. McKinsey found the organisation bureaucratic, top
heavy and unfocused. Its report said Austrade was failing to justify its
ADollars 127m (Pounds 60.40m) budget, and concluded that changes would be
required to justify its continued existence.
Mr Ralph Evans, chief executive since July 1991, says the points made in the
McKinsey report have been absorbed. Many staff have been relocated overseas
to increase direct contacts in overseas markets. More managers, including Mr
Evans himself, are being recruited from the private sector. And resources
are being diverted from 'easy' markets such as the UK and US to 'difficult'
countries in Asia and Eastern Europe, where McKinsey thought Austrade could
provide services that companies were unlikely to establish for themselves.
Austrade is also paying increasing attention to the Asia/Pacific region,
which most forecasters expect to play an increasingly important role in
Australian trade. The run-down of activities in Australia and other
English-speaking countries has helped provide resources to increase
representation in Beijing, Hong Kong, Singapore, Jakarta, India, Bangkok,
and Vladivostok, in Russia's resource-rich Far East which was still closed
to most foreigners less than two years ago.
Operations in Japan, by far the most important of Australia's trading
partners, have been boosted by four regional offices to support the main
representation in Tokyo and Osaka.
Mr Evans says his goal is to make Austrade as much like a private company as
possible. 'We are trying to encourage a culture of enterprise that is
oriented towards results, towards actually making a bit of difference to
Australia's export business,' he says.
Austrade representatives used to spend much of their time compiling economic
statistics and marketing Australia as a whole. Now they are encouraged to
bring buyers and sellers together and organise, for example, flexible credit
terms for cash-starved buyers in newly-liberalised economies. Sometimes
trade commissioners have played an important role in spotting opportunities
for Australian companies, and finding partners in big contracts.
There have been some successes. The Beijing office spotted an opportunity to
develop an air traffic control system for 50 Chinese airports, and helped
find a local joint venture partner for AWA, the Australian electronics
group, which subsequently won the contract against stiff competition.
In Hungary, Mr John Charody, a trade commissioner recruited from the private
sector, helped put together a series of agreements under which Australian
companies will supply thousands of games machines, and set up a national
lottery and a chain of computerised betting offices.
McKinsey suggested that Austrade had played a 'worthwhile' role in exports
valued at ADollars 3.5bn over three years, and argued that the total could
be improved. But assessing the impact of trade promotion is more difficult
than adding up the value of goods or services sold. Trade promotion
organisations have relied on indirect indicators such as the number of trade
displays or the number of meetings facilitated by representatives. But such
indicators reveal little or nothing about the amount of business which gets
done.
The alternative approach being adopted by Austrade is to assess the value in
terms of sales or contracts of efforts on behalf of specific companies. But
as Mr Evans points out: 'We have got to set up some criteria. . . to decide
whether we have helped a lot in specific cases, or just at the margins.'
Austrade has commissioned an independent investigation to cross-check the
results with the companies. Also, exporters will be asked whether they are
getting good value from Austrade's offices.
