FT  04 JAN 93 / Life in the Single Market: How the British lined up a common
European railway - UK engineers put the continent on the right track, but
are now fast being left behind
the single European railway is here. And it's all thanks to the British. If
their engineers hadn't built the early continental railways in the image of
their own, they might all have had different track widths, and joining them
together a century later would have been that much harder.
As it is, a new era has dawned for rail travellers. There will be no more
changing trains at the borders: from now on, passengers will whizz from one
side of the EC to the other almost as easily as they do from London to
Birmingham (though, given the vicissitudes of travelling by British Rail,
that is possibly not the best measure of convenience).
Actually, things will not be quite like that: or at least, not for a while.
As in so many other areas, the arrival of the single European market is the
first step in a long process of change for the railways, the fruits of which
will only very slowly become visible.
It is worth noting first that international rail travel is nothing new
within the Community. While Britain's railways remain physically isolated
from those of the continent, hundreds of trains cross other EC borders
daily: indeed, international traffic accounts for an estimated 21 per cent
of EC rail passenger mileage.
Even so, the more telling statistic is that only 0.5 per cent of
cross-border EC travellers go by rail rather than road or air. The reason is
that Europe's railways were built to serve national needs, not international
ones, so links between the different countries' systems are poor. And even
where they exist, crossing the border can take time: quite apart from
frontier controls, most of which should be phased out this year, it is often
necessary to change locomotives or trains because one country's rolling
stock will not work with another's power and signalling systems.
The EC aims to change all this with a three-pronged plan to speed up
international rail travel. One prong is to work towards technical
harmonisation; another, to improve international rail links, using the funds
for trans-European networks agreed under the Maastricht treaty; and the
third, to work towards a European high-speed rail network, building on the
high-speed lines already in France, Germany and Spain.
But those are goals that stretch into the next decade. For now, the only
immediate difference to EC rail operation is a directive requiring all
countries to open their railways to trains being operated between two other
countries, charging a set rate for use of their tracks. Previously, railways
have often refused transit traffic where they have not considered the
returns worthwhile.
The result could be a rise in number of the newly emergent 'hotel' trains
such as the Pablo Casals running between Spain and Switzerland. These are
luxurious trains travelling long distances between European capitals and
offering a comfortable, relaxing alternative to the increasingly congested
airports and airways.
Britain, of course, will remain on the periphery of all this. Separated from
the continent in the Ice Age, it is still waiting to be reconnected by the
tunnel, and seems unlikely to see its first continental rail services until
at least mid-1994.
The only consolation is that, thanks to the common track gauge set by its
pioneering engineers, it will at least be possible to travel between Britain
and the rest of Europe without having to change trains under the Channel.
