FT  02 DEC 93 / Arts: 'Derby Day' winner - Theatre
Here is a real long shot, but in the end a clear winner. The Yorkshire
Theatre Company's Derby Day by Brian B Thompson is all that we have learned
not to expect from the contemporary fringe theatre in London. True, like the
principal horse involved, it has a slowish start. After that, it has all the
traditional virtues of laughter, suspense, a touch of sentimentality and
even a social conscience.
One of the reasons for admiring it is that it is so unexpected. Derby Day
comes from no recognisable stable. It contains a lot of blunt Yorkshire
humour, then moves to Newmarket where the way of life is quite different,
but still essentially male-dominated.
The adopted daughter of a widowed trade unionist has moved south to become a
jockey. I shall not reveal whether or not she wins the Derby; for that is
part of the suspense, and anyway the result depends on a stewards' inquiry.
Yet even from that brief outline you should see that there are serious
subjects underlying the comedy.
Derby Day combines old-fashioned drama with new-fashioned acting and
staging. There is a cast of four, and no props except the odd box and fence.
The actors play the horses as well as the jockeys, trainers, owners, BBC
commentators and other hangers-on. They do the horses by emitting a series
of grunts and moving forwards and backwards as each race takes its course.
A touch of fairy tale enters when the Kentucky horse Lone Dancer (one of
several roles by Christopher Halliday) turns out to be able to talk, but
mainly to the girl jockey.
The horses can, of course, talk to each other, as they do before the start
of the big race. One of them is called 'Theboydonegood'. 'No horse with a
cheap and nasty name,' says a horse named Bunbury, 'has ever won the Derby.'
Still, Theboydonegood makes the early running.
Thompson throws in pots of extraneous jokes. 'You didn't catch Clem Attlee
in the bookies,' says the trade unionist. The whole piece is extraordinarily
good-natured. In the one scene of violence where the male jockeys turn on
their girl rival, the punching and kicking is mimed rather than acted out.
Much London theatre could learn from that restraint.
It is tempting to give all the acting laurels to the diminutive Rosalind
Paul as the heroine, and certainly this is a magnificent performance. Yet
she also has the most sympathetic part. The boys do pretty good as well: not
only Halliday, but Bruce Byron and Andrew McIlwee in various other parts.
This is an outstanding group directed by Toby Swift.
Derby Day runs at the Cockpit until December 18. There must be some other
London theatre with a similar open stage capable of picking it up.
Cockpit Theatre, London NW8, (071) 402 5081
