FT  19 OCT 93 / Survey of Aluminium (5): Rivals show their mettle - New
materials
ALUMINIUM is the most modern of the leading industrial metals and its
fortunes since it first came on the scene just over a century ago have
always been linked with technical progress in the manufacturing industries.
But if technology has provided the aluminium makers with a seemingly endless
stream of opportunities it has also, especially in recent years, thrown up a
series of strong competitors. It is in meeting these challenges and in
developing ways of extending its uses throughout the manufacturing sector
that the future prosperity of the industry is seen to lie.
The latest challenge, which is threatening aluminium's share of the
lucrative aerospace market, has come from so-called 'composites', such as
carbon-epoxy, in which carbon fibres are embedded in toughened resins. These
provide a blend of strength and lightness exceeding those of the usual run
of aluminium alloys, and nowhere is this quality more prized than in the
aerospace industry.
As is usual with advances in aerospace materials the new composites have
been taken up with the greatest enthusiasm in the defence sector. They also
threaten to eat into aluminium's traditional dominance in the commercial
aircraft sector - but not as deeply as had been expected.
A case in point is the 777 airliner being developed by Boeing. A year ago
the company estimated that composites would account for about 10 per cent of
the structural weight of the aircraft, chiefly through their use in the
vertical and horizontal tails, the floor beams of the passenger cabin and
the trailing edge flaps. That would have helped to cut aluminium's
contribution to the weight of the airframe to 55-60 per cent, compared with
73-75 per cent in the Boeing 757 and 767. More recent estimates suggest that
aluminium will still contribute 67 per cent.
The aluminium producers are not taking even this more modest incursion into
their territory lightly, however. New alloys, involving titanium and lithium
(the lightest of all metals) among others, are being developed to achieve
improved compression strength and corrosion resistance. And the industry has
come up with its own 'composites' in the form of structural laminates, such
as Alcoa's 'Arall', which combines aluminium with fibre-reinforced epoxy
layers to cut weight and improve fatigue life and damage tolerance. Already
Arall is being used in the cargo door of the McDonnel Douglas C-17 military
transport.
Another composite, Duralcan MMC, an aluminium-based metal-ceramic material
developed by Alcan of Canada, is expected to have important uses in
aerospace, motor and energy. Alcan claims it is lighter and stronger than
steel or titanium and can be made more corrosion-resistant.
In the electrical industry aluminium tends to be a challenger rather than a
mere reactor to challenges.
Alcan of Canada, through its Alupower subsidiary, claims to be the leader in
the field of aluminium-based electric power sources. These systems, which
offer much reduced volume and weight compared with conventional batteries,
are making significant inroads into the markets for standby batteries for
the telecommunications industry, propulsion power for underwater vehicles
and range extenders for road vehicles - all areas where weight saving is at
a premium.
The extended use of electricity for public transport is also providing
opportunities for aluminium. Guide rails for rapid transport systems is one
example, and higher up the technological ladder comes the construction of
guideways for high-speed rail lines such as the Maglev (magnetic levitation)
system used already at Orlando and Las Vegas in the US. Such systems are
also obvious outlets for light aluminium rail cars.
The motor industry has traditionally used a lot of aluminium, but there is
always room for progress. Amax has high hopes for its 'semi-solid forging'
(SSF) technology in this area. This uses specially processed aluminium
billets for forging at one stroke into high quality car components needing
little, if any, further finishing.
SSF also has possibilities in the aerospace sector, says Amax, and in the
manufacture of domestic appliances.
For most people the kitchen is the place they are likely to come into
contact with the greatest variety of aluminium uses - in cooking foil, food
packaging, appliances such as refrigerators, cookers and food processors
and, of course in the casing of the now ubiquitous microwave oven. The
inside of the microwave is still widely regarded as a no-go area for
aluminium, however, and that is something the producers of aluminium foil
and containers are anxious to change.
Early microwaves had glass-covered magnetrons, which could be damaged by
energy waves reflected from metal, so the manufacturers warned against its
use in them. Microwave technology has improved since then and the new
protected ceramic magnetrons can cope with aluminium providing a few simple
rules are followed - it is claimed, moreover, that in tests arcing is
extremely rare even if the container is placed hard against the oven's wall.
Mr Nick Kendal, managing director of Alcan Ekco Packaging, says a growing
number of manufacturers have been persuaded by test results that their
initial strictures against the use of aluminium in their microwaves are out
of date and have included instructions for the use of foil containers in
later editions of their manuals.
At its Montreal headquarters Alcan has developed 'Micromatch', an aluminium
microwave tray allowing selective heating for the various components of a
pre-prepared meal - even no heating at all for individual components, if
required. That sort of advantage could help to overcome prejudice in the
convenience food sector and once microwave meals are appearing in aluminium
packaging on supermarket shelves the consumers' resistance will surely begin
to evaporate.
