FT  23 NOV 93 / Technology: Pilots of the airwaves - Radio networks are
slowly becoming accepted and may revolutionise communications
Pocket telephones ring in railway carriages, pagers beep in the middle of
conferences, fax machines even spew out messages in the boot of a car. Radio
communications, it would seem, are everywhere.
So it was with disappointment that critics greeted the August launch of
Apple Computer's Newton, a personal digital assistant, or PDA for short. It
soon became apparent that the book-sized message pad could only send brief
messages and only then to another Newton located nearby using low-powered,
infra-red beams.
The problem for Apple was not that there were too few methods of
communication, but too many. 'Imagine you were on the Newton development
team. What communications would you have put in?' asks Larry Taylor, manager
of the Advanced Technology Group at Apple's European research and
development centre. 'In Utopia, there would just be one means of
communicating which would meet everyone's needs. Unfortunately it's not like
that.'
In Europe alone, Taylor points out, there are at least four digital radio
systems beginning operation. In the US and Japan, further new services
proliferate.
A further hitch has been the size of the plug-in equipment needed to bring
communications - bigger than the PDA itself. However, the PCMCIA card, an
electronic board about the size of a credit card, should soon enable the
Newton to communicate over mobile telephone networks or even PC networks,
using the latest radio local area networks (Lans).
PCMCIA cards, which conform to standards devised by the Personal Computer
Memory Card International Association, are already widely used in electronic
diaries and organisers for delivering stored information. Now, says Jim
Derbyshire, director and founder of Cambridge-based Symbionics, the radio
communications development specialists, they have become the enabling factor
for PDAs. 'The emergence of that de facto standard opens up the ability for
radio communications.'
Taylor acknowledges the appeal of such a system. 'With half a dozen PCMCIA
cards you could cover just about everything.'
Companies such as AT&amp;T/NCR and Olivetti, which manufacture radio-based Lans
to link PCs by radio rather than wire, believe PCMCIA cards will be on sale
by the middle of next year. They are looking to PDAs and notebook PCs to
elevate radio Lans from their present Cinderella role into mainstream
computing.
'Personally, I think we will see them becoming widespread as the decade
moves on,' says Andrew Bud, division manager of wireless systems at
Olivetti.
Even when PCMCIA cards are available, there will still be the problem of
whether enough applications are available to ensure consumers and businesses
want to buy the PCMCIA cards, says Bud.
Taylor agrees that it is a 'chicken and egg' situation, but believes a third
factor has to be in place - the infrastructure. 'Newton falls squarely into
the infrastructure black hole.'
Today's widespread cellular radio systems are analogue, not the digital
systems needed for the easy transmission of data. The coverage offered by
the pan-European digital telephone service GSM is patchy and its UK
derivative, PCN - the Mercury One-to-One service - is still novel.
Although radio Lans have been mooted for several years, problems defining
the standards and the lack of allocated radio spectrum has meant they are
also in their infancy. 'Getting into market was actually the hardest thing,'
says Bud.
Other factors have hampered the acceptance of radio Lans, not least the
recession, says Adrian Ridley-Jones, senior consultant at Logica.
'Organisations have already identified the structures needed and have Lans
in place. Existing Lans have to be phased out before organisations will look
at radio Lans in earnest.'
There are obvious advantages to having a radio network rather than a wired
one in the office. PCs can easily be moved from desk to desk without the
need for re-wiring. Anyone with a PDA or notebook PC who has official access
to the network can retrieve data or print documents from anywhere in the
building - in a meeting, for example.
'My best friends are rats, asbestos and bureaucrats,' says Bud. Rats gnaw
through cables, walls filled with asbestos cannot have holes drilled in them
and bureaucrats list buildings, so preventing cabling from being installed.
A fourth growth area for radio Lans, he believes, will be
'architecturally-challenged buildings' - anything with solid concrete
pillars and little space for ducting.
Where radio Lans have been installed to date, it has been to extend
corporate wired networks, says Justin van der Lande, marketing manager at
AT&amp;T/NCR for Wavelan, its radio Lan. However, he concedes, 'there hasn't
been a dramatic take-up of product'.
A further factor slowing down sales has been the confusion over the
different systems and the frequencies in which they operate. In Europe, the
Olivetti system operates in a frequency band at around 1.9 GHz, the
frequency allocated for cordless telephones. The Olivetti system, on the
other hand, operates at 2.4 Gig, in the ISM (industrial, scientific and
medical) band.
In the US, the ISM band is available, as are frequencies at 18 GHz. Last
month the regulatory authorities also announced that the 1.9 GHz slot would
be available for radio Lans as well as mobile telephones. However, some
modifications will have to be made to the European equipment to enable it to
work to US rules.
The good news is that both the US and European standards organisations have
recognised the importance of adopting a single frequency and a single
standard for the next generation of radio Lans - dubbed hyperlan - which
will operate at very high speeds. A draft standard for hyperlan will be
published by the end of 1994.
Even given the goodwill on both sides, it will be some time before such a
standard is converted into products which can be purchased. 'High-speed data
will be a long way down the line - post-2000 and something,' says John
Davis, group leader in the mobility services sector at BT's Martlesham
research laboratories.
'For quite a long time we're going to get low-speed systems. You could
probably use those for your Newton, but they're of no use if you've got a
workstation and you're shipping computer-aided designs backwards and
forwards.'
Further worries for potential radio Lan users include eavesdropping and
interference with the data. And following the scares in the US linking the
use of mobile telephones with cancer, manufacturers could face health scares
as well.
Ridley-Jones dismisses such fears, saying the power output needed to
transmit data such short distances - up to 50m - is negligible. 'There is
talk that over 1W is cause for concern,' he says, but points out that the
military regularly transmits data at more than 50W. In effect, says
Derbyshire, radio Lans will operate on average at one hundredth of a watt -
compared with 2W for a portable telephone.
Derbyshire believes many of the problems facing radio Lans are cultural as
much as technical. 'It needs three people to work together: the computer
manufacturer, the PABX manufacturer and the provider of the plug-in card.'
In the US, in particular, he believes it is a battle between the computer
and telecoms companies. 'There's a high level of politics in it. Computers
become phones and phones become computers.'
Derbyshire says the problems will eventually be overcome. 'It will happen
because market forces will dictate it.'
Taylor is also optimistic, even about what he calls 'Star Trek'
applications. 'It would be nice to think you could get public access to
things such as maps when you're lost in the street,' he muses. 'Personally
I'm convinced that the benefits of being able to communicate without having
to plug into the wall are enormous.'
