FT  19 FEB 93 / Arts: Blown out of proportion / A look at contemporary
British glass
Like Pallas Athene, studio glass was born fully armed. It did not emerge out
of a groundswell of independent glass-making activity but out of a workshop
held at the University of Wisconsin in 1962. The aim was to see whether
techniques could be developed that would enable an artist to work in glass
in the intimacy of a studio. Within a decade, over 100 glass programmes had
sprung up in the art schools of the US, and the implications for
glass-making were being felt across Europe and Japan.
In 1965, Sam Herman arrived in Britain from Wisconsin and his teaching,
first at Edinburgh and then at the Royal College of Art, inspired a new
generation to take up the blow-pipe. Given that Britain had no real
tradition of artists or designers working with glass manufacturers, as in
Sweden, France, Italy and Czechoslavakia, the vigour of the studio glass
movement in this country is all the more remarkable.
Contemporary British Glass at the Crafts Council surveys the achievements of
the last 25 years. It is an eye-opening, but also a perplexing and
disappointing show. Appropriately enough, it opens with Herman's 'Green and
Gold Bottle', a free-blown, organic-looking form that both illustrates the
appeal of manipulating bubbles of molten glass and reveals why the majority
of glass-makers here turned to more controlled 'warm' or 'cold' glass
techniques.
There is a beguiling purity about the glass made in the 1970s. The
American-born Steven Newell delights in contrasting transparency and opacity
in his clean-cut translation of a Mannerist Wunderkammer object, a 'horn'
cup and cover; and formal and technical purity combine in Pauline Solven's
sculptural 'Three Reed Stems'. This was an exciting period of technical
innovation and experimentation in hand-blowing, engraving, enamelling,
sand-blasting, cutting and casting. Virtuoso effects predominate, ranging
from Peter Layton's exquisite mottling to Diana Hobson's paper-thin mosaics
of textured pate-de-verre.
After such refinement, the strident colour, heavy curves and triumphant
scale of the 1980s comes as a rude shock. Vast, wobbly goldfish bowls of
streaky colour and self-conscious conversation pieces such as Steven
Proctor's pretentious 'Momentum' now seem as dated as fluorescent globular
lamps and squidgy PVC chairs.
One might have expected some sense of direction to emerge in the recent
work, which accounts for half of the show. Interesting technical experiments
continue, particularly in the combining of techniques and media. Pauline
Solven, for instance, builds colourful patterned structures out of
mould-blown units that are sawn, reassembled, sand-blasted and etched - and
are not so unlike some Elizabeth Fritsch ceramics. Keith Cummings and Anna
Dickinson often combine glass with metal, Tatiana Best-Devereux glass with
ceramic.
The problem here is that too few makers know what to do with their skill and
ingenious effects. At one extreme are the intricate pieces that degenerate
into over-fussiness, at the other are forms that simply do not know when, or
why, they should end.
The quest for significant form has not, however, escaped the contemporary
glass-maker. The modest group of black, African-inspired vessels on show by
Anna Dickinson have a rare presence and quiet power. There is a similar
assurance of handling in Steven Newell's boldly chased chargers.
What is striking about a lot of recent work is a new emphasis on content and
allusion: glass can no longer look like glass but has to be manipulated and
camouflaged to the point where it might be any other material. I cannot see
the point of, say, David Reekie's lost-wax cast figures of men poking their
heads out of windows; and what does one do with whimsies such as Diana
Hobson's feather-tipped mixed-media 'Rainbow Jester' other than invent some
kind of Post Modernist whatnot on which to display them?
What the last 25 years have shown is that it has not been practicable for a
glass artist to work in splendid isolation in his studio. Studio glass still
has an extremely small market and, apart from Pauline Solven who has had her
own studio since 1975, the most successful enterprises seem to be small
co-operatives like Covent Garden's The Glasshouse, where commercial ranges
offer an alternative to one-off pieces.
But this show has concentrated solely on one-off, domestic-scale pieces.
Part II, which surveys the emergence of large-scale, sculptural and
architectural glass, is scheduled for 1995.
Contemporary British Glass continues at the Crafts Council, 44a Pentonville
Road, Islington, London N1, until March 7
