FT  05 NOV 93 / Technology: Ringing the changes
A new plastic extrusion technology developed by Eropol, a small French
engineering company, could change the life of millions of women suffering
menopause symptoms.
A joint venture between Dow Corning of the US and Sweden's Kabi Pharmacia
has launched an intra-vaginal ring on to the Swedish market. The UK and
France could follow suit.
IVRs have long been discussed for birth control and menopausal purposes.
Hormones embedded in the ring's silicone material are released in a
controlled manner to ease menopause symptoms or prevent conception.
Until now, the technology has not been available to produce these
cost-effectively. Eropol's solution
involves an extrusion tool into which are fed, simultaneously, the
hormone-doped silicone material forming the central core of the ring and the
pure silicone material surrounding it.
To obtain the circular profile, with a core concentric to its surrounding
silicone layer, the flow of material into the extrusion die must be
carefully regulated. The silicone entering the extrusion die is split into
10 streams, through the centre of which is introduced a stream of the doped
silicone. As each stream's flow can be controlled, Eropol can achieve the
required quality of extrusion.
Once extruded, the string of hormone-doped silicone is cut into small
lengths which are joined and become perfectly concentric because of the
cut's conical form. The rings are placed into moulds with heating elements
to harden the silicon.
The aim is to develop an auto-regulating mould capable of adapting to the
silicone's expansion during heat treatment. It would stay open during the
hardening process, with the halves kept apart under the pressure of a spring
to allow the silicone to expand. The mould would then be closed and two
tools inside it would perform the deburring action. That part of the process
has not been mastered and the rings are finished by hand. Eropol expects to
deliver the automated solution next year.
This technology could also serve to develop a contraceptive ring.
