FT  15 JUN 93 / International Company News: AECI, Sasol merge petrochemical
and plastics interests
AECI and Sasol, South Africa's two biggest chemicals groups, are to merge
some of their petrochemical and plastics interests and form a company with
an annual sales of more than R2.5bn (Dollars 784m).
The proposed merger combines Sasol's feedstocks with downstream converting
companies in AECI, which is 38 per cent owned by ICI of the UK. It will
produce an integrated and diversified plastics group able to compete
internationally.
The initiative is an attempt to improve the companies' competitive position
against the background of weak international petrochemical markets and the
prospect of increased competition in the domestic market as tariff barriers
are lowered.
Mr Mike Sander, managing director of AECI, said: 'It takes us from being an
inwardly focused group to a manufacturing entity that can be very, very
competitive internationally.'
Mr Paul Kruger, managing director of Sasol, said the venture was a logical
step in Sasol's strategy of adding value to its feedstock strength by
expanding its interest in the polymer business.
Apart from being attractive in itself, the venture offers Sasol a market for
additional ethylene.
The proposed merger will allow the new company - to be owned 60 per cent by
Sasol and 40 per cent by AECI - to embark on a project converting AECI's PVC
from carbide feedstock to ethylene feedstock.
Sasol produces feedstocks such as ethylene, propylene and polypropylene
which are used in the production of downstream products such as
chlor-alkali, PVC, polyethylene and cyanide by AECI.
Mr Kruger said the deal was not anti-competitive as the two companies were
not in competition.
It was 'a combination of strengths, not a combination of products to
eliminate competition in the market place'.
AECI confirmed yesterday that discussions were under way, following the
ICI/Zeneca demerger, 'to review ICI's position in the businesses operated by
AECI with a view to aligning ICI's interest in AECI more closely with ICI's
international business strategy.'
