FT  24 JUN 93 / Survey of Istanbul and the Olympics (1): A late dash for the
tape - In this four-page survey, John Murray Brown looks at Istanbul's
prospects of winning its bid for the Olympics at the turn of the century
There will be only one medal awarded on September 23, when the 96 members of
the International Olympic Committee gather in Monaco to announce the venue
for the 2000 Games.
But Istanbul is making a late dash for the tape and if the enthusiasm of the
local organising committee is any measure, the city may still just pip the
current favourites, Peking and Sydney, to the winning post.
A physical, historical and symbolic melting pot of religions and regions,
straddling two continents, Istanbul offers what is perhaps a unique setting
for the world's biggest sporting event.
Compared with its European neighbours, Turkey has a young and growing
population. Moreover, in a location so close to the founding site of the
Classical Games, Turkey is also a window to a vast Asian region to its east,
where sports competition is in its infancy and the Olympic ideals have still
to make an impact.
Logistically too, Istanbul would seem to have many advantages. An hour ahead
of continental European time and seven hours from the eastern US, television
advertisers can be confident of their investment. Istanbul's central
geographic position also means that on average competitors, to get to the
Games, will have to travel less than five hours, an important consideration
in terms of time and expense for the poorer nations competing. Climatically
too, Istanbul believes it offers the perfect site for both athletes and
spectators.
Financially sound, the Turkish city's bid is underwritten by the government
in Ankara. With just one abstention, Turkey's parliament last year passed a
unique Olympic law providing the national IOC rights over the Olympic logo -
important in a country with rudimentary trademark cover - and pledges to
make up any shortfall in revenues stemming from the Games. The law provides
the national Olympic Committee with the authority to go ahead with the
project even if the municipality or national governments change. In
addition, the bid envisages the free acquisition of state-owned land for
many of the major facilities to be built.
Officials speak confidently that they can meet the need for new
infrastructure on time. The budget envisages spending more than Dollars 400m
on the Olympic village and the various facilities, including an 80,000-seat
main stadium, where work is due to start later this year. As for coping with
the huge influx of additional visitors for the Games, officials claim that
Istanbul currently has almost twice as many hotel beds as Barcelona, the
last Games venue in 1992, and the tourism board estimates the number will
have almost doubled by the year 2000.
If the bid is successful, the city metro, now under construction, is to be
extended to the Olympic village, and a new air terminal is envisaged. Mr
Attila Aksoy of advertising agent Young and Rubicam, which designed the bid
logo, claims the Games will impose no burden on the city. Conversely, given
the location far from the centre, the Olympics are not expected to interrupt
the city's daily business life.
Today Istanbul receives around 2m tourists a year, a considerable strain on
the capacity of its existing infrastructure. However the city municipality
has in place several large ongoing projects for the water systems, to
improve the mass transport network and the introduction of city gas supply -
all in a bid to ease the overcrowding and the currently high levels of
pollution. Expenditures will continue regardless; a successful Olympic bid
would merely serve to accelerate the plans.
In addition, every day some 5m people move from one part of the city to
another. Traffic congestion is worsening. Money was invested in sea-buses to
encourage commuters to leave their cars at home. For those who did use cars,
the municipality constructed parking lots in a bid to ease the traffic
problem in the old's city's narrow streets. Paradoxically, the sea-buses are
still running at a loss, and the car lots are frequently empty. Meanwhile,
the congestion deepens and the city crawls to a halt.
But then, Istanbul has always been a wonderful contradiction. From one of
the old wooden mansions on the Bosporus, or a fish restaurant in Bebek, the
city has all the chic of the French Riviera. Venture into one of the city's
poorer quarters, the gece kondu (built in a night) and this European
identity is under threat from other influences, Moslem fundamentalism, and
the Arab and Kurdish communities from Turkey's south-east.
Mr Cuneyt Ayral, publisher of Bizim Sehir, an Istanbul newspaper which
documents green issues, believes the municipality should impose a tax on new
arrivals. 'You pay to live in Paris, and New York, so why not Istanbul?' he
asks.
The World Bank, which is helping fund various water improvement projects,
takes a similar stand, urging Iski, the water authority, to seek an economic
return for the services it provides.
The Games, it is hoped, will spur the authorities to address all these
issues. The municipality has already instituted new guidelines about waste
discharges. More and more industries in the city are installing waste
treatment plants. Mr Kriton Curi, a professor of environmental engineering
at Bogaci University, points out: 'Today the only green places in the city
are those occupied by the army.'
Turkey certainly has no shortage of skilled contractors to do the job. Today
more than 20 companies have wide overseas experience.
Turkey's private sector can be expected to take up the challenge, too.
Sports sponsorship, a relatively new phenomenon, is growing by the day. An
unseemly crowd brawl at the European basketball championship between teams
from Greece and Turkey did little for the ongoing political dialogue. But
the television coverage did wonders for Efes Pilsen, sponsors of the Turkish
team. Tuborg, its great rivals in the local beer market, is now said to be
considering a similar sponsorship programme.
Moreover, for Turkey's sportsmen, the hope is that the Games will spur a
national revival. Although modestly represented in historical medal tables -
26 golds in a total of 53 medals since 1936 - the athletic prowess of the
Turks is heavily concentrated in such events as weightlifting, wrestling and
judo - where Turkey had a female competitor who took a bronze in Barcelona.
The national press gives plenty of space to sports, but like the tabloids in
the UK, the obsession is with football. Mr Yalcin Aksoy of the Sports
Ministry in Ankara says many of the Olympic events are currently not even
practised in Turkey. It is not a problem of lack of facilities, he says.
'Even the facilities we do have are not fully used.'
Turkey's bid still faces considerable hurdles, not least an image problem.
That is unfair, since it is based on the years of military rule, which ended
over a decade ago.
Mrs Tansu Ciller's election as the country's new prime minister and the
first woman to lead Turkey should redress the balance and somehow lift the
veil on Turkey, a predominantly Moslem country with a devoutly secular
constitution. As an Istanbulu, there is some expectation that Mrs Ciller may
be persuaded to canvass for the city's cause rather as Mr John Major, the UK
prime minister, has done for Manchester.
Winning the Games would be a badly needed fillip for one of the world's most
important historical sites, and instil a new discipline into the city's
planning policies, something which is painfully missing today.
At the national level, the staging of the Olympics would merely provide
further vindication of Turkey's modernising trend and offer a great
incentive to go further in opening itself economically and politically to
the world.
