FT  25 NOV 93 / Lada car becomes victim of success
As western carmakers fight for markets, Russia's Avtovaz which makes the
Lada, is in the unusual position of being unable to meet demand.
Now Avtovaz is looking to western capital markets and carmakers to help
finance its expansion and modernisation.
It considers itself lucky compared with other Russian manufacturers, many of
them fighting for day-to-day survival and facing a continuing fall in
output.
Earlier this week, the Moscow mayor's office announced that Zil, the maker
of presidential limousines and ordinary trucks, was switching to a four-day
week and could suspend production altogether.
But at Avtovaz, Mr Nikolai Lyachenkov, the production manager, says: 'We
have managed to keep output at the same level as last year.' His company
makes around 650,000 cars a year. It is only problems with suppliers in the
former Soviet Union which prevent it reaching full capacity of 1m cars, he
says.
A rare source of support for Avtovaz has been the hard-currency revenues
from the export of 40 per cent of its output. Under the government's
sweeping privatisation programme, the enterprise has been turned into a
joint stock company and its 100,000 employees have already opted to acquire
51 per cent of the capital.
Next month, the government will auction off another 25 per cent in the form
of vouchers distributed to every citizen of Russia, and a further 22.5 per
cent will be offered to corporate investors at a special investment tender.
But despite relishing the new independence afforded by the government's
privatisation efforts, Mr Nikolai Glushkov, Avtovaz's deputy director for
finance, does not place much hope in attracting any significant investment
at either sale.
Instead, once Price Waterhouse produces its first set of western-style
accounts around April next year, the company plans to attract foreign
investors by increasing its capital.
Avtovaz also hopes next year to produce a new family of passenger cars in
the same class as the Vauxhall/Opel Astra. It is taking part in a separate
industrial consortium which wants to produce a lower-quality car in the Opel
Corsa range a few years later.
In the longer-term, says Mr Peter Rogers, a partner at Price Waterhouse
which has been hired as auditors and advisers to Avtovaz, the company must
aim for a western stock exchange listing.
Avtovaz has been talking with potential foreign investors for three years
now. In 1991, before the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Soviet car
industry ministry hired Bear Stearns, the US investment bank, to value the
company, and Deloitte Touche was involved in a first attempt to translate
Avtovaz's accounts into terms understandable to western businesses. But that
arrangement collapsed. The enthusiasm of Fiat, which was negotiating the
possibility of taking a 30 per cent stake in Avtovaz also waned.
As Russian industry clamours for protection, Avtovaz executives say they are
not bothered by the flood of Mercedes, BMWs, and Cadillacs which makes
Moscow a promising market for western luxury cars. 'They will never be our
competitors,' said Mr Boris Kruyenkov, the company's deputy finance
director.
But as Avtovaz's domestic costs approach world levels, he says the
government should be ready to protect it in future from the sort of imported
cars which could compete with it.
