FT  02 SEP 93 / Book Review: Absolutely certain of its own correctness
THE PURSUIT OF REASON: THE ECONOMIST 1843-1993 By Ruth Dudley Edwards
Hamish Hamilton Pounds 30. 1,020 pages
One hundred and fifty years ago today James Wilson produced the first
edition of The Economist. Wilson was a quintessential early Victorian: an
indomitable, self-made, self-educated Scot with an energy, didacticism and
dedication to business that verged on monomania (His dying words were: 'Take
care of my income tax.'). He was a passionate advocate of laissez-faire and
founded his paper with the express purpose of preaching the gospel of free
trade and, in particular, the need to abolish the Corn Laws.
Ruth Dudley Edwards, in an absorbing and exceptionally well-written official
anniversary history of the paper, suggests many of Wilson's characteristics
were taken on by The Economist and have made it 'respected, successful, but
often disliked'. She says of Wilson: 'He was clever, well-informed and he
radiated absolute belief in the correctness of his views.'
Other qualities he bequeathed to his paper included a strong belief in civil
liberties; the courage to stand by well-argued but unpopular opinions; but
also a propensity occasionally to follow deductive logic from abstract first
principles to the bitter end, regardless of the complex social realities on
which the deductions have to bear.
Edwards has juxtaposed throughout her book early and later treatments of
similar themes. There has been an admirably consistent opposition to capital
punishment. Indeed there has been a willingness to take up unpopular
positions - on the Irish famine, against the suffragettes, against the Boer
war and the first world war until 1916, and against the Suez intervention.
She notes that two weeks after founding the paper, Wilson, who opposed
slavery, argued against restricting imports from countries which employed
slave labour, on similar grounds to those deployed by the paper in the
mid-1980s when it opposed sanctions against South Africa. On the other hand,
Wilson argued passionately against the Factory Acts - with impeccable logic
and fundamental foolishness.
A subsequent and more famous editor, Wilson's son-in-law, Walter Bagehot,
argued it would be better - for the slaves and for everybody else - if the
south won the American civil war.
Echoes of this tendency can still be found in the modern Economist: in much
of the writing of Norman Macrae, including an article in 1966 against equal
pay. It resonates in the uncompromising stance taken under the editorship of
Rupert Pennant-Rea ('a Robespierre among economists') towards the
maintenance of sterling's ERM exchange rate right up to the debacle.
During the 19th century The Economist was a small circulation paper (about
3,000 a week) written by businessmen for businessmen. Bagehot, its most
famous editor, expanded its influence, teaching the Bank of England how to
be a central bank, advising both Liberal and Conservative chancellors and
explaining the constitution to the middle-classes.
The paper began to change in the 20th century under editors such as Francis
Hirst (1907-16) and Walter Layton (1922-38), who were more interested in
politics and ideas than business. From Geoffrey Crowther (1938-56), those
recruited to write for the paper were increasingly taken on for their brains
and writing ability, and tended to have no experience other than
journalistic.
Throughout, The Economist has enjoyed outstanding editorial independence.
From Wilson's death in 1860 to 1928, the paper was owned by his widow and
six daughters, who were usually supportive of its editors. Then in 1928,
Walter Layton turned the paper into a limited company and secured perhaps
the most water-tight guarantee of editorial independence in journalism. The
magazine is now 50 per cent owned by the FT. Apart from Geoffrey Crowther,
who as editor once or twice gave in to pressure from trustees and later, as
managing director, tried (unsuccessfully) to pressurise his editors,
everyone appears to have behaved well.
This is Layton's main claim to gratitude from writers and readers. He was an
otherwise unsatisfactory editor: an insider concerned not to rock the boat.
This meant much failure of nerve. He was renowned for adding late on
Thursday nights at the end of copy he found too strong: 'Time alone will
show'. Since Layton there has been none of that.
Geoffrey Crowther, who gets alpha for brains and gamma for character from
Edwards, expanded the employment of women, though for the somewhat
politically incorrect reason that 'I can get a first-class woman for the
price of a second-class man'. Since the war there have been lots of clever,
strong-minded women in senior positions but, despite big changes in
circulation (now more than 500,000, 80 per cent of it abroad), few women
readers. It is to the credit of The Economist and Edwards that she shows few
inhibitions when it comes to the successes, failures, and internecine
warfare of people still active on the magazine. The fight over policy
towards the Vietnam war, the struggles between editorial and non-editorial
departments and the debacle of the Latin American edition are well
chronicled.
The treatment of the paper's developing views on big issues for the postwar
period, however, is skimpy: only 12 pages on post-war inflation and the
paper's views; only scraps on industrial development and policies; and no
systematic treatment of the paper's views of Britain and the Common Market -
of how, like the rest of us, it has struggled to develop a satisfactory
political attitude to the EC, while inveighing against the detestable common
agricultural policy.
The reviewer is former chairman of Midland Bank and former deputy governor
of the Bank of England
