FT  17 JUN 93 / Leading Article: British TV thinks big
MR PETER Brooke, the heritage secretary, is considering whether to lift the
ban on the UK's larger independent television companies being acquired or
merging. Hopes he may do so have been raised by his assertion that Britain's
broadcasting should not go the way of its motorcycle industry because of
unreasonable restrictions. The rules should change, but not for the reason
stated.
The issue has been precipitated by a European Community policy which will
open all ITV companies to hostile bids from elsewhere in the EC from the
start of next year. That makes a nonsense of a continued embargo on domestic
takeovers. However, the most powerful reason for abolishing it is that it
serves no useful purpose. The main arguments for keeping it are to prevent
unhealthy industry concentration and preserve regional broadcasting
services. But the strongest safeguard against anti-competitive behaviour is
the application of the UK's standard merger laws.
Regional programming is best assured for now by enforcing franchise licence
terms. That is what the Independent Television Commission is there to do.
Longer term, though, provision of regional services need not continue to be
regarded as a profitless social obligation. In the US, it has become a
rewarding business, attracting many participants.
In Britain, variety in local services has been inhibited by scarce frequency
spectrum. But new digital compression techniques - which may be introduced
on the planned fifth ITV channel - and gradual expansion of cable television
offer the promise of a far greater diversity of delivery systems. The ITC
needs to ensure that these new sources of competition are allowed to develop
freely.
However, Mr Brooke should be sceptical of some arguments advanced by the
abolitionist lobby. Much is made of the cost savings which industry
consolidation will permit. However, many of these efficiencies are available
without mergers or acquisitions by, for example, pooling production
facilities and contracting out services such as transmission. There is also
a risk that potential savings will not go to better programming but will be
dissipated in over-bidding for contested acquisitions.
Much the most dubious argument is that the ITV structure needs to
consolidate if British broadcasting is to prosper internationally. True,
even the biggest companies are dwarfed by foreign counterparts. But it is
not obvious that they possess the commercial vision and skills to compete
effectively on world markets. Indeed, the disappointing results of offshore
excursions by BT suggests businesses based on domestic monopolies make poor
national champions. Mr Brooke needs to remember that UK motorcycle
manufacturers failed not primarily because of inadequate size, but because
they grew used to captive markets and ignored new competitors until too
late.
