FT  27 MAR 93 / Food and Drink: Tried and trusted - An hotel that cares for
staff and guests
THE COFFEE was poured professionally. Upstairs, the bedrooms were being
cleaned and, in the kitchen, the chef and her assistants were preparing
lunch.
A typical day in a small British hotel, you might think. But this one is
very different, for the Mariners guest house in Rye, East Sussex, is run by
the mentally handicapped.
It belongs to the Canterbury Oast Trust, a charity established in 1985 to
care for those with autism, Down's syndrome or meningitis contracted in
childhood. Today, it provides a home and professional care for more than 100
patients aged from 19-60, and has created work for 35 of those in two
free-market industries - catering and tourism - which have generated over
Pounds 350,000 inincome.
But the money is secondary to the aims set out by the trust's original
executive director, Joe Graham. One is creating the sort of jobs that make
the disabled feel they are doing something worthwhile. The other is offering
a service that involves the public, so giving people the chance to
re-evaluate their attitudes to the mentally handicapped.
In 1988, Graham saw the Mariners was for sale and realised it might provide
the opportunity he was seeking. The site was right: the main street of a
picturesque tourist town with commercial competition to give the venture an
extra element of challenge.
Despite political opposition from local restaurateurs, he won over his
trustees and bought the three-bedroom guesthouse for Pounds 285,000. It had
been sold twice in the previous three years because it could not be made to
pay.
Graham and the disabled staff made it an immediate success. On the third
Saturday, the day's takings topped Pounds 200. Today, they are more than
Pounds 500 each Saturday.
The Mariners is open seven days a week, 360 days a year, and the patients
work two shifts: from 8.30am-2.30pm and noon-6pm. They get free board and
lodging and about Pounds 50 a month spending money.
The length of the shifts is the biggest problem. Keeping the interest and
enthusiasm of patients can be difficult and, because their attention span is
so short, training takes place almost daily. But there has been enormous
progress: several will soon be taking the first stage of the National
Vocational Qualification examinations in catering studies.
In 1990, the trust decided to launch a much larger commercial venture and
spent Pounds 565,000 on a nearby 90-acre farm which it converted into a
centre for rare animal breeds as well as a residential home. The farm,
including a 120-seat self-service restaurant and conference centre, created
an extra 50 jobs for the disabled, secure homes for 26, and employment for
30 able-bodied staff in an area of high unemployment.
During the first six months, it attracted 62,000 visitors who spent Pounds
245,000. The farm won three championship medals at the 1992 Royal Show,
which the patients attended, and eight of their prize-winning Berkshire pigs
have been exported to Japan.
By last autumn, however, the trust had run into severe cash-flow
difficulties. Income was declining with the onset of winter and donations
were proving hard to get because of the recession. Several local firms,
which had agreed to underwrite the conference centre in return for their
names on the wall, had to withdraw.
The trust responded with a review which tightened financial and management
controls. Graham left and was replaced by a new general manager and
fund-raiser. But the housing will be finished by mid-April, with
accommodation for 26 residents.
Like so many others in the British tourism industry, the trust is hoping for
an end to the recession and a long, hot summer. This would ease its
financial concerns and allow an increasing number of visitors to experience
one of the most impressive examples of British catering.
The Mariners hotel and tearooms, 15 High Street, Rye, East Sussex (tel:
0797-223 480) is owned by Canterbury Oast Trust, Highlands Farm, Woodchurch,
Ashford, Kent (tel: 0233-861 493, fax 0233-861-457).
