FT  14 APR 93 / UK Company News: Telegraph's Southam deal approved -
'Exacting procedure' to obtain minorities' consent for Pounds 72.3m
acquisition of stake
MINORITY shareholders in The Telegraph, which is 68 per cent owned by Mr
Conrad Black's Hollinger, yesterday approved a deal under which The
Telegraph will buy half Hollinger's stake in Southam, the Canadian newspaper
group, for Pounds 72.3m.
The special meeting held to consider the deal lasted only five minutes.
The Hollinger shares were not allowed to be voted at the meeting yesterday
afternoon. Of the shares eligible to vote, proxies were received from 53.52
per cent in favour of the deal and 1.44 per cent against. That meant that
95.9 per cent of votes cast approved the deal.
At the meeting the resolution was carried unanimously, and shareholders who
attended did not ask any questions.
Speaking after the meeting, Mr Black said that the vote was 'a very good
turn-out' for an EGM. He said 'if any shareholder had any significant
concern they would not have abstained. An abstention is an indication of
tacit approv-al.'
The deal - under which The Telegraph will buy shares in Southam at CDollars
18.10 each - had aroused comment when it was revealed that shortly after The
Telegraph's independent directors had approved and posted a circular to
shareholders recommending it, Power Corporation, the Canadian company which
is run by Mr Paul Desmarais, had agreed to buy a stake in Southam at
CDollars 14 a share.
Power and Hollinger, which each hold 18.8 per cent of Southam's shares, also
came to a shareholder agreement.
The Telegraph then had to issue a supplementary circular, describing the new
circumstances, in which the independent directors again recommended the
deal.
Mr Black said yesterday that Power had put a proposal to Southam prior to
the first circular going out but Southam had declined. 'I had no reason to
believe that Power wished to proceed,' he said.
'I wish now that the first circular had not gone out. I had no idea that
discussions with Power would revive and be fruitful.'
He said the first circular had been approved at a meeting on the morning of
March 13 in London, and he had heard from Power that evening in Florida
after which 'things moved quickly'.
He also said that if there had been 'any way of getting a lower price' for
the shares bought by Hollinger he would have.
He described the process of gaining approval from The Telegraph's minority
shareholders for the deal as 'an exacting procedure'.
He said that now Southam's management could proceed with plans to cut
overmanning at the group, which has 7,500 employees, and that provisions had
been made in previous accounts to cover 1,300 redundancies.
