FT  29 OCT 93 / Oil groups pull out staff after attacks in Algeria:
Repatriation follows violence by Islamic radicals
FOREIGN companies operating in Algeria, including many of the more than 20
oil groups exploring new concessions, have begun repatriating dependants and
non-essential staff because of worsening extremist violence.
Islamic radicals, angered by the cancellation of elections which would have
brought them to power in 1991, have this year launched an increasingly
violent campaign against government officials, local journalists and
foreigners.
Last Sunday, three employees of the French consulate in Algiers were
kidnapped. This followed the murders of two French surveyors, two Russian
army officers and three oil workers from an Italian company.
In Egypt, where three foreigners were shot dead on Tuesday in a luxury
hotel, Islamic extremists have adopted similar tactics in an attempt to
cripple the country's valuable tourist industry.
More than 2,000 people have been killed in Algeria since a state of
emergency was declared in January 1992, and diplomats in Algiers say that
clashes between security forces and Islamic extremists have worsened
significantly in the past two months.
Total, the French oil group and one of the biggest foreign oil interests in
Algeria, has shipped out dependants from all 120 French families and moved
its remaining male staff into a hotel. France has 24,440 nationals
registered with its three consulates in the country. Of these, 7,000 to
8,000 are expatriates on limited contracts and therefore are most likely to
return. Most of the rest have dual nationality.
The French foreign ministry has not instructed its nationals to leave
Algeria, but this week recommended that families might want to use the start
yesterday of a 10-day school break in Algeria to leave the country.
Occidental of the US said it had repatriated all family members and
tightened security at the villas of remaining staff.
All the oil companies reached by telephone emphasised, however, that work
would continue despite the fact that the loss of some personnel was already
starting to interrupt schedules. BP said some families of its staff had left
the country and that it was keeping a 'wary eye' on events. According to the
Italian embassy, almost all dependants in the 650-strong Italian community
were set to leave, though the embassy was, so far, leaving the decision to
companies' discretion. Agip, Eni, Enichem and Olivetti all have large
offices in Algiers and have made arrangements to fly families out. Among
German groups, Mercedes and Siemens are also understood to have begun moving
out dependants and some expatriate staff.
Anadarko, the Texas-based oil group, says it has also decided to repatriate
almost all its expatriate staff from Algiers.
Many foreign oil companies have entered into production sharing deals with
Sonatrach, the state oil group, after the government's decision to allow
foreign participation in the oil sector. The law change reflected the
government's acknowledgement that it could not fully exploit oil and gas
reserves without foreign technology.
A substantial part of Algeria's hard currency earnings go to pay off its
Dollars 27bn (Pounds 18bn) foreign debt and the government has been counting
on revenues from new oil and gas discoveries to increase earnings.
