FT  24 MAY 93 / US plans economic aid for S Africa
THE US is prepared to work with other leading industrialised nations to help
South Africa 're-enter the global economy' once its transition to a
non-racial democracy is firmly on track.
In the first speech by a secretary of state exclusively devoted to Africa
policy since the end of the cold war, Mr Warren Christopher said the US-led
effort, in which it expected co-operation from others in the Group of Seven
leading industrial nations, would begin once a transitional executive
council has been put in place and a firm date for elections set.
Before that, Mr Christopher went on: 'We have urged the World Bank and the
parties in South Africa to begin planning now the projects that will lead to
economic growth.' He hoped US businesses would be in the vanguard of
investment in South Africa.
He had special praise for both Mr Nelson Mandela and President F W de Klerk
for the 'monumental achievement' of making free and fair elections possible.
'That election will echo around the African continent and across the world
as a roaring triumph of human rights,' he said.
Mr Christopher placed his commitment to assist the South African economy
firmly in the context of the promotion of democracy throughout the
continent. 'That is why President Clinton chose to invite the first
president of a democratic Namibia, Sam Nujoma, as the first African head of
state to be recognised at his White House.'
Elsewhere in his speech, he bluntly referred to President Mobutu Sese Seko
of Zaire as an example of 'corrupt dictators' but he singled out no other
African autocrat, preferring instead to praise unnamed 'courageous
democrats' from Senegal to Benin and Madagascar to Mali, and to warn that
'the US will take human rights into account as we determine how to allocate
our scarce resources for foreign assistance'.
The Christopher speech, commemorating the 40th anniversary of the
Africa-America Institute, was to have been the stage for announcing US
recognition of the former Marxist government of Angola. That, however, was
pre-empted by Mr Clinton earlier last week.  ANC leader Nelson Mandela ended
a two-day visit to Natal province yesterday, urging an end to conflict
between supporters of the ANC and the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom party,
Reuter reports.
At least 8,000 people have been killed in clashes between the groups in
Natal since 1986.
Mr Mandela's plea came a day after at least 13 people were killed in clashes
between ANC supporters, Inkatha hostel dwellers and police in Thokoza
township, east of Johannesburg. The ANC and Inkatha both demanded a judicial
inquest into the killings.
Mr Mandela also said the date for the first all-race elections would be
announced before the end of this month. The 26 parties to multi-party talks
have already agreed the poll will take place no later than April next year
and have been debating a precise date.
ANC activists devised a plan to rescue Mr Mandela from Robben Island prison
in 1981 in a basket dangling from a helicopter, but the attempt was called
off by ANC leaders in exile because it was too risky, Reuter reports. Mr
Mandela was freed in February 1990 after 27 years' detention.
