FT  24 JUL 93 / Dream house of horrors: Dominic Lawson explains why terror
stalks the English property market
THIS IS a horror story. There is a journalist, let us call her Mrs W, who
once offered to buy the house of a friend of mine. She had paid many visits
to the property, and they were on the verge of exchanging contracts. In the
course of these visits they had become friendly. Once they had even sung
madrigals together. This was civilised upper middle-class England at its
best.
'Tell me,' said the lady buyer when they had put the song sheets away,
'where are you moving to?' And the seller gave the name of the road where
stood the house of his dreams, on which he, too, was about to exchange
contracts. And that, as Edgar Lustgarten used to say, was his fatal error.
Two days later my friend received a call from the estate agent acting for
the vendor of his putative new home. There had been another bid for it,
Pounds 5,000 above his offer. A sudden ghastly thought struck my friend: 'It
wasn't from a woman called Mrs W, was it?'
Yup. It was. He told the agent that he would match Mrs W's offer, and after
doing so rang up Mrs W and confronted her with her treachery. 'We even sang
madrigals together,' he wailed. She seemed embarrassed, said she did not
know what had come over her, it was such a lovely house; but she would not
make another bid for it. 'But you've cost me Pounds 5,000,' he protested.
She apologised profusely.
Two days later he received another call from the estate agent who, in an
irritatingly, if understandably, chirpy manner told him that Mrs W had upped
her bid for his dream home by a further Pounds 5,000. 'She can have it,'
sighed my friend. As far as I know, he still lives in the house where he and
Mrs W sang madrigals together.
The moral of this story, if it can be called a moral, is that when it comes
to the property market, the respectable English middle classes tend to
behave in a very unrespectable way. Even those whose careers are far removed
from the wicked ways of commerce suddenly behave with the cynical savagery
of a Wall Street junk bond salesman when they see the home they want.
I am not superior in this respect, but you will just have to imagine the
depths to which I have sunk to ensure capture of the right property at the
right price, and I will just have to imagine what you have done. This is not
the confessional.
Perhaps it is not so surprising that we behave like animals in the property
market. The home is our nest; it is where we envisage our family safely
sleeping. There are scavenging predators out there; it is kill or be killed.
On a less anthropological level, the property market, in England at least,
is so organised as to cause maximum heartache and stress. Unlike Scotland,
there is no question of sealed bids and may the best man win. At every stage
we are fleeced by the professional classes with their overpriced surveys and
hidden commissions. The government, too, likes to twist the knife: stamp
duty on property transactions is the modern equivalent of the window tax -
and equally fair.
Most bizarre is the recondite business of 'valuations.' These are carried
out by myriad little companies for the benefit of mortgage lenders, with
whom the valuers enjoy a cosy and lucrative relationship. In recent years
the valuations carried out for the lenders have tended to be less than the
prices offered by would-be buyers, with the result that many people cannot
raise the mortgage they need to secure the property they want.
I know of a property which has three bidders, all offering the same price.
But none can buy because the 'valuation' placed on the flat by three firms
acting for three building societies is too low to cover the size of the loan
required.
This is the economics of the madhouse. The value of a property is what the
market is prepared to pay. And the market consists of buyers, not building
societies attempting to guess what will happen to a property's price in six
months time.
This system of 'valuation' is a Marxist concept, based on the notion that a
commodity has an inherent value quite distinct from any price which the
forces of supply and demand have determined.
The British property market is a bizarre mixture of unfettered capitalism
and socialist planning. No wonder it makes monsters of us all.
Dominic Lawson is taking a break from this column in order to write a book.
He will return in November.
