FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (31): The population puzzle - Experts search
for reasons for a dip in the fertility rates
SHANGHAI'S population has stopped growing because the birth rate has fallen
so low, according to China's ministry of family planning. That claim does
not take account of peasants flocking to the city's construction sites or
the sprawl of the new suburbs. But if true, it reflects the success of
China's population programme, one of the most ambitious and internationally
controversial aspects of its policy.
For nearly two decades, China has been trying to curb the growth of its
population in order to raise living standards and restrain pressure on
scarce resources. Latest government figures put the total at 1.17bn: China
now has a nearly quarter of the world's population on around seven per cent
of the world's arable land.
Estimates of the future population are staggering. The United Nations'
central projection is that by 2050, the total could reach 1.52bn.
But tiny changes in assumptions about family size produce a wide range: from
as little as 1.23bn in 2050 up to an astounding 1.9bn in 2050 (and 2.4bn in
2150), although demographers regard the highest figures as unlikely.
The core of China's policy is to limit couples to one child, mainly through
financial incentives. In Beijing, couples pay 10 per cent of their income
for a second child and a further 15 per cent for a third. In practice, they
may also lose promotion, housing and other benefits.
The programme has also aggressively promoted contraception, principally
intra-uterine devices, sterilisation, condoms and pills. Abortion is also
widely available: the ministry reports one abortion for every two live
births.
Much foreign criticism has centred on press reports of compulsory abortion
and sterilisation. Beijing has generally called these reports exaggerated,
but the family planning ministry acknowledges that some local officials may
be inadequately trained - 'around 60 per cent of staff at township level
left school at around 15 years old - they do not have enough knowledge of
contraceptives,' says the ministry.
It is clear that the policy has had a dramatic effect. According to
government figures this year, the fertility rate - the average number of
children per woman implied by current birth rates - has fallen to around 1.9
from 2.25 in 1990. That is nearly as low as western European and US rates,
and less than half that of India.
The reasons for the fall have puzzled population experts, given the partial
relaxation of the one-child policy in the mid-1980s - 'we were certainly
surprised when the figures came through,' says Mr Carl Haub, a demographer
with the Population Reference Bureau, an independent Washington-based
research organisation. Some analysts speculate on an unpublicised toughening
of policy; others question whether the fall is sustainable.
The headline figures also hides other concerns. The policy has been more
effective in the cities than in the rural areas, where three quarters of
people live, and where the average number of children per family is still
2.6.
'The countryside is still a problem - they work with their hands and believe
that they need more hands,' officials say. The policy also appears to have
encouraged a disproportionate number of baby boys, traditionally preferred
to girls in China. Ultrasound machines - which can detect the sex of the
foetus - are now widespread, although abortion on those grounds is
officially discouraged.
According to the family planning ministry, in Zhejiang province in the
Yangtze Delta, the proportion of boys to girls has reached 118 to 100
compared to the normal 104.
Demographers stress that given these tensions, and the scale of social
change now under way in China, particurlarly growing affluence and migration
to the cities, the future is highly uncertain.
In Mr Haub's words: 'Who knows what China will look like in 30 years time?
The range of prospects for its population is enormous.'
