FT  21 JUN 93 / Survey of Nordic Banking and Finance (5): New broom tackles
losses - S-E-Banken's president talks to Hugh Carnegy
AT THE handsome but somewhat staid head office of Skandinaviska Enskilda
Banken, close to Stockholm's waterfront, Mr Bjorn Svedberg, its president
and chief executive, wears an appropriately stern expression when discussing
the catastrophic losses incurred last year by Sweden's leading commercial
bank.
He sticks firmly to the line he has held, ever since the bank's relatively
encouraging first quarter results, that it is too early to say that
S-E-Banken is out of the woods. He will not comment, in the midst of highly
sensitive negotiations, on the extent of state aid he is seeking under the
bank's application for government support filed last February.
But he will allow this comment: 'The earnings capacity of the bank is pretty
good. The dominant problem is the credit losses. Once we get out of the
credit losses, I see us developing as a healthy bank.'
The big question is how S-E-Banken will extract itself from its gargantuan
loan losses, and how long it will take. Last year, the bank plunged to a
SKr5.4bn (about Pounds 500m) operating loss after lending losses - mainly
tied to the collapsing property sector - of SKr11bn. The total portfolio of
non-performing loans spiralled to almost SKr29bn, or 8 per cent of all
outstanding loans.
Faced with the threat of falling below the internationally-decreed capital
adequacy ratio of 8 per cent, S-E-Banken applied for state support. The
government responded favourably, saying it would keep the bank solvent.
But no conclusion has yet been reached on how much - if any - direct aid the
bank requires. Last week the two sides issued a joint statement saying the
first step towards recapitalising S-E-Banken should be a call on its
shareholders, via a share issue yet to be detailed. A decision on state
support was put off until the autumn.
The negotiations have been complicated by signs of improvement in
S-E-Banken's plight. In the first quarter, its operating loss was cut by 55
per cent as interest earnings rose sharply and the portfolio of
non-performing loans shrank slightly. Falling interest rates have come as a
welcome fillip and stock market speculation that the worst is over has sent
S-E-Banken's share price racing upwards from a low of around SKr7 in April
to almost SKr40.
As Mr Svedberg pointedly remarks, S-E-Banken has not fallen below the
capital adequacy 'red line'. But equally pointedly, the bank has not
withdrawn its application for aid. Clearly, with loan losses set to pin the
bank in deficit again this year and perhaps even 1994, S-E-Banken would like
some latitude to help it deal with its bad assets. The government has set a
precedent in its assumption of tens of billions of kroner of bad loans held
by state-owned Nordbanken and Gotabanken.
Mr Svedberg has some bargaining chips in his hands. The government is
anxious to ensure the banks are not forced by their predicament to squeeze
new credits just as the recession-struck economy is set to resume a slow
growth path. It is under strong pressure politically not to give S-E-Banken
help without getting something in return, such as equity. Yet Mrs Anne
Wibble, the finance minister, does not want the state to deepen its
ownership role in the banking system.
While the negotiations continue, Mr Svedberg must get on with the job of
knocking S-E-Banken back into operational shape. He has the benefit not only
of being untainted by any responsibility for the past disasters, but of
being new to the banking scene altogether.
When the bank's small shareholders vented their anger over the catastrophic
1992 losses at the group's annual meeting in April, understandable criticism
of the board's performance pointedly excluded the decision to bring in Mr
Svedberg last September.
Instead, there was praise for the appointment. Mr Svedberg, 56, was well
known as one of Sweden's most prominent senior managers. An engineer by
qualification, he was at the time of his appointment chairman of Ericsson,
the big telecommunications company where he had previously spent 13 often
turbulent years as chief executive.
But it was not just the small shareholders who liked the new broom. To the
Wallenberg family, which holds some 7 per cent of S-E-Banken and regards it
as a prestigious - if tarnished - jewel in the dynastic crown, Mr Svedberg
was anything but an outsider as the family is a major shareholder in
Ericsson.
One of the chief changes he has instigated has been a structural shake-up of
the bank. It has been streamlined into three main divisions: S-E-Banken, the
retail division, Enskilda Corporate, the corporate and investment division,
and Diligentia, the 'loan hospital' which contains all the group's bad
assets. 'We are trying to be a model bank for the 1990s when I anticipate a
high level of competition in a market which will not expand as it did in the
1980s,' Mr Svedberg says.
'We are decentralising very much, seeing to it that the branch managers are
the people who really coach their people to take care of the customers.' The
emphasis is on achieving a structure 'with very few levels between myself
and the customer'. Words like 'professionalism', 'productivity' and
'quality' come up frequently, echoing Mr Svedberg's industrial background.
Rigorous new credit control systems have also been introduced, with a series
of local, regional and national committees set up to review every lending
decision the bank takes. 'The aim is to have a real second opinion for every
loan in a way that we didn't have before. It is one system all over the
group. It looks at a credit from a more technical and a policy point of
view.'
Sweden's slow return to growth will not offer the banks any 'quick fixes',
Mr Svedberg says, but S-E-Banken, which handles two-thirds of the country's
international payments, hopes to benefit from strong export growth over the
next two years.
