FT  07 JUL 93 / Foreign Exchanges: D-Mark loses a little ground
THE D-MARK was a touch weaker against the dollar and European currencies
yesterday following remarks from Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the outgoing
Bundesbank president, that German inflation was slowly coming down, writes
James Blitz.
But in spite of this, the market remained unsure about the prospects for
further cuts in German interest rates. There was continuing concern that the
French franc could come under pressure inside the European exchange rate
mechanism if the Bundesbank does not reduce its official rates by  1/2
percentage point either before or immediately after its summer recess.
The D-Mark weakened slightly against the dollar after Mr Schlesinger said on
Monday night that west German inflation had come a 'step closer' to meeting
the Bundesbank's goal of 2 per cent.
Weak employment data continues to put a cap on the dollar, but the US
currency closed about  1/2 pfennig higher against the D-Mark in London
yesterday at DM1.7000. It subsequently finished New York trading at
DM1.7046.
Sterling also continues to profit from the perception that European interest
rates are coming down, while UK base rates have remained unchanged for
nearly six months. The pound ended  1/2 pfennig firmer at DM2.5675.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency strategist at Citibank, said sterling
still has a strong upside, but this may be capped by the UK policy mix of
low interest rates and tight fiscal consolidation which is not positive for
currencies.
The French franc was also fractionally stronger against the D-Mark. After
closing at FFr3.3860 on Monday night, the franc yesterday finished trading
at FFr3.3810.
However, the franc is becoming a focus of attention in the markets. The key
issue facing the currency is whether the Bundesbank delays implementation of
another cut.
The French authorities have had some chance to 'go it alone' in monetary
policy in recent months. However, although French three-month interest rates
have been some 50 basis points below Germany's in recent weeks, that
differential narrowed to 18 basis points yesterday amid concern over the
deteriorating economic situation and France's restricted ability to lower
rates.
Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister, has mitigated the pressure
to cut rates by concentrating on a fiscal reflation package. Following a
major government bond issue, there is now talk of tax cuts to reflate the
economy.
But Miss Alison Cottrell, an economist at Midland Global Markets, believes
that the French franc could come under pressure if Germany does not ease
policy between now and its council meeting on July 29, the last before the
summer recess. She believes that good inflation figures could lead to a
reduction in the Lombard rate on July 29.
