FT  07 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Protection puts Peru's vicuna
more at risk - With economic exploitation banned the field is open to
rustlers
BANNING the economic exploitation of endangered species has traditionally
been seen as the most effective method of protection. But that strategy is
not working for the vicuna, South America's graceful, shy camelid.
Officially classified as endangered, the herds of vicuna that roam the high
and lonely Peruvian Andes are increasingly falling prey to well-organised
gangs of international rustlers - and the cash-strapped government can do
little to counter their hit-and-run tactics.
No one knows quite the extent of the illegal trade. 'But it's very lucrative
and the organisation is sophisticated,' says Mr Domingo Hoces, an expert
with Conacs, Peru's relatively new quasi-governmental agency for camelids.
'There are brigades of well-armed hunters working for brokers within Latin
America who then ship the fibre in bales to Europe and Asia.'
One animal yields only about 200 grams of the coveted, soft hair, so five
rustled animals may die to produce a metre of cloth which, on the European
or Asian black market, can sell for anything between Dollars 1,500 and
Dollars 3,000.
The answer to the rustlers, say both Conacs officials and businessmen
interested in buying the valuable vicuna fibre, lies in the rational
exploitation of the animal. If the peasant farmers who are presently charged
by law with protecting the animals, which roam wild over their
communally-owned territories, are permitted to benefit from the eventual
sale of pricy vicuna cloth, goes the argument, both protection and husbandry
are certain to improve - and the wretchedly poor Andean peasants would be
better off.
International aid agencies have, over the years, run pilot programmes in the
vast Pampa Galeras high plateau in Ayacucho department, home to Peru's
largest concentrations of vicuna herds. They have taught peasant farmers
periodically to round up and shear the animals - though hair may be clipped
from the same animal only every two or three years.
The vicuna is native to the Andean countries of Peru and Bolivia, and, to a
lesser extent to Chile, Argentina and, more recently under a re-settlement
scheme, Ecuador. Hardy and resistant to the extreme cold, it inhabits the
inhospitable highlands between 3,700m and 4,800m above sea level.
Historically coveted for its especially fine hair, the vicuna was protected
and periodically culled by the Incas but later, during the colonial and
independence periods, indiscriminately hunted almost to extinction.
Agreements on protection between Bolivia and Peru in the late 1960s were
later extended to include Chile, Argentina and Ecuador. The protection
strategy worked and the Andean vicuna population is now estimated at 160,000
or more, 65 per cent of them in Peru.
Now that the species no longer faces the threat of extinction and herd sizes
are stable, sustainable utilisation would appear to be indicated. Six years
ago Cites, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species,
authorised selective exploitation of the live-shorn vicuna. But, so far, the
interested parties have failed to reach consensus.
Several rival companies specialising in luxury fibres have been in Peru in
recent months hoping to expedite an agreement. One of them is a consortium
formed by UK-based Dawson International and Italy's Ermenegildo Zegna.
An immediate stumbling-block to a deal between international business and
the Andean peasants is price. 'There's been an irresponsible raising of
expectations,' says Mr Nick Kuenssberg, CEO of Dawson Premier Brands, who
visited Peru in early June to act as broker between Conacs and the
'comuneros'.
Although there is obviously no current reference price for vicuna hair, Mr
Kuenssberg says that its fineness and rarity mean it could 'reasonably
command four to five times the price of cashmere'. That would mean perhaps
Dollars 250 a kilogram for dehaired fibre. But the comuneros, having heard
that vicuna cloth retails on the black market for Dollars 3,000 a metre,
think they should receive four times that.
The 1987 Cites amendment permits marketing of cloth woven from vicuna hair,
but not the hair itself. Trials have been run by a textile company in Peru
and some 600 metres of vicuna cloth are now stockpiled in Lima, unsold,
along with 3,000kg of hair.
Ms Soledad Yoshimoto, president of Conacs, favours shipping the valuable
hair for spinning and weaving abroad. 'Foreign companies have the technology
which is not yet available here,' she says. 'When we launch vicuna on the
international market, we must ensure we are selling the best possible
product.'
The Dawson International-Zegna consortium is proposing spinning the cloth in
Britain, offering the comuneros a royalty on its eventual retail price.
But they say that Conacs must allow then to negotiate directly with the
comuneros, who should be formed into an appropriate association holding the
right to the 'Vicunandes' trademark which is demanded by Cites to identify
cloth spun from hair legally collected from live animals.
Experts estimate that immediate supply could be between one and three tonnes
of hair a year, rising as husbandry and shearing methods improve to perhaps
15 tonnes a year from the whole Andean region.
But the legal and bureaucratic obstacles remain. Cites is emphasising its
condition that only cloth, not fibre, may be sold. Conacs wants to maintain
an intermediary role between the peasant farmers and the international
cloth-makers. And businessmen need a mechanism by which they can contract a
reliable supply of raw material directly from the Andean farmers.
A solution is needed that will ensure the healthy survival of the species,
an attractive product for the well-heeled consumer and an improved standard
of living for many impoverished Andean peasants. Until it is found, illegal
hunting of the vicuna will continue inexorably.
