FT  29 MAR 93 / Coal mountain may bury hopes: Improved productivity has only
added to the problems of saving mines
MR NEIL CLARKE, British Coal chairman, may already be roughing out in his
mind the statement he is likely to issue in six to 12 months' time to close
some of the pits reprieved last week.
The form of words could be along the lines of: 'It is with deep sadness and
regret that I have to announce that the market-testing exercise we have
carried out since March has failed to find the 15m additional tonnes we
need. It has not been possible to secure a market for x of them and we have
no alternative but to close them.'
The x is likely to be less than the 12 pits reprieved on Thursday. But
unless the energy market changes beyond all expectations, further closure
announcements are inevitable within a year. More will follow.
In addition Mr Clarke may soon sound the death knell for some of the six
pits which British Coal said this week would be mothballed. The ostensible
reason for holding back on closing them last week was to see the outcome of
the market-testing.
But with British Coal executives already admitting they will struggle to
find a market even for the reprieved mines, the corporation will eventually
have to give up on some of the mothballed pits. The financial incentive for
doing so sooner rather than later is that it will cost between Pounds 2m and
Pounds 4m a year for each mothballed pit.
British Coal's problems in keeping open the 12 reprieved pits, and providing
a realistic lifeline to the six which are mothballed, stem from a
combination of a rapidly declining market at a time of impressive
improvements in productivity.
The fact is that the 19 pits which British Coal considers its best - those
it intended to keep open even under the original plans announced in October
to close 31 other pits - can produce more than enough coal to fulfil the
corporation's contractual obligations to supply 40m tonnes to the
electricity generators in the year from April 1 as well as supply other
industrial and household markets.
But the 12 reprieved pits alone will have produced nearly 13m tonnes of coal
in this financial year. Given productivity improvements of around 20 per
cent a year, that could rise to more than 15m tonnes next year. Finding a
market for all of that would be a tall order in itself - but in 1994-95 the
problems worsen significantly.
That is because the long-term contracts with the electricity generators
envisage a 25 per cent reduction in tonnages, from 40m tonnes in 1993-94 to
30m tones in 1994-95. Put simply, British Coal will have to sell 25m tonnes
above what it is already contracted for in 1994-95, nearly as much again as
it has contracts for with electricity companies.
This will come at a time when some of the gas-fired power stations, being
built by partnerships involving regional electricity companies, and the
Sizewell B nuclear station come on stream and crowd the market further.
The generators are expressing their willingness to talk to British Coal
about additional sales but few in either the electricity or the coal
industries believe the contracts they are likely to sign will fill all of
the gap between supply from 31 pits and demand.
Most feel that British Coal will struggle to sell much more than 10m tonnes
a year. Nor will the deals come easily. 'We are talking months of talks
rather then weeks,' said one electricity company executive.
British Coal executives are talking optimistically about using the subsidies
to tap into niche industrial markets where they have previously been denied
access because of the buyers' preferences for cheaper imports. The
corporation may even to try to supply British Steel with some of the 8m
tonnes of specialist coking coal it requires a year, virtually all of which
is now imported.
In the meantime, the delays in closing and mothballing pits will add to
British Coal's already overburdened stockpiles. Last December the High Court
ruled it had acted illegally when it announced plans in October to close 10
pits immediately because it had failed to consult widely enough.
That places an onus on the corporation to act less hastily this time, and it
will be several weeks before production stops at the two doomed mines and
six which are to be mothballed. These together mine 250,000 tonnes a week,
and a similar amount will come from the 12 reprieved pits, for which there
is not yet a market.
All of this additional coal - up to 2m tonnes a month worth Pounds 72m -
will go straight on to stockpiles, which at 11m tonnes are already far
higher than the corporation wants. Unless it is prepared to keep stocks
artificially high for years to come, this will add to the pressure for
closures.
The government is stressing that collieries which are not viable under
British Coal may thrive in the private sector which will also be offered
subsidies. However, coal industry analysts believe there is room in the
market for little more than half a dozen private-sector pits, and potential
buyers will take their pick from the 12 closing almost immediately.
Not surprisingly the mood among British Coal employees was sombre this
weekend. Referring to prospects for the saving all reprieved 12 pits, one
executive said yesterday: 'It's like trying to push a bus up Crystal Palace
Hill.'
