FT  01 MAY 93 / Lessons in the art of survival: UK boarding schools are
changing as pupil numbers fall
While the recession was officially pronounced dead by the government this
week, it is biting its deepest into one area of British life usually
regarded as immune. Boarding schools across the country have seen their
steepest fall in numbers - 6 per cent - since records began in 1982,
according to the Independent Schools Information Service.
Attendance at independent day schools has been resilient over the past
decade, and girls' day school attendances rose slightly this year. But the
latest fall in the number of boarders, coming on top of a 10 per cent
decline over the previous three years, has forced many boarding schools to
adopt new strategies.
They are under pressure from two economic forces: the seemingly inexorable
rise in their costs, and hence fees, and the effect the recession has had on
parents' ability to pay.
Independent school fees (including day schools) have risen on average at
double the rate of inflation for more than a decade. Last year, average fees
rose by 8.3 per cent, triple the inflation rate, taking the average cost of
a term at boarding school to Pounds 3,125. Headmasters' Conference schools,
the independent sector's elite, charge Pounds 3,425 on average; prep schools
charge Pounds 2,492.
Boarding schools are aware of the danger of pricing themselves out of the
market, but their scope to keep fee increases down is limited. Education is
highly labour-intensive, with staff salaries accounting for up to 80 per
cent of costs, according to Mr Michael Oakley, chairman of the Independent
Schools Bursars Association, which represents school treasurers.
Independent schools need quality staff, and cannot ignore teachers' pay
agreements in the state sector. Isis believes that keeping independent
school fee increases below the public sector teachers' pay rise of 9.5 per
cent is, therefore, something of a victory.
Fee increases have also been fuelled by competition between schools on
eye-catching capital projects, such as sports halls and drama centres. As
the recession deepened, parents began to decide that these were luxuries
they could no longer afford.
Ms Joan Jefferson, president of the Girls' Schools Association and
headmistress of St Swithun's, a boarding school in Winchester, admits:
'Boarding is expensive and it's inevitable that in a time of severe
recession it will be affected more because it costs more.'
Boarding numbers have been hit far harder than day pupil numbers, which
dropped by only 0.2 per cent last year after a decade of consistent growth.
School fees are usually one of the last items of expenditure to be cut when
a family suffers financial difficulties.
By contrast, the downward trend in boarding numbers has continued for more
than a decade, even during the buoyant years of the mid-1980s, suggesting
that social, as well as economic factors, are squeezing boarding schools.
There were 126,616 boarders in the UK in 1986, according to the Department
for Education, and only 109,216 in 1992.
In contrast with previous generations, the value of keeping children within
a family environment, rather than sending them for a 'character-building'
experience at boarding school, is more widely accepted.
However, the oldest and most famous boarding schools have managed to escape
the general trend. At Winchester College, for example, numbers have risen
because the school offered more places than usual last year, assuming that
some parents would be forced by the recession to withdraw their sons. This
did not happen.
Mr John Sabben-Clare, the headmaster, points out that the school is
insulated against the recession because it attracts pupils internationally,
not just from the UK or its local area.
But minor boarding schools which are not household names, in outlying areas
of the country which offer sparse catchment areas should they want to
attract day pupils, face real difficulty in justifying fee increases to
parents.
They need to adapt to survive. That means an end to the ambitious building
and capital projects of the past decade, increased assistance for pupils,
whether from endowment funds or from the government's assisted places
scheme, and a more flexible approach to boarding. Many boys' schools are
becoming co-educational to expand their target market.
One example is Blundell's School in Tiverton, Devon, established in 1604,
and the scene for much of the action in Lorna Doone, which will become fully
co-educational from September this year. Mr John Leigh, the headmaster who
took over at the beginning of the year, says: 'There's a genuine desire to
increase equal opportunity. But it's fair to say that the economic climate
was a catalyst.'
Like other schools in the south-west, Blundell's has seen the number of
boarders drop, though they still make up roughly three-quarters of the
school's population. Blundell's has a policy of giving financial aid to
local children - Mr Leigh points out that this corresponds to the founder's
intention - and a quarter of pupils receive bursaries or scholarships from
the school.
This puts it in line with the Isis figures which showed that 26.6 per cent
of independent school pupils received help with fees, most of it - 16.9 per
cent - coming from the schools themselves.
When Blundell's makes appeals to its alumni in future, it will be asking for
funds to endow bursaries, not to build sports halls. According to Mr Leigh:
'I think of the 1980s as the decade of building and of the 1990s as the
decade of learning how to use those buildings to the best advantage.'
Again this echoes the Isis trend, which shows that capital spending per
pupil declined for the first time since 1982 last year - by 10 per cent to
Pounds 513.
Another Devon boarding school, Shebbear College, has taken more drastic
action. Shebbear is a 150-year-old Methodist school in the north of the
county. Its number of boarders has steadily declined, and at the end of last
year the Methodist Board of Management announced that it was to vacate its
present site and merge with a girls' school in Bideford, 12 miles away.
Shebbear's governors and teachers succeeded in overturning the decision.
However, they have done so only by accepting staff redundancies, and a cut
in teachers' allowances. A total of Pounds 250,000 has been cut from the
school's budget of Pounds 1.6m for next year, while fees for juniors have
been trimmed by almost a third, from Pounds 1,250 to Pounds 850 per term.
From September, the school, like Blundell's, will be fully co-educational.
These changes demonstrate the economic pressures on small boarding schools.
Mr Russell Buley, Shebbear's headmaster, said: 'We're simply recognising
where the markets are for our product. The way forward is to face up to the
problems of being an isolated boarding school and turn that to our
advantage.'
The proportion of boarders at Shebbear has dropped steadily and now
comprises just over half the school's population. Many parents in north
Cornwall and Dartmoor prefer a daily two-hour round-trip to the expense of
boarding.
'Flexi-boarding' is the less traumatic policy which has been adopted by the
Royal Naval School in Haslemere, Surrey. The school, which once had a heavy
boarding emphasis because it was founded to educate the daughters of naval
officers, now allows weekly boarding, and occasional overnight stays. Girls
living locally are also allowed to spend time boarding while parents are
away on business.
Mrs Jill Clough, the headmistress, explains that this unusual system evolved
because of parental demand. It lessened the costs for many, while also
allowing day girls to share in the 'boarding experience' to some extent.
Like Blundell's, Royal Naval is now digging deeper into bursary funds and is
also receiving help from charities. Mrs Clough describes this as taking a
long-term view - if the funds are not used now, when parents are finding
times tough, family links with independent education could be broken.
Strategies such as these mean that it is still too soon to declare the final
demise of the British boarding education. But survival for the less
prestigious boarding schools now requires innovation to attract new pupils
and a greater effort to hold down costs than has been apparent in the past.
