FT  01 SEP 93 / Business and the Environment: When conservation efforts fail
to protect - Despite sound funding and noble intentions, a project to curb
deforestation rates in north-west Ecuador has collapsed
Environmentalists applauded when the Global Environmental Facility was set
up three years ago to create a United Nations-backed international fund for
developing countries. They saw the GEF as a way for north and south to share
responsibility for global environmental problems.
The World Bank was administrator of the fund. Developing countries were to
receive Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1bn) over three years for projects on
protecting the ozone layer, international waters and biodiversity, and
limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
Yet earlier this year, a proposed GEF project in Ecuador, Ecoforest 2000,
was dropped because of its controversial social and environmental
implications. Its failure revealed the obstacles in implementing the GEF's
objectives and raised questions over the World Bank's role as the
administrator of such a fund.
Ecoforest 2000 was conceived as a long-term forestry management scheme to
minimise deforestation of primary forest by planting tree farms for
sustainable use by commercial timber companies. The tropical rainforest in
north-west Ecuador has one of the world's highest biodiversity densities,
but also one of the highest deforestation rates.
It was the first project to be approved by the International Finance
Corporation, the private-sector financial arm of the World Bank, using GEF
funds.
At first sight a laudable initiative, it was soon criticised by local
communities and environmental groups.
Many asked why only a single managed timber source was planned as an
alternative to existing sources, namely the Durini Foundation, a
family-owned lumber group which is one of the wealthiest businesses in
Ecuador.
The small landowners were said to have equal or larger environmental
importance. The effect on the indigenous groups was also questioned.
Lorena Gamboa of the environmental group Accion Ecologica criticised the
IFC-GEF's impact study, saying it underestimated the effect of resettling 40
to 50 families toestablish tree farms. Landless farmers were likely to
increase pressure on deforestation and colonisation of virgin forest, she
claimed.
The GEF's plans to lease lumber rights from indigenous people at extremely
low prices in some of the last large tracts of primary forest also proved
contentious.
While such concerns were being voiced, expectations for the project to meet
community needs - to lessen acute poverty and enable development of regional
infrastructure such as health services and schooling - were large. And these
high expectations exacerbated the project's problems.
The IFC-GEF's alleged insensitivity to community needs prompted many to
question their commitment towards conservation. Ecociencia, for example, an
ecological research centre, says the project failed to provide an
alternative for principal agents of deforestation in the area - the colonos,
or settlers. Colonos subsist on sale of timber or clear land for farming.
Teodoro Bustamante, a member of Fundacion Natura, Ecuador's largest
environmental group, says the project's aim of a single and managed timber
source in the area was based primarily on commercial principles, with
conservation only a secondary consideration.
The IFC-GEF sponsored review of the project, released in March, confirmed
many of the criticisms and revaluation needs. Funds were subsequently frozen
and a round-table talk was scheduled for all those involved. But before the
meeting, the IFC delegation announced its withdrawal.
'We were all disappointed by the withdrawal,' says Bustamante, 'and it
ridiculed the entire consultation process, illustrating that they were not
really interested in our input.'
The subsequent collapse of the project has cast doubt on the potential for
alternatives to the continuing destruction of tropical primary forest in
Ecuador. Environmentalists are left with only bitter reproaches for how the
project was handled. And the failure of the Ecuadorian government to develop
a strategy of sustainable forest utilisation, and to allocate sufficient
resources to the management of forests and protected areas, has created a
hostile climate for foreign aid to benefit the country's environment.
But others believe one lesson can be learnt from the experience - future
projects would benefit if environmental groups and local communities were
involved in the early design of a project.
The need for this is highlighted by scientific studies showing that the 4
per cent annual deforestation rate will devour tropical forests of
north-west Ecuador in a decade or two, eliminating an estimated five animal
species per day.
