FT  24 JUL 93 / VW shares hit on spy probe links to Lopez: Speculation grows
over ex-GM executive's future
VOLKSWAGEN shares lost further ground yesterday as speculation grew that Mr
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the motor group's controversial production
director, might be forced out.
The shares shed another 1 per cent of their value in Frankfurt as markets
reacted to Thursday's statement from prosecutors probing allegations of
industrial espionage against Mr Lopez.
The statement showed investigators had established a link between Mr Lopez
and a cache of confidential documents belonging to General Motors, his
former employer, found recently in a Wiesbaden house.
VW stocks closed DM3.2 lower at DM345, while other leading German motor
manufacturers gained and the Dax blue-chip index rose more than 17 points to
1830.83.
Mr Lopez would probably have to go sooner or later because suspicions about
his activities were harming confidence in the VW management, analysts said.
However, they agreed his loss would not seriously damage VW's recovery
prospects since restructuring measures were already well-established.
The company's comment on Thursday that there was no reason for Mr Lopez to
resign 'at present' was seen by one as a sign that the company was 'keeping
the back door open'.
Meanwhile, complaints from VW that the prosecutors' statement was
'one-sided' earned the company a brusque rebuff yesterday.
The prosecutors' Darmstadt office described as 'incomprehensible' charges of
bias on the grounds that VW had not been allowed to see four boxes of
documents found in a house recently vacated by two GM employees who followed
Mr Lopez to VW after he quit the US group in March.
The boxes contained details of a secret new car model, future sales
strategies, and, crucially, confidential information specifically requested
by Mr Lopez when he still worked in the US.
It also emerged that Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, yesterday met Mr
Gerhard Schroder, a senior member of the group's supervisory board.
Mr Schroder, prime minister of Lower Saxony, which owns 20 per cent of VW,
has been a vociferous supporter of Mr Lopez and Mr Piech, defending them
against what he claims is a 'campaign' by a 'foreign' company to damage VW.
A state government spokesman said the two men would consider what
conclusions could be drawn from the week's events.
