FT  20 NOV 93 / Travel Books: Guide to the fate of the giants
IT IS a shock, seeing elephants in the wild. What causes the sensation is
the effect of their size and physicality allied to their vulnerability. You
know that at any time a poacher's spray of bullets could remove this great
beast from the face of the earth.
Anyone heading for the safari grounds of Africa or Asia this winter should
invest Pounds 17.50 in a copy of The Fate of the Elephant by Douglas
Chadwick (Viking). It takes you in close to the giants and makes you feel
ashamed that their fate should be in doubt.
The strength of the book derives from Chadwick's travels. He starts in
Siberia, at a mammoth graveyard (the earliest known human portrait was
carved in mammoth ivory 26,000 years ago).
Then he visits east and central Africa. Then Japan and Hong Kong, where he
investigates the ivory trade. One Japanese netsuke carver tells him that it
would take 12 years to make the transition from carving ivory to carving
wood or some other material, and then another two or three years to learn
the characteristics of each type of wood.
Then India. Then Switzerland, for a meeting of Cites, the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species. ('Wildlife is the
second-most-lucrative illegal trade item in the world, exceeded only by
drugs,' he says). Then Thailand and Malaysia, and finally southern Africa.
Chadwick provides a great amount of elephant lore and information - most of
it gained first-hand - and this can be depressing. For example, he says that
in Tsavo national park, Kenya, he spent days looking for elephants and found
mostly dead ones.
'I learned to locate them the same way scavenging lions find carcasses, by
watching the sky for vultures. Once I found the first of a group, the stench
would lead me to the rest of the family. Four bodies here, six there,
another two across the gully, whitewashed with vulture droppings, putrefying
under the sun until the flesh liquefied . . .'
Chadwick says that the ivory trade is not the greatest threat to the
elephant. Its greatest peril is the explosive growth of the human
population. Both Loxodonta africana and Elephas maximus are running out of
living space among 5bn-plus humans, so where will they and their huge needs
fit in as human numbers approach the 10bn to 12bn projected within 50 years?
The Fate of the Elephant is not all gloom. Chadwick explains how his travels
made him grow to like wild elephants tremendously. He found them
overwhelmingly sociable, expressive and emotional. Their size is pulverising
yet they react to the smallest things - pausing to let a mongoose scurry by
or cautiously circling a paper wrapper left by a tourist.
All the while, says Chadwick, he had a very strong sense of a mind behind
each elephant's actions: a sense of information being processed in
interesting and highly individual ways.
The fate of the elephant will be a close-run thing. 'I want to believe,'
says Chadwick, 'that we will ultimately save elephants and that we will do
it because we acknowledge and accept their commonality with us.'
With luck, says the author, man's moral progression will enable him to
extend his sense of kin to other species. Chadwick wouldn't be surprised if
elephants help show the way.
Train Journeys of the World (Automobile Association, Pounds 16.99) covers
what it calls 30 of the world's most spectacular and famous rail routes.
Photography and maps are excellent, and the commentaries strike a good
balance between information and travelogue.
Journeys include the Marrakech Express to Casablanca and Fes; Japan's Bullet
Train; the central railway of Peru; the Rhine valley (Cologne-Frankfurt);
Austria (Bregenz-Vienna); the Glacier express through Switzerland; Spain's
Andalusian express; southern India (Madras-Ootacamund); Bangkok-Singapore,
and Cairo-Aswan.
