FT  21 JAN 93 / Technology: Mini-discs with a megabyte - James Buxton
monitors an innovation which may give greater flexibility to computer users
on the move
The day may not be far off when personal computer users who need to take
large quantities of data on trips will carry a miniature hard disc drive in
their pockets instead of taking several copies of the ubiquitous 3.5-inch
floppy disc.
This would be a boon to business people on the move such as managers and
accountants. They would be able to transfer data such as company accounts
and archive documents from their desktop computers, get on an aircraft and
slot the hard disc drive into another machine at their destination.
The advance would be made possible by the recent invention of extremely
small hard disc drives covering no more surface area than a credit card and
with a thickness of only 10.5cm. A Scottish company, Calluna Technology of
Glenrothes in Fife, has designed the first 1.8-inch drives with 85-megabyte
data storage (the most powerful in this size). It will start assembling the
new drives this spring.
The new drives are initially intended for use in slim sub-notebook-size
computers which current-ly do not have disc drives. From an early stage,
they will be removable.
At present, users of portable machines face a dilemma. They can buy a
computer in the so-called notebook range with both hard disc and floppy
drives. But the machines weigh about 7lb, and may also need battery chargers
or power packs: this is a strong disincentive to carrying them around every
day.
Alternatively they can buy a sub-notebook computer which might weigh about
2lb but with internal memory of no more than 1Mbyte. This can be augmented
by inserting memory cards, a type of semi-conductor which currently offers
between 1Mbyte and 2Mbyte of extra storage. But these will not give the
storage capacity provided by their desktops.
The new miniature hard disc drives will make life easier for busy, mobile
users - though they will still have to negotiate the tiny keyboard. When a
desktop interface for this size of miniature drive becomes available,
possibly later this year, they will load their sub-notebooks with data from
their desktops and obtain a performance that is comparable to that of their
larger machine.
The Calluna team responsible for this breakthrough previously worked for
Rodime, a Glenrothes company which was highly successful in the early 1980s,
producing the world's first 3.5-inch disc drive. But after a series of
setbacks, Rodime put its manufacturing operations into receivership in 1991
and now just licenses its technology.
Norman White, Rodime's former technical director, founded Calluna, of which
he is now managing director, with five ex-Rodime colleagues in late 1991.
The company has assembled a financial package which, including supplier
credits, totals about Pounds 5m, with equity from 3i, Innolion and Altus
Finance (two offshoots of Credit Lyonnais), and Scottish Enterprise (the
official development body for Scotland).
Calluna's achievement was to get two 1.8-inch (48mm) discs within the 10.5mm
thickness specified in the Type III format agreed by the Personal Computer
Memory Card International Association, the US body formed to promote the use
of memory cards. Rival designers have so far only squeezed one drive into
the format, obtaining half the storage capacity of Calluna. The Scottish
company has also made advances in reducing the amount of power needed to run
the drive.
Calluna will assemble its drives in a semi-automated process employing up to
100 people and using sub-assemblies from component makers in the Far East.
It will offer the drives in two versions: one for permanent installation
into the sub-notebook computer by the original equipment manufacturer, and
the other in a portable version.
White says the drives will initially be sold to OEMs, mostly in Taiwan and
Hong Kong, to obtain their validation for the removable version which might
be sold directly by dealers for installation in sub-notebooks.
'Expressions of interest from computer makers in the Far East are especially
strong for our removable version,' says White. 'The OEMs are talking about
the second and third quarters of 1993.' Calluna's target market for the
removable version is likely to be Europe where it will be the only
indigenous manufacturer of 1.8-inch drives.
Calluna will concentrate on the high performance end of a market which could
total 1m units in 1993 and 3m by 1994, and perhaps be worth Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 600m) over five years. Its plant will have the capacity to produce
up to 500,000 a year.
Andrew Baul-Lewis, an analyst with International Data Corporation, says:
'There is potential for that product in the computing market. It depends on
pricing, performance and constantly increasing the capacity of the drive.'
How much will the new drives cost? White says the OEMs might be charged
Dollars 5 per Mbyte of storage making Dollars 400 per drive, compared with
Dollars 30 per Mbyte in memory cards. But the price will fall if the product
takes off.
Success will have its risks. Calluna is embarking on the difficult path of
bringing a product to market and leading in a field where competition is
bound to intensify. Sceptics will point out that these were challenges which
ultimately defeated Rodime.
