FT  01 NOV 93 / Hume demands government response
MR JOHN HUME, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, said
yesterday that the UK government had a 'responsibility' to explore his joint
peace initiative with Mr Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Fein, the political
wing of the IRA.
He was on the counter-attack after the apparent rebuff to the initiative by
the British and Irish governments. 'I expect to be listened to,' he said.
'The proposals that I have put to the government are proposals that can lead
to a dialogue with all parties, including Sinn Fein, in a situation in which
there is no violence,' he said on London Weekend Television's Walden
programme.
He insisted that the joint Brussels statement by the two governments on
Friday was 'only an appeal to end the violence. I am taking direct action to
try and end it.'
Accused by the harshest of his unionist opponents of being a fellow
traveller of the IRA, Mr Hume is nonetheless a lifelong opponent of violence
and has himself been the target of nine IRA attacks over the past 20 years.
Inspired by figures such as Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King, he began
his political career in the civil rights movement in Londonderry in the late
1960s. Unionist-inspired violence removed that movement from the streets,
and was then met by growing IRA violence. Mr Hume remained throughout a
constant advocate of constitutional and peaceful means to bring about
change.
A founding member of the SDLP in the early 1970s, he holds a conviction that
nationalism, whether Catholic or Protestant-orientated, will gradually
dissipate in the European union slowly being forged in Brussels.
Not one to be baulked by criticism of his ideas or his tactics, he recently
said: 'I am criticised for my approaches, but nobody else is putting any new
proposals on the table. I want to see an agreed Ireland, not a united
Ireland. I want a new Ireland in a new Europe.
'I am more confident now about the future than I have been for the past 20
years. In 10 to 20 years more there will be a whole new ball game.'
On the apparent rebuff of his initiative with Mr Adams, he argued that
several of the principles in the initiative had been incorporated into the
Dublin government's six-point proposals, and into the communique issued by
the two governments on Friday.
He said yesterday: 'I am awaiting clarification of their response, but part
of the process that has been proposed has already been proposed in (the
Hume-Adams) initiative.
'I believe there is a way of bringing that about now which does not threaten
the interests of any section of our people, that does not impose any
solutions and which does not give victory to any section of our people'.
The savage UFF attack in Londonderry on Saturday night, the first of its
kind there for many years and a clear intimidatory warning to Mr Hume,
underlines the extent to which unionist extremists oppose even the most
moderate nationalist viewpoint.
