FT  20 OCT 93 / Brazil's Congress to probe corruption claims
BRAZIL'S Congress yesterday decided to conduct a special inquiry into
corruption allegations levelled against more than 20 members. But an
important constitutional revision process, which some analysts feared would
be delayed by the scandal, appeared to remain on track.
The inquiry has 45 days to decide if there is any truth to the allegations
which have been made by Mr Jose Carlos Alves dos Santos, a former budget
secretary who is now facing murder and other charges.
He named several senior politicians, including two serving government
ministers and the president of the Senate, as benefiting from a corrupt
scheme linked to construction contracts under the governments of former
presidents Jose Sarney and Fernando Collor.
Investigators found Dollars 1.4m (Pounds 933,000), including Dollars 30,000
in counterfeit US currency, at Mr dos Santos's home and in safety deposit
boxes, police said.
He said in a weekend interview with the Veja news magazine that he
repeatedly witnessed bribery transactions and had received large money
bribes.
All the politicians involved have denied the charges. An inquiry last year
led to the downfall of then-president Collor on unrelated corruption
charges.
Congress decided yesterday to continue work on the constitutional revision,
aimed at simplifying and modernising the constitution, in parallel with the
investigation. Groups opposed to the review, including left-wing politicians
and church groups, had called for its suspension pending the outcome of the
inquiry. They argued that with so many members of Congress under suspicion,
its rulings on the constitution would be in doubt.
The two government ministers have remained at their posts, despite offering
their resignations to President Itamar Franco in order to contest the
allegations.
Mr Franco, who has stressed the probity of his regime compared to that of
his disgraced predecessor, is thought to want to hear any evidence in full
before making a decision on their future.
The government yesterday sought to play down the significance of Mr Franco's
earlier comments that he would not block early presidential and
congressional elections if Congress wanted them.
Government leaders and senior politicians said that his comments had been
exaggerated and few saw any chance or advantage of holding elections before
they are due late next year.
