FT  23 DEC 93 / O come all ye faithful
On the night before the night before Christmas, believers in the Science of
Happiness will gather in the Tokyo Dome, scene of baseball games in season,
stadium-style rock concerts and the occasional trade fair.
They will come to listen to Ryuho Okawa, founder of the religion and former
office worker, who will deliver a sermon on the Neo-Japanese Dream, his
vision that late 20th-century Japan has been chosen as the site for an
international spiritual renaissance.
Mr Okawa, who still has the look of the salaryman and lacks a firm
handshake, is one of many gods crowding into the Japanese pantheon. The
Science of Happiness (or Kofuku No Kagaku) regards Jesus as an early
prophet, providing reason to genuflect at Christmas, though a nativity scene
depicting events of 2,000 years ago can hardly compete against a sports
stadium filled with 50,000 of the faithful and a man they believe to be a
god.
The sudden rise of Mr Okawa's religion, which claims more than 5m followers
and has ambitions to convert all Japanese, is seen as a popular reaction
against the spiritual poverty of material wealth, though the Christmas
antics of young Japanese suggest that materialism still has drawing power.
Christmas Eve is supposed to be spent in the company of that special friend,
for whom the Y100,000 act of devotion is a supper show, a hotel room
overlooking Tokyo Bay, and a pendant, diamond ring or otherwise prominent
piece of jewellery.
Well-prepared couples will have taken a pre-Christmas tour to an amusement
arcade, Mirrorna, where they stumbled through a mirror maze, and sought
advice from computerised fortune tellers about the suitability of their
partner. Recession has made 'Christmas At Home' a popular theme in Japan,
but the emphasis is still on romance and consumption. Present-giving to
children, not traditional in Japan, is socially acceptable, and the
Christmas card has acquired a creeping popular-ity.
Most of the card scenes are of snowmen and Santa rather than the arrival of
the wise men or the radiant babe in manger. One card claiming to 'provide
energy for the year ahead' comes with a compact disc that supposedly sends
'subliminal messages' through a selection of songs including White Christmas
and Silent Night. A homegrown hamburger chain, Mos Burger, believes that
this is the season to be amused by puns, as munchers are told to have a
Merry Xmos.
Indulging in a Christian festival can be done without violating the doctrine
of Shinto, a religion or folklore which allows the devout to observe other
faiths. It is a mark of Japanese tolerance that 49 new religions were
registered last year, bringing the country's total to 5,888.
Shinto is flexible enough for the Emperor to have been deified and debunked
during the past century, and gradually redeified in the minds of a minority
of Japanese over the past few years without undermining the popularity of
festivals with origins in the planting season and the harvest.
It also allows Japanese companies to pursue the cause of materialism with
enthusiasm while maintaining a shrine on the roof of their head-quarters.
But the stripping away of Emperor Hirohito's supernatural powers at the end
of the second world war left a vacancy that others rushed to fill. In 1945,
a Yamaguchi farmer's wife declared the 'first year of God's Kingdom', and
spread the word of what was known popularly as the 'Dancing Religion' for
its ceremonial use of dancing. Born Sayo Kitamura, she became Ogamisama and
travelled the world, urging all to 'rid yourself of selfishness, polish your
soul and become a true human being', a creed still followed by an estimated
650,000 people.
Mrs Kitamura described herself as a living god. But other self-appointed
deities are coy about their status and rely on the faithful to draw the
conclusion that, for example, Daisaku Ikeda, leader of Soka Gakkai, a lay
Buddhist movement claiming 8m members, is more than a mere man. An unseemly
argument within the movement has stained his halo. Mr Ikeda has been
'excommunicated' by the monks who claim to be guardians of the faith; the
monks, in turn, are accused by Mr Ikeda's assistants of 'madly playing golf
and living spendthrift lives'.
Another reason for the spread of new religions and the sudden popularity of
hypnotism and seances is believed to be the weakening of ties between
company and employee. Instead of worshipping daily at the house of
Mitsubishi or Mitsui, disillusioned employees are said to be seeking
satisfaction elsewhere, swapping the blue suit for monk's garb or dabbling
in the supernatural or tak-ing in mass on Christmas Eve.
Perhaps the most or least appropriate place to spend Christmas in tolerant
Japan is Shingo, a village in the northern prefecture of Aomori, which
claims to be the last resting place of Jesus. The locals say they have
uncovered evidence that Jesus's younger brother was captured and crucified,
while he escaped, finally seeking refuge in Japan, where he married and
fathered three children.
Having created the legend, the Shingoites are cashing in on it. They have
produced 'Christ village' sake and rice crackers in recent years, and
arranged an exclusive appearance by Santa Claus this Christmas. The
villagers are haunted by neither Christian guilt nor eastern shame, and all
are welcome.
