FT  23 SEP 93 / Buy-out proposed for DTI agency
THE DEPARTMENT of Trade and Industry has announced a review of the operation
of its Accounts Services Agency in a move which could pave the way for the
first management buy-out of a central government unit.
Mr Timothy Eggar, a DTI minister, yesterday said that he had decided to
commission a survey from consultants to assess the commercial position of
the agency and alternative forms of ownership and management.
The Accounts Services Agency carries out financial and management accounting
services. It became an executive agency under the government's Next Steps
initiative in October 1991, and was formerly the DTI's accounts branch.
Mr Eggar's action follows proposals for a buy-out submitted to him at the
start of this month by the management of the agency, backed by Capita Group,
the consultants providing services to the public sector.
He said he welcomed the proposal and commissioned the review in light of the
'very good progress' the agency had made in developing a commercial
approach.
The agency has already won the contracts for accounts work at the Department
of National Heritage, the Historic Royal Palaces Agency, the Royal Parks
Agency, the Central Statistical Office and the government regulators for
electricity, gas and telecoms.
Mr Michael Hoddinott, the chief executive of the agency, said that the
buy-out would allow greater autonomy in determining staff wages and
incentives and was more likely to allow it to win contracts from market
testing in other government departments.
He said he would encourage staff to take out shares in the company, and that
while details of the buy-out were being finalised, management and staff
would have considerable control and would not be dominated by Capita,
adviser on the proposal document.
Companies House is currently undergoing a review by external consultants
into possible options, including privatisation. But the Accounts Agency is
the first to have forced a review by proposing a buy-out.
Proposals have been invited from consultants, and one is expected to be
selected within the next few weeks.
The agency has about 90 staff and is based in Newport, Gwent. Its own
accounts to March 31 this year show net assets of Pounds 142m.
