FT  14 APR 93 / Royal Bank to buy Boston Five Bancorp
THE Royal Bank of Scotland's fast growing US banking subsidiary, Citizens
Financial, is paying Dollars 95m (Pounds 62.9m) in cash to acquire Boston
Five Bancorp as part of its New England expansion.
The acquisition, which will be funded by Citizens without recourse to Royal
Bank shareholders, represents a significant step towards the bank's goal of
generating at least 10 per cent of its earnings from the US.
It also underlines the growing importance of the US banking operations run
by Mr Larry Fish, Citizens' chief executive. Last year Citizens, which
already has retail banking operations in Rhode Island and Massachusetts as
well as a Georgia-based mortgage company, contributed Pounds 19.7m to the
bank's profits.
Mr George Mathewson, Royal Bank's group chief executive, said yesterday:
'This acquisition is a further important step in our long term strategy in
the US. We intend that Citizens should double in size in the next three
years while becoming the leading community bank in southern New England.'
The deal will make Citizens the sixth largest bank holding company in New
England with Dollars 6.4bn of assets. At the end of January, Boston Five had
total assets of Dollars 1.7bn.
Some 25 offices will be added to Citizens Bank of Massachusetts' 11
branches. Deposits will increase to Dollars 2.1bn.
The deal will double the size of Citizens' mortgage banking subsidiary's
portfolio to Dollars 8bn and rank the Gulf States Mortgage company among the
60 largest in the country.
'Doubling the size of our mortgage servicing operation fits our goal of
expanding our fee-generating business and our expansion into the Boston
market fits with our strategic mission for growth,' said Mr Fish.
In spite of the recession and a banking crisis in New England, Citizens has
thrived in recent years and has helped restore some faith in British banks'
US operations.
After enduring losses in the late 1980s, and debating how quickly they could
sell, the mood among some British banks towards their US subsidiaries has
changed considerably. As they struggle with bad debt at home, US operations
have become an attractive source of income for some banks including the
Royal Bank and National Westminster.
Bank of Scotland sale, Page 24
