FT  27 MAR 93 / An odd society battles on: David White finds Falkland
Islanders an endangered species
MEASURED by the ratio of military to civilians, the Falkland Islands must
have the most heavily defended population on earth. The colony's 2,200
inhabitants, almost all of British descent, barely outnumber the 2,000 UK
airmen, soldiers and sailors posted there.
Since the 1982 UK-Argentine conflict over the islands, an influx of new
blood has reversed the population decline. But numbers have never been much
greater than today and as a surge of prosperity based on squid fishery
peters out, nothing short of an oil bonanza is likely to change that.
The two communities live apart. Most servicemen are housed at Mount
Pleasant, a new airfield complex built on a peat bog 35 miles from Stanley,
the capital, along a road that (although the islands' best) is only partly
tarmac.
They are pretty self-sufficient. A sore point, under discussion with local
authorities, is that mess kitchens use New Zealand lamb, in a territory
whose treeless, wind-battered expanses serve little productive purpose
except as grazing for 750,000 sheep.
The meat comes by way of Britain, 8,400 miles away, in what is probably the
longest voyage ever undertaken by a meat carcase. The thing is that the
islands have no EC-standard abattoir and they say they cannot now afford
one.
Nevertheless, the armed forces are the islands' biggest cash customer, and
the biggest tourism earner. They are warmly appreciated.
Military flights, which anywhere else might be considered a nuisance,
provide reassurance. 'We get complaints when people don't low-fly enough,'
says Rear Admiral Neil Rankin, British forces commander.
Islanders worry about the improving relations between London and Buenos
Aires. The need to co-operate with Argentina, whether on fisheries or on
future oil development, is a bitter pill to swallow.
The scars from 1982 show no sign of healing. Argentine citizens are still
banned. There are no transport connections. The main link to the outside
world is the 18-hour, twice-weekly flight to the UK by RAF Tristar. The
garrison, with a few Tornado fighters, heavy Hercules aircraft, helicopters
and a frigate, is designed to hold the base until reinforcements arrive in a
crisis.
Running expenses are put at Pounds 50m-Pounds 60m a year, not counting the
pay servicemen would get anyway, nor the cost of the RAF staging post on
Ascension Island.
In spite of the 'firm and unwavering commitment' pledged during a visit this
week by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the British defence secretary, the number of
military personnel may be reduced. But the islanders' numbers could dwindle,
too. Sixth-formers go to the UK; there may be less reason for them to come
back.
Prospects opened up after the war. Under a programme to bring land into
local ownership, farm employee Mr Robin Marsh bought 20,000 acres in West
Falkland, the smaller of the two main islands, with 5,000 sheep.
But for the past three years, as world wool prices have plummeted, he has
depended on support from the Falkland Islands government. This support may
now stop.
The government tapped unprecedented wealth from a licence regime set up in
1987 for vessels fishing within a 150-mile zone. The boats are mostly squid
'jiggers' from Japan, Korea, Taiwan and southern Europe. Government revenue,
previously about Pounds 6m a year from wool tax receipts and UK grand aid,
shot up to an unaided Pounds 40m.
But last year Argentina launched a rival licence scheme, a move widely seen
in the islands as deliberate economic pressure. Argentina is in a powerful
position, since the young squid move south to the Falklands through its
waters.
It agreed with Britain last December to limit this season's number of
licences. But the Falklands have slashed their estimate of licence earnings
for the financial year just ending from Pounds 23m to Pounds 15m. Next year,
government officials say, the planning figure is just Pounds 10m.
At the islands' secretariat on Thatcher Drive, Mr Ronald Sampson, chief
executive, describes it as 'perhaps the greatest reduction in revenue that
any country will experience short of having a war.'
Public works, including the upgrading of tracks into something resembling
proper roads, have run out of money.
The good times have nonetheless left their imprint. A new hospital and
school have been built. With a gradual migration from 'camp' - the country
areas - residents say Stanley has become more bustling and urban.
Japanese four-wheel drive vehicles can be spotted among the Land Rovers.
Outlying settlements now have telephones and next month should receive
television programmes.
But where else do the armed forces provide the only television service?
Sparseness, Englishness and remoteness make for an odd society. Darts
matches and sheepdog trials are covered live on radio. The islands have no
cash machine, no Indian restaurant, no illegal drugs and as yet no dole.
There are as many species of penguin as pubs.
What the islanders are waiting for is offshore oil. Successful exploration
has been carried out in nearby Argentine waters. A seismic survey to the
south is almost complete. Another has started to the north. Mr Sampson says
even getting as far as exploration would bring a dramatic boost in
population.
Oil could transform the islands. But people are in two minds about the
prospect. They value their unspoilt lifestyle. Says Mr Sampson: 'The most
endangered species here would be Falkland Islanders.'
