FT  18 DEC 93 / Serbs to vote as economy crumbles: Laura Silber on the
hardships after three years of war and 19 months of UN sanctions
Journalists from Television Serbia are already toasting the victory of
Serbia's ruling Socialist party ahead of tomorrow's parliamentary elections,
so confident are they of another victory for their sponsors.
Their confidence may be misplaced. All the indications are that the
opposition are more popular and have run a better campaign.
Recent opinion polls indicate that opposition parties, notably DEPOS, the
opposition coalition led by Mr Vuk Draskovic, the ultranationalist Radicals
of Mr Vojislav Seselj, and the centrist Democratic party could pose a
challenge to Socialist majority rule.
But, after three years of war and 19 months of sanctions, Serbia has turned
into something of a never-never land and the results of opinion polls are
rarely borne out by the votes recorded.
'Under normal circumstances, the opposition would be a sure winner, but here
nothing is as it seems,' said a western diplomat, reflecting on whether the
Socialists would, for the third time since the first multiparty elections in
1990, succeed in capturing most of the 250 seats in the Serbian parliament.
As if oblivious to the rapidly deteriorating economy, a monthly inflation
rate of 450,000 per cent and an average wage of Pounds 1.50, the Socialists'
message ahead of the polls has been that President Slobodan Milosevic has
achieved Serbia's national goals and that only he can now secure a Greater
Serbia.
But, picking through rubbish bins, dispensing with colourful dinar notes too
worthless even to bother collecting, the inhabitants of Belgrade appear more
concerned with economic than with national salvation.
In the conviction that Serbs have won the war in Croatia and Bosnia, they
are preoccupied with how to survive.
The opposition has focused on this preoccupation and pitched its campaign at
countering the economic chaos, accusing the government of plunging Serbia's
7.1m voters into drastic impoverishment.
While the Socialists blame the economic situation on the UN sanctions,
imposed for Serbia's violent carve-up of Bosnia, the opposition is charging
that Serbian leaders have used the sanctions to fatten their own foreign
bank accounts.
Pitching for the moral high ground with slogans such as 'posteno',
Serbo-Croat for honesty, the opposition has run a seasoned campaign.
They have criticised Mr Milosevic for giving criminals free rein over
Serbia, by way of reference to Mafia boss, Mr Zeljko Raznatovic, alias
Arkan, the paramilitary leader who has formed a satellite party of the
Socialists in a bid for the extremist vote.
In the hope of deflecting the Socialists' usual charges of treachery, they
have also played the nationalist card.
'Sarajevo, Mostar, Benkovac, Pakrac, that is Serbia,' pledged a charismatic
Mr Draskovic, referring to cities in Bosnia and Croatia.
But they have been able to do little to counter the Socialists' iron grip of
the media.
Nor may they be in a position to counter the Socialists' penchant for
electoral manipulation and fraud: the virtually unknown party of the
Associated Left, led by the wife of Mr Milosevic, has been accused of being
a possible funnel for stolen votes.
And, even if the opinion polls are borne out and the Socialists lose their
majority, Mr Milosevic seems unlikely to bow to the results.
He may allow the opposition a few months in which to cope with the economic
deluge, before calling new elections, or, if really pressed, he could
declare a state of emergency and cement his grip on all institutions in
Serbia.
Whatever the result, the election is unlikely to have furthered the cause of
democracy in Serbia.
