FT  26 MAR 93 / Management: A tax brake on relocation - This 'minor' Budget
change will hit companies hard
'DRACONIAN', 'unwarranted', 'shock horror' were the words used by companies
to describe the unexpected removal in last week's UK Budget of a 40-year-old
package of tax breaks for moving employees from one part of the country to
another.
What may have seemed to the casual observer a minor technical change is
likely to have a profound effect on relocation. It will make companies more
reluctant to move people and could put some of the hundreds of specialist
relocation firms out of business.
At present most of the 175,000 employees moved by their companies each year
have all their expenses paid for them - from house hunting, insuring empty
houses, estate agency fees to compensation for any disturbance. They may
receive further compansation if they are going to a higher cost area.
In the future, most of these payments will become a taxable benefit. Under
the new rules only Pounds 8,000 of moving expenses will be free of tax, and
the existing Pounds 13,440 tax allowance for moving from a cheaper to a
dearer area is to be removed altogether.
'The Pounds 8,000 ceiling bears no relation to the real costs of moving,'
says John Carolan of Black Horse Relocation Services. He estimates that the
typical cost of moving somebody who lives in an Pounds 80,000 house might be
around Pounds 32,000, including the housing allowance and a loss on resale
of the old home. For employees in larger homes the cost can be greater
still: with Pounds 8,000 barely covering the estate agents fees.
The growing band of specialist firms offering relocation consultancy, home
search, moving and conselling services are beginning to get edgy. 'Employers
are going to think a lot harder before moving people,' says Chareline Gibbs
of New Eras, relocation consultants. 'They will have less money to play
with, and won't use outside services for anything they can do in-house.'
Jean Littlejohn, head of relocation at the Automobile Association, says the
company is going to have to rethink its relocation plans. 'We had set up an
effective and efficient package for moving people. Now a lot of our
employees will think twice before moving.'
The main problem, she argues, will come from the sale of existing
properties. At present the AA offers its employees a guaranteed minimum
price for their houses and if it sells the house for more the employee gets
the extra. Under the new rules, if the house is sold for less - a not
uncommon occurance in a falling market - the employee will have to pay tax
on the difference.
Companies face a serious problem: if they leave their employees to pay the
tax on their moving expenses, it may be difficult to persuade them to move
at all. But if they compansate them for the higher tax by paying them more,
then the total costs of the move can become prohibitively high.
'Instead of relocating 30 to 40 people en masse, companies may just move the
key people. A more tax-efficient way of doing it would be to train new
recruits in the area,' says Gibbs.
Sue Shortland, a relocation expert at the Confederation of British Industry,
agrees: 'It all depends on the added value that a person can bring to the
job,' she says.
Over the past few years companies have already cut down on relocation: tax
benefit or not, it is expensive to move people. Says Shortland: 'The
majority of companies only relocate the employees they have to have. Yet you
can always look that little bit harder to cut costs.'
The Inland Revenue argues that the Budget changes have got rid of an unfair
anomoly. Under the old system, employees being moved by their company not
only had their expenses paid, but the benefit was tax free, those who moved
themselves in search of a better job have to pay all the costs and do not
get any tax breaks either.
Moreover, the Revenue reasons there is no point in giving a tax allowance to
people moving to a more expensive area, when what the government is trying
to do is increase the traffic in the opposite direction.
