FT  19 AUG 93 / Sarajevo accord puts UN in charge
THE three sides in the Bosnian peace talks yesterday agreed on a plan to
demilitarise Sarajevo and put the besieged capital under UN administration.
The proposals - agreed 'in principle' on Monday and now fleshed out in more
detail - provide for the city to be run by a UN administrator app-ointed by
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general.
The administrator will be advised by a body comprising four Moslems, three
Serbs, two Croats and one minority representative, probably Jewish.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb leader, said it had been agreed 'to
postpone a solution on Sarajevo for two years and, in the interim, the
capital will be administered by the UN'.
But officials at the Geneva talks pointed out that the agreement was to form
part of a wider Bosnian accord, suggesting it was unlikely to be implemented
quickly. UN officials in New York said the proposals would need a fresh
Security Council resolution and there might be disagreement among member
nations.
Bosnia's Moslem President Alija Izetbegovic played down the significance of
the agreement. It did nothing to 'solve the agony of Sarajevo,' he told the
FT. 'We need the immediate lifting of the siege.'
Fierce fighting elsewhere in Bosnia yesterday threatened to undermine the
Geneva peace talks. A UN protection force official in Zagreb said fighting
was continuing between Moslem and Croat forces in central Bosnia, in spite
of formal agreements for a ceasefire.
UN officials in Sarajevo, meanwhile, reiterated warnings that the 35,000
Moslem inhabitants of Mostar to the south-west, who have been cut off from
humanitarian supplies by fierce fighting between Croat and Serb forces
around the city, were facing critical shortages of food and water.
A Red Cross worker in Mostar confirmed that the situation was deteriorating,
and said the city was under sporadic shelling.
The US yesterday said that Croatia could face economic sanctions if its
troops continued to impede relief supplies to Mostar.
But the State Department said there was no question of threatening military
action against the Croatians along the lines of the threat of air strikes
levelled at the Bosnian Serbs surrounding Sarajevo.
US officials remain reluctant to make any specific promise to contribute
troops to a Bosnia peacekeeping force, should a settlement be reached, but
reaffirmed their general commitment to take part.
Amid continued diplomatic tension between the UN and Nato over possible air
strikes, the Belgian government announced it fully supported
Lieutenant-General Francis Briquemont, the Belgian UN commander in Sarajevo,
in spite of his controversial comments attacking Washington's threatened air
strikes.
Gen Briquemont and Brigadier Vere Hayes, his British chief of staff, were
quoted earlier this week criticising Nato plans for air strikes.
A UN spokesman said late yesterday the organisation now was in a position to
use air power in Bosnia. Ms Madeleine Albright, US envoy and Security
Council president, had been informed.
The UN announced on August 11 that all arrangements were in place for
possible air strikes, but that tests were being carried out. The
announcement indicates these have been completed.
