FT  21 SEP 93 / BNP and Dresdner may extend alliance: Michel Pebereau tells
Peter Martin and Alice Rawsthorn of French bank's strategy
BANQUE Nationale de Paris (BNP), the leading French bank which is the first
candidate for privatisation by France's centre-right government, may extend
its alliance with Dresdner, the German bank with which it has a
cross-shareholding agreement, to include links with other European banks.
Mr Michel Pebereau, BNP chairman, yesterday said before the launch of the
bank's privatisation marketing campaign, that BNP and Dresdner might
consider forging commercial links with other European banks to expand their
retail banking activities into other areas of the European Community.
'The agreement with Dresdner means that BNP's French clients can use the
Dresdner network in Germany and their German clients can use our branches in
France,' said Mr Pebereau. 'Eventually we will need to offer a similar
facility in other countries. It is possible that together we might link up
with banks in Italy or the UK.'
The agreement between BNP and Dresdner, one of a number of cross-border
ventures recently concluded in European financial services, enables both
banks to take up to 10 per cent of the other's equity. The share swap will
not be implemented until after BNP's privatisation, which is scheduled for
completion by December 20.
The BNP chairman described the Dresdner alliance as central to his group's
strategy in retail banking and international banking for corporate clients,
its second main area of activity.
Mr Pebereau and the BNP board are this week beginning a series of marketing
presentations in preparation for the bank's sale to the private sector. The
share issue comes at a time when BNP is under considerable financial
pressure. It recently reported a 61 per cent fall in interim net profits
from FFr1.33bn (Pounds 1.9bn) in the first half of 1992 to FFr522m in the
same period this year. Mr Pebereau said that 1993 would be 'a difficult
year' and that 1994 would be 'difficult too' with 'the real recovery' coming
in 1995.
Lex, Page 20
