FT  03 FEB 93 / World Trade News: Indignant EC springs to defence of its
directive - Community officials see utilities ruling as an important
market-opening initiative
CONTRARY to US claims that the European Community is bent on using the
obscure new 'utilities directive' to block US companies' access to
government contracts, EC officials see it as an important market-opening
initiative and one of the most important parts of the single market
programme.
This perhaps explains the outburst on Monday of Sir Leon Brittan, the EC's
most senior trade official, attacking as 'unilateral bullying' Washington's
threat to freeze out EC companies when awarding US federal contracts.
Mr Niels Helveg Petersen, Denmark's foreign minister and president of the EC
Council of ministers described the action as sending the 'wrong signal for
the world economy.'
The Clinton administration said on Monday that from March 22 it would block
EC companies from bidding for millions of dollars' worth of American
government contracts and, potentially more damaging, threatened to withdraw
from the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade's multinational government
procurement code.
The initial action is to be taken as retaliation for what the US says is EC
discrimination against US sales of telecommunications and power-generating
equipment to government utilities following the introduction of the
utilities directive on January 1 1993.
The idea of 'government procurement contracts' may be hazy to many, but they
are nevertheless immensely important.
Overall, Commission officials estimate that they represent some 15 per cent
of EC gross domestic product, of which 7 to 10 per cent - contracts worth
Ecu240bn-Ecu340bn (Pounds 194.88bn-Pounds 276.08bn) - could be opened to
competition by the new directive.
The present row centres on the specific area of contracts for equipment
supplied to telecommunications and electrical utilities in the EC.
The directive allows EC governments to reject tenders for supply contracts
where the non-EC content of the products supplied exceeds 50 per cent of
total value.
It says that in borderline cases preference should be given to tenders where
over half the products are made in the EC, even if the price is up to 3 per
cent higher than that of competing tenders.
The US believes this so-called 'reciprocity' clause is discriminatory. The
EC in turn has complaints about allegedly protectionist US procurement
legislation, including the Buy American Act, which the EC says imposes far
stricter price preference clauses on products of US origin.
In the utilities sector, US and EC central government spending is roughly
equal. US central authorities spend annually Ecu48bn on supplies, Ecu25bn on
services and Ecu7bn on works; the EC spends respectively Ecu40bn, Ecu30bn
and Ecu25bn. About half this could be contract expenditure.
In the trickier area of state expenditure the US figure is Ecu194bn and the
EC's Ecu145bn. Contracts in the telecommunications and electrical equipment
sectors are said to be worth about Ecu50bn annually in the US and roughly
the same amount in the EC.
What galls Sir Leon Brittan and his officials is that they believe the EC
directive will allow US suppliers to compete directly on the EC market and
gain a chunk of that Ecu50bn total.
That is a view shared by the French government, which tried unsuccessfully
to postpone the implementation of the utilities directive before Christmas.
The attempt was made on the grounds that it would put EC suppliers at a
disadvantage compared with their US counterparts.
Brussels officials claim that the public procurement directives are already
having an effect on the sheltered market.
In spite of the fact that not all EC countries have put the utilities
legislation into their national law, about 250 equipment contracts were
advertised for tender in the EC's Official Journal in January.
'We are getting advertisements from every member state in the Community,
major and minor utilities,' one official said yesterday.
About 40 of those notices stated a contract value making a total of some
Ecu500m. That is probably far short of the overall value of advertised
contracts, but still equals the annual value of trade in the whole EC public
procurement sector before legislation was introduced.
In EC-US negotiations at the beginning of January the community offered to
drop temporarily the offending 3 per cent clause on telecoms and electricals
equipment, in exchange for suspension of the Buy American Act at five
federal-controlled power utilities, representing some 25 per cent of the
market.
EC negotiators also pressed for a wider deal covering procurement supplies,
works and services. 'The idea was to meet the American problem on
electricals and telecoms, at least partially, and to give a kick-start to
(multilateral Gatt) negotiations on public procurement,' one EC official
said.
That deal was rejected, and even though the US presidency has changed since
the January negotiations, Commission negotiators say it is unlikely to be
given a new lease of life by the Clinton administration.
Sir Leon has nevertheless urged the US to show restraint, and hopes to
discuss the issue with Mr Mickey Kantor in Washington during his first
formal meeting with his US counterpart, on February 11.
