FT  26 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Fishermen spurn peace move
THE PROBLEMS of the fishing industry are being exacerbated by the antagonism
between catching and processing interests, Mr David Curry, the fisheries
minister, told the Commons yesterday.
He disclosed that when he sought to bring the two sides together earlier in
the week, either in a meeting under his chairmanship or in a discussion
conducted in his office, the offer was accepted by the processors but turned
down by the fishermen's representatives.
Mr Curry stressed that the fact that the two key parts of the industry were
'diametrically opposed' was making the government's task more difficult.
He rejected a demand by Mr Austin Mitchell, Labour MP for Great Grimsby, for
the imposition of a temporary dumping ban on fish imports from Russia.
Mr Curry urged those who favoured such a course to think of the large number
of people in the processing industry whose jobs depended on an adequate
supply of fish.
More fish went into the processing side for fish fingers and other products
than went to the fresh fish market, he said.
The minister also pointed out that the landing of under-sized fish, along
with heavy landings of cod in the ports of Humberside, were among other
factors that had to be taken into account.
While it was difficult to know the precise quantities of Russian fish which
was being imported into Britain, these imports were certainly not sufficient
to account for the whole of the problem in the market, the fisheries
minister ar-gued.
Mr Curry used his speech to appeal to Britain's trawlermen not to engage in
any further blockades of ports, following their previous action, and
suggested that while demonstrating they had failed to notice recent signs
that fish prices had 'firmed considerably'.
Mr Brian Donohue, Labour MP for Cunninghame South, called for an inquiry
into why fish prices in the shops were still high in spite of the 'massive
downturn' at the quayside.
Mr Curry said a distinction had to be made between fish destined for
processing, and fresh fish supplied to the shops.
