FT  05 JAN 93 / Unrest in Polish mines eases
LABOUR unrest in Poland's coal mines abated yesterday, leaving the
government free to address mounting budget problems which threaten to delay
agreement on a crucial 14-month standby loan from the International Monetary
Fund.
The IMF has yet to approve a letter of intent predicated on a 1993 budget
deficit of not more than Zl 80,000bn (Pounds 3.3bn), or about 5 per cent of
GDP. This year's budget has yet to be accepted by parliament but several
votes last week on public sector pay and housing loans have already
increased outlays by Zl 10,000bn.
The continuing budget debate in parliament could push the deficit over Zl
100,000bn. 'The situation has put Mr Jerzy Osiatynski, the finance minister,
in a difficult position and is becoming a serious test of the Polish
cabinet's commitment to tight money policies,' a western financier said
yesterday.
Poland needs the Dollars 660m (Pounds 434m) loan from the Fund to go ahead
with a further 20 per cent reduction in its western government debt agreed
in 1991, and to resume debt restructuring talks with western commercial
banks.
Miners at more than 60 of the 65 Silesian coal mines, who have been on
strike for three weeks, yesterday heeded a call by Solidarity trade union
leaders to return to work. But rival unions denounced Solidarity's new
year's eve deal with the government on restructuring the industry and easing
its financial burdens.
The agreement with Solidarity committed the government to doing little more
than it had already planned, unionists from the breakaway Solidarity 80
movement said at the Makoszowy mine, which, with three other pits, stayed
out on strike yesterday.
Meanwhile, in Lodz, an important textile centre where unemployment is over
20 per cent, Solidarity leaders yesterday called for a regional strike while
talks continued in Warsaw with Mr Jacek Kuron, labour minister, on the
region's problems.
Mr Leszek Balcerowicz, Poland's former deputy premier and finance minister
and a proponent of free market policies, has agreed to become a member of
President Lech Walesa's 49-strong Council of Economic Advisers which meets
for the first time today.
Mr Balcerowicz has held no public role since giving up his government post
at the end of 1991.
