FT  05 APR 93 / The Clinton-Yeltsin Summit: US farmers reap gains from aid
package - Washington's Dollars 1.62bn for Moscow reflects Clinton's
fascination for micro-programmes
THE Dollars 1.62bn US assistance package for Russia is larger than expected
and is carefully crafted to appeal to the US farm and commercial sectors.
It is also, according to officials in Vancouver, 'the maximum the Clinton
administration can do with available funds' that do not require approval by
Congress.
In its detail, it is very much the handiwork of President Clinton, whose
fascination for interventionist micro-programmes is well established.
The predictably largest component, about Dollars 900m, is for subsidised
food sales and grants, an attraction to US farmers and, through its use of
the Food for Progress programme, a way round the block on sales financed
through the Commodity Credit Corporation caused by Russia's Dollars 630m of
arrears.
The US intends disbursing its food aid mostly over the next half-year before
the Russian crop is harvested. The separate Dollars 194m food assistance
programme, also involving Food for Progress, covers direct delivery to those
in need and stocks for Russian commodity auctions.
The US is also making much of the private sector development elements of the
package, worth about Dollars 148m. Of this, in 1993, Dollars 50m has been
earmarked for the Russian-American enterprise fund for small business, a
further Dollars 60m to promote privatisation and Dollars 20m for
agri-business co-operation.
The 'Democracy Corps Initiative,' worth another Dollars 48m, is designed to
assist Russian progress in its transition from authoritarian rule.
Programmes, each worth a few million dollars, encompass education, the law,
administration, the media and other aspects of the market economy.
The Dollars 6m officer resettlement plan, a direct response to an appeal
from the Russian government, is initially a pilot project to provide 450
houses for returning Russian officers over the next 16 months.
The trade and investment segment, to which the US attaches particular
importance because of its potential appeal for US businesses, is dominated
by Dollars 232m of credits and insurance from the Eximbank and the Overseas
Private Insurance Corporation. It comprises the recently finalised Dollars
82m Eximbank loan to finance the sale of Caterpillar pipeline construction
machinery and a Dollars 150m Opic package in support of Conoco's 'polar
lights', a large oil development scheme.
The US will also support full Russian membership of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade and seek to extend to Russia the benefits of its
Generalised System of Preferences (GSP), granting duty-free access into the
US of a wide range of products from developing countries. Russia, which like
the former Soviet Union is excluded from GSP, last year shipped to the US
Dollars 46m in goods that would have qualified for GSP treatment, a volume
expected to increase sharply.
The Dollars 38m energy and environment initiative consists of a fistful of
programmes for improved energy efficiency and environmental clean-up. A
further Dollars 215m will be available this year to assist the dismantling
of Russian nuclear, chemical and other weaponry.
Two new high-level committees have also been established. Vice-President Al
Gore and Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, will focus on trade and
investment, while Mr Ron Brown, the commerce secretary, and deputy prime
minister Mr Alexander Shokhin are to chair a US-Russian business development
committee.
Laurie Morse adds from Chicago: The Dollars 700m earmarked for new grain
sales will restart farm exports that have been stalled since November 30,
when Russia fell behind on its interest payments.
US grain prices, which rose slightly on Friday at the Chicago Board of Trade
ahead of the Vancouver summit, are expected to rally further today.
