FT  08 MAR 93 / Politics in the age of the microchip
It matters that Mr Al Gore, America's vice president, cares passionately
about technology. One of the peculiarities of modern politics is that most
politicians spend most of their time on issues that have little or no
bearing on the future prosperity of their nations. Diplomacy, for example,
continues to outrank economics and finance, which in turn outrank science
and technology. Yet we are living in the age of the microchip not the age of
Metternich. Since the great depression, technological change (something
beyond the ken of diplomats and economists) is reckoned to have accounted
for about two thirds of the rise in global living standards.
One reason for being confident about America's long-term future is the
attention it is now paying to technology. The Clinton-Gore policy paper
Technology for America's Economic Growth signals a fundamental shift in US
priorities. During the cold war, technology policy was driven by a desire to
maintain a military lead over the former Soviet Union. The US ploughed huge
sums into two areas - basic science and defence research and development. By
any standards, the policy was a resounding success. US academics head the
Nobel prize lists in every category of basic science while the Pentagon
enjoys a near monopoly of the world's smartest weapons.
But with US industrial dominance taken for granted, no attention was paid to
economic competitiveness. Last year only 2 per cent of the Dollars 73bn
federal R&amp;D budget was spent on projects relevant to manufacturing industry.
Total spending on civilian R&amp;D accounted for only 1.9 per cent of national
income, against 2.7 per cent in Germany and 3.0 per cent in Japan.
The Clinton administration is determined to make industrial expansion the
main goal of federal technology policy. Free market economists are making
the predictable response, which is that the lure of big profits will always
be the most effective spur to commercial innovation. They are correct, but
they are wrong to imply there is nothing government can do to help. Many of
the most important technologies of the 20th century, including computers and
jet engines, were initially wholly dependent on the public purse.
The Clinton-Gore technology plan is deliberately modest in scope and seems
to avoid many of the pitfalls of old-style industrial policies. It envisages
additional spending of only Dollars 17bn over four years - hardly an
irresponsible goal. It recognises that the military R&amp;D machine can be wound
down only gradually. The civilian share of the federal R&amp;D budget is
projected to rise from about 40 per cent to just over 50 per cent by 1998.
Over time, the network of 700 federal laboratories will be expected to
devote up to 20 per cent of their budgets to R&amp;D partnerships with industry,
against less than 5 per cent today.
The strategy admittedly does not entirely avoid the error of trying to pick
winners - Washington wants to help US industry develop new 'clean car'
technologies. But the single biggest boost to civilian innovation is a
research and experimentation tax credit worth about Dollars 2bn a year which
will not discriminate between different sectors.
There are, moreover, at least two big ideas that could pay off handsomely.
The first is the national network of 'information superhighways' long
championed by Mr Gore. Drawing an analogy with publicly subsidised railways
in the 19th century, Mr Gore believes that huge productivity gains will be
possible if all businesses, government agencies, schools and households can
ultimately be linked in a national fibre optic grid. The plan is to provide
modest subsidies for groups wanting to tap into such a communications
network, thus giving the private sector an incentive to accelerate plans for
its construction. As with the big infrastructure projects of the past,
information superhighways could spur a new generation of commercial
technologies.
The other big idea also draws on an historical parallel. US farms achieved
huge gains in productivity this century partly as a result of agricultural
'extension' services that ensured rapid dissemination of new technologies
and management techniques. Building on past pilot projects, the Clinton
administration wants to create a national network of manufacturing extension
centres to make sure that the nation's 360,000 small and medium-sized
manufacturers have access to the latest technologies and training
techniques.
The Clinton-Gore plan will also promote so-called 'agile manufacturing'
programmes and 'regional technology alliances'. The idea is to use the
flexible corporate relationships pioneered in dynamic regions such as
Silicon Valley as a template for general industrial development. It will
thus encourage the formation of regional clusters or networks of companies
and research institutes to share information and jointly develop new
products and markets.
The Clinton administration's attempt to reorient US federal science and
technology policy is still at the embryonic stage. But it would be a mistake
to assume it will be counter-productive just because interventionist
policies have a mixed record in Europe and Japan. On the contrary, what is
now happening in the US may well become a model for a new breed of
intelligent industrial policies - that is if politicians wake up to the
importance of science.
