FT  12 JAN 93 / Saddam pushes UN resolve to the limit: Further allied
attacks on Iraq would allow Mr Saddam to reinforce his political posture as
the only Middle Eastern leader willing to stand up to the world's largest
military power
PRESIDENT Saddam Hussein's recent actions suggest that he is moving from the
merely provocative to the almost reckless in his challenges to the United
Nations and the US-led Gulf war alliance.
He has chosen to test the resolve of the UN in three ways. First, by sending
aircraft and surface-to-air missiles into the exclusion zone south of the
32nd parallel. Second, by refusing to allow UN inspectors to fly into
Baghdad to continue their search for weapons of mass destruction. And third,
by sending hundreds of Iraqis across the newly demarcated border with Kuwait
to carry off missiles, weapons and other equipment.
Any one of these actions could be taken as a sufficiently serious breach of
the post-Gulf war UN resolutions to warrant a military response. Taken
together the three provocations indicate that the Iraqi leader is prepared
to withstand air strikes by the American, British and French forces based in
Saudi Arabia and the Gulf.
The Iraqi leader's response last week to the ultimatum for removing
surface-to-air missiles from the air exclusion zone revealed what an
apparently risky game he was playing.
Baghdad continued its belligerent statements right up to the deadline last
Friday night and ultimately relied on US electronic surveillance to decide
that the missiles had been moved to positions where they no longer posed a
threat. The Iraqis left themselves no other avenue for retreat and
subsequently denied they had bowed to US demands.
They have embarked on a scarcely less reckless course by refusing UN weapons
inspectors the right to fly into Baghdad in their own aircraft. Last August,
President George Bush was believed to have been ready to order air strikes
if Iraq refused a request by the weapons team to visit ministries in
Baghdad.
At the last moment the UN team did not file the request and confrontation
was postponed, but shortly afterwards Washington decided, in conjunction
with Britain and France, that action had to be taken to protect the Shia
population in the south against further attacks by the Baghdad regime. By
blocking the UN team from even entering Iraq, Mr Saddam will be well aware
of the possible response.
Against this already tense background, the incursion by Iraqis into the
border area near the port of Umm Qasr, part of which reverts to Kuwait under
the redrawn border, was sure to set off even louder alarm bells. In part it
can be explained by the provision for Iraq to remove some of its equipment
before the new border comes into effect, but seizing a range of weaponry as
UN observers watched made the incursion wholly political in its effect.
In being so provocative Mr Saddam would appear to have calculated that
whatever the outcome, his own position within Iraq need not be weakened. As
was seen from the Gulf war, a massive military defeat did not seriously
weaken his grip on power.
Further allied attacks on Iraqi military installations, such as were
threatened last week, may not prove any more effective in achieving the
Western aim of forcing a change of regime in Baghdad.
On the other hand, they would allow Mr Saddam to reinforce his political
posture as the only Middle Eastern leader willing to stand up to the world's
largest military power at a time when there is widespread regional anxiety
about the danger of Iraq being split into three.
With over 400 Palestinians stranded by Israel in southern Lebanon in
defiance of a UN resolution and Islamic nations meeting to protest at the
suffering of Bosnian Moslems, the Iraqi-inspired crisis in the Gulf is also
well timed to highlight the contrasts in US attitudes.
If Mr Saddam calculates that he has not too much to lose by provoking
President Bush during his final days in office, he must also reckon that he
has a chance of harvesting bigger political gains by facing down the allies.
There is an undoubted perception in the Gulf, including Iran, that Mr Bill
Clinton will be less ready to order American armed forces into action than
Mr Bush. Arab and Iranian officials have absorbed the simplistic headline
messages that Mr Clinton will be devoting the greater part of his energies
to resolving domestic, economic issues.
But the single most difficult calculation to be made about Mr Saddam is how
vulnerable he feels to Iraq's mounting economic difficulties when added to
the knowledge that he cannot indefinitely sustain a situation which denies
his forces access to large parts of the country.
As his refusal to withdraw from Kuwait demonstrated, Mr Saddam is a gambler
whose calculation of the odds defies normal bookmaking mathematics. He might
think on this occasion that he is placing a quite modest bet which, for him
at least, is likely to pay some sort of a dividend.
1992
End-July: Iraqi troops surround Shia strongholds in south after intensifying
air attacks on the rebels.
August: Iraq continues delaying tactics over UN inspections, and concern
grows among western allies over the Shias. On August 26, the US, UK and
France declare an air exclusion zone in southern Iraq to protect the Shias
from air attack.
September/November: Confrontations between Iraq and the allies quieten as
the US presidential election campaign moves towards its climax with the
victory of Bill Clinton. December 27: US aircraft down Iraqi warplane in
southern air exclusion zone
December 29: US says Iraqi aircraft made more sorties in the southern
exclusion zone but no shots were fired at them.
1993
January 2-3: Iraqis cross Kuwaiti border in apparent attempt to take
equipment such as water tanks and electricity cables they say belong to
Iraq. They are reported to leave empty-handed.
January 5: US expresses concern at Iraq's deployment of radar and
surface-to-air missiles inside the exclusion zone and says it is considering
how to respond.
January 6: US, UK and France, supported by Russia, demand removal of
batteries within 48 hours or the allies will 'respond appropriately and
decisively'.
January 7: US reports Iraqis begin dispersing missiles.
January 8-9: US reports further movement of missiles, as well as aircraft,
finally concluding that all the batteries had been dismantled and moved back
to original sites.
January 10-11: Iraqis cross Kuwaiti border and seize abandoned armaments and
begin dismantling naval base warehouses. The incursions coincide with Iraqi
moves to prevent UN teams from coming into the country and declarations that
Iraq will free itself of the air exclusion zones.
