FT  05 JUL 93 / Advocate of active government: Philip Stephens on
soul-searching in the two main UK political parties
Mr John Smith should be luxuriating in Mr John Major's misfortunes. It is
not often an opposition leader can count on a government to shoot itself in
the head. The last to do so with such unerring accuracy was the government
of the then Mr James Callaghan. That brought Mrs Margaret Thatcher to power
and the 14 years of Conservative rule of which Mr Major remains the
bene-ficiary.
But the Labour leader has less cause for celebration. If the government is a
shambles, the opposition has yet to show it can win the lasting affection of
an electorate angry with the Conservatives. The fear in too many Labour
minds is that while voters may be ready now to desert the government, in the
end they will prove once again to be strictly temporary converts.
A year on from his election as Labour leader Mr Smith is the target for
sniping at Westminster. The aggressive modernisers who want to replace
socialism with social democracy are impatient with his careful, studied
approach to change. The traditionalists accuse him of being too easily
pushed into betrayal of Labour's past.
More curiously he finds himself in bitter confrontation with the trade
unions which 12 months ago anointed him as Mr Neil Kinnock's successor. If
he loses his fight to weaken the unions' collective voice in party
decision-making his leadership will be severely compromised.
Mr Smith is unmoved. A self-assured Scottish advocate whose politics are
infused with a streak of Presbyterian moralism, he refuses to sweat in the
Westminster hothouse. Confident or complacent, he points to Labour's gains
in the county council elections in May (Labour is running Norfolk for the
first time in 103 years) and to its successes in exploiting Mr Major's
troubles with everything from the economy and Maastricht to Mr Asil Nadir
and party funding.
So he replies briskly to criticisms of a 'remote' style. 'They say that of
every leader.' Suggestions that Labour's message lacks resonance in the
country are brushed aside. 'I was elected to win the next election. That is
my overriding purpose. I try to think every day what I have done to advance
that purpose. And I will win the next election. There is no doubt about
that.' He insists he has set out with clarity the policy framework for that
election. The independent Social Justice Commission is to publish soon the
first comprehensive map of British society since the Beveridge Report 50
years ago. The national policy forum, which now steers policy-making, has
prepared detailed approaches to the economy, Europe and democracy.
But if there was a recurring theme during the interview - the 'big idea'
always demanded of politicians by political commentators - it was his
conviction that government can and must change things. 'The notion of the
government taking reponsibility is the key division between the political
parties.' Labour's guiding principle was simple. 'There is no dramatic
choice between prosperity and justice. The task of politics is to improve
our society. A strong economy and a fair society is my slogan.'
He began with an uncharacteristically passionate commitment to
constitutional change: Scottish and Welsh devolution, regional assemblies,
stronger local government, a bill of rights and freedom of information, a
purge of Whitehall quangos. 'Our constitution and our forms of government
have become antique and foolish. I really think we have to move from being
subjects of the Queen to citizens of a modern state.'
He was not (lest the tabloids take fright) talking about abolishing the
monarchy. But he believes the theory of the British constitution - based on
the sovereignty of the monarch in parliament - has prevented explicit
statements of the rights and obligations of citizens.
Parliament had become 'weak and ineffective'; the spawning in areas such as
health and education of a 'new magistracy' of officials appointed by
Whitehall was 'offensive to democracy'; local government had been
undermined.
Mr Smith wants pluralism. 'Decentralisation of government, a new style of
open government, systems that lead to more honest government.' This was not
simply a chattering classes issue. There is a moral undertone. 'There is a
great deal of unease in this country not just about our economic decline and
the social disintegration but also about the style and manner and purpose of
government.'
What then about electoral reform? The party's inquiry under Professor
Raymond Plant had called for a proportional voting system for the House of
Commons to put an end to the winner-takes-all principle in British politics.
Mr Smith rejected the Plant recommendation but has promised a referendum.
Political opportunism? He was unapologetic. A change in the voting system
would break the essential link between MP and constituency. 'You need to
have constituencies in the British political system. You cannot have two
classes of members, one without a constituency and one with.'
Nor did he want compromise government. 'Inevitably you end up with coalition
governments in which the tilt to left or right is decided by the middle
party. I can see why the Liberal Democrats are in favour of a system like
that because they would never be out of power.' But his promise of a
referendum was serious: 'I accept that this is an important debate which has
to be decided. I genuinely want a referendum, there will be one.'
One thing there would not be was any pre-election deal with Mr Paddy
Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats. 'We are not interested in
electoral pacts or electoral deals for the very simple reason that parties
do not own votes. I have no right to instruct Labour voters to vote in any
particular way.'
It is on the economy though that Mr Smith will stand or fall. He must shape
an economic policy that persuades a sceptical electorate he can be trusted
with their taxes.
The party has quietly abandoned the tax plans which cost it in 1992 the
pivotal support of southern England's aspiring classes. Nationalisation is
no longer a word that passes Labour lips. New spending commitments have been
outlawed. But even those who follow politics closely are unsure where Mr
Smith would strike a balance between the respective roles of markets and
states, between spending and taxes.
He disclaims the party's dirigiste past. It is no longer interested in state
ownership or planning, in spending for the sake of it or in soaking the
rich. But neither does it share the Tories' faith in markets.
Back to active government. 'We are defining what governments can do and what
markets can do. Let markets decide the price of potatoes but let them not
decide on access to education, health or on the shape of our training policy
because they can't do that.'
Government must act as catalyst for advance; investing in education,
training, science and technology. More public spending then? Yes. 'It's
investment and you have got to invest to get a rate of return.' Mr Smith
sees the trap; spending, he adds, will only rise as fast as the country can
afford. That will depend on stronger economic growth. But on the principle
of intervention he is unapologetic: 'Government must do the things that
without government intervention will not happen. That is not a dirigiste,
command-style economic policy.'
Nor does intervention mean direction from Whitehall. Just as political power
should be diffused to the regions so too should the government's role in
supporting industry. For Mr Smith the model is not the National Enterprise
Board of the 1960s but the Scottish Development Agency of the 1980s.
A long-term approach is the way forward. 'The most important thing about
economic policy is to get away from short-termism which is the endemic
British disease and a very strong feature of Conservative government.' As
for his tax plans they will be spelt out only much closer to the election.
They will be fair but not penal.
All this though will be irrelevant if Mr Smith loses his conference showdown
over party democracy with those erstwhile allies Mr John Edmunds and Mr Bill
Morris. Mr Smith has staked out a position on the issue of
one-member-one-vote which most of the unions have flatly rejected. On the
present arithmetic he would lose the vote at conference. Someone has to
blink. Mr Smith says it will not be him. 'I will fight on. My argument is
right. I will maintain it.' Quite simply he cannot afford to lose.
