FT  20 APR 93 / Parliament and Politics: The respectable face of an unholy
alliance - Labour's voice on European affairs talks to Philip Stephens
MR George Robertson's European credentials are as good as any in the House
of Commons. The 47-year-old MP for Hamilton was a friend of Brussels long
before it was fashionable to be so in the higher reaches of the Labour
party.
He played a pivotal role in persuading the opposition to put enthusiastic
Europeanism at the centre of its manifesto for the 1992 election. His
reputation among some of the less enlightened Labour MPs as a 'Euro-fanatic'
played a not-insignificant part in denying him enough votes to win the place
he deserves in the shadow cabinet.
But that was last year. Now Labour's European affairs spokesman spends every
waking hour making it as difficult as possible for Mr John Major to ratify
the British version of the Maastricht treaty.
Mr Robertson is adamant that his party is not out to destroy Maastricht.
Sitting in his Westminster office yesterday he stressed repeatedly that its
tactics were legitimate. 'Labour at no stage has organised any filibuster
against the legislation. Nor has it supported attempts to wreck the treaty.
We have acted like an opposition. We have not made life easy for them. But
we have not prejudiced the long-term future of the treaty,' he said.
Later this week, he added, Labour would join the government in opposing the
referendum on the treaty demanded by Euro-sceptics on the Conservative back
benches.
But the opposition will press to the limit its campaign to force the
government to abandon Britain's opt-out from the treaty's social chapter
whatever the threats from Mr Major that without such an exclusion he would
not ratify.
Before last night's outburst by left-wing Euro-sceptics Mr Robertson had
been among a delegation which persuaded Mr Michael Morris, the deputy
speaker, to accept for debate another amendment to the bill which might -
just might - derail the ratification process.
The amendment, the latest in a series opposing the social chapter opt-out,
is designed to face Mr Major with the choice of abandoning either the
opt-out or the whole treaty. It requires the Commons to take an explicit
vote before final ratification - or rather a still-more explicit vote than
the one demanded by a similar amendment already accepted by the government -
on the social chapter protocol.
The Tory Euro-sceptics may join the opposition in voting to delete the
opt-out, hoping that Mr Major would then abandon the whole treaty. Labour's
judgment was that the prime minister would drop the opt-out rather than
become the pariah of Europe by wrecking the treaty.
Mr Robertson will continue to press for yet another vote - on the so-called
amendment 27 - which would put still more pressure on the prime minister
over the social chapter.
This less-than-holy alliance with the Tory Euro-sceptics is not that easy to
explain to the outside world. It smacks of political opportunism. Until
yesterday's move by Mr Tony Benn to censure the deputy speaker, it had
allowed the opposition to paper over its own internal divisions by
persuading the Labour Euro-sceptics to keep relatively quiet.
The stance sufficiently disturbed President Francois Mitterrand of France
for him to seek a personal assurance from Mr John Smith, the Labour leader,
that the opposition would not destroy the treaty for the rest of the
community.
But Mr Robertson is unrepentant. Mr Major, not Labour, had delayed the
passage of the bill by promising the Tory Euro-sceptics that the critical
third reading would not come until after the second Danish referendum on May
18, he said.
Within that timetable, Labour had demanded no more than the proper scrutiny
demanded by legislation of such significance. 'We have taken a specific
decision not to support amendments which would wreck the treaty . . our sole
interest is not to prevent ratification but to get the social chapter which
all the other 11 countries are going to enjoy,' Mr Robertson said. Britain's
European partners did not want the opt-out.
He had checked with other governments that a decision by Britain at this
late stage to accept the social provisions would not delay ratification. The
necessary changes could be made in an inter-governmental conference lasting
a matter of hours. Whatever Mr Major said now, if parliament voted for the
social chapter it was 'inconceivable' that the prime minister would refuse
to sign 'something that everyone else in Europe regards as sensible'.
Maybe. Mr Robertson is a skilful enough politician to make it sound
convincing. Nor could anyone doubt the honesty of his attachment to the
social chapter. But somehow he cannot quite dispel the impression that
Labour, like the government, will emerge eventually from the Maastricht saga
with something less than honour.
