FT  23 APR 93 / Arts: A Scottish 'Norma' to cherish - Opera
One of the enduring memories from my year at opera school is watching
Caballe rehearse Norma, tripping lightly along the coloratura up to top C's
and down again. Unfortunately it never sounded as easy as that in the
performances. The role seems to invite vocal mishaps, as when a later
soprano at Covent Garden opened her mouth to deliver the crowning top note
of her entrance aria and nothing came out.
What a pleasure it is after so many years of disappointments to come out of
a performance in which the soprano had all the notes - the high, the low,
the loud, the soft, all there for her to pluck from the air as deftly as a
sprig of Norma's holy mistletoe. Jane Eaglen was the singer, to whom
Scottish Opera has entrusted its new production of Bellini's opera. In
recent seasons she has done them proud in several other roles and this was
her due.
There are just a couple of ways in which she falls short of the ideal
Bellinian soprano and it is best to get those out of the way at the outset.
The voice is not really Italianate at heart, not vibrant with emotion, open,
intense; nor does she always drive home a phrase at the point where it
counts (although I note that her final solo, 'Deh] non volerli vittime',
raised the emotional temperature enormously).
In every other respect this was a magnificent display of confident and
secure singing. Miss Eaglen is more ambitious vocally now. Her 't'imploro'
to Adalgisa melted into the softest tone. The cadenza up to a high B in
front of Oroveso was a marvel of floated quiet singing from so big a voice.
It comes as no surprise to read in the programme that her future engagements
are to be in Vienna, Chicago, Paris etc.
As this opera contains some of the finest of Bellini's music, it would seem
to invite the sublime in a production, but all it usually gets is the
ridiculous (remember Covent Garden's pack of neanderthal yokels galumphing
around the stage?) Judge's production has its share of the risible. The
priestesses enter like a chorus-line of Druidic Tiller-girls, clad in the
latest snazzy bronze body jewellery with multi-coloured fans on their heads,
and they wield wicked-looking scythes.
But I must not mock. As productions of Norma go, this one at least has the
advantage of an ingenious set, which gives us a real sacred grove, in which
the Druids can attend to their rites; and Judge is one of the most able at
working with his singers to bring drama, emotion and personality from the
music. From Jane Eaglen he drew far more than the usual stock melodramatic
poses.
It was unfortunate that the scheduled Pollione was only able to act the
role, while another sang from the side of the stage. Katherine Ciesinski
sounded somewhat curdled of tone as Adalgisa, but she was brave enough to
take the top part in her first duet with Norma, when other singers of the
role usually shelter faint-heartedly underneath. Norman Bailey, looking a
Merlin-like elder with long, white locks, was a suitably grave Oroveso.
John Mauceri conducted, giving us every note of the score as it is printed
in most editions, plus the calm ending to the 'Guerra' chorus, which Bellini
cut from his autograph. The ornamentation, worked out during rehearsals, was
among the most stylish of its kind. In fact, all told, this was among
Scottish Opera's finest efforts: the company has provided a fine showcase
for its world-class Norma.
Production sponsored by the Peter Moores Foundation. Further performances at
the Theatre Royal, Glasgow until May 6, then Aberdeen, Edinburgh and
Newcastle
