FT  10 MAR 93 / Money Markets: Futures drift lower
EUROPEAN currency futures drifted lower yesterday in generally quiet
trading.
Although the market is still expecting the Bundesbank to ease its officially
posted rates on Thursday next week, one dealer commented that expectations
had raced ahead too quickly.
'I think there has been too much expectation priced into the market and
people are now reining back,' he said.
The June Euromark futures contract eased slightly from an opening of 93.12,
leading to a sharper fall in French franc futures. The June Pibor contract,
after starting the day at 91.58, dropped to around 91.52.
Sterling futures also slipped on the day, with a weaker pound and concern
over the government's defeat in the House of Commons over the Maastricht
treaty compounding the downward drift.
Few in the UK money markets are expecting a rate cut on Budget Day next
week. Even afterwards, dealers are not optimistic that the authorities will
ease policy at an early stage, especially while the pound is languishing at
around the DM2.40 level.
The market appears to have taken on board comments by the Bank of England
that it does not want to see the pound significantly lower than current
levels.
One dealer complained that each time sterling recouped some of its losses, a
full scale recovery was scuppered by political mishaps.
'So long as the government keeps shooting itself in the foot with the pound,
the longer it is going to be before they can cut rates,' he said.
The June short sterling contract, which opened at 94.56, was trading around
7 basis points lower at the close.
After the Bank of England unexpectedly forecast a cash surplus on Monday,
yesterday saw the usual forecast for a liquidity shortage. Ironically, the
market was reluctant to part with paper and overnight rates were forced up
to around 8 per cent, compared with Monday's 4 per cent.
One-week money firmed to just above 6 per cent from 5 1/2 per cent. Further
out there was little movement. The key three-month interbank rate was
unchanged at around 5 5/16 per cent on the offered side.
The shortage, which was revised during the day to Pounds 1.3bn, was relieved
in the late afternoon when the Bank provided late assistance.
