FT  07 APR 93 / Shell unveils Pounds 1.3bn plan to extend life of Brent
field
THE RESERVES of the UK's biggest oil and gas field will be significantly
boosted by a Pounds 1.3bn engineering project on a scale never carried out
before anywhere in the world.
Shell UK yesterday unveiled a five-year scheme which will extend the
productive life of the Brent field in the North Sea by more than 10 years.
It will add the equivalent of a medium-sized gas field and a small oilfield
to the UK's hydrocarbon reserves.
The project accords with the government's desire to see oil companies
extract more oil and gas from existing fields. To encourage this, it
announced in last month's Budget the lowering of petroleum revenue tax and a
sharp cut in tax allowances for new oilfield exploration.
Mr Chris Fay, managing director of Shell UK Exploration and Production, said
in Aberdeen that the project had been planned over the past three years and
he had been 'as surprised as everyone else by the Budget changes'. Although
the Brent project would benefit from the changes, their overall effect on
Shell Expro's North Sea operation was 'basically neutral'.
The UK's oil production from the North Sea peaked in 1986, but oil companies
expect it to continue well into the next century. The Brent project, which
could be emulated in other fields, will further prolong it.
The project, which received Department of Trade and Industry approval
yesterday, involves progressively lowering the pressure in the field to
release large quantities of gas and some oil which are currently
unrecoverable. This will be achieved by modifications to the platforms.
The Brent field, off Shetland, is the biggest producing both oil and gas in
the North Sea. It produces 13 per cent of the UK's oil and 10 per cent of
its gas, but its oil production peaked in 1985 and some 73 per cent of the
recoverable oil has been produced.
The new project should extend its life from the originally projected
run-down date of 1998 to about 2010. It will add 34m barrels of oil to
Brent's recoverable reserves, bringing them to 1.976bn barrels, and will
boost the field's recoverable reserves of gas by 1.5 trillion cubic feet,
bringing them to 5.5 trillion cu ft.
When the field is abandoned, about 55 per cent of its oil and 80 per cent of
its gas will have been recovered. From the turn of the century, gas will be
the dominant production from the field, greatly simplifying production and
reducing operating costs.
Shell Expro, which operates the field on behalf of a 50-50 joint venture of
Shell and Esso, said gas was currently locked into the oil by the high
pressure at which the field is operated. 'When the pressure is lowered, the
gas comes out of the solution.'
The Brent field will remain in production while the work is carried out,
with one platform being shut down at a time, reducing output. Facilities in
three of the four platforms will be modified or replaced to permit
depressurisation and to handle the increased quantities of gas. All four
platforms will be upgraded and refurbished.
