FT  18 FEB 93 / Money Markets: Sterling futures rally
SHORT sterling futures staged a rally in late trading after Scandinavia Bank
 -rumoured to deal on behalf of George Soros, the international investor -
bought actively.
In earlier trading the March and June contracts had drifted lower on the
back of the Bank of England's quarterly inflation report and better than
expected retail sales figures.
The Bank's report warned that a further reduction in interest rates could
jeopardise the government's aim of defeating inflation. The retail sales
figures, although widely leaked over the weekend, nevertheless heartened the
market. Sales rose by 1.6 per cent in January, month-on-month, against
expectations of a 0.5 per cent monthly increase.
In the last 15 minutes of trading, the June contract rallied to 94.50,
although this was still below the previous close of 94.57. The March
contract ended at around 93.98, a net 6 basis points below the previous
night's close.
Traders said that two weeks ago the market was pricing in a rate cut at
around the time of the Budget next month, but that it had now become
sceptical about early monetary easing. This conflicted with the prevailing
view on the foreign exchanges that the govern-ment would put its desire to
see economic recovery ahead of its low-inflation goal.
A money market dealer commented: 'Today, people are talking about the
government waiting until the summer for another rate cut, if we are to get
one at all.'
Interbank rates were once again fairly static, although easy liquidity meant
that rates at the shorter end eased. The Bank's forecast liquidity shortage
was Pounds 200m. This was relieved in the afternoon when the Bank purchased
Pounds 208m of band-1 bank bills at 5 7/8 per cent. The overnight rate
stayed at around 5 per cent for most of the day.
Trading in French Pibor futures was described by one dealer as weird. The
March contract fell about 10 basis points from the previous close to 88.39,
but the June contract added the same amount to finish at 90.85.
Dealers said there was still talk of a base rate rise in France, with
investors still worrying about the ability of a new centre-right government
to hold the franc in the European monetary system.
In Germany, sentiment about rates remained positive, boosted by hopes of
continued moderate wage agreements.
