FT  16 OCT 93 / Cookery: The renaissance of Britain's apples - Succumb to
the onslaught of imported Golden Delicious? Never
a soggy place this year - features an abundance of hedgerow and garden
fruits: blackberries, rowanberries, elderberries, damsons, apples and pears.
Apples, above all else.
My own trees are sulking, but neighbours complain of being kept awake by the
soft and monotonous tom-tom of their apples thudding to the orchard floor.
In this house, the apple thud comes through the letterbox in the form of
press releases as the high street multiples fall over themselves trying to
out-apple each other.
Competition is healthy, of course, and it is right to celebrate the
renaissance of growing, selling and eating more of Britain's native apples.
Heaven forbid that we should succumb completely to the onslaught of imported
Golden Delicious, or that we should allow the thousands of home-grown
varieties to be whittled down to little more than Cox and Bramley.
I wonder, though, if we are becoming so obsessed by the number of varieties
available that quality is in danger of being overlooked - or, at any rate,
relegated to second place?
Egremont Russets, Ellison's Orange Reds and Ashmead's Kernels may be on sale
in name, but how often are they the real thing? When did you last buy a Cox
and hear the pips rattle inside it? Fruit that has been ripened properly on
the tree is, alas, not easy to buy.
Commercially, almost all apples are pulled prematurely from the tree before
the sugars and flavours have had a chance to develop. Some of the commercial
crop goes straight to the shops. The rest is put to sleep in cold storage, a
limbo from which it can emerge into the market place months later as dull
and uninteresting as it went in. Mediocrity is the price of maximum shelf
life.
Why also, I wonder, do most people think of cooking with apples only in
terms of puddings and cakes? We all know such recipes can be delicious but,
as one who is not particularly sweet-toothed, I favour promoting more
savoury uses of the fruit.
Apples make excellent soups. Try them in partnership with parsnip, fennel,
beetroot or cumin. They also go well with celeriac, chopped and fried
roughly to serve with poultry, or poached and whipped up into a light,
creamy mousse studded with toasted walnuts.
I like the Scandinavian trick of mixing apple sauce with mayonnaise to serve
with pork and ham. Let the apple dominate, or the mayonnaise, depending on
whether the meat is to be served hot or cold.
Apples go well with sausage meat, pheasant and prawns. Recently, at the Lou
Calel in Pujols, near Agen, I was served a wonderful saute of foie gras
garnished with fried apple.
Apple and cheese is another good combination. Here is a recipe that bridges
the gap between sweet and savoury.
SAVOURY APPLE TART (serves 4) Although I have used Cheddar here, this is a
recipe that invites many variations on the theme, using other cheeses both
mild and pungent. Try, for example, Mrs Kirkham's lovely fresh Lancashire
cheese; Mendip goat cheese or traditional French log; or ewe's cheese such
as Ticklemore or pecorino sardo.
Some cheeses take longer to become molten than others, of course, and may
benefit from being added to the tart earlier in the cooking process than I
have specified for Cheddar.
Ingredients: 6-7 oz ready-made puff pastry; 12 oz sharp and aromatic dessert
apples (at this time of year, Charles Ross is a good choice); 1 dozen fennel
seeds; about 2 oz mature farm Cheddar cheese (Keen's would be my first
choice);  1/2 oz flaked almonds, just as they are or toasted lightly; beaten
egg to glaze the pastry.
Method: Roll out the pastry and cut it with a sharp knife to an oblong 8 x
12 inches or slightly more. Trace an inner oblong  1/2 - 3/4 inch from the
edges of the first, taking care not to cut the pastry right through.
Score the pastry borders lightly with a pattern, and knock up the sides with
the back of the knife to encourage the pastry to rise well in baking. Fold
the pastry gently in two, lift it onto a baking tray and unfurl. Chill
briefly.
Peel, quarter, core and slice the apples thinly. Crush the fennel seeds and
sprinkle them over the inner oblong of pastry. Add a grinding of black
pepper and half the almonds.
Lay the apples on top, taking care to keep them within the confines of the
inner oblong. Some cooks might urge you to marshal the apple slices in
military rows but higgledy-piggledy is quicker and looks just as effective.
Chill for 20 minutes or until ready to cook.
Brush the pastry borders with beaten egg (taking care to avoid dribbles down
the sides or the egg will glue the layers together and so prevent a proper
puffing up).
Bake on a preheated baking sheet at 400-425`F/200-220`C (gas mark 6-7) for
20-25 minutes until the pastry is coloured richly, well risen and crisp, and
the fruit is tender.
Grind a little more pepper quickly over the apples, add the grated Cheddar
and then the rest of the almonds. Return the tart to the oven for a just a
few minutes until the cheese is molten.
