FT  18 FEB 93 / Unemployment in the UK: What to do if it happens to you
How long will it take to get another job and how will I find it?
Two thirds of all unemployed people get a new job within six months. Of more
immediate use - although scarcely more reassuring - is the fact that new
jobs are not to be found in the most obvious places.
For executives, typically earning more than Pounds 30,000 a year, answering
job advertisements is likely to net a job in just 20 per cent of cases.
Approaches to headhunters score 10 per cent, while mail shots to companies
will do more for the Post Office's revenue - just 5 per cent of jobs are
landed by this method.
The most effective method is to network: half of executives who get back
into work do it through networking, according to outplacement consultants
Drake Beam Morin (DBM).
What is networking?
The first rule is not to blow your best contacts while you're feeling
shattered - wait until you have regained your equilibrium. You are not
asking those you network for a job but, as Mrs Michele Cozzi from DBM
explains, co-opting them to help with your research.
For example: 'I understand from our mutual friend Fred Bloggs that you're
very knowledgeable about the current state of the widget market. Would you
be able to spare me a few minutes over a coffee . . . ?' The objective of
the phone call is to set up a face-to-face meeting; the purpose of the
meeting is to come away with the names of two or three other people you can
network - plus permission to use your latest contact's name.
It's so long since I've had to write a CV. What's the style?
It needs to be professionally presented, just two pages if possible, and
clear and factual. Do not include salary details unless requested because
you could close off options.
Reverse chronological order, focusing on the past 10 years, is preferable.
You can organise a CV by function, for example sales experience or
management skills, but doing it this way could arouse suspicions. An
employer may think you are concealing your age or that you have been
job-hopping.
Where do I start?
With practicalities. Go to the Jobcentre to sign on. Unemployment benefit is
Pounds 43.10 for a single person, Pounds 26 extra for an adult dependant.
Even if you are not eligible for benefit (most people are - it is not
means-tested) you will get National Insurance credits. You may also be
eligible for other benefits and help with mortgage interest payments.
Towry Law, financial advisers, recommends alerting your bank, mortgage
lender, and education authority if you have children at college and also
compiling a budget.
Useful reading and contacts:
Parting Company - How to Survive the Loss of a Job. Drake Beam Morin, 5
Arlington St, London SW1A 1RA. Pounds 10.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service advises on unfair
dismissal, back pay and disputes. See local phone book. The Department of
Employment runs a free helpline on statutory redundancy payments: 0800
848489.
The Institute of Personnel Management will suggest three approved
consultants who will help you find a job. Tel: 081 946 9100.
Back-to-work guide compiled by Diane Summers.
