FT  05 MAR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: 'Last chance' cocoa talks to
adjourn
COCOA CONSUMING and producing countries will today formally adjourn
unsuccessful talks on a new international cocoa pact with price
stabilisation provisions and agree to return for a fifth round of
negotiations later this year. The 1986 pact expires at the end of September
and cannot be extended.
The current session of United Nations-sponsored talks, billed as the final
round, has made little progress over the past two weeks. The decision to
adjourn rather than abandon the negotiations followed signs yesterday that
some producers were willing to make big concessions on both prices and
financing to secure an agreement with economic provisions.
The two sides will have further consultations under the auspices of the
International Cocoa Council in London before setting a date for the next
two-week negotiating session. The council is to hold its next meeting later
this month.
Mr Alain Gauze, commodities minister of the Ivory Coast, the world's biggest
cocoa producer, yesterday floated new ideas on financing the proposed stocks
withholding scheme for market support, and said the price range to be
defended was 'negotiable'. However, delegates said other producer
representatives were divided on how far to concede consumer demands and
there was insufficient time to reach an agreed producer position before the
talks ended today.
Mr Gauze's proposals, made orally at a meeting of producer countries, go
some way towards bridging the gap between the two sides over the vexed
financing issue. Producers want consumers to share the costs of the new
scheme, while consumers say it should be financed, initially at least, from
the existing assets of the International Cocoa Organisation. These consist
mainly of arrears owed by producers, notably the Ivory Coast and Brazil, and
the 233,000 tonne buffer stock which ceased operations in 1988.
Talking to reporters after the meeting, Mr Gauze said he had suggested a
three-pronged financing scheme. The first prong would be for countries in
arrears to pay for the cost of their own withholding, which would then be
offset against their ICCO debts. This proposal, put forward last week by the
talks' chairman, Mr Peter Lai of Malaysia, has already been accepted by
consumers in principle.
The second would be limited sales from the buffer stock, of both defective
and sound beans, to fund withholdings by new producing members. Consumers
have proposed sales of up to 20,000 tonnes a year to help finance the
overall scheme, Mr Jan van Sluisveld, their spokesman, said.
The third and controversial element would be a levy on cocoa exported to or
imported from non-members. Producer calls for equal burden-sharing with an
across-the-board trade levy have been firmly rejected by consumer countries
while existing resources suffice to finance the new accord. But one consumer
delegate said yesterday that Mr Gauze's proposals were worth considering.
On prices, there has been no movement since Wednesday when consumers
increased their floor price offer from SDR840 to SDR900, while producers
reduced their demand from SDR1,180 to SDR1,040 as proposed by Mr Lai last
week.
The only tangible progress made at the meeting was an agreement by the two
sides last week on a maximum limit of 350,000 tonnes of cocoa to be withheld
from the market.
