FT  09 JUN 93 / Airbus plans jumbo Boeing challenger
THE European Airbus consortium is pressing ahead with plans to develop a
700-800 seat airliner at the same time as its four-partner companies are
studying with Boeing the development of an even larger aircraft.
Boeing executives confirmed at a Financial Times aerospace conference before
the Paris Air Show that their company was also considering a larger version
of its 400-500 seat 747-400 jumbo.
The US company, the world's largest manufacturer of commercial jets, agreed
earlier this year with the four Airbus partners - Aerospatiale of France,
Deutsche Aerospace, British Aerospace and Casa of Spain - to study joint
development of a super jumbo. But Mr Adam Brown, Airbus director of
planning, said yesterday it would be an 800-1,000 seater which would not
compete directly with Boeing's 747-400 which dominates the current 400-500
seater market.
Airbus has thus decided to challenge Boeing with an alternative plan for a
700-800 seater jumbo, called the Airbus A3XX, in a single class
configuration. This would compete with the US company's larger version of
the 747 which it is planning to maintain its dominance of the jumbo market.
Mr Brown told the conference he expected no growth in the commercial
aircraft market over the next 10 years, but he said Airbus remained 'firmly
convinced about the potential viability of our proposed A3XX ultra-high
capacity aircraft'.
New smaller narrow-body airliners were unlikely to be built over the next
decade, he said, but there was a strong case for developing a large capacity
aircraft by the turn of the century. However, given development costs of
more than Dollars 15bn, extensive international collaboration was
inevitable. Airbus was trying to interest Japanese manufacturers in the
A3XX.
Although all the main manufacturers are considering broad co-operation on
such an aircraft, they are also anxious to maintain leadership of any new
collaborative programme. This explains both the discussions between Boeing
and the Airbus partners and their alternative jumbo projects.
At the smaller end of the market, said Mr Brown, the main focus would be on
derivatives of existing airframes rather than wholly new designs. Boeing,
for example, is expected to launch later this year a derivative of its 737
twin-engine narrow body jet.
The financial pressures on airlines, coupled with continuing overcapacity in
the market, were expected to reduce sharply new aircraft programmes over the
next 20 years, Mr Brown warned.
'Over the past 20 years the three prime manufacturers together have on
average launched one major new or derivative programme every year. Over the
next 20 years, it's hard to envisage more than a quarter of this number.'
Mr Homi Mullan, managing director of Chase Investment Bank, said that with
airlines generating inadequate cash flows to support an estimated Dollars
310bn worth of new aircraft required between now and the end of the century,
the World Bank should consider helping more to finance the airline needs of
third world countries. Barely 1 per cent, or the equivalent of Dollars 300m,
of bank infrastructure financing last year supported airline or airport
related projects.
