FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Analysis): Distillers avoid added burden -
Drinks and Tobacco
THE BUDGET brought relief to the Scotch whisky industry but disappointment
to brewers and drinks retailers.
After long and intensive lobbying by the Scotch whisky industry, the
chancellor was finally persuaded not to add to the tax burden on spirits.
'This is very good news for one of Britain's most successful exports and we
appreciate the consideration,' Mr Tony Greener, chairman and chief executive
of Guinness, said yesterday. 'Clearly the chancellor has listened to the
industry and we hope he will do the same next year.'
The Scotch Whisky Association also made it clear that the narrowing of the
tax differential with beer and wine was only 'a move in the right
direction'.
The industry, faced with a 10 per cent decline in scotch sales and the
closure of distilleries, had argued strongly that any tax increases would
lead to further job losses. It also warned that excessive taxation of
spirits in the UK encouraged similar taxation policies in other European
Community states, endangering exports.
The chancellor acknowledged these arguments - but the clinching argument may
have been the fall in tax revenue from spirits.
In 1991-92, the government's tax receipts of Pounds 2.6bn from spirits were
2.3 per cent lower in real terms than in the previous year. Falling sales
since then are estimated to have cost the chancellor a further Pounds
50m-Pounds 60m.
The chancellor also recognised the drinks industry's concern about the
impact of cross-Channel shopping - encouraged by lower Continental taxes -
on the brewers and drinks retailers.
Even though estimates suggest the chancellor may lose up to Pounds 200m in
revenue this year from duty-paid drinks imports, he did nothing to avert the
danger. The increase of 5 per cent in duties on beer and wine adds 1.5p to a
pint of beer and 5.5p to a bottle of wine.
The Brewers' Society condemned the duty increase as a further incentive to
duty-paid imports of beer, which already accounted for nearly one pint in 10
drunk at home. 'It will have serious consequences for UK business and jobs,'
said the society's director, Mr Robin Simpson. 'French retailers will be
laughing all the way to the bank. It is also a wide-boys' charter which will
mean an increasing black market in beer.'
Mr Alistair Eadie, of the Wine and Spirits Association, said the
chancellor's move would cause 'further damage to the retail sector and
jobs'. He added: 'We hope the autumn Budget will do more to align UK rates
of excise duties with those of out European partners.'
The tobacco industry also protested about the effects of the 'damaging and
unfair' tax increase on tobacco - adding 10p to a packet of 20 cigarettes
and 4.5p to a packet of five small cigars.
Mr Christopher Bullock, director of the Tobacco Advisory Council, said that
the tax hike would not stop people smoking; it would only encourage more
duty-paid imports and smuggling of cigarettes across the Channel.
