FT  28 SEP 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (17): Hail to the chief /
Government
THE RISE OF THE BRITISH PRESIDENCY by Michael Foley Manchester University
Press Pounds 12.99/Pounds 35 325 pages
CURIOUSLY, most businessmen think strong government is a good thing.
Schooled in macho corporate leadership, they equate government with business
and crave for dominant chief executives able to get a grip on 'UK plc'.
In reality, most businesses - indeed most citizens - are better off with
weak government, provided the rule of law is firmly established and their
diet is more than government contracts. But if it is a President they want,
a President they have got. The story of how and why is told in Michael
Foley's The Rise of the British Presidency.
Foley offers useful insights into the making of leaders of all kinds in a
soundbite, image-led age, even for readers not especially interested in the
academic debate on whether Britain has 'Cabinet' or 'prime-ministerial'
government.
Foley's key to modern presidentialism is 'spatial leadership' - a new
executive style in which authority comes from 'a sense of distance, and
occasionally detachment, from government'. Thatcher and Reagan were spatial
leaders par excellence: Reagan by endlessly attacking 'Washington' and
boasting of knowing nothing about the government he led; Thatcher by acting
as leader of the government and leader of the opposition at the same time.
So pervasive has cultivation of the image of the outsider become that the
most uncompromising insiders now have to present themselves as brash
interlopers. At the least, the modern leader needs to be a political
outsider; if he or she can be a social outsider too, so much the better.
John Major trades on the latter - defeating 'toff' Douglas Hurd for the Tory
leadership because he hadn't been to Eton; Thatcher made the most of the
former, emphasising her break with a generation of consensus politics.
To succeed as an outsider, you need to be a populist. Foley calls it
'designer populism', characterised by highly-publicised political
intereference in the government machine 'not in the style of a managing
director, but more in the theatrical mould of a deus ex machina enhancing
the political position of the premier at the expense of the organisational
integrity of the government.'
Enter Reagan the tax cutter and Thatcher the Brussels slayer. Enter, too,
the designer populism of much modern business marketing, pitting dynamic
'new' brands and companies against unresponsive 'old' products and outfits.
Corporate observers might also draw parallels with Foley's theme of the
growing divorce between leadership and policy.
For the student of politics, Foley has some important points to make about
the way prime-ministerial power is acquired and exercised. He argues
plausibly that the televisual personalisation of leadership enables prime
ministers to circumvent their Cabinet and party colleagues to an
unprecedented degree. Moreover, the cult of the outsider necessarily pits
the PM against his or her party and governmental elites, at least
rhetorically and often in matters of substance too.
Less convincing, however, is Foley's argument that 'presidentialism' has
produced a long-term increase in the profile and power of the prime
minister.
It is based on the contemporary fallacy that the modern age began 30 years
ago. Churchill and Lloyd George appear briefly in the book, only to be
dismissed as exceptional because they were war-time leaders. Gladstone,
Disraeli and Pitt do not even make the index. Yet judged by their executive
dominance and popular profile in their own day, any of those three could be
set against Thatcher or Reagan.
John Morley, writing in the 1880s, described the authority of the prime
minister as 'not inferior to that of a dictator, provided the House of
Commons will stand by him.' Gladstone was a giant in his day; between 1868
and 1892 - they had long careers in those days - elections were virtually
referendums on his leadership and policies.
Back in the 1780s, Pitt the Younger was dubbed 'The Minister', so
overwhelming was his dominance. A century before that, Louis XIV was
consolidating absolute monarchy in France with the aid of political and
propaganda techniques all too recognisable in the Courts of Margaret and
Ronald. Peter Burke's brilliant book The Fabrication of Louis XIV, a tale of
populist politics, media manipulation, and acting for the public stage,
should be compulsory reading for any politician or advertising executive.
President Louis, alas, was so busy fighting wars to accumulate glory and
popularity that he had little time for humdrum trade or the welfare of his
people. Plus ca change . . .
