FT  11 FEB 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Kuwait claims big oil
production rise
KUWAIT'S OIL production has leapt by 210,000 barrels a day in the past few
weeks to 1.98m barrels a day, according to Mr Ali al-Baghli, the country's
oil minister, who said any cut from that level would be 'painful'.
The minister, quoted in Kuwait's al-Anba newspaper, denied that the recent
rise in production had contributed to slippage in the oil price and said
Kuwait would discuss the proposals for the Organisation of Petroleum
Exporting Countries to cut output during this weekend's meeting 'with
understanding and reason'.
But the minister's comment that 'a reduction would be painful for us'
signals Kuwait's determination to retain output at levels as near present
production as possible and resist pressure from fellow Opec members to
subscribe to a ceiling much below 2m b/d.
For the last Opec agreement in November Kuwait undertook to produce 1.5m b/d
and raise production only as market conditions allowed. Yesterday's figures,
however, are well ahead of the oil ministry's previously stated targets for
1993, which put output at 1.85m b/d in the second quarter, 2.05m in the
third and 2.15m b/d in the fourth. Kuwait's pre-Gulf war quota was 1.5m b/d,
but it was lifting at least 2m b/d before the invasion.
Industry analysts viewed Mr al-Baghli's figures with some scepticism,
suggesting that Kuwait's output was likely to be nearer the 1.778m b/d he
announced in late January. 'A figure of nearly 2m is a bit of posturing,'
said Mr Fareed Mohammedi, an analyst with Petroleum Finance Company in
Washington. 'The issue is where Kuwait is going to cut from, and they don't
want to cut from 1.5m b/d, they want to cut from 1.9m b/d'
Last month's tour among Opec members by Mr Alirio Parra, the cartel's
president, produced broad agreement, between Iran and Saudi Arabia in
particular, that the organisation should seek to trim at least 1m b/d from
its overall output to support prices, with the Saudis suggesting that the
cuts should be pro-rata from all producers.
Mr Gholamreza Agazadeh, Iran's oil minister, was quoted yesterday on Tehran
Radio as saying that the cut should be from Opec's nominal, but abused,
ceiling of 24.58m b/d reached at its last meeting in November to 23.5m b/d.
But he said that such a cut would merely sustain prices at present levels
and that he would enter this weekend's meeting calling for a cut of more
than 1m b/d. Most industry figures put Opec's actual present production at
more than 25m b/d.
