FT  31 MAR 93 / Nigeria's mission feared impossible: Edward Balls and Tony
Hawkins on the tasks facing one of Africa's biggest economies
Sitting in his top floor office, Chief Ernest Shonekan, chairman of
Nigeria's transitional council, stresses his government's commitment to
economic reform and ends with a heartfelt plea: 'For God's sake, help us to
succeed because this is Nigeria's last chance.'
The office window offers a panoramic view of the country's new capital,
Abuja, a monument to Nigeria's malaise. A grandiose project, half-finished
as petro-dollars ran out, and boasting two luxury hotels in which civil
servants and politicians live at the state's expense, its construction has
been notorious for inflated contracts and kick-backs.
Chief Shonekan, who chairs the council installed by President Ibrahim
Babangida to govern the country until the delayed transition from military
to civilian rule is completed in August, is promising to provide what the
soldiers have conspicuously failed to deliver: sound economic management. In
recent weeks, he and senior officals have travelled to London, Washington
and Paris pleading for western aid and debt relief in return.
Yet the transitional council poses an awkward dilemma for Nigeria's western
creditors. Few observers doubt that Africa's most populous nation, burdened
by chronic official debts amounting to 113 per cent of gross domestic
product last year, has no chance of economic regeneration without debt
reduction. A recent International Monetary Fund report concluded that,
without debt relief, Nigeria would face an average Dollars 2bn a year gap in
its balance of payments throughout this decade.
The dismal record of the military government, combined with discouraging
statements from the civilian presidential candidates, means that western
creditors are extremely wary of pouring good money after bad. They are
demanding an agreement with the IMF and a lengthy record of sound financial
management before they will consider offering debt relief - conditions that
the transitional council cannot meet within its short period in office.
To Chief Shonekan, chairman for many years of the Unilever trading
subsidiary, UAC Nigeria, the west's lack of interest seems dangerous.
Nigeria's leaders find it difficult to understand why the west is reacting
coolly to his administration's commitments to restoring fiscal discipline,
abolishing the distorting domestic fuel subsidy which could bring in an
estimated N63bn (Pounds 1.7bn) in extra revenue and wipe out this year's
projected N28.6bn budget deficit.
Yet while the council intends to make progress in reforming Nigeria's
distorted and deteriorating economy - income per head has fallen from
Dollars 1,000 a year in 1980 to a mere Dollars 290 in 1991 - the odds appear
firmly stacked against it.
First, the council is currently hampered by the consequences of rash
decisions made before it assumed control three months ago. The escalating
cost of the protracted election process, combined with the problems of heavy
military spending and profligate public procurement practices, meant that
the budget deficit grew to 9.8 per cent of GDP last year, of which more than
half was the result of unaccounted off-budget spending. The deficit has been
financed largely by borrowing from the central bank, fuelling rapid monetary
growth and resulting in a sharply higher annual inflation rate of 54 per
cent by the end of the year, up from 13 per cent in 1991.
The result is that the indicators of financial performance look bleak, in
spite of the council's attempts to bring the budget under control. Inflation
has since crept up to more than 60 per cent annually and is expected to
accelerate - possibly even double - this year as the effects of last year's
excess spending feed through.
The council is also being blamed for the military government's inability to
meet its debt obligations. In Paris last week Chief Dele Olashore, the
finance secretary, was on the receiving end of a sharp rebuke from the Paris
Club of official creditors angry at the renewed build-up of an estimated
Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn in arrears and delayed payments to both the public
and private sectors.
Second, and more worrying, is the fact that the transitional council has so
far been unable to bring its financial management under control,
particularly the increasingly chaotic exchange rate system.
A year ago the central bank sanctioned an 80 per cent devaluation of the
official naira exchange rate to close the distorting gap between the
official fixed rate and the 'parallel' market rate, considered by the IMF to
be an important indicator of financial mismanagement. But the budget deficit
and accelerating inflation have caused this gap to reopen in recent months,
despite the loss of much of the country's foreign exchange reserves, as
investors try to flee the currency.
But rather than allow the official rate to fall to the parallel rate the
council tried to buck the market. It cancelled foreign exchange auctions and
then rationed US dollars at the over-valued official rate, a policy which
enriches the banking sector while starving importers of necessary foreign
exchange.
To World Bank observers, the lack of a clear and sensible exchange rate
policy suggests that the military, not the council, is in control of
economic policy. The exchange rate confusion casts doubt on the council's
ability to push through politically unpopular tax increases and spending
cuts which will be needed if the council is to reach an agreement with the
IMF.
The third problem for the council is the proximity of the hand-over to
civilian rule, assuming that Nigeria's military president does not shift the
goalposts once more. Unless the council acts decisively, it is likely to be
written off as a lame-duck administration with which the west dare not do
business.
But there is a real danger that the combination of rising debt and
deep-seated public antipathy towards western-inspired structural adjustment
programmes will persuade the politicians to risk going it alone, thereby
cutting off the option of debt relief. Both presidential candidates oppose
the increase in petrol prices, now a precondition for an IMF agreement, and
neither has given a clear commitment to the reform policies.
Apparently boxed in from all sides, the transitional council leaders
privately wonder whether they were correct to ignore friendly advice and
take on the job in the first place. But, brief though its tenure may be, the
council may still have time to put a number of irreversible reforms in
place, thereby setting the parameters for the incoming civilian government.
The council has already appointed a budget monitoring committee of prominent
businessmen to ensure some accountability and transparency in public
finances; it has started the phased removal of the domestic petroleum
subsidy; and it is planning to broaden the tax base by the launch of a
modified value-added tax.
In return, the council would commit itself to a 'shadow' reform programme
with the IMF, which the incoming administration could use to pave the way
for an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) - a source of
concessional finance.
A pledge on debt relief is essential to this strategy. The stick that the
IMF can shake at the new civilian president is the suspension of the shadow
programme if he resorts to extra-budgetary spending to reward his campaign
supporters. Debt reduction is the carrot which, if staged over the life of
the ESAF, would ease pressure on the balance of payments and release funds
for social spending. But that carrot is unlikely to appear before Chief
Shonekan hands over in August, however, and his plea for help seems unlikely
to go unanswered.
'If the western creditors withhold support and want us to commit suicide
then they will lose, as well as us,' warns Chief Olashore, formerly a
leading Nigerian banker, hinting at the turmoil elsewhere in Africa as
examples of what might happen in Nigeria. 'I hope that they are informed
enough to prevent that from happening.'
