FT  02 OCT 93 / Italians begin to learn the economic facts of life: After
decades of cushioned existence, the harsh truth of unemployment is now
striking home
JOB LOSSES across Italian industry are bringing home the harsh truth that
the long-hallowed concept of job security has ended.
On present trends, 400,000 workers are likely to lose their jobs this year,
bringing the unemployment rate to 11 per cent of the active population.
The jobs squeeze, which began in 1991, cannot simply be blamed on the
domestic recession and slack growth among Italy's trading partners. A
significant part of unemployment is occurring in mature or loss-making
industries such as chemicals/fertilisers, construction, defence steel and
shipbuilding.
The restructuring problems of state-run companies have tended to be felt
most acutely among their sub-contractors. The latter have been the first to
shed labour and protests have broken out across the country.
In the south, where unemployment is running at 23 per cent or more,
frustrated workers have staged violent and angry protests. Only spectacular
gestures, such as the violent occupation of the chemicals plant at Crotone
earlier this month, draw the attention of Rome and move public opinion.
Occupying the railway lines is one of many desperate tactics used by workers
to highlight factory closures. Demonstrators have blocked the Italian
railways 11 times this month, occupying the lines for 200 hours.
In the north, where the unemployment rate averages 7 per cent, the protests
over job losses have been more disciplined. This is because trades unions
exercise greater control and believe in demonstrating their strength through
formal strikes and street marches.
Unemployment is being exacerbated by two factors. Successive Italian
governments having ignored EC demands to cut subsidies to state industries,
the Ciampi administration is now obliged to adhere to Community norms in a
hurry.
In the case of steel this is going to mean unspecified but substantial job
cuts.
At the same time the need to reduce the public sector deficit is forcing
through large-scale privatisation and this inevitably means job losses. Much
of the state sector has previously padded payrolls and personnel recommended
by politicians.
The shock is all the greater since Italy has no formal unemployment benefit.
Instead,a system has evolved of funding redundancy through state and
employer contributions.
A person laid off can obtain up to 80 per cent of salary for two years.
Unless a special case can be made, the pay-packet is thereafter cut to a
minimum wage for a further year, (which in special cases can also be
extended). Only after this process is complete will a person be taken off
the company's books and placed on a transfer list that in theory ensures
priority in the new jobs queue.
The system was designed to absorb short downturns in the economic cycle, so
trained workers could easily be laid off and rehired. The Italian motor
industry has benefited enormously from this system.
However, this procedure was based on the premise that the employee would be
re-absorbed by the employer. As such it is wholly inadequate to accommodate
long-term structural unemployment or to deal with the effects of a long,
deep, recession.
The employment picture will not improve in the short term, the Bank of Italy
has warned, even if the recession bottoms out early next year.
But the government has only a limited mandate and is unlikely to have time
to address a fundamental issue like drafting a new system of unemployment
benefit. Nor can it easily provide measures to give a quick boost to jobs,
as both this year's budget and that of 1994 are conditioned by the need to
cut public spending.
Some L10,000bn (Pounds 4.1bn) has been found from unused public works funds,
while a further L1,275bn has been earmarked for youth employment schemes and
developing alternatives to replace the cuts to come in the steel industry. A
start will be also made on introducing job training schemes and temporary
work contracts. But the government will have to rely on fire-fighting
techniques, and hope that any one protest does not get out of hand.
