FT  16 JAN 93 / Arts: Moved by The Deep Blue Sea - Malcolm Rutherford hails
the revival of Rattigan's play at the Almeida theatre
TERENCE Rattigan's The Deep Blue Sea struck me as one of the best and most
moving English plays I had read when I first came across it as a boy in the
1950s. At school we read John Osborne's Look Back in Anger at about the same
time. It seemed odd to discover from the Sunday newspapers that Osborne had
knocked Rattigan off the stage because there was no place left for a
well-made play with good manners. For Rattigan and the young Osborne had at
least one thing in common: they were masters of their craft. We were
astonished by the fickleness of the London critics.
With hindsight one can see that Rattigan's demotion had more to do with
fashion than with his abilities as a writer. His characters were too upper
middle class to have their emotions taken seriously. Such reverse snobbery
is now, I hope, behind us.
The Deep Blue Sea gets even better with time. There is one particular scene
which must bring a lump to the throat of all but the subhuman. It comes
early on when Hester Collyer has just tried to commit suicide by the gas
fire and is faced with Sir William, the husband from whom she has estranged
herself, now a QC. One particular line, too. They talk about the dinner
parties they used to give in Eaton Square, and which are still given by Sir
William. Hester comes back to her old social self to ask with genuine
curiosity and affection: 'Is David very pompous now he's Solicitor-General?'
How anyone could have thought such dialogue is artificial is beyond me. Here
is one of the most poignant scenes you will ever encounter.
Yet although this is the gem, The Deep Blue Sea is not a one-scene play.
There is pathos, wit, drama and even a touch of suspense all through. If you
have never seen it before, ask yourself at the interval how you expect it to
end. Probably you will guess right, but not with total confidence.
Hester is a complex part. She prefers physical passion to intellectual
detachment and a comfortable social life, but she knows what she has given
up in leaving her husband for a young lover and is articulate enough to
explain her motives. In Karel Reisz's production at the Almeida, she is
played by Penelope Wilton. Whenever she is on stage, which save for one
scene is practically all the time, it is impossible to take your eyes off
her. Ms Wilton works by having magnificent poise: very still, very
determined, none of the nervous twitchings of a Hedda Gabler. She does
nothing, even have an occasional spasm, without thinking. I doubt if Peggy
Ashcroft, who first played the part in 1952, did it better.
Hester is nothing, however, without a man. She needs the best possible male
supporting cast to go with her. In Nicholas Jones as her husband, she gets
it. Jones is very tall, very suave, the epitome of the well-dressed,
well-educated, well-off, emotionally inarticulate Englishman. Without Jones
to play against, Ms Wilton's performance would not be nearly so effective.
The hardest part nowadays is that of Freddie, Hester's lover. Possibly this
is where the play dates. He was a crack pilot in the RAF in 1940, a top test
pilot just after the war, but clapped out by the time he was 25. The
emotional impact of that is no longer what it was. If the play had been
written slightly later, Hester might have fallen for a Jimmy Porter.
Nevertheless, under Reisz's direction, Linus Roache does all that can be
done with the material.
The other outstanding performance is by Wojtek Pszoniak as the East European
doctor who has been struck off the medical register, presumably for what was
then indecency. The play has a history of being really about Rattigan's own
homosexual feelings. Pszoniak eyes Freddie's male friend in a way to bring
this out: he also saves Hester.
Yet watch Sandra Voe as Mrs Elton the landlady as well. This very English
play has everything: class in all senses of the term.
Almeida Theatre until March 6. (071) 359 4404
