FT  10 DEC 93 / On a wing and a prayer
The Church of England, established by law, gains no advantage in Heaven from
its association with the Crown of the United Kingdom. I discerned this by
listening to Archbishop Trevor Huddleston, then Bishop of Masasi, some 30
years ago. His concern, while we walked together in the hot African dust,
was the salvation of mankind as an act of worship of God, not a free pass to
visit the prime minister or the Queen.
Since those heady days I have been a consistent disestablishmentarian. The
case for separating the British state from its official church is best
argued on its merits. These have been considerable since . . . let us say
since attendance at public worship ceased to be compulsory. In a week in
which parliament has ceded the sabbath to Mammon, by allowing virtually
unrestricted shopping on the seventh day, the case seems overwhelming.
Christian ayatollahs may have been in the ascendancy in a quasi-theocratic
state when Queen Elizabeth I assumed the title of Supreme Governor of the
church, but that was nearly half a millennium ago. Queen Elizabeth II may
well be the last to hold this purely nominal office.
None of the above has anything to do with the personal life of the Prince of
Wales. That is an after-dinner topic - unavoidable, but not serious. It is a
phase through which we must all pass before growing up. The national mind
has been drugged by the ingestion of too many tabloids. Give me a lightly
grilled sole, a little spinach and a Havana of reasonable purity and length,
and after devouring the first two I'll puff on the third while competing in
scurrility with everyone else. But that is an abuse of the spirit. Even a
long-standing agnostic like myself cannot be proud of it. We should focus on
the church.
First, let me clear away one further, more fundamental, distraction. I have
argued here before that the British polity would be healthier if the formal
apex of power was the will of the people, protected by a declaration in a
written constitution. That would remove the opportunity open to the
executive to abuse its authority by affecting to act on behalf of the
monarch. Thus democratised, the head of state could continue to wear a
crown, if that is what the populace wanted. This topic, like royal
behaviour, should be detached from the thread of the argument about
disestablishment.
Pause a moment, to tick off what I hope is agreed so far. There is only one
heir to the throne. He is Prince Charles. End of story, although not the end
of gossip. There are many churches, mosques and synagogues in Britain; only
one has been so bound by history in seductive ermine that it is unable to
concentrate on its true religious function, for fear of disconnection from
the political process. Some of its ministers register near panic at the
prospect of being reduced to the status of priests in a minority Christian
sect.
These long-standing fears must be felt all the more acutely at present.
Financial mismanagement has diminished the Church of England's earthly
riches, and obliged its parish clergy to scratch around ever more piteously
for fresh sources of support. The decision to permit women to become priests
has split the church. Some recalcitrants are running off to Rome while
others stay behind in miserable defiance, or plain confusion. An explosive
debate about disestablishment could damage this fragmented church beyond
repair.
We disentanglers can wait. Granted, the present may not be an ideal moment.
Yet the truth is that separation of church and state is proceeding in the
usual English way: by fits and starts. The prime minister, acting on behalf
of the Queen, appoints the bishops - but does so from a short list prepared
by the church. The House of Commons, in which heathens appear to be the
majority, votes on matters such as the ordination of women - but follows the
general synod of the church. The next monarch may be 'defender of the faith'
but not 'supreme governor'. It is progress, but we are still stuck with 26
Anglican bishops in the House of Lords.
None of this changes the essence of the case. That is best put as a
question. At a time when many people, particularly young people, are
searching longingly for spiritual guidance, what on earth are the Anglican
disciples of Jesus Christ doing in their centuries-long embrace with the
descendants of Caesar? Surely not merely preserving their position? It may
be that in the coming century the vacuum left by the materialism of the 20th
is filled by institutions other than the Church of England. True believers,
rising above institutional concerns, should welcome that.
A more enduring future may lie in store for the world-wide Anglican
communion, whose member churches were founded by missionaries who risked
their lives to preach the gospel, or by British settlers in what became the
white Commonwealth, or by America's Episcopalians. There are Anglicans in
India, and in Japan, and of course in the Church of the Province of South
Africa. Most of the world's 70m Anglicans are black Africans. This
international community would be strengthened if its mother church ceased to
be part of the British state. The opposite view is expressed by Michael
De-la-Noy, press officer to the archbishop of Canterbury in 1967-70. In his
recent book, The Church of England (Simon &amp; Schuster, Pounds 16.99), Mr
De-la-Noy notes that establishment 'provides links with the Foreign Office,
so essential to the Church's dealings with governments overseas'. He must be
right about the institution, but could be wrong about its purpose.
It would be naive to insist that that purpose, which is in essence to
sustain a transcendental view of the universe, can only be served by
volunteers uniting in worship. The influence of both Islam and Christianity
was expanded by the sword. Crusades - and, we must hope, jihads - are,
however, a thing of the past. The task, for some exalted individual, some
doctrine, some institution is to find 21st century ways of keeping human
faith alive. Lambeth Palace, which sits across the Thames in
mock-equilibrium with the Palace of Westminster, does not seem a likely
source of such inspiration. The original 12 disciples would have found the
link incomprehensible. The C of E should float free. It might then save
itself and - who knows? - some of the rest of us.
