FT  09 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Pressure on margins leaves TDG at Pounds
33.5m
SEVERE PRESSURE on margins hit profits at Transport Development Group which
yesterday reported a 7 per cent decline at the operating level to Pounds
40.5m for the year to December 31.
Mr Martin Llowarch, former British Steel chief executive who took over as
chairman in April, said the squeeze on margins had been most severe in
transport and plant hire. 'These are two areas where it has been pretty
acute in recessionary times,' he said.
The pre-tax performance masked the decline, showing an almost doubled return
of Pounds 33.5m, against Pounds 16.9m. Turnover rose by Pounds 15.2m to
Pounds 599.5m. The strong rise in pre-tax profits was due to the restatement
of 1991 results under new accounting standards. A Pounds 17m charge for
withdrawal from the US had previously been taken as an extraordinary item.
Earnings, similarly restated, rose from 3.6p to 12.05p. The proposed final
dividend is maintained at 6.5p, for an unchanged total of 9.5p.
Mr Llowarch said TDG had experienced good trading in the Netherlands and
Germany. France had been difficult, however, with losses of Pounds 2m in one
subsidiary which wiped out profits from other French businesses.
Mr Llowarch warned that even the previously buoyant parts of continental
Europe were beginning to slow down. 'Transport has been getting more
difficult on the continent than in the UK,' he said.
TDG was taking steps to streamline the management of its European
operations, as it had been doing in Britain for the past two years.
Redundancy costs for 1992 came to about Pounds 2.8m.
Trading continued to be quiet in Britain, with no sign of an upturn.
Operating profits declined from Pounds 32.3m to Pounds 31.8m, although they
were cushioned by an increase in the storage division.
In the US, the group said it was confident of receiving the outstanding
Pounds 10.7m proceeds on the sale of Willig Freight. However, this depended
on the success of a private bond offer by the purchaser, which was expected
to go ahead in the near future.
COMMENT
The gloomy noises coming out of Europe are perhaps one reason for the
shares' decline from 295p to 285p in a buoyant market. There are some who
argue TDG tends to leave the starting gate a bit late when it comes to
strategy. The refocusing has been going on for two years, and is only now
addressing Europe. On the other hand, its strong balance sheet shines at
this point in the recession. What many fear, however, is that the cautious
management will not use that strength aggressively. Forecasts are for flat
profits of about Pounds 36m to Pounds 37m. The prospective p/e of 17.6
leaves the price about right, if not slightly demanding. However, this could
change with economic recovery.
