FT  09 JUN 93 / Management: A shot of advice for business travellers -
Vaccinations are still extremely important / Health Check
DESPITE astuteness in other fields, business travellers tend to be
dangerously cavalier about health. Trips are often arranged at short notice,
when other matters take higher priority. Unless their employer takes
responsibility for preventive medicine, business travellers give it little
thought, or simply assume that staying in good hotels guarantees good
health.
While this may hold more or less true for North America, Northern Europe,
Australia and New Zealand, the rest of the world is more perilous and there
are some precautions travellers should find time for, no matter how rushed
the schedule.
An incomplete course of immunisations is better than none.
Travellers should be up to date with tetanus as the spores which cause the
disease are widespread in the developing world. Admittedly tetanus is more
of a hazard for those roughing it, but infection can result from very
trivial injury and the right treatment may be unavailable in an emergency.
Provided a traveller has had a full course of tetanus toxoid in the past, a
booster every 10 years is enough.
Polio presents a serious risk in countries with poor hygiene and may be
spreading in Europe too. The British have little natural immunity to it, so
again immunisation is essential.
Those who have never had polio vaccine need three oral doses (drops or sugar
cube) at monthly intervals. Anyone immunised in the past needs only one
booster every 10 years - worth doing even if travel is not on the agenda.
Typhoid is also widespread. The traditional vaccine requires two doses and
protection lasts three years. The new oral vaccine Vivotif is only three
capsules (one capsule, alternate days) and avoids the feverish reactions
associated with the traditional vaccine. There is also a new single-dose
injectable vaccine, Typhim Vi, which seems free of significant side-effects.
Another new vaccine is that for hepatitis A, which supersedes the painful
and relatively ineffective gamma-globulin injection. Hepatitis A is common
in the developing world, but it occurs in Britain too, so some people are
already immune. If time allows, check immunity with a blood test before
having the vaccine.
An international vaccination certificate for yellow fever is still needed
for Nigeria, Ghana and many other countries, and the certificate is not
valid until 10 days after the jab. The vaccine gives virtually 100 per cent
protection for 10 years and is given in about 600 specialised centres in the
UK.
Cholera vaccine provides negligible protection and there is no longer any
international requirement for it. Nonetheless, immigration officers in some
countries still ask for a certificate - hence the risk of hepatitis B or HIV
from a dirty needle at the port of entry. If going to Zambia, Mexico, or
parts of South America, it may be a good idea to be armed with an exemption
certificate, have the vaccine before departure, or take a small supply of
sterile disposable needles, available from Masta (Medical Advisory Services
for Travellers Abroad).
Only 5 per cent of travellers' illnesses are preventable by vaccines.
Even in the most prestigious accommodation, care with food and water is
important in preventing cholera as well as common types of diarrhoea which
could otherwise ruin a vital meeting.
Anti-malarial tablets are vital if visiting a malarious area and should be
started a week before the trip and continued for at least four weeks after
returning home.
According to one estimate, only two-thirds of those at risk are taking
anti-malarials, so it is no surprise that 2,000 people import malaria into
Britain every year, of whom about a dozen die. Even normally low-risk areas
such as Ethiopia and Zambia have seen epidemics recently and malaria
parasites are also becoming more resistant to drugs. The right tablets
depend on the itinerary, including stopovers. Check the current situation by
phoning the Malaria Reference Laboratory Healthline on 0891 600 350.
Protection given by anti-malarials is important but far from perfect.
Measures should also be taken to prevent mosquito bites. The anopheles
mosquito (the female of which transmits malaria) tends to be more active in
the evenings, so sleeping under a mosquito net can help, especially if it is
impregnated with insecticide.
Air-conditioning, when working, reduces the chance of being bitten, but one
has to leave the hotel sometime.
Outside, cover legs and arms with clothing after sunset, and apply insect
repellents to exposed skin (Jungle Formula products can be bought from
chemists before departure.)
Masta can supply up-to-date immunisation advice and health briefs for
individual countries, and will fax if necessary. Call 071 631 4408 with
itinerary.
British Airways travel clinics provide a wide range of vaccinations,
including yellow fever and other travel advice. A recorded message, on 071
831 5333 gives details.
The author is a GP in London.
