FT  02 DEC 93 / After The Budget: M25 targeted for 'shadow tolls'
The government has targeted Britain's busiest motorway, the M25 around
London, as the first project for which it proposes to pay 'shadow tolls' to
private investors.
Under the scheme, investors would be repaid out of public sector funds
according to the number of cars using the road rather than by tolls paid
directly by motorists.
Ministers had been opposed to 'shadow tolls' because they felt that
insufficient risk was being taken by the private sector. However, in
Tuesday's Budget speech Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced a
policy change.
The Transport Department intends to hold 'early discussions with the
construction industry and others to identify appropriate schemes'.
Most of these other schemes are expected to involve widening and
improvements rather than new building. The first contracts could be awarded
within 18 months.
In the longer term, the government intends to install an electronic system
for charging motorists for using motorways.
The Treasury dropped its opposition to shadow tolls in return for the
transport department accepting such a system of electronic charg-ing.
Spending on the national road network is planned to fall from Pounds 2.09bn
in this financial year to Pounds 1.96bn in 1995-96. Companies interested in
taking part in shadow toll schemes would be asked to bid for the tender to
widen a particular motorway. The company that asked for the smallest payment
from the government for the traffic using its lanes would normally be given
the contract.
Construction companies, which have been lobbying the government to accept
shadow tolling, welcomed the change of heart but said they would need to see
the small print of the plan before acclaiming it.
Plans to proceed with involving private companies in a Pounds 400m-Pounds
600m modernisation of the west coast mainline railway from London to
Scotland were announced by the government yesterday. Companies are to be
asked 'within the next few days' to bid for a contract to draw up
performance specifications for the line, Mr John MacGregor, transport
secretary, said.
Once detailed specifications have been agreed, the private sector will be
invited to bid late next year to carry out the work on the track and
signalling. Bids will be sought late next year.
Meanwhile, Sir Wilfrid Newton, London Transport chairman, said yesterday
that government funding would meet only half of the money needed to maintain
and modernise London's Underground system over the next three years.
