FT  23 SEP 93 / UK Company News: UniChem advances 43% as operating margins
expand
UNICHEM, the pharmaceuticals wholesaler and retailer, boosted first half
pre-tax profits by 43 per cent to Pounds 18m after a significant increase in
operating margins and in spite of government constraints on drug pricing.
Sales rose 17 per cent to Pounds 574m and earnings of 8.3p were up 51 per
cent under FRS 3 or up 15.3 per cent before the adjustments.
Operating margin grew from 3.1 per cent to 3.4 per cent.
Mr Jeff Harris, chief executive, described the recent decision by the health
secretary to cut 2.5 per cent on average from the price of medicines was
'reasonable, if unwelcome'. 'We are grateful to see some stability come back
to the subscription drugs market,' he said.
He expected this market to grow by about 9 per cent a year. Half the growth
would come from price increases, as more expensive drugs were introduced and
prescribed, and half would come from volume increases.
De-listing of certain drugs that doctors can prescribe would reduce growth
in the market. But there would be an increase in sales of drugs now only
available under prescription which will become more freely available over
the counter.
Gearing was maintained at 17 per cent, up from 9 per cent, in spite of
Pounds 8m spent on expanding the Moss Chemists retail chain.
The largest wholesale division lifted sales by 11.4 per cent but the company
made its fastest progress in the hospital market where sales jumped by 42
per cent to Pounds 20m.
During the period the group bought 34 shops and now has 236 outlets.
While UniChem is a distributor and retailer of drugs, it is included in the
health and household sector and has watched its share price fall in line
with the sector in the last six months.
Analysts forecast full year profits of about Pounds 35.5m, giving a
prospective earnings multiple of about 14, just below the average for the
entire market and below the average for the pharmaceuticals sector.
Mr Harris said he did not understand why UniChem - a distributor of drugs -
was rated like a pharmaceuticals company.
