FT  21 JAN 93 / Tokyo mounts silent rescue operation: Attempts to stem the
tide of non-bank debts
BEHIND Japan's 21 top banks, which include household names like Mitsubishi
and Sanwa, lies a tangled financial undergrowth of 37,000 non-banks. The
often troubled relationship between the tightly regulated large banks and
the legions of loosely regulated non-banks is perhaps the main source of the
malaise afflicting the Japanese financial system.
Just as many of the difficulties of the US financial system began in
unknown, provincial savings and loan institutions so the gravest threat to
the Japanese financial system could come from the non-banks.
Japanese banks face mounting bad debts from real estate loans which turned
sour with the collapse of the bubble economy of the late 1980s.
The top 21 banks had non-performing loans of Y12,400bn (Pounds 63.6bn) at
the end of September, more than half the banks' equity base, according to
the Ministry of Finance.
Many of these bad debts are flowing in from the non-banks which the big
banks are linked to. The Bank of Tokyo announced it was restructuring one of
its non-bank affiliates. The Nippon Credit Bank, the long-term credit bank,
is grappling with huge problems at three of its non-bank affiliates.
Bank executives and officials at the Ministry of Finance are manning the
pumps in an attempt to stem the tide.
The non-banks lend money for house purchases, real estate development and
consumer credit. But they do not take in deposits from savers. They finance
themselves with borrowings from larger financial institutions and then lend
that money to their customers.
About 80 per cent of non-bank finance comes from other financial
institutions, mainly banks.
The non-banks were among the most active inflators of the bubble economy.
Non-bank lending more than trebled from Y31,000bn in 1987 to Y97,000bn in
March last year, the most recent figure available. That is twice the growth
rate of lending by national banks which rose from Y306,000bn to Y460,000bn
in the same period.
Non-bank lending surged because many of the banks used their non-bank
affiliates to escape the regulations imposed by the Finance Ministry.
The large banks are licensed by the ministry's commercial banks division.
Yet even though some non-banks such as the Orient Corporation and Orix are
listed companies they do not have to be licensed by the ministry.
The non-banks are just registered with local prefectural governments; many
have strong local political roots which they use to protect themselves
against interference from Tokyo.
The only legislation regulating the non-banks was passed in 1973 to protect
borrowers against loan sharks.
As a result the Finance Ministry finds it difficult to establish the extent
of the non-banks' bad debts, let alone bring them under control.
The ministry's first attempt two years ago to force the nonbanks to disclose
more information got virtually nowhere. It was only from last November that
parliament gave the ministry power to collect information about the
non-banks' lending.
The details of the non-banks' problems are still not publicly known. But the
general picture is alarming. The non-banks were heavily exposed to the steep
fall in the real estate market over the past three years, with land prices
in some urban areas down by as much as 60 per cent. The top 300 non-banks
account for 70 per cent of all non-bank loans, worth about Y66,000bn. About
40 per cent of those loans are to real estate developers and construction
companies, compared with 17 per cent for the banks. Another 30 per cent of
non-bank loans have real estate as their collateral.
About a year ago 100 of the top non-banks told the Finance Ministry that
more than a fifth of their loans were non-performing, with no interest paid
for more than a month.
Non-banks have loans worth about Y3,000bn to companies which went bankrupt
between the autumn of 1991 and last month, according to a report by the
research arm of Nippon Life Insurance, the country's largest life insurance
company.
The report estimates that 34 of the most troubled non-banks have bad loans,
mainly to property companies, worth about Y5,800bn.
Most of the bad loans which are building up in the non-banks will eventually
find their way back to the big banks. Mr David Snoddy, banking analyst at
Jardine Fleming, the securities house, estimates that about a quarter of the
Y58,000bn the banks have lent to the non-bank sector will turn into
non-performing loans. About 80 of the top 300 non-banks are either bank
subsidiaries or affiliated to banks.
In spite of the overwhelming problems no non-bank has yet gone bust. That is
because the Finance Ministry is orchestrating a hidden but extensive
bail-out by the big banks.
A Ministry of Finance official explained in typically coded terms: 'We have
advised the banks to take a great interest in the health of their
non-banks.' In plain language that means the banks have been told not to let
any non-banks fail.
The most obvious outward sign of the silent rescue operation is the
extraordinary growth in cheap loans to the non-banks. The NLI report
estimates that at least 33 top non-banks are receiving interest rate
reductions or exemptions from their main backers, on borrowings worth
Y6,600bn.
Cheap commercial bank loans, at an interest rate of 3.5 per cent or less,
several points below normal commercial rates, rose by 194 per cent in the
year to August. Most of these were to troubled non-banks.
Non-banks which stuck to consumer lending during the years of the bubble
economy and were not drawn into real estate lending are not in deep trouble.
Those that over-extended themselves during the bubble are rapidly beating a
retreat back to their core businesses of consumer credit, hire purchase
finance and housing loans.
However, restructuring the non-banks will take years rather than months. In
the 1980s the non-banks provided the big commercial banks with a convenient
back door route to expand their lending. In the 1990s the non-banks will be
a heavy drain on the top banks' resources. The hidden rescue operation of
the Japanese non-bank sector will take years to complete.
 ----------------------------------------------------------
NON-BANKS: AFFILIATIONS OF THE TOP 100
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Type of                             Number of   Outstanding
parent                             affiliates   Loans (Ybn)
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Bank                                      34        24.4
Of which
 City Bank                                17        14.3
 Long Term Credit Bank                     7         5.3
 Regional Bank                             4         1.3
 Trust Bank                                4         1.6
 Norin-Chukin Bank (Agricultural Bank)     2         1.9
Manufacturing Company                      8         3.3
Trading Company                            6         4.9
Other Non-bank                             8         3.1
Stock Broker                               4         1.9
Life Insurance                             5         1.7
Real Estate                                2         1.0
Others                                    33        37.6
TOTAL                                    100        77.9
 ----------------------------------------------------------
