FT  03 SEP 93 / PLO seeks joint Arab signing of peace accords
THE PALESTINE Liberation Organisation said yesterday it wanted Syria, Jordan
and Lebanon to sign preliminary peace agreements with Israel at the same
time as its own accord on interim self-rule.
The move is an attempt to assuage anger among the other Arab participants to
the Middle East peace talks at having been bypassed in secret negotiations
which led to the PLO-Israeli accord.
Mr Hakam Balawi, a close aide of Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, said in
Tunis: 'We are making efforts for the agreements to be signed at the same
time.' PLO and Israeli officials have said they hoped to sign a joint
declaration of principles - governing Palestinian self-rule and providing
for Israeli military withdrawal from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho
 -in Washington as early as next week.
The PLO's call came after King Hussein, the Jordanian ruler, called for an
Arab summit to discuss the imminent PLO-Israeli deal and co-ordinate an Arab
response. In a television interview broadcast in Jordan last night, the king
expressed deep disappointment at having not been consulted before the
PLO-Israel deal, and said: 'We in Jordan do not accept the imposition of any
agreement . . . we are not a party to.'
Jordan is particularly worried about potential security implications of the
deal, fearing that any violent opposition to it could spark an influx of
Palestinians from the West Bank. 'If things deteriorate among the various
Palestinian groups over what to do with Gaza-Jericho, then people will seek
refuge in Jordan, which we cannot accept,' a senior official said in Amman.
There was no immediate response to the king's call for a summit yesterday,
which follows his departure for urgent talks in Damascus on hearing of the
PLO-Israeli breakthrough. But diplomats said Lebanon and Syria share the
king's anger at being bypassed in the PLO-Israeli talks and that all three
states will want to digest both the details of the accord and the extent of
Palestinian opposition to it before taking any further steps in the resumed
Washington peace talks.
Mr Fares Bouez, Lebanon's foreign minister, held talks in Damascus with Mr
Farouk al-Sharaa, his Syrian counterpart, after which he said they had
agreed 'on the importance of continued, deepened and higher co-ordination'.
Syrian officials refused to comment on either the PLO-Israeli deal or King
Hussein's call for a meeting.
But while diplomats said Lebanon, Jordan and Syria were likely to try to
forge a united front on the agreement, most believed the trio would have
little choice but to join the strong momentum Israel and the PLO have
created behind their accord.
Jordan and Syria are close to agreeing on texts for declarations of
principle to guide their own negotiations with Israel. Jordanian officials
said this week they could foresee signing a joint 'agenda' with Israel
during the present session of the Washington talks.
Syrian negotiators in Washington said they hoped they could reach
preliminary agreement with Israel next week.
Meanwhile, in a sign of the potential for violence in the occupied
territories, Palestinian gunmen yesterday shot dead an Israeli soldier and
slightly wounded another in the West Bank town of Hebron.
Israeli officials blamed the attack on fundamentalist Islamic militants who
have branded the peace agreement as a betrayal of the Palestinian struggle.
Recognition near, Page 4
