FT  18 MAR 93 / Paler shade of green: The UK Budget adds obstacles to an EC
carbon tax
Does the UK Budget signal the end of a European-wide carbon and energy tax?
The answer is probably yes. The tax proposals, in their original form, were
already facing considerable obstacles. The chancellor's comments may well
have compounded their difficulties.
The Budget, which included the imposition of VAT on domestic fuel and higher
petrol and car-licence taxes, made more claims to greenness than any of its
predecessors - even though the claims were immediately disputed by
environmentalists.
The chancellor argued that these measures would help reduce carbon dioxide
emissions and combat global warming. But while he agreed that 'there may be
a case for further co-ordinated international action on global warming', he
added: 'I remain unpersuaded of the need for a new European Community tax.
Tax policy should continue to be decided here in this House - not in
Brussels.'
The swipe at Brussels' influence is hardly unfamiliar, and the UK
government's resistance to the proposed EC energy-carbon tax began to
surface as long ago as last autumn. But given that a Community consensus is
needed on the issue, Tuesday's comments by Mr Norman Lamont caused a sharp
reaction in Brussels. Mr Ioannis Paleokrassas, the environment commissioner,
insisted that negotiations towards the energy and carbon tax would continue.
'I don't see why we should withdraw the (energy tax) proposal.' However, he
welcomed the new green taxes 'as long as they are in the right direction -
and these ones seem to be in the right direction'.
The Budget has put the UK in an odd position - ahead of many Community
members on measures to restrain carbon emissions, but resistant, it appears,
to the Commission's proposals that could force others to follow suit.
Concerns about the UK's stance are likely to surface next Tuesday when
energy and environment ministers meet at a special 'jumbo' council.
That joint council, a rare occurrence, is a sign of new efforts to
resuscitate the proposals, which have made little progress since the Rio
Earth Summit last July. The EC committed itself to stabilising carbon
dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 on condition that its main
trading partners take similar steps. However, a recent internal Commission
report showed that, without a tax, EC emissions were set to miss that target
by a minimum of 4 per cent.
The original EC plan was to impose a combined carbon-energy tax, starting at
Dollars 3 a barrel of oil or oil-equivalent and amounting to Dollars 10 by
the end of the decade. Fuels would be taxed more heavily the higher their
carbon content - coal has more than gas, nuclear has almost none.
Discussions on the plan were given fresh vitality by the new US energy taxes
announced by the Clinton administration. But consensus between the Community
members remains difficult, according to Mr Paleokrassas.
The carbon part of the tax plan has proved the most controversial. France -
heavily committed to nuclear power - wants the carbon-energy tax to be
weighted more towards fuels with a high carbon element. The UK wants a
smaller carbon element, a position likely to be strengthened by the current
review of the coal industry which is likely to preserve some uneconomic
pits. As Mr Robert Jones, chairman of the UK parliamentary select committee
on the environment, argued, it hardly makes sense to subsidise a fuel
industry and at the same time introduce a financial incentive to switch away
from that fuel.
The energy part of the tax has also come under attack from poorer countries.
Spain in particular argues that the richer countries which emit most carbon
dioxide, and have most resources to spend on energy-saving technology,
should be set higher reduction targets.
Environmentalists and economists have also challenged the proposed tax's
environmental effectiveness, particularly on transport, the fastest growing
sector of carbon dioxide emissions in both the UK and Europe overall.
In its original form, the EC estimates that the tax would have raised the
price of petrol by only 6 per cent and diesel by only 10 per cent. Demand
for transport is unresponsive to changes in fuel price - transport
economists were sceptical yesterday that even the Budget's extensive package
of extra costs for UK motorists would have much impact on traffic levels.
One of the most effective deterrents, they argue, is poor roads and traffic
jams, but the UK, as well as much of Europe, is embarking on a heavy
road-building programme. On that argument, even if an EC tax were weighted
more heavily towards transport, as recent councils have begun to explore,
the environmental benefit could still be negligible.
These tensions suggest that if proposals for an EC tax survive, it may well
be in a looser form - an aggregation of each country's measures, some
perhaps taken for fiscal rather than environmental reasons. Next week's
council will help show whether the UK chancellor's comments have been truly
obstructive, or whether they are a sign that discussions are already moving
towards a modified tax.
