FT  10 FEB 93 / Hyundai founder retires as party leader
MR Chung Ju-yung, the founder of South Korea's Hyundai business group,
yesterday announced his retirement from politics following his recent
indictment for election violations in the December presidential polls.
Mr Chung had appeared demoralised by the weekend indictment, and stayed away
from the United People's party's (UPP) first anniversary celebration on
Monday.
But 'he told me he was at ease now', said his son, Mr Chung Mong-joon, who
is an MP for the UPP.
His sudden departure as chairman of the UPP will probably lead to its
dissolution. UPP officials admitted it was unlikely that Mr Chung would
continue to fund the party from his estimated Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.6bn)
fortune, depriving the group of its main financial source.
'I will no longer engage in politics,' Mr Chung said yesterday in a brief
statement to MPs at the UPP headquarters, which is already being vacated.
'Instead, I will work for the economy.'
Mr Chung, who described Mr Kim Young-sam, the next Korean president, as an
'idiot' during the election, also apologised for criticising his opponents.
'I should have regarded them as partners and praised them.'
He gave no indication if and when he would give up his parliamentary seat,
although he is still expected to leave the National Assembly shortly.
'Chairman Chung was already losing interest in politics even before the
indictment because he was defeated for president, which was his main goal,'
explained a senior UPP official.
'He couldn't accept remaining in politics if it only meant being a
legislator in the National Assembly.'
Mr Chung finished third in the presidential election, while the UPP is the
third biggest party in the National Assembly, holding 11 per cent of its
seats, following parliamentary elections last March.
If the UPP collapses, most of its MPs would become independent members or
join either the ruling Democratic Liberal party or the main opposition
Democratic party.
Mr Chung was indicted on Saturday on charges of receiving more than Dollars
60m in illegal campaign funds from Hyundai Heavy Industries (HHI), his
group's shipbuilding unit. He claims the money came from the sale of shares
in HHI.
Prosecutors said they would continue legal proceedings against Mr Chung in
spite of his political retirement.
His departure from politics, however, reduces the chances that the
government will conduct reprisals against Hyundai as it did last year when
Mr Chung formed the UPP to challenge the government's tight control over
business.
The share prices for most of the 19 listed Hyundai companies rose at the
news of Mr Chung's retirement.
Hyundai officials suggest that his future role will be to develop overseas
business by serving as a roving ambassador for the group.
Mr Chung retired as the Hyundai chairman in 1987, although he and his family
retain majority control of the conglomerate, the biggest in Korea.
