FT  24 SEP 93 / Survey of IMF World Economy and Finance (17): An
intellectual goad at the US Treasury - Profile, Lawrence Summers / The World
Bank is coming under strong pressure from one of its former employees to
reform itself
IN AN administration which seeks to make economics an essential component of
its foreign policy, Mr Lawrence Summers has found a central role as
undersecretary for international affairs at the US Treasury.
A talented academic economist with a broad list of publications on
everything from tax policy to women's education, Mr Summers has seemed to be
waiting for a Democratic president to come along so that he could enter
government.
Although he worked for former president Ronald Reagan's chief economist, Mr
Martin Feldstein, he was also the principal economic adviser to the
unsuccessful presidential campaign of Mr Michael Dukakis in 1988, before
taking leave of absence from his Harvard University professorship to serve
as chief economist of the World Bank.
In his third floor office overlooking the east wing of the White House,
immaculately restored to its 19th century splendour during the Bush
administration, Mr Summers has come back to haunt his former employers at
the World Bank.
One of the tasks assigned to him at the Treasury is goading the
international financial institutions into reform designed to make them more
effective instruments of development.
The issue has been a popular subject in the US Congress. Spurred on by tales
of excess at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, members
have regularly summoned the Treasury to explain why the US should contribute
more money to these institutions.
Senator Jesse Helms has pursued his quest to cut down on first class air
travel at the International Monetary Fund, while Mr Barney Frank, chairman
of the House of Representatives sub-committee in charge of international
financial issues, has harassed the World Bank into improvements in its
disclosure policy and appeals processes.
Mr Summers has urged the World Bank to sharpen its focus on poverty relief
and on the effective implementation of projects, not sparing it criticism -
to the point that some of his former colleagues have accused him of playing
to the congressional gallery.
Such criticisms go down well with the vocal US environmentalist community -
usually hostile to the World Bank - which retains, nevertheless, an abiding
suspicion of Mr Summers.
But Mr Summers's principal role is in the co-ordination of economic policy
with the other members of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations.
The US's ability to lecture its partners with good grace has been modestly
improved by President Bill Clinton's efforts to pass a budget that would at
least slow the growth of the federal budget deficit. G7 finance ministry
officials have, perhaps, been more appreciative of these efforts than Mr
Clinton's domestic audience.
But the administration's handling of its economic relationship with Japan
has at times been less than masterly. Mr Summers's carefully drafted
declarations that the US is not seeking to talk up the yen have become
almost routine.
The financial markets have taken the opposite view, as a string of Mr
Summers's colleagues in the Treasury as well as in other departments has
spoken yearningly of how helpful a stronger yen might be in redressing the
US trade deficit with Japan.
And some Japanese officials complain that there is little difference between
Mr Summers's lectures on the need for fiscal expansion and those of his
predecessor in the Bush administration, Mr David Mulford.
Mr Summers has also expanded his job to include a broader articulation of US
trade policy, where his predecessors at Treasury tended to limit themselves
in this field to trade in financial services.
The G7 finance ministers often make earnest declarations at their regular
meetings about the need for swift movement on trade liberalisation talks,
but their colleagues responsible for these negotiations do not attend the G7
meetings.
That seems unlikely to change, but Mr Summers is seen as a prominent voice
in the creation of an intellectual framework for the Clinton trade policy '
a policy that has at times appeared to foreign partners to pull in different
directions: committed to multilateral trade negotiations but at the same
time aggressively pursuing bilateral trade measures.
But the administration argues that the two approaches are not incompatible:
that tough enforcement of trade laws and international agreements is not
just necessary to placate domestic opinion, but actually helpful to the
pursuit of a new and more liberal Gatt.
In particular, US officials distinguish efforts to gain access to markets
they regard as unfairly closed to US goods and services, notably in Japan,
from efforts to close US markets to imports.
The burdens of office have compelled Mr Summers to adopt a less provocative
approach to economic argument than was his wont. He has kept, however, his
intellectual agility, and is picked by many in Washington as a rising star
in the Clinton administration.
