FT  26 OCT 93 / No need to talk to IRA
It can go on like this. The campaign of violence generated by the
provisional wing of the IRA nearly a quarter of a century ago may continue
for as long again. Sir Pat-rick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, said
in the Commons on Friday that the price of defending democracy and the rule
of law is always high, and always worth paying. 'We shall defend them in
Northern Ireland, if necessary at infinite length,' he insisted. The thought
is almost too awful to contemplate, particularly as we weep for the innocent
victims of the Saturday night bombing in the Shankill Road. Surely something
can be done?
Not much. Formulas for immediate peace depend on one of two unlikely
starting points. First, the IRA provisionals could unilaterally renounce
violence. The events of the past few days demonstrate their unreadiness to
do so. Alternatively, the British government could offer concessions and
negotiations in return for an undertaking to end the carnage. As Sir Patrick
intimated again yesterday, there is no question of such a deal.
The courageous Mr John Hume, the Social Democratic and Labour party member
for Foyle, will not accept this impasse. He is to be given credit for his
motives, even if his hard work does not produce a successful result. He has
been talking to Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of the political wing of the IRA.
They appear to have been working on a delicate formula. Perhaps we should
see the full details before we judge it, but rejection is the likely
outcome. Any peace plan that involves formal negotiations with Mr Adams or
Sinn Fein ahead of a complete and unequivocal renunciation of the use of
terrorism as a political weapon will fail.
Some will protest that this is too inflexible a posture, that the situation
is so horrible that it requires an abandonment of previously entrenched
positions. The recent South African and Middle East breakthroughs are
seductive examples in support of such an argument. The case does not,
however, stand up to examination. It is true that President F W de Klerk
released Mr Nelson Mandela from prison and negotiated with him, even though
the ANC leader refused to disband his raggle-taggle and pathetically
ineffective army. But the IRA cannot rely on this analogy. Irish republicans
have the vote, both north and south. Mr Adams even won an election to the
Westminster Parliament. South Africa's blacks could not vote. They have not
yet done so.
Again, the Israeli government has recognised and dealt with the Palestine
Liberation Organisation, after years of swearing that it would not. But its
overriding objective is survival. It has always seen its first duty as the
defence of Israel's existence against a host of external enemies. At the
time of the recent deal it had nowhere else to go. Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO
leader, was likewise in a corner. The other Arab states were not able to
represent the Palestinian interest in direct talks with Jerusalem.
Here it is different. Britain is not, and will not be, threatened with
obliteration by the IRA provisionals. No external enemies surround us. Sir
Patrick looks to constitutional talks to further the peace process. The
Anglo-Irish agreement provides for direct conversations between London,
Belfast and Dublin; he will pursue those.
Principles apart, there is no need to deal with the provos. Think about it.
There is no domestic political reason why the government should conclude a
peace agreement with Sinn Fein, let alone with its terrorist counterpart.
You might think that after 24 years of violent insurrection there would be a
swelling chorus in favour of compromise, of doing a deal, of getting out, of
ceasing hostilities at any price.
There is not. I recall a recent conversation with a senior minister. Our
starting point was the catalogue of IRA and 'loyalist' violence. Since 1969,
no fewer than 3,089 people have been killed by terrorists in Northern
Ireland alone. Some 2,156 of these were civilians. These figures include an
increasing number of murders by 'loyalist' paramilitary organisations.
Murders on the British mainland are becoming commonplace. To remind you of
just two - in Warrington in March an IRA bomb killed a three-year-old and a
12-year-old. This was part of a seemingly never-ending series of bombing
campaigns, some pre-Christmas, some for Christmas, some aimed at 'economic
targets'. The City of London has been sealed off since the summer; only
yesterday travellers inwards from the west were inconvenienced by bombs at
Reading and Basingstoke. Mr Tony Benn, relying on the House of Commons
research department, said on Friday that the total cost of the emergency
since 1969 was Pounds 14.5bn at current prices.
The senior minister pointed out that this unhappy story carries a strange
moral, namely that there has been no public demand for a change of
government policy. Mr Benn quoted opinion polls that suggest the opposite,
but these were even less convincing than usual. The postbags of members of
parliament are not stuffed with constituents' letters pleading for a deal
with the IRA. The troops-out movement appears to have faded away; yesterday
Labour was calling on the government to send more soldiers in. The British
people are almost absurdly stoical. They express horror at every new
outrage. They condemn, but offer no quarter to, the perpetrators. Each
additional inconvenience to the travelling or working public is bitterly
criticised, but rarely adduced as a reason for changing tack.
In sum, the political tide is against Mr Hume's plan. Mr John Major, who
does not enjoy a reputation for firmness, would be greatly damaged were he
to 'give in to the IRA'. That would be seen by the voters as losing a war,
something alien to the British psyche. The prime minister is aware of this.
He said at the recent Tory conference that 'no government which I lead will
negotiate with those who perpetrate or . . . support the use of violence'.
The Tories have restored their former name - the Conservative and Unionist
party - in recognition of the reality that Mr Major's government, which
commands a majority of just 17 with Conservatives alone, frequently has to
importune nine Ulster Unionists for support. Heaven knows what has been
promised in return, but we can be sure that a deal with the provos before
they lay down their arms is not part of it.
