FT  14 AUG 93 / Finance and The Family: Aggressive approach pays - Unit
trusts / Schroder UK Enterprise
SCHRODER UK Enterprise is a fund with a deliberately aggressive approach.
Founded in July 1988, and run since the start by Jim Cox, it holds only
40-45 stocks - those which it believes have the best prospects for growth.
This puts a premium on Cox's stock-selecting skills.
He emphasises that Schroder's approach is heavily research-orientated, with
close links between the group's analysts and its fund managers. 'Our overall
rule is that there aren't any rules - no black boxes or magic formulae which
have the secret of successful stock-picking,' he says. 'But, with careful
research, it is possible to tilt the odds in your favour.'
Cox feels management change at a company often presents an investment
opportunity: 'Change inside a company means that shares may be mis-priced.'
He points to the leisure group Granada when Gerry Robinson, formerly of the
Compass Group, took over shortly after a Pounds 163m rights issue. 'The
business had too much debt but the shares had considerable value at the
rights issue price.'
UK Enterprise also has a core of large growth companies such as Cable &amp;
Wireless or Reuters, and some 'recovery' stocks. This eclectic approach
indicates that Cox does not fit neatly into the 'growth' or 'value' schools
of investing. 'We are just looking for stocks which are cheap,' he says.
Over the past year, the fund has had a heavy emphasis on the financial
sector, particularly in banks, insurance companies and merchant banks. 'We
believe the financials will benefit from falling interest rates and a
reduction in the bad debt problem, plus a sharp improvement in the insurance
cycle,' says Cox.
The concentration on financials stands out when you look at the fund's top
10 stocks: GRE (the biggest holding), Schroders, Kleinwort Benson, TSB,
London &amp; Manchester, Cable &amp; Wireless, National Westminster bank, British
Airways, Legal &amp; General, and Sedgwick.
Cox believes GRE has been undervalued by the market. After a dividend cut,
he says, the shares yield 5 per cent with prospects for growth, especially
if the insurance cycle rebounds.
British Airways is one of the fund's non-financial stocks, and Cox points
out that the company is in a growing industry with the balance of supply and
demand moving in its favour.
'Airlines have not been making much money in recent years but BA has made
more than most,' he says, adding that the shares look attractive on a
price-to-cash flow basis.
As the fund grows - it is now Pounds 115m compared with Pounds 100,000 at
launch - there is an inevitable tendency for Cox to acquire more stocks. But
this is not a trend he wants to see develop too far since, as he puts it: 'I
don't want to dilute the effect of each individual bet.'
Some bets go wrong; one was a holding in Ratners, the jewellery retailer,
where the financial problems proved worse than Cox thought. But, overall,
the fund's performance figures are extremely impressive. It is top of the UK
equity growth sector over the five years to August 1, with growth of 146.85
per cent (offer-to-bid with income re-invested: source Micropal).
Over three years, it is second (out of 136) in the sector with growth of
69.95 per cent. In the past year, it is 10th (out of 145), giving investors
a return of 45.4 per cent. No other fund in the sector can match UK
Enterprise's achievement of being in the top decile (10 per cent) of funds
over one, three and five years.
Cox is optimistic about the prospects for UK shares. He believes the key is
interest rates and argues that, when they come down, equity markets tend to
rise. With very little inflation in the system, bond markets are reaching
new highs; that also aids the outlook for share prices.
Charges
Schroder says it is increasing the annual charge on the fund from 1 to 1.5
per cent 'to bring the charge in line with the rest of the industry'. The
initial charge is 5.25 per cent and the bid-offer spread is 6.25 per cent.
The minimum investment is Pounds 1,000, or Pounds 25 a month. The trust is
Pepable at no extra charge, although the minimum monthly Pep investment is
Pounds 50. The fund is run for growth, rather than income, and has a yield
of 2.24 per cent at present.
