FT  10 FEB 93 / International Company News: Noranda to sell 49% stake in
forest group
NORANDA, the Canadian resources group controlled by Toronto's Bronfman
family, is insulating itself from the turmoil in other parts of the Bronfman
empire by selling its 49 per cent stake in MacMillan Bloedel, the
Vancouver-based forestry group.
Noranda Forest, which holds Noranda's pulp and paper interests, will raise
CDollars 971m (USDollars 764.5m) from the sale. Its 55.5m shares will be
offered to institutional and retail investors in Europe and Canada at
CDollars 17.50 per share through a group of securities dealers led by RBC
Dominion Securities and Burns Fry.
Besides being western Canada's biggest forestry company, Macblo is to emerge
as a significant minority shareholder in the large Dutch paper and packaging
group being created by the merger of KNP, Buhrmann-Tetterode and VRG.
Macblo owns 30 per cent of KNP. It said yesterday that it would have a 16
per cent stake in the enlarged company, with an option to raise its
shareholding to 20 per cent through newly-issued shares.
Mr Alf Powis, Noranda chairman, said yesterday that the sale of Macblo had
'bullet-proofed' Noranda from concerns in investment and banking circles
about the health of other parts of the Bronfman industrial and financial
services empire.
Shares of companies in the Bronfman orbit have plummeted in recent weeks
amid fears that troubles at Bramalea, a property developer under bankruptcy
protection, and Royal Trust, which is seeking an infusion of capital, might
spill over into the rest of the group.
The Macblo sale will cut Noranda's debt-to-capital ratio from 45 per cent to
25 per cent. Mr Powis said that proceeds would remain with Noranda Forest,
which has sharply cut back its capital spending to conserve cash.
News of the deal pushed Noranda's share price up by CDollars 1.50 to
CDollars 18.88 on the Toronto stock exchange yesterday. Shares of other
Bronfman-controlled companies also advanced.
Macblo, which has been hit by the slump in North American pulp and paper
markets, separately announced that losses narrowed last year to CDollars
48.8m, or 52 cents a share, from CDollars 93.4m, or 98 cents a share, in
1991. Revenues rose to CDollars 3bn from CDollars 2.7bn.
