FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Survey of
Investment Trusts (25): A useful means to a fixed gain - But there is still
some risk attached to them, because you are exposed to the stock market, and
investors will need to know the professional vocabulary / Zero-Dividend
Preference Shares
IF YOU want to zero in on a fixed target for growth, zero-dividend
preference investment trust shares may be the answer. However, they may not
be quite the perfect answer they once seemed.
Zeros can be offered only as part of a split-capital investment trust, which
has a specific date on which it will be wound up. On that date, the zeros
will have first call on the assets - hence the phrase 'preference shares'.
No other shareholders will be paid until the zeros have been repaid in full.
At the beginning of the trust's life, a redemption value is fixed for the
zeros. No income is paid on them (in most trusts, any income generated by
the fund is paid to income shareholders). That means that all the return you
receive on a zero will be taxed as capital gain. If, like most people in the
UK, you do not pay capital gains tax, this allows zeros to offer a tax-free
return.
As the zeros typically account for only about a third of the trust's capital
structure, it is possible to offer a high redemption value without requiring
the portfolio to grow very much. That fixed redemption value also allows
investors to use zeros as a vehicle to speculate on interest-rate moves. As
with other fixed-interest securities, the price of zeros should go up when
interest rates come down.
The gearing effect is crucial to the success of zeros, and can be explained
using the following crude example. If the zeros account for a third of the
capital structure, then they can offer to triple their value by redemption
without requiring any growth at all from the underlying portfolio in which
the trust invests.
In this example, the holders of the other classes of share might be a little
peeved if the fund managers do not deliver a little extra growth, and the
gearing structure usually works much more subtly. So much more subtly, in
fact, that some analysts began to express concern that the zeros would not
be able to deliver on redemption.
In October last year, with the market still yet to pick up after Black
Wednesday, Philip Middleton, investment trust analyst with Smith New Court,
issued a report sardonically entitled 'Noddy Buys A Zero'. In it, he said:
'The market in these shares still seems relatively inefficient. Insufficient
attention is given to portfolio yield on the underlying assets. In addition,
the market does not seem to have priced into the valuation of many shares
the substantial risk that zeros will not be repaid in full. There remain
some very attractive shares, but also some very overvalued ones.'
The rise in the market since then has done much to shore up zeros, but
Middleton's criticism still stands. Peter Walls, investment trust analyst at
Credit Lyonnais Laing, says:
'I have been very critical of these in the past, but I'm less worried about
them now. Fortunately the equity markets have proved once again that they do
have the capacity to outperform.'
He, and Hamish Buchan, of County NatWest, suggest that the underlying
portfolios in which split-capital investment trusts invest can only be
ignored at the investor's peril.
If you want to invest in zeros, you will need to be armed with the following
vocabulary.
Gross redemption yield. This expresses, as an annualised compound interest
rate, the return you will get by buying at today's price and then holding on
to the zeros until they are redeemed. It assumes that the redemption price
is met.
This yield can, therefore, be compared directly with the rates of return on
offer from fixed-rate deposits, to show what kind of value is on offer.
According to Walls, the average gross redemption yield on offer from the
sector has shifted from 9.8 per cent last year to 8.7 per cent. He regards
this as offering better value, given the performance of the rest of the
economy.
Cover. The cover expresses the degree of security you have. It expresses the
total value of the trust's portfolio as a percentage of the amount needed to
pay the redemption amount in full. Any zero with cover of more than 100 per
cent thus already has enough assets to meet redemptions - the portfolio
would need to go down before redemptions were in danger.
Again, the market recovery has rather come to the rescue. According to
Walls, average cover rose from 118 per cent to 123 per cent as the market
took off at the beginning of this year.
Hurdle rate. This provides another measure of the zero's chances of being
redeemed in full, by measuring the annualised rate of return the trust needs
to achieve to repay the zeros in full. For any zero with more than 100 per
cent cover, the hurdle rate will be negative. No trusts require an
unrealistic hurdle rate - as of March 16, the day of the Budget, only four
zeros required a rate of more than 2 per cent, and the highest was 4.9 per
cent.
Zeros with high gross redemption yields may appear attractive, but often, as
Buchan points out, this is just a risk premium. And all of these factors are
generated ultimately by the underlying performance of the fund.
Zeros are useful financial instruments. A fixed gain, free of income tax,
has obvious uses for school fees planning, for example. But when you buy a
zero you are still exposing yourself to the stock market.
