FT  11 NOV 93 / Poles look to new cabinet to deliver
THE POLISH government yesterday consigned opposition politics to the status
of a minority sport, after three stormy years of vulnerable cabinets.
Indeed, with 310 votes behind him in yesterday's vote of confidence - in a
460-seat chamber - Premier Waldemar Pawlak, the 34-year-old farmer and head
of the Polish Peasant Party boasts a majority that many would envy.
The PSL, with its political base in the rural areas where well over
one-third of Poles live and work, and the post-communist Left Democratic
Alliance (SLD) together won 35 per cent of the vote in elections on
September 19. But a new election law, eliminating parties with less than 5
per cent of the vote, translated that into just under two-thirds of the
seats, leaving the right-wing parties - representing over 20 per cent of the
voters - unrepresented in parliament.
It is even possible that Mr Pawlak's cabinet could serve a full four-year
term. If the opinion polls are to be believed, the Polish people are now
looking to the future with a degree of optimism last recorded in the early
days of the reforming Solidarity governments.
The new cabinet has also inherited a growing economy, with 4 per cent
increases in GDP forecast for this and next year. Inflation promises to fall
from this year's 32 per cent to around 21 per cent next year if the new
government holds next year's budget deficit to the International Monetary
Fund's recommended target of around 5 per cent of GDP.
It is here though that cracks could emerge. The rural voters who supported
the PSL, and those in the recession-struck towns who backed the SLD, are
looking for tangible, and rapid, economic improvements.
Elements in both parties are willing to take risks with inflation. Such
moves, as Mr Marek Borowski, the SLD politician in charge of the economy,
knows full well, would risk a worsening of relations with the IMF. That, in
turn, could jeopardise a desperately needed 20 per cent cut in the country's
Dollars 30.6bn debt to western governments, due to be implemented next year.
The fact that the World Bank remains Poland's largest source of capital -
until a debt rescheduling agreement can be negotiated with western
commercial banks owed Dollars 12.3bn - also puts a premium on monetary
stringency.
However, the SLD's trade union component, which makes up around a third of
the parliamentary party, could provide the focus for a left-wing alternative
to the party's free marketeers, such as Mr Borowski and Mr Wieslaw
Kaczmarek, the new privatisation minister who promises to continue to
whittle away at the state sector.
The politicians at the top of the PSL and the SLD appear to have the
sophistication to maintain a common front and prevent internal rivalries
from undermining the new government. However, the social pressures the
government faces will be difficult to contain.
