FT  03 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Lihir stake offer brings
confusion
CONFUSION REIGNED yesterday over the controversial Lihir Island gold deposit
in Papua New Guinea, the largest undeveloped deposit of its kind in the
world, after the Malaysian Mining Corporation said it had been invited by
the PNG government to take a 20 per cent stake in the USDollars 700m (Pounds
451m) venture.
However, RTZ Corporation, the world's biggest mining company, which owns 80
per cent of the project, greeted the news frostily and suggested that MMC
was only one of several corporations that might be interested in a stake in
Lihir.
Some analysts said MMC's statement was probably connected with the political
pressure being applied by the PNG government, which has been demanding that
RTZ go ahead with the project as quickly as possible.
Mr Masket Iangalio, PNG's mining minister, is in London today for further
discussions with RTZ. An RTZ official pointed out that the Lihir joint
venture company announced only last week that substantial progress had been
made in talks with the PNG government and that only a few outstanding issues
remained to be resolved. 'We would not be having discussions with the
government unless progress was being made,' the official said.
RTZ, which has indicated that it wants to reduce its shareholding in Lihir
below the 56 per cent it will be left with after the PNG government acquires
30 per cent, said it was talking directly to other interested parties.
The junior partner in the joint venture is Niugini Mining, which discovered
Lihir. It will have 14 per cent after the government takes a stake.
Niugini's parent, Battle Mountain Gold of the US, does not want Niugini to
buy the 20 per cent RTZ is offering.
The PNG government gave RTZ until May 20 to find another partner and said it
would temporarily take 50 per cent of the project in order to to speed up
the funding process.
One analyst pointed out: 'Obviously RTZ would prefer to find its own partner
rather than have the PNG government do it.'
Lihir, in the crater of a dead volcano nearly full of very hot water, has
resources of 42m troy ounces of gold and is expected to produce 628,000
ounces annually in its first 13 years.
