FT  02 APR 93 / Aids drug effectiveness in question: Setback for HIV
treatment after Anglo-French AZT trial
THE FIGHT against Aids received an unexpected setback yesterday when the
largest and most authoritative study of its kind showed that AZT, the
leading drug used to fight the disease, fails to delay its onset in people
who are infected with HIV.
The results of an Anglo-French trial will shock thousands of HIV-positive
people worldwide who believe that regular doses of AZT can help them.
The World Health Organisation estimates that about 10m people worldwide are
HIV-positive but not yet suffering from Aids. The trial results leave them
without any therapy proven to keep the disease at bay.
Four smaller US studies of AZT in early HIV infection had suggested that the
drug could slow down the progression to Aids.
The outcome - reported today in the medical journal, the Lancet - is also a
serious setback for Wellcome, the UK company selling AZT worldwide under the
Retrovir brand name. 'This is much the most powerful study ever carried out
with HIV-positive patients who have not yet developed symptoms of Aids,'
said Professor Ian Waller, the project's principal UK investigator.
The Anglo-French project known as Concorde, involved 1,749 patients who were
allocated at random into two groups, one taking AZT and the other a placebo
(dummy) pill. They were followed for an average of three years. Survival
rates in the two groups were almost the same; 8 per cent of those taking AZT
and 7 per cent of those on placebo had died after three years. And there was
no significant difference in progression to Aids.
'These results do not encourage early use of AZT in asymptomatic
HIV-infected individuals,' says the UK Medical Research Council, which
organised Concorde jointly with France's National Aids Research Agency.
Wellcome hoped to expand sales of Retrovir - worth Pounds 131m in the six
months to February 1993 - by marketing the drug to asymptomatic patients.
The latest finding does not affect the view that AZT can prolong the life of
HIV-positive patients who have gone on to develop Aids.
Wellcome estimates about 38 per cent of US patients using AZT - its second
best-selling product - are asymptomatic. The company reckons between 125,000
and 150,000 Americans use the drug.
'A 38 per cent collapse in sales would be the disaster scenario. We do not
think the trial has implications for clinical management,' said Wellcome.
'Using AZT on its own is old science. Doctors are moving to combination
therapy (using AZT with other drugs).'
Wellcome argues that Concorde's conclusions are not as stark as they appear.
It points out that the procedure was changed in the middle of the trial to
allow placebo patients whose condition was deteriorating to take AZT. It
believes that this 'diluted' the difference between the groups.
But the company and the Concorde investigators agree that the future lies
with cocktails of anti-HIV drugs rather than 'monotherapy' - using a single
drug such as AZT.
Mr Nick Partridge, chief executive of the Terrence Higgins Trust, the
leading UK Aids charity, called the Concorde result 'very depressing for
people who are well and taking AZT. It is clear that we are many years away
from adequate treatments'.
Third of sales threatened, Page 7
Share price hit, Page 44
