FT  26 OCT 93 / Ladbroke seeks NY betting shops
LADBROKE Group, the UK lei-sure company, has approached Mr David Dinkins,
mayor of New York, with an offer to buy or run the city's 93 off-track
betting shops.
Mr John Long, president and chief operating officer of Ladbroke Racing in
the US, wrote to Mr Dinkins on October 13 suggesting a meeting to discuss
'several levels of involvement' by the UK company.
These could range from 'a management contract to outright purchase', he
said.
The future of racing and off-track betting in New York is being reviewed by
New York state governor Mr Mario Cuomo. This review prompted the Ladbroke
approach, said Mr Long, adding that the company has approached the city and
the state before.
The New York city-owned Off-Track Betting Corporation suffered for many
years from under-investment and many of its branches are badly sited or in
need of refurbishment. The corporation said it was now spending Dollars 4.5m
(Pounds 3m) a year on revamping its branches.
In the year to June the corporation attracted bets of Dollars 811m, down
from Dollars 878m the year before. It blamed this fall on the weakness of
the US economy, though casinos and other gambling operations have increased
their business. After paying out Dollars 616m on winning bets, the operation
contributed Dollars 43.4m to the New York state and city last year.
Even if Ladbroke won the support of New York city, it would still face
obstacles to making the betting operation more profitable.
The New York Racing Association, which owns three of the state's four
racecourses, restricts the live broadcast of races in off-track betting
shops to encourage punters to go to its tracks. Only around a third of
branches carry live broadcasts. Also, several neighbourhood organisations
have prevented new branches from opening in desirable locations in
Manhattan.
Mr Dinkins, who is in the middle of a bitter mayoral election battle, has
yet to respond to the Ladbroke overture.
A spokeswoman for the mayor said: 'It (off-track betting) is in the
assessment mode. No decision has been taken.'
Ladbroke's US off-track betting operations are restricted to five large
venues in Pennsylvania, where it broadcasts races. Mr Long refused to
comment on whether the company wanted to move into off-track betting in
other states.
