FT  29 JUL 93 / VW chief seeks to restore confidence
VOLKSWAGEN, bruised by allegations from General Motors of industrial
espionage, yesterday sought to restore confidence with claims that it was
winning the war in the European car market.
At a press conference at his company's headquarters in Wolfsburg, Mr
Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, aired suspicions of dirty tricks, and repeated
charges that GM had resorted to mud-slinging to further its allegations of
industrial espionage by VW employees.
But he also produced data which suggested that VW was making a strong
recovery after its loss of DM1.25bn (Pounds 480m) in the first quarter. He
said orders in June were more than 15 per cent up on the same month last
year and that the new Golf model had widened its market lead over the Astra,
built by Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary.
Mr Piech cited an independent motor industry expert's view that GM was
trying to damage VW in a commercially motivated war, started after Mr Piech
hired Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, GM's global procurement director,
in March.
In his first press conference to defend VW, Mr Lopez and four former GM
employees who followed Mr Lopez to the German car maker, Mr Piech quoted Mr
Daniel Jones, professor of motor industry management at Cardiff University:
'This is a war.'
He used Mr Jones's opinions to support VW's claims that the industrial
espionage allegations were untrue but were being used to further GM's real
aim - to disrupt the German group's recovery programme by depriving it of
the renowned cost-cutting and innovative production skills of Mr Lopez and
key members of his GM team.
But he returned to the attack with accusations that the US group was
attempting 'to abuse public prosecutors (investigating GM's spying charges),
the media and public opinion to slander our company'.
A recent press release from the prosecutors, which linked Mr Lopez with
confidential GM group data found in four boxes in a Wiesbaden house formerly
occupied by two of his so-called 'warriors', was 'tainted with
one-sidedness', Mr Piech charged.
It had led to unlawful public prejudgment of Volkswagen. The boxes had been
'in other hands' in the time between Mr Lopez's colleagues leaving the house
and the delivery of the material by 'unknown' and 'indirect' ways to the
police, he claimed.
The prosecutors office said yesterday: 'We are absolutely sure of our
facts.'
In Frankfurt the VW share price closed up DM11.70 at DM359.70, while other
German car makers fell sharply and the blue-chip Dax index dropped more than
11 points to 1,833.91.
Piech hurls some mud, Page 2
