FT  22 OCT 93 / World Trade News: Computer makers seek window of opportunity
 -US companies are targeting Japanese schools
WHILE US trade negotiators in Tokyo this week try to convinceJapan to buy
more high-tech goods from foreign companies, they will also be keeping a
keen eye on the fortunes of one key US industry which will be affected by
public purchasing decisions.
US computer companies are gearing up to sell their wares to Japanese
schools, which are expected to buy hundreds of thousands of PCs over the
next few years as part of a government-sponsored programme to raise the
level of computer education in the country.
The US government will no doubt be watching their progress carefully. Mr
Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, noted on Wednesday that US computer
makers had been 'locked out' of the Japanese public procurement market for
computers.
And the education market is one conspicuous public procurement sector in
Japan where US PC makers have had little success.
When Mr Ron Brown, commerce secretary, came to Japan in late April, he made
a point of visiting Apple's offices in Tokyo and indicating that he wanted
to see US companies sell more PCs to Japanese schools. High-technology
products such as PCs are priority items on the list of goods the US is keen
to sell to Japan.
The expected PC-buying binge in the months ahead provides US computer
companies such as Apple and IBM, with a big opportunity to penetrate the
Japanese schools market. It stems from a decision by the Japanese government
to boost purchases of PCs for schools as a key part of its economic stimulus
package announced in the spring.
If schools take up the government's offer as they are expected to, Japan's
educational market for PCs is likely to double in 1994, says Mr Hector
Saldana director of strategic sales at Apple Japan.
The aim of both IBM and Apple is to double their share of the market over
the next few years.
But in common with all market sectors on that list, the Japanese public
schools market, which has been dominated by domestic makers such as NEC and
Fujitsu, is hardly an easy one to crack.
Industry estimates give NEC a 50-60 per cent share of the educational
market, with Fujitsu coming in second at 25 per cent, while the share of US
companies is minimal.
Lack of user familiarity with foreign products, an emphasis on relationships
rather than quality and price, and above all local politics, all doom the
foreign vendor in the Japanese public schools market as much as they affect
decisions in other areas of government procurement.
While IBM and Apple are working hard to win over teachers and education
authorities by visiting schools it is often the local politicians, rather
than the people who will be actually using the machines, who make the final
decision.
For public schools, the local educational authority, staffed by civil
servants and heavily influenced by local politics, makes the procurement
decisions.
'The officials in the local educational authority are not the ones who will
use the computer,' Mr Hideaki Sekine, general manager of educational systems
operations at IBM Japan, says regretfully.
'The process of how decisions are made tends to be heavily influenced by
politics, and if not by written policies, by practices which favour local
vendors,' says Mr Saldana. .
A few months ago, Apple had the recommendation of a school board in Sakai,
outside Osaka, to buy Apple computers overturned at the final point by the
local education board, on the basis of a 10 per cent price difference.
Although the school board said it still favoured Apple, the contract went to
NEC.
Mr Saldana prefers not to complain too much, however. He is confident that
if Apple has the right products and the right policies it can improve its
position in the market significantly.
But he does ask that the Japanese government ensure that the market is a
fair one. 'Apple is a foreign company and doesn't have a lobbying
mechanism,' Mr Saldana says. 'The only thing we can ask of the central
government is to make sure the process is fair.'
