FT  29 SEP 93 / Rao seeks to calm foreign investor fears
INDIA PLANS to sign bilateral investment protection treaties with the US,
the UK, Germany and other countries in order to reassure potential foreign
investors about the safety of their investments, Prime Minister P V
Narasimha Rao said yesterday.
Mr Rao told a businessmen's conference in New Delhi that the treaties, which
are commonly used between countries to codify foreign investors' legal
rights, would show India's 'firm commitment and assurance to foreign
investors'.
In a wide-ranging review of economic reform, Mr Rao pledged to continue with
the liberalisation programme he started two years ago. He said reforms were
planned in the Companies Act, which governs corporate rights, in foreign
exchange legislation and in the financial markets.
The prime minister's speech was seen in Delhi as an attempt to restate the
government's commitment to economic reform at a time when ministers have
been preoccupied with other issues, notably the political impact of the
destruction of the Ayodhya mosque last December. However, Mr Rao tempered
promises of further liberalisation with warnings about the dangers of
over-rapid change.
Mr Rao said: 'We cannot be deterred or diverted from the chosen path, which
is to secure our rightful place in the world economy.' Responding to charges
that the government had slowed the pace of reform in recent months, the
prime minister said it was important that the system was able to absorb
reform 'without collapsing'.
In some other countries reform had gone too fast with 'undesirable results'.
In India the process of spreading reform through levels of government had to
be accelerated but it could not be 'jumped over', said Mr Rao.
The prime minister added that reform would have 'a human face' with
government acting to ensure the poor did not have to wait 10 to 15 years for
the benefits of reform. He warned that the difficult part of the reform
process still lay ahead. There had to be a careful balance between reform
and economic stability so the adverse effects were kept to a minimum.
Indian lorry drivers yesterday called off a nationwide strike on its 13th
day following an assurance by the government that its Transport Development
Council would meet on October 1 to discuss the truckers' demand for a
reduction in fees levied by Indian states when crossing their territory,
Shiraz Sidhva adds.
More than 1.8m largely self-employed drivers took their vehicles off the
roads, affecting prices of essential commodities. Two people were killed and
over 1,000 arrested when the government tried to use force to make the
truckers resume work under the Essential Services Maintenance Act and the
National Security Act.
