FT  22 SEP 93 / UK finds success in Malaysia: Background to Major's visit
TEN YEARS ago Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, piqued at what
he perceived to be British high-handedness on issues ranging from trade
matters to increased fees for Malaysian students studying in Britain,
instituted a 'Buy British Last' policy.
When Mr Major, the UK prime minister, meets Malaysia's leaders today during
his official visit to the country he will find attitudes very much changed.
Malaysia is now one of the success stories in Britain's overseas trade and
investment drive. Aside from the mainly transshipment traffic through
Singapore, Malaysia is Britain's biggest export market in the South-East
Asia region.
Britain's exports to Malaysia have nearly trebled in value in the last five
years, reaching Pounds 636m last year. In the first three months of this
year Britain became the leading foreign investor in Malaysia, putting Pounds
122m into a variety of projects.
Malaysia's exports to Britain have also been growing strongly, reaching
Pounds 1.1bn last year. Its economy has been growing at more than 8 per cent
in each of the last five years. The country is industrialising fast.
Malaysia's exports to Britain are no longer confined, as in the old colonial
days, to the more traditional goods, such as rubber and tin. The
manufacturing sector is now leading the country's export drive. Up to April
1993, Proton, the Malaysian car manufacturer, had exported nearly 57,000 of
its cars to Britain, where it has become a popular low-priced model.
The improvement in British-Malaysian trade was in large part due to the
close relationship through the 1980s between Dr Mahathir and Mrs Margaret
Thatcher.
Dr Mahathir espouses many of the beliefs - and an amount of the leadership
style - of the former British prime minister. Mrs Thatcher, on a private
visit to Kuala Lumpur this month, received red carpet treatment and, in
return, was effusive in her praise for Dr Mahathir.
The big breakthrough for Britain in Malaysia came in 1988 with the signing
of a memorandum of understanding on defence. Since then Britain has made
Pounds 1.3bn of defence sales to Malaysia, including 28 Hawk trainer
aircraft and two frigates. British officials calculate civil projects have
been worth another Pounds 1bn in British exports.
But bigger prizes are still to be won: Power projects. To keep pace with
expected economic growth, Malaysia's power output, now about 5,000MW, needs
to grow five times over the next 25 years. The government calculates that in
the next 10 years alone MDollars 40bn (Pounds 10.3bn) needs investing in the
power sector.
To alleviate the financial burden, Malaysia is encouraging private sector
participation in its power industry. A multi-million-pound independent power
producer (IPP) project involving a British company is expected to be
announced during Mr Major's visit.
National Power, the British electricity company, recently withdrew from an
IPP project because of contractual differences with the local company
involved. However other UK companies such as John Brown, British Gas, Rolls
Royce/NEI and the National Grid continue to win substantial amounts of
business.
A new international airport outside Kuala Lumpur is scheduled for completion
before the city hosts the Commonwealth Games in 1998. An Anglo-Japanese
consortium which includes GEC, Gammon and Balfour Beatty (BB is also lead
contractor in a Pounds 350m hydroelectric scheme in peninsular Malaysia) is
hoping for a large share of the work in the Pounds 2bn airport project.
However, Malaysia is pressing for substantial concessionary finance from
Britain.
It has also signalled it wants other trade-offs - such as more British
landing rights for Malaysia Airlines, the national carrier.
Other infrastructure sectors in which British companies are pursuing
business include upgrading Malaysia's railway network, developing ports,
building private hospitals, and work in the country's rapidly expanding
telecommunications sector.
Both Shell and BP are involved in petrochemicals projects, while North West
Water is finalising negotiations on its 25 per cent stake in a Pounds 1.5bn
project to privatise the country's sewerage system.
As elsewhere, Britain faces tough competition in winning contracts ahead of
Japan and, more recently, Germany and France.
