FT  15 JUN 93 / Somalis cast UN peacekeepers in role of tyrants
THE CHARRED remains of a young boy, burnt beyond recognition, marked the
place where US bombers pounded clandestine ammunitions dumps in Mogadishu
for the third night in a row.
Wailing women said as many as nine people had been killed in the pre-dawn
strike. For Somalis, the nightly raids bring back the nightmare of the
savage civil war that destroyed their capital. The difference is that this
time the attacks are from the foreign troops who were greeted with garlands
of flowers and songs when the United Nations launched its humanitarian
operation in Somalia last year.
'First they brought us food. Now they are bringing weapons,' a young man
said. 'We fear they have come to kill us.' The air attacks, which are aimed
at destroying the hidden weapons stores of Somalia's most defiant warlord,
General Mohamed Farah Aideed, have united the people of his south Mogadishu
fiefdom in blind hatred of the 12,000 UN troops stationed in the capital.
Even residents who bear the scars of Gen Aideed's brutality say they must
rally in defence of a man branded as a war criminal and a tyrant.
Yesterday was a day of mourning for the victims of a demonstration shot at
by Pakistani troops on Sunday. Heeding the call of Moslem prayers from
loudspeaker vans, hundreds of families walked to a parade ground. They held
their arms up to show the helicopters hovering overhead they were carrying
no weapons. The helicopters fired warning shots; the crowd would not budge.
The swaying arms turned into clenched fists. From prayers, the voices
curdled into angry slogans against the United States and the UN. The
commanders of the UN Blue Helmets are being dubbed 'Somalia's new warlords'.
'Look how they are behaving in our country,' said Ms Quman Ahmed Gurhar,
incensed with rage. 'We don't want the UN here. We are prepared to fight to
save Aideed. He is our leader, like Bill Clinton.' Pieces of shrapnel from
last night's air attack were being given to journalists as proof of further
senseless destruction of the city.
The rally was shaken by a loud explosion. UN helicopter pilots had fired a
shell at a rocket launcher hidden in a garden. They missed their target,
instead hitting a ramshackle tea stall where a young mother eked out a
meagre existence. She was alive when the crowd bundled her into a cart to
take her to Benazir hospital, but conditions there are primitive.
The UN came under some international criticism for the weekend shooting of
unarmed demonstrators which, according to the International Committee of the
Red Cross, left 38 dead.
Mr Fabio Fabbri, Italian defence minister, said such episodes discredited
the image of the UN and could, in the long run, jeopardise peace efforts in
other trouble spots of the world.
The US said it regretted the shootings, but announced it was stepping up
military activity by sending at least four more attack helicopters to join
action against Gen Aideed's forces. 'We are going to smack them as they need
to be smacked, hitting them as circumstances demand,' a Pentagon official
said.
In Germany, the opposition Social Democrats said they would take Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's government to court over its decision to send troops to
Somalia. An advance party of 225 German soldiers is already in the country
and 1,700 will be deployed there under current plans.
In Mogadishu, the UN hit back at accusations that Pakistani peacekeepers had
fired at unarmed civilians first. The UN spokesman said gunmen loyal to Gen
Aideed fired the first shots at a Pakistani-held building. 'Armed Aideed
gunmen used women and children as shields while they advanced on the
Pakistani unit,' US army Lt Col Kelvin McGovern told reporters.
He also accused Gen Aideed's militias of mutilating the 23 Pakistanis
ambushed at a feeding centre on June 5 - an act of cold-blooded murder which
sparked the present crisis.
But the Pakistani action last weekend has blotted out the memory of the
earlier atrocity and it is clear the presence of the 4,000-strong Pakistani
contingent is inflammatory.
Somali gunmen accused of provoking Pakistani force, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 19
