FT  10 APR 93 / Books: Did Heisenberg stop the bomb? - Germany's 'reluctant
genius'
HEISENBERG'S WAR: THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE GERMAN BOMB
by Thorns Powers
Jonathan Cape Pounds 20, 608 pages
SOME MEN flaunt their wars. Werner Heisenberg, leading physicist of Hitler's
Third Reich, did not. Heisenberg, lauded in 1933 with the Nobel Prize for
his Uncertainty Principle, has a war record about which very little seems
certain. Thorns Powers, in telling The Secret History of the German Bomb,
struggles to pin down just what Heisenberg was up to. In particular, how
consciously did he operate a one-man go-slow, and if so, why?
Powers' 500-page narrative necessarily concentrates as much on the atom bomb
that was made - the Allied bomb - as on the one that was not. The central
fascination of the tale lies in the bluff-counter-bluff resorted to by both
sides as each sought to probe the other's motives and progress. Can any
sliver of information be taken at face value?
Early on a report reaches the West that Heisenberg 'tries to delay the work
as much as possible.' True, or bluff? The Americans were unconvinced, but
their own counter-probes could not be pressed with too great an intensity,
lest the Germans twig that the American effort was off and running.
In fact, as Powers confirms, the Germans, prompted by Heisenberg, concluded
in mid-1942 that attempting to build a bomb within the likely time-frame of
the war would be at best difficult, at worst crippling. Nor were they sure
that they could get the 'critical mass' down to manageable size. They opted
instead for a modest programme of reactor development.
The Americans and their allies continued to think that the Germans retained
an option, as it were up their sleeve, until captured documents proved the
contrary in the winter of 1944-45. Meanwhile, plans to capture or
assassinate Heisenberg were kept warm. If there were a German bomb, then
Heisenberg's work would be the underpinning of it.
By the time of the Hiroshima atom bomb explosion, Heisenberg and nine key
colleagues were safely captured and tucked away at Farm Hall, Cambridge,
chattering into hidden microphones. Powers believes that recently released
sections of the Farm Hall tapes confirm Heisenberg to have been an active
procrastinator. Heisenberg shares in the initial shock of Hiroshima, but
within a matter of days is lecturing his colleagues accurately on the
physics that lay behind the Allied success, and how the 'critical mass' had
been scaled down from the one ton the Germans initially thought necessary to
the few kilograms that made the Allied bomb deliverable. Surely, Powers
claims, the brilliant Heisenberg must have known all along, but stayed
quiet.
Yet in the post-war scramble by physicists on both sides for moral high
ground, Heisenberg never claimed the credit Powers thinks due to him. In his
most settled explanation, in a 1964 letter to Hans Bethe, Heisenberg strikes
a deftly equivocal note: 'The German physicists did not want to build atomic
bombs and were glad that they were spared the decision about producing
atomic bombs by external circumstances. In this, what you called 'social
conscience' played a considerable role, although there were other motives,
not least the pure self-preservation instinct.'
Here, surely, lies the essential difference in the psychological drives of
each side. Physicists working to the Allied tune could assume that failure
would not bring direct retribution. German physicists would hesitate before
promising Hitler a bomb and then being unable to deliver. A 'pure
self-preservation instinct' would lead you into not taking the risk.
The quieter life was the best guarantor of the longer one.
