FT  27 JUL 93 / Technology: Ways to break a vicious circle / A look at
advances in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, in a series on drug
discoveries
CREAKING joints and early morning stiffness have traditionally been seen as
a normal part of the ageing process. The condition is often painfully
crippling but difficult to avoid. However, another form of arthritis, known
as rheumatoid arthritis, is more insidious. The disease, which afflicts one
in 100 people, can strike at any age and torments women twice as often as
men. Its onset is normally in the 20s and 30s, although children can be also
affected.
The condition is both debilitating and life-threatening. Recent studies
suggest that not only quality of life is impaired, as sufferers struggle to
live normal lives with increasingly crippled joints, but life-expectancy is
reduced by an average of six years.
Scientists are still trying to find the cause. They are confident, however,
that there is a genetic component which predisposes people to the illness. A
particular sequence of genes is found in about 80 per cent of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, explains Bruce Littman, director of clinical medicine
at the central research facility of Pfizer, the US drugs group.
This genetic sequence appears to be insufficient to cause rheumatoid
arthritis on its own. There are probably also environmental factors, which
may be linked to a single bacteria or virus, or a combination of organisms,
says Littman.
The exact effect of the organisms and the genetic predisposition remain
unclear. However, the result is that they trigger an inappropriate response
from the body's immune system to the joints' tissues.
One theory is that the external organism may cause alterations to the cells
in the joint, which are then viewed by the immune system as foreign
material, says Beat von Graffenried, project leader for immunology at the
research and development department at Sandoz of Switzerland. Once the
immune system has identified the cells as foreign material, the system
erroneously views them as an attack, and launches a counter-offensive.
During a normal infection, the immune system identifies an antigen or
foreign body and reacts by generating cytokines. These help activate the
immune system and trigger the production of chemicals that create
inflammation. This gives the body's defences access to the infectious
material.
Normally, once the infection has been defeated the system shuts down.
However, in rheumatoid arthritis, for reasons that remain obscure, this
fails to occur. The result is that 'the immune system goes wild and just
won't stop attacking the joint,' says Littman.
A vicious circle is created. The body continues to manufacture the
cytokines, which prove highly toxic to the joint's cells, destroying their
structure. As the cells disintegrate, the immune system identifies the
newly-damaged cells as foreign bodies, and reacts by renewing the attack.
One of the main targets for the renegade immune system is the joint lining,
which becomes inflamed and swollen. In addition, the fluid that lubricates
the joint made by the lining accumulates, adding to the swelling and the
pain.
Traditionally, the first-line therapy for rheumatoid arthritis is a class of
medicines called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or Nsaids.
Datamonitor, the London-based market research company, estimates that in
1991 these drugs generated sales of Dollars 4.3bn (Pounds 2.9bn).
The market for Nsaids is static because of the recent expiry of the US
patents of one of the most successful Nsaids, a drug called Feldene,
manufactured by Pfizer. Those for the best-selling product in the US, a
treatment from Syntex of California called Naprosyn, expire in December. The
world's top-selling Nsaid is Voltaren, marketed by Ciba of Switzerland,
which generated sales last year of SFr1.63bn (Pounds 700m) in 1992.
Nsaids are from the same class of drugs as aspirin. They work by inhibiting
the production of cyclo-oxygenase, an enzyme that helps in the production of
prostaglandins which increase blood flow and cause inflammation.
Unfortunately, although Nsaids reduce the symptoms of both inflammation and
pain, they have no impact on the production of cytokines and do nothing to
reduce the self-destruction process. They also have severe gastro-intestinal
side-effects and can cause stomach ulcers in prolonged use.
Traditionally, when Nsaids are no longer enough to contain the disease,
physicians turn to second-line therapies. These include treatments such as
gold, D-penicillamine and sulphur celamite.
Among the gold treatments is Ridaura, developed by SmithKline Beecham, the
Anglo-American healthcare group. The company has proven Ridaura's
effectiveness, but it is still unsure how it actually works. Some patients
react badly to gold treatment. However, since most of these drugs are no
longer protected by patents, little is being invested in developing them
further.
The final line of defence has normally been disease-modifying anti-rheumatic
drugs (Dmards). These include Pfizer's recently-launched Tenidap, Sandimmune
from Sandoz, and Rheumatrex, a treatment developed by American Cyanamid's
drugs division, Lederle. Tenidap works in two ways, according to Littman at
Pfizer. First, like the Nsaids, it controls the production of
cyclo-oxygenase. Second, it affects the production of several cytokines.
Sandimmune is an immunosuppressant, originally developed to prevent the
rejection of organs after transplants. It works by blocking the secretion of
chemicals which are responsible for activating the immune system. For
rheumatoid arthritis patients, it is used at low doses, although there is
concern that it could suppress the immune system to the extent that patients
develop opportunistic infections or even cancer. There is presently no
evidence to support such fears.
Lederle's Rheumatrex is actually an anti-cancer drug. It suppresses the
production of white blood cells responsible for the immune response.
However, the traditional progression of therapy from Nsaids to secondary
therapies and finally Dmards is now being challenged. Drug groups such as
Sandoz and Pfizer now maintain that Dmards should be used early in therapy
in an effort to control the disease's progression.
'Sandimmune may be far more effective if taken at the start of the disease
than later on when damage is already considerable,' says von Graffenried.
Sandoz is presently conducting trials to determine if this is the case.
The key to early treatment is identifying the disease early. Many patients
fail to go to their doctor until the disease is well-developed. However,
specialists now believe it should be possible to monitor patients with a
family history of the disease by measuring chemicals called acute phase
proteins, which are an indicator of excessive cytokine activity.
Drug groups are developing a number of leads for the next generation of
treatments. 'There's no point creating new drugs developed on the old lines.
There are enough Nsaids around. We must keep looking at compounds that
influence the development of the disease,' says von Graffenried.
Centocor, the US biotechnology group, is developing a treatment using
monoclonal antibodies, which would inhibit the functioning of certain parts
of the immune system. A number of companies are also developing drugs that
will work against a peptide called substance P, that helps the action of
cytokines. Celltech, a small British biotechnology group, is looking at ways
of inhibiting the action of one particular cytokine, known as Tumour
Necrosis Factor Alpha.
Another approach, according to von Graffenried, is to identify the virus or
bacteria that causes the original problem and then find a way of preventing
it triggering the cycle of self-destruction. 'That's the dream, but it won't
be easy,' he says.
Others are trying to find a way of treating people with the genetic
predisposition to develop rheumatoid arthritis. Von Graffenried says: 'The
biggest dream is genetic therapy. There's clearly a strong genetic link. We
need to find the gene that makes people susceptible to the disease and then
see if we can rectify it. I have some reservations about the practicality of
developing such a therapy, but conceptually it's attractive.'
The series continues next month by looking at the latest advances in
epilepsy treatment.
