FT  08 JAN 93 / Menem spends to cut poverty
ARGENTINA'S President Carlos Menem, bolstered by figures showing inflation
at its lowest level in 20 years, yesterday unveiled a Dollars 1.5bn package
to improve the lot of the poor, the old and very young.
The package coincides with a popularity offensive by Mr Menem to amend the
constitution so he can stand for re-election when his term ends in 1995. His
government is now aiming for a sweeping victory in September's mid-term
congressional elections to secure two-thirds of the seats in the Chamber of
Deputies, the lower house. The amendment requires a two-thirds majority of
Congress.
Mr Menem, who is more than halfway through his six-year presidential term,
has sound opinion poll ratings, although his popularity has been declining
over recent months. Pollsters say low inflation remains the key to any
politician's popularity, but public opinion is focusing on poverty, falling
real incomes and worsening social services.
The government has already raised this year's spending estimate by 17.4 per
cent to Dollars 39.65bn, a figure Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minister, says
cannot be increased. Officials insist that funds for the social package have
already been allocated in the budget.
Government figures published this week showed retail prices rose by only 0.3
per cent in December, bringing the inflation rate for 1992 down to 17.5 per
cent from 84 per cent for 1991. Wholesale prices rose even more slowly: last
year's index rose 3.1 per cent, and wholesale prices actually fell 0.7 per
cent in December.
This modest rise in wholesale prices is allowing Mr Cavallo to argue that
companies' export competitiveness is not at risk, and that there is
therefore no need for a devaluation of the peso, fixed against the dollar
since April 1991. Mr Menem is weakening the power of the unions by breaking
their hold on workers' health and social security services by throwing them
open to competition. The services, funded by compulsory payroll deductions
worth billions of dollars a year, are a pillar of union power and a source
of corruption.
Falklands squid, Page 20
