FT  11 DEC 93 / Food &amp; Drink: Strictly for serious claret lovers only -
Appetisers
The most perfect gift for a claret lover has presented itself in the nick of
time for Christmas: the beautifully-bound and long-awaited magnum opus based
on the unusually rich archives of Bordeaux first growth Chateau Latour.
Chateau Latour - The History of Great Vineyard 1331-1992 by my revered
colleague Edmund Penning-Rowsell is a translation and synthesis of a
two-volume work based on the Latour archives which appeared in French in
1974, but is very much more handsomely produced and continues the Latour
story right up to this year when Allied-Lyons sold it back into French
hands, concluding a 30-year British stewardship.
It was just after the property was bought by Pearson, owners of the
Financial Times, that the extraordinary collection of correspondence between
the managers and owners of the estate was found, some dusty cupboards
yielding a history not just of this property but of the world's most famous
fine wine region, back to the 14th century.
The book is elegantly written and helpfully presented so that anyone
interested in bordeaux finds it difficult not to be drawn in to this inside
story of how some unremarkable marshland was transformed into the fount of
one of the most magnificent liquids in the world.
The book is produced in a strictly limited edition, the first 10 copies are
signed, and costs Pounds 145 from Hatchards of Piccadilly in London
(071-439-9921) or from the publishers Segrave Foulkes on 081-546-8909).
* * * * *
The FT promotion 'Lunch for a Fiver' last January, which allowed people to
eat in top-class restaurants for Pounds 5, bore several pale imitations in
subsequent months. Coming shortly to a bookshop near you, however, is the
book Dinner for a Fiver.
This is a direct response to a reader's letter which asked me how the 130
restaurants in our scheme managed to prepare a two-course lunch and sell it
for Pounds 5. I asked the chefs and restaurateurs to provide me with a
representative three-course menu which they had offered during that
fortnight together with the ingredients and method.
Dinner for a Fiver contains recipes from more than 60 of the restaurants
which took part and includes, in its 192 pages, menus for French, Italian,
Chinese, Thai and even Belgian dinner parties.
Vermilion, the publisher, was brave enough to rise to my challenge calling
for the paperback to sell for Pounds 5. The official publication date is
January 6 but copies should be in the bookshops before Christmas. It is also
available by mail order. Tel: 0279-427203.
* * * * *
The record for the biggest ever single sale of cigars belongs to Zino
Davidoff, doyen of cigar merchants. In a splendid new coffee-table book, The
Illustrated History of the Cigar, he recalls that the event occurred in the
late 1950s at his Geneva shop, when ex-King Farouk of Egypt, a large man in
every way, placed an order for 40,000 Hoyo de Monterrey Double Coronas.
After many cables and phone calls to Cuba, the order was able to be
confirmed. The king kept his side of the bargain, paying what now would be
the equivalent of Pounds 400,000.
The Illustrated History of Cigars, by Bernard Le Roy, Maurice Szafran, is
published by Harold Starke Publishers, Eye Suffolk, 200 pages, Pounds 40.
* * * * *
If you have left an important client off your Christmas hospitality list nil
desperandum. Jeroboam's, the wine and cheese specialists, can come up with
plenty of ideas for corporate presents. It specialises in putting together
gift boxes for companies 'whatever the budget'. To ensure pre-Christmas
delivery in the UK last orders should be in by December 16. Contact:
Jeroboams 51 Elizabeth Street, London SW1W 9PP. Tel: 071-823-5623, fax
071-823-5722. Retail and wholesale.
* * * * *
Essex company Tremayne and Webb, of The Gatehouse, Hobbans Farm,
Bobbingworth, Chipping Ongar, is also well-used to supplying company
boardrooms. Hampers and gift packs start from Pounds 9.75 up to The Ultimate
Indulgence Hamper at Pounds 425. Kimberley and Toby Webster will provide
more details. Tel: 0277-890525, fax: 0277-890149. Last orders for UK
delivery December 15.
* * * * *
Marks &amp; Spencer is also trying to snatch some of the corporate market this
year with its gourmet gift chests. Champagne, port and Christmas provisions
come in a wooden chest at Pounds 250. Although I find the appearance of
their cakes unattractive - 'shop cakes' my grandmother would have said
dismissively - its range of biscuit and chocolates is good. Attractively
packaged, prices start for as little as 29p for chocolate pennies. Ideal
stocking fillers and children's fare.
Careful selection of M &amp; S canapes will also save you a lot of party
catering time. Smoked salmon rolls filled with cream cheese or smoked salmon
pate (Pounds 6.99 for 18) make a reliable cold platter.
* * * * *
Innes traditional organic sourdough bread tastes like bread used to. A 2kg
loaf measures 15 inches across and the dough takes five days to rise. It can
be bought by mail order from Thoby Young at the Fresh Food Company, 100
Bayswater Road, London, W2 (tel or fax 081-969-0351). It costs Pounds 10.50
including p and p. With the bread, try Mojama tuna, from Andalucia, a
delicacy not readily available in the UK.
