FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of South Africa - Open for investment (19): In search
of recognition - Philip Gawith discusses foreign investment
AFTER the isolation years, South Africa's business community is enjoying
being back in the fold, hoping the world will want to lend to the country,
trade with it and, above all, invest in it. First prize would be a headline
investment of the 'IBM to build Dollars 1bn plant' variety.
Clearly the optimists are going to be disappointed, for the time being.
First, the world has changed. Before isolation, the eastern bloc and China
were no-go zones and the Pacific Dragons had barely entered the business
lexicon. Nor had South America embarked upon widespread financial
liberalisation. Change in all of these areas has opened a host of markets
competing for the multinational investment dollar.
Second, save for special cases - such as investment flowing from the recent
issue of cellular telephone licences - it is unlikely any significant
investments will be made until it is clear South Africa has achieved a
stable transition.
This is not, however, to say that nothing is happening. On the contrary,
there is a ferment of activity. Examples include: Alfa Romeo is again
selling cars in South Africa and Volvo will soon be doing so: IBM is
probably going to return through an investment in a local distributor;
Hoechst has expanded its operation by paying R70m for a polyester fibre
plant; Foodcorp has signed a deal with Pillsbury; Lufthansa has added an
extra flight and is flying on a daily basis; ferrochrome producers Samancor
and Nippon Denko have formed a joint venture, while Mitsui will distribute
some of Sasol's chemicals in Japan and Korea. The list goes on.
So, while the headline investment may be absent, the incremental
internationalisation of the corporate scene is proceeding apace. The main
trend to be observed is as obvious as it is understandable: companies want
to establish a presence, but without any significant equity commitment. As
Dr Chris Stals, governor of the Reserve Bank, commented recently in
Washington: 'They're offering us their services, not their money.' The deals
one is hearing about are thus in distribution, licensing and franchising.
At issue here is not only the question of who will come, but how they will
do it. Any future government is sure to have a very strong commitment to
black economic advancement, a process that many US investors, in particular,
are likely to want to support. Given the underdeveloped state of black
business in South Africa, franchising (sectors with strong potential include
hair care salons and fast food outlets) and joint ventures are the most
logical routes of assisting this process. There are, for example, many small
black business contractors, but often they will lack access to credit to buy
materials and have non-existent financial or administative systems.
The process of finding partners, however, will not be easy. Despite years of
activity in this field, the US embassy is still not in a position to offer a
list of potential partners.
According to the Reserve Bank, at the end of 1992 total investment in South
Africa by foreign residents amounted to approximately Dollars 30bn. This
included repayable debt of about Dollars 18bn and about Dollars 12bn of
South African corporate equities and bonds issued by government and other
public and private sector borrowers. About half of the latter sum is
'direct' investment - in South African subsidiaries and branches of foreign
companies - with the other half being invested by non-residents in rand
denominated paper ('portfolio' investment).
During the sanctions years, South Africa experienced a net outflow of
foreign investment from the country as many companies, especially US ones,
disinvested. The stock of US fixed investment in South Africa shrunk as a
result by a third, to roughly Dollars 1bn and 110 companies. Although some
UK and European companies also left, most stayed and already have a presence
in South Africa. From an investment perspective, the Japanese and Asian
presence is negligible.
Mr Derek Keys, finance minister, speculates that the order in which foreign
countries will 'carry the baton' when they return might be: US, Japan, UK
and other Europeans. How will they be received by a future government? The
key policy document in this regard is the 'Agreed framework in relation to
foreign direct investment', a product of the National Economic Forum, and
endorsed by the ANC. This is largely a motherhood-and-apple pie affair, but
points worth stressing are:
Realisation of the importance of stability and 'consistent, credible
economic policies';
The view that South Africa should not introduce special tax incentives to
attract FDI, the object rather being 'the equal application of reasonably
low corporate tax rates which remain stable';
During the transition assurances will be provided on security of investment,
foreign exchange policy, and minimisation of bureaucratic obstacles;
Industrial incentives will be equally available to foreigners and locals.
