FT  14 SEP 93 / Technology: Meaty questions on the menu - How is food
affected by irradiation? Della Bradshaw looks at a debate that is turning
into a trade issue
The thought of eating beef full of hormones, genetically-altered vegetables
or seafood dosed with radiation is viewed by many consumers with horror. But
while the consumers' eye is focused on nutritional quality, the food
industry sees some of the latest food technologies as potential trade
issues.
On completion of the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, scheduled for December 15, rules will be implemented to define when
treated foods can be legally banned from a country and when such a ban would
be deemed a barrier to trade.
The aim of the new rules, according to a Gatt official, is to define a firm
scientific basis for the protection of consumer health. 'Our concern is that
the trade side has to have a scientific base.'
The test case for the new rules will probably be the continuing issue of
hormones in beef, but food irradiation, in which the products are dosed with
ionising radiation to kill microbes, looks set to provide more widespread
debate.
Over the past decade irradiation has proven a veritable battle ground for
scientists, conservationists and the fresh food lobby.
Proponents of the technology say that there are years of scientific evidence
to prove that irradiation is safe. 'There's probably more research gone into
irradiation than any other food process,' points out David Kilcast, manager
of the sensory evaluation group, at the UK's Leatherhead Food Research
Association.
'There is a massive body of scientific evidence to suggest that it's a
useful food process,' he adds.
Perhaps most significantly, many scientists believe that by killing off
bacteria, irradiation could prove a useful tool in preventing the spread of
food poisoning.
Anti-irradiation groups claim that proper research has not been done into
certain aspects of the technology, such as its effects on the vitamin
content of food, and that some of the scientific evidence is flawed. They
also point out the danger of consumers believing that irradiation enables
them to keep fresh food indefinitely, so resulting in food poisoning.
Furthermore, they question why food should need irradiation in the first
place. 'The public perception is that irradiation is only there to cover up
defects in food,' says Tony Webb, project officer at Australia's Food Policy
Alliance, which combines the interests of trade unionists, farmers and
others. 'People don't want food to hang about on shelves. They want shorter
shelf lives rather than longer ones.'
The consumer, he says, wants foods produced with fewer pesticides and
additives using high-quality farming practices and processing methods. That
frequently adds to the expense of food production.
If food producers are allowed to promote unhygienic food production and then
clean up the food with irradiation, Webb reasons, then they are undercutting
environmentally sound food practices.
'It's as direct a distortion of trade as government subsidies,' he argues.
'The issue is about fair trade.' Webb believes that the whole agenda should
be turned on its head.
Australia has now become the focus point for the acrimony in the food
irradiation debate, following the Australian government's decision to order
a moratorium on food irradiation in 1989. This was followed by a request to
the World Health Authority to produce the definitive scientific report on
food irradiation's effect on the nutritional value of foods.
The first draft report was published in spring 1992, but the Australian
government, which funded the report, was only allowed by the WHO to sit as
an observer in the consultation procedure. A preliminary final report was
sent to the Australian government towards the end of 1992, but with the
proviso that only the government and closely related bodies should see it.
Gae Pincus, chairperson of Australia's National Food Authority, which
advises the Australian government on issues of food safety, decided to defy
WHO rules and make the report available on a 'read only' basis for other
interested parties as part of the consultation process.
'We couldn't countenance it not being available,' says Pincus. 'Over the
past couple of months the report has been available to anyone who wants it.
The WHO has accepted that. But we will still wait for the 'final final'
report before we take action.' The 'final, final' report should be available
by the end of the year.
In its draft form, the report does not address the issues set it by the NFA,
claims Webb; namely, whether irradiation affects the safety and nutritional
value of food. 'It's a shoddy job,' he concludes.
Pincus also reports that the NFA had reservations about the report - 'some
substantive, some editorial'. Yet the scientific evidence reviewed in the
report could form the basis of an international standard on food irradiation
which would have status under Gatt.
Whatever the evidence in the final WHO report, rules on irradiation could
prove extremely difficult to define.
The area is fraught with anomalies, such as the different dosages of
radiation needed for different foods, especially in composite products. In a
meat and potato dish, for example, the potatoes could be subjected to one
level of radiation to prevent sprouting, but the meat would need a different
dose, points out Kilcast.
'We need to do tests on the eating quality of the combination product,' he
adds. 'If you apply the appropriate dose to appropriate food it's fine, as
with any food process. If not, you get the same results as if you
oven-roasted a lettuce.'
The EC is continuing to grapple with harmonisation in the light of the
single market. But with Germany banning the technology and the Netherlands
renowned as the irradiation capital of the world, the going is tough. In
between the two extremes there are numerous discrepancies.
In the UK, for example, only herbs and spices can be irradiated. In France,
on the other hand, Camembert cheese has been added to the list of foods
which can be treated, but UK law means it would be illegal to sell the
cheese in Britain.
Even for single products - in the US some chickens are irradiated, for
example - Pincus believes exporting countries would have a difficult time
pressing home their case with or without international standards. 'You could
counter by asking why they couldn't send the non-irradiated version of the
product and then get quickly into health and safety issues.
'It would raise some interesting questions,' she adds. 'It may lead to
questions about the microbiological state of the product before
irradiation.'
However, the Gatt official confirmed that if countries have rules which ban
foods for which there is an international scientific standard then 'they may
be called upon to justify them'.
Rather than import bans, Gatt suggests that clear food labelling would give
consumers a choice. Sceptics argue that labelling is unlikely to provide the
consumer with the full information, particularly if only a small proportion
of the total contents of the food - a herb, say, or a spice - has been
irradiated. In many countries such a small amount of one ingredient would
mean the product as a whole was exempt from labelling under existing rules.
It is also questionable, argues the anti-irradiation lobby, whether
restaurateurs will want to emblazon their menus with notices that their
seafood platters or chicken dishes contain irradiated produce.
'One of the problems of irradiation is the name,' says Katie Munson, senior
business analyst at the Henley Centre for Forecasting, in London, which has
carried out extensive research into food acceptability. 'People are very
suspicious of anything to do with radiation. Irradiation would have to do an
enormous PR job to become accepted. Whether it's dodgy or not doesn't
matter; it's people's reactions that matter.'
