FT  23 SEP 93 / Caution urged on Nato expansion
NATO should consider carefully before enlarging its membership to include
former Warsaw Pact countries in central Europe, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, British
defence secretary, said in Moscow yesterday.
He expressed clear UK reservations about an early move to integrate Poland,
the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary.
Enlargement is set to be a central issue at the Nato summit in January.
The UK is taking a notably more cautious line than has recently emerged in
the US and Germany, particularly from Germany's outspoken defence minister,
Mr Volker Ruhe.
Mr Rifkind told the Russian General Staff Academy: 'Membership of Nato
involves responsibility as well as rights and cannot just be seen as a
political statement or as a means of enhancing the security of any one
individual country.'
Nato had to seek stability throughout Europe and must not create 'new areas
of contention and mistrust,' he said. His remarks were partly aimed at
reassuring Russian military leaders, who are concerned about the expansion
proposals.
President Boris Yeltsin, on recent visits to Warsaw and Prague, indicated
that Russia had no objection if central European countries decided to join.
However, these remarks are widely viewed in Moscow to have been
ill-considered. Senior Russian defence officials see any move to incorporate
former Warsaw Pact members as premature. Such a move is seen as a potential
provocation to political hardliners.
Dr Alexander Savelyev, vice-president of the Institute for National Security
and Strategic Studies, said there were 'powerful groups' within Russia who
would not accept an eastwards expansion of Nato.
Mr Rifkind said there could be no question of seeking to isolate Russia.
'There is no strategy of encirclement and, if there were, the UK would have
no part in it,' Mr Rifkind assured his audience of Russian officers.
The January summit would have to consider the alliance's relations with all
other European states, including Russia, he said.
