FT  08 JUN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Mellor believes Lamont will not
rock PM's boat
ONE OF Mr Norman Lamont's close political friends yesterday offered a firm
prediction that the chancellor would not take revenge for his dismissal by
seeking to destabilise Mr John Major's government.
The forecast by Mr David Mellor - who himself resigned from the cabinet last
autumn - that Mr Lamont would be circumspect in his public statements was
echoed by other friends of the former chancellor.
Mr Lamont, still shocked by Mr Major's decision 10 days ago to reshuffle the
cabinet, consulted several friends at the weekend on the approach he should
adopt in his first public statement on his departure from the government.
He has indicated that he sees no reason why he should be made a scapegoat
for the depths of the recession, for the explosion in public borrowing or
for the debacle of sterling's retreat from the exchange rate mechanism.
But Mr Mellor said that he doubted that Mr Lamont would speak in tomorrow's
Commons debate on the government's economic policies called by the Labour
party. That debate, which will be opened by Mr John Smith and Mr John Major,
will see Mr Kenneth Clarke's first Commons appearance as chancellor.
Writing in the Evening Standard, Mr Mellor said his contacts with the former
chancellor indicated that Mr Lamont intended to keep back for his memoirs
his account of his two-and-a-half years at the Treasury.
That would set out 'without rancour and without any desire for revenge' his
defence of his chancellorship.
Mr Lamont was aware that any attempt to destroy Mr Major's government would
take with it his own political reputation. The former chancellor's appetite
for politics was 'undiminished' and at 51 he might well contemplate a return
to high office.
Mr Mellor's assessment coincides with informal messages to the prime
minister's office since the reshuffle. Other friends of the former
chancellor have also stressed that he has hopes of a senior appointment in
the City while he remains on the backbenches.
That prospect would be diminished by an outright attack on Mr Major.
