FT  25 MAR 93 / East Thames area to be developed
A TASK force to spearhead development of the East Thames corridor, a rundown
swathe of riverside east of London, is to be set up to boost long-term
economic growth and create thousands of jobs.
The announcement of the plan yesterday by Mr Michael Howard, the environment
secretary, was in sharp contrast to the vision of Mr Michael Heseltine, when
he was environment secretary, of a linear city on both sides of the Thames.
Mr Howard said the first stage would be consultative. There was no question
of blocking development to the west of London, and ribbon development at the
expense of the environment would not be allowed.
However, there was a need to plan for the long term beyond the recession,
and the 30-mile corridor on both sides of the Thames from Docklands to
Tilbury and Sheerness could become the bridgehead to the Continent.
The newly created task force will prepare a planning framework for the
corridor, which should be available for public consultation by the end of
the year. The intention is to have the framework in place by March next
year.
One of the problems is to create cohesion among the 16 local authorities
covering the corridor. These include parts of six London boroughs, part of
Thurrock in Essex, and the Kent authorities of Dartford, Gravesham,
Rochester, Gillingham and Swale.
Development plans are likely to come under attack for a variety of reasons.
The area contains some of the most derelict and hazardous wastelands in the
country, but it also has some important wildlife sites.
Mr Howard acknowledged that contamination on some sites could be a problem,
and emphasised the need to develop the corridor 'to safeguard its
internationally important wildlife habitat'.
The intention is to avoid the mistakes made in Docklands by ensuring
development of the corridor coincides with a big infrastructure programme.
Mr Howard published a list of projects in addition to the Channel tunnel
rail link, including the promised Jubilee Line, extensions to the Docklands
Light Railway, improvements to the railway services to Tilbury and Southend,
and upgraded road links.
The Association of London Authorities said it was essential that
improvements to the infrastructure were carried out at all stages.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said it was a much-needed boost
to the economy of the south-east.
Editorial comment, Page 21
