FT  20 FEB 93 / Travel Focus: For billionaires who do not own a yacht -
Catherine Stott cruises round the Baltic on Sea Goddess I, a ship on which
even the extremely rich can relax / Cruising
IT WAS nice of Cunard to recreate the life style of a billionaire's private
yacht party; to package it so beautifully for 100-plus guests; and to make
the price so utterly inclusive that money itself is never seen on board.
Cunard has two ocean-going, yacht-style cruisers, Sea Goddess I and II,
which rove the world year-round and, with a draft of only 14ft, insinuate
their sleek prows into the most secret harbours, exclusive marinas and
usually unnavigable rivers.
I joined the Sea Goddess I at high summer in the Baltic and even the
foreplay was exquisite: a uniformed chauffeur at the airport, bowing and
handing me a long-stemmed rose before speeding through Copenhagen in a
limousine to where the Krug of cruise ships, 320ft of pure white, rested
seductively at the quayside.
Fleets of Mercedes disgorged well-heeled travellers. Matching six-packs of
Vuitton and Hartmann baggage were hoisted aboard. Nancy Reagan lookalikes -
size 4 social x-rays - clutched monogrammed jewel cases. Queuing to board,
Charles Beckwith, deeply tanned from one of his Caribbean homes, viewed the
Scandinavian drizzle with distaste and growled that what he was spending on
the cruise could have paid for another Jaguar.
He clutched an alligator briefcase close to his chest. His wise-cracking
wife of 40 years said: 'Charlie keeps his most precious things in there. His
krugerrands and his hair-dryer.'
Piped aboard, we were pressed to accept a crystal goblet of champagne, and
our first scoop of caviar, in a flower-filled lobby where good Oriental rugs
floated on a marble floor. This was the time to evaluate the other guests.
Sea Goddess I, it appeared, is very much a yacht for couples, of whichever
persuasion. There are 58 double cabins. Even the ultra-spoilt professed
themselves impressed by the accommodation, which is designed cleverly. Each
cabin has a picture window, and a long wall of blonde wooden units
concealing enough closet space even for those who like to change five times
a day. There is a safe big enough for your gold bars and a refrigerator
inside a private bar which is replenished constantly.
Everyone was much friendlier than on other cruise ships. Perhaps the rich
are truly relaxed only with other rich people - and with prices starting at
Pounds 3,740 apiece for a week's summer cruise in Europe, it is an
assumption they can, rightly, make about each other. Everyone said they were
'in' something - 'in' medicine', 'in' movies'. One ancient Pennsylvania
billionaire said he was 'in' coffins.
Friendships formed quickly. People would bag you in advance for drinks and
dinner. Otherwise, there was an open seating policy where you filled up the
tables as you arrived. The restaurant was pretty and you could dine at any
time between 8pm and 10pm. Since the officers and crew are Norwegian, the
cuisine tends towards the Scandinavian. The majority of guests were
American, but with a selection of Europeans. Ages ranged from 14 to 80 but
most people were in their 40s and 50s.
The difference between the Sea Goddesses and almost every other cruise ship
is the deliberate lack of entertainment; indeed, there is very little
structured activity on board. I suppose Cunard thinks that if you are smart
enough to have made the kind of money you need for a Sea Goddess cruise, you
probably have your own ideas on how to spend an evening. There is dancing,
however, a little gaming room, and a decent library of books and movies.
Rather unusually, the ships tend to stay in port until midnight so that
guests may dine ashore without hurry. Other, cheaper vessels sail at
sundown, knowing that if their passengers have paid for dinner on board,
they will not wish to pay for another one.
On the Baltic cruise, the American guests were less than impressed by the
first two ports of call. 'No shopping - very frustrating,' said a Floridian
fashion plate as we landed by tender at a speck in the Baltic named
Christiansoe, nothing but a 100-acre rock where raucous guillemots and
razor-billed auks outnumbered the hardy fisher-folk 100 to 1. Nor did they
rave over Bornholm, Denmark's permissive holiday isle, where they complained
that all there was to do was watch a million herrings drying like socks on a
line.
Most did not go ashore in teeming rain in Gdansk and Tallin where we
Europeans paddled about cheerfully marvelling at the medieval architecture;
the tall, gabled houses with brightly tiled roofs; and the radial, cobbled
streets.
The mood lightened on reaching Helsinki, that great white northern city of
the sea, with the architectural set-piece of Senate Square at the centre of
a perfect, 19th-century town plan. The Americans were looking forward, they
said, to buying fur coats and fine china. No one had told them that Helsinki
is one of the world's 10 costliest cities. They bought nothing.
Our long and dismal entry into St Petersburg was accompanied by a humorous
commentary from the Norwegian captain (if that is not a contradiction). On
the first of our two days there, we were driven in the roughest bus most of
these people had ever seen to the Catherine Palace at Tsarskoe Selo.
It was rum to be in the company of heavy-duty capitalists who mistook the
little dachas round about for garden sheds. Seeing a fat peasant woman
cycling with an even fatter pig in her basket just made their day. 'This
will be our first vacation when you haven't bought a house,' joked a Texan
to his wife.
Back in the big city, we had a drama outside the Winter Palace. A New York
dentist, thrilled at his success in haggling over Russian army watches with
a black marketeer - 'Ten for Dollars 100: they sell for Dollars 200 each on
Fifth Avenue: that's all my Christmas presents taken care of' - discovered
his wallet, containing 25 gold and platinum credit cards, had been lifted
during his transaction. For some reason, the collective mood was not one of
unalloyed sympathy.
After St Petersburg, the Sea Goddess I meandered in limp sunshine around the
summer fleshpots of Scandinavia. Both Goddesses have a safe platform for
water sports and ocean swimming. It is used in tropical waters, if calm. In
the chill waters of Lake Malaren, not far from Stockholm, only the hardy
Scandinavian stewardesses took advantage of it.
Catherine Stott was a guest of Cunard. A seven-day Goddess cruise in
European waters costs from Pounds 3,740 a person including flight, meals,
drinks and tips. Details: Cunard, 30a Pall Mall, London SW1 Y5LS. 071-491
3930.
