FT  01 MAY 93 / Cookery: The scent of elder is in the air
NOW YOU see it, now you don't. The elderflower season comes and goes as fast
as a conjurer's rabbit. Scottish readers can relax for a bit, but those
living in sheltered corners of the south should be sharpening their
secateurs in readiness to cull this year's crop of the hedgerow muscat - a
mere whiff of which can send ex-patriates reeling with nostalgia for
Elgarian English landscapes on balmy summer days.
The first elderflower blossoms of the season deserve to be enjoyed as a
treat in their own right. Forget about calories: dip them into a fluffy
egg-white batter and deep-fry them for the best-ever fritters. Eat them
without cream; that would be over the top. Just dust them with sugar for
crunch and squeeze lemon juice over them.
The second great use of elderflower is in drinks. Home-made country wines
are not my scene but elderflower champagne was - until I discovered it is
usually, but not always, petillant and can go off with a bang. A few summers
ago, I took some bottles to the Royal Show. One of them exploded in the
middle of the night and caused something of a stir, with police dogs
sniffing out the area in readiness for a royal visit next day.
A safer bet is elderflower syrup, a heady concentrate of the fragrant
blossom. It makes an agreeable stand-in for elderflower champagne if diluted
to cordial strength at the point of serving with a slug of lemon and plenty
of fizzy mineral water. (Commercial elderflower cordials are less enticing;
usually, they are made with citric acid, not lemon, which gives them a
tinny, citrus quality).
The third - some would say the best - use of elderflower is in conjunction
with little green gooseberries (although this pairing often is difficult to
achieve since the gooseberry season, which supposedly coincides with that of
the elderflower, does not always make it on time).
Twirling a head or two of elderflower round and round a gooseberry jam pan,
and raking the florets into a pie dish or fool, produces magic results. But
when you have no fresh blossom, a slurp of elderflower syrup provides an
instant and sublime remedy. So, make elderflower syrup as soon as you can so
you will have it to hand when I come to write about cooking with
gooseberries in a month or so.
ELDERFLOWER SYRUP
You will need about 18 fine blossoms. Pick them away from both main roads
(where they will be heavy with pollution) and intensively-farmed,
chemically-sprayed fields (same reason). Choose blossoms that have just
unfurled to the full; that is when their scent is best. Do not wash them:
just shake them to get rid of any dust and wild life.
You will also need one organic or unsprayed lemon, preferably the aromatic
Amalfi variety. Grate the lemon zest into a saucepan. Add  1/2 lb granulated
sugar, pour on 1 pt water and bring to the boil. Add the blossoms, cutting
off the stalks close to the creamy heads as you drop the flowers into the
pan.
Push them well down into the liquid and bring back to the boil. Cover the
pan and set it aside until the contents are cold.
Then, squeeze the juice from the lemon, stir it into the syrup, strain
through a muslin-lined sieve and bottle. Store in a properly cold larder or
cellar - or, better still, in the refrigerator. It should keep for nearly a
year.
