FT  04 JUN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: D-Mark shows more weakness
THE D-MARK continued to show signs of weakness inside the European exchange
rate mechanism yesterday as the peseta recovered in the run-up to the
Spanish general election, writes James Blitz.
Last week's run on the Spanish currency was partly triggered by speculation
that Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the country's prime minister, would lose this
Sunday's general election.
But following his strong performance on television earlier this week, some
Spanish opinion polls are now putting Mr Gonzalez neck-and-neck with Mr Jose
Maria Aznar, the main opposition leader.
Dealers believe Mr Gonzalez retains a strong commitment to Spain's ERM
membership, and the peseta yesterday rallied to a London close of Pta77.89
against the D-Mark from a previous close of Pta78.24. In the ERM grid, it
jumped one place - to close in second place below the Portuguese escudo.
Mr Jeremy Hawkins, economic policy adviser at Bank of America in London,
believes that the peseta's strength in recent days has been the source of
more D-Mark weakness. 'If the peseta can hold on to these levels, then
tensions in the ERM might die down altogether,' he said.
The Italian lira was one beneficiary of yesterday's weakness in the German
currency, closing at L912.0 from a previous L913.9. The French franc
consolidated its strong run against the German currency this week, closing
unchanged at FFr3.369.
The Swedish krone was also stronger, despite comments from the Swedish bank
governor that the currency was likely to float for some time to come. The
krone was trading last night at around SKr4.4955 to the D-Mark from around
SKr4.5130 at the start of the European day.
Once again, sterling was one of the currencies not to benefit much from
all-round D-Mark weakness, although, for the first time since Mr Kenneth
Clarke was appointed chancellor, the currency did not depreciate on the day.
The pound remains undermined by speculation in money markets that Mr Clarke
will introduce another cut in UK base rates, and closed at DM2.4650, up  1/4
pfennig on the day.
The dollar was also fairly unmoved against the German currency, remaining
range-bound between DM1.5970 and DM1.6030. It later closed in London at
DM1.6005.
One reason for the limited position taking in the dollar was that dealers
were awaiting today's non-farm payroll figure for May, which is expected to
show a net monthly rise in the headline figure of 130,000.
However, some suggested yesterday that even more importance is now being
attached to the producer prices and consumer prices figures in the US which
are not due out until later this month. If these figures show unexpected
rises in inflation, the Federal Reserve could tighten monetary policy.
