FT  23 JUN 93 / Faint heckle from dispirited Names
MR MICHAEL DEENY, chair-man of the Gooda Walker Names Action Group, forecast
at the Lloyd's annual meeting yesterday that the market was about to embark
on 'the biggest and most costly exercise in the history of debt collecting'.
Mr David Rowland, chairman, announced that 1990 losses were Pounds 2.9bn -
even greater than the total he forecast less than two months ago.
Names were left in no doubt about the momentous nature of the occasion. Mr
Rowland said the loss 'represents in every way the low point of Lloyd's
history in the last 305 years'.
Most of the Names questioning Mr Rowland spoke in a dispirited fashion, as
if they had already given vent to most of their anger at a much bigger
meeting of Names at the Royal Albert Hall last month.
Mr Edward Sherwell, a steward at the Royal Festival Hall, said at the start
of the meeting: 'It will obviously be a very sad day.'
And so it proved - even bleaker than a conference of the Communist party
that Mr Sherwell recalled when everybody had been grey, even the children.
Only about 1,200 Names attended - including many who work at the insurance
market - leaving the concert hall half empty. In a three-hour presentation
Mr Rowland and his fellow council members on the platform were heckled only
occasionally.
One critic, Mr John Podmore, unexpectedly launched an attack. What was Mr
Rowland doing about the Names who had lost or had taken their lives and the
'ultimate absolutely appalling destruction of quality of life' suffered by
many Names? 'This must be atoned for by the society,' said Mr Podmore or
'those who have been fleeced will have their revenge,' he concluded with a
flourish.
Accusations that Lloyd's was allowing corporate investors to participate on
more favourable terms than its existing Names drew mild applause.
But by 1.25pm many Names were already trooping out of the hall, leaving only
a handful of dissidents to vote against approval of the annual report and
accounts.
