FT  20 OCT 93 / Ulster peace overture heralds uncertain finale: What has
been agreed in the latest initiative seeking a settlement in the province
and what are its chances of leading to something more solid?
CAN an overture for peace in Northern Ireland which has been welcomed by the
IRA be taken seriously?
The welcome comes from people who have pushed home their political message,
not just through megaphones in street rallies, or through hunger strikes in
prison, but with the car bomb and the silenced pistol shot in the night.
That is the question that will face Mr John Major, the prime minister, next
week when he hears from the Irish government the details of the recent peace
initiative created by Mr John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labour
party, and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the
Provisional IRA.
The two nationalist leaders from the province say that, after six months of
bilateral discussions, they are 'convinced that a process can be designed to
lead to agreement among the divided people of this island, which will
provide a solid basis for peace'.
With the Treasury pressing hard for deep defence cuts, the IRA believes the
temptation for Mr Major must be at least to explore what may be offered.
At the same time, however, Mr Major's precarious Westminster majority and
the threat of further backbench revolts has increased his dependence on the
support of the Ulster Unionist party, led by Mr James Molyneaux.
Mr Molyneaux, who sees treachery and betrayal of the Union behind the
Hume-Adams initiative, thus has a powerful weapon with which to attack it.
And attack it he has, saying last week in no uncertain terms: 'We reject
Hume-Adams. It is sheer lunacy.'
So what is there for Mr Major to chew on in this initiative, and what makes
it different from the many failed peace initiatives of the past two decades?
First, it is not coming solely from Mr Adams.
It is co-authored by Mr John Hume, a widely respected lifelong opponent of
using violence for political ends. His political inspiration is drawn from
figures such as Martin Luther King and Mahatma Gandhi rather than such
traditional republican heroes as Wolfe Tone or James Connolly.
Second, the initiative has the blessing of the Irish government, which has
as much interest as the British government in seeing a peaceful settlement
of the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Mr Hume and Mr Adams have agreed to keep details of the initiative secret
until both governments have had time to evaluate it. But recent interviews
with both men allow the following outline to be pieced together:
The initiative envisages a three-stage process, beginning with the search
for a mechanism to bring about a cessation of hostilities. It would then
progress through a protracted period of all-inclusive negotiations on the
future constitutional status of Northern Ireland and culminate in a
simultaneous referendum north and south of the border on any proposed
changes.
Mr Hume and Mr Adams do not have any blueprint for a future constitutional
settlement, but are united in believing that Unionists should not be allowed
to block the British government's own efforts to achieve political progress
and dialogue.
Mr Hume and Mr Adams would accept the outcome of a referendum, even if a
majority in Northern Ireland were to reject a solution which would favour a
nationalist perspective.
In relation to the last point, Mr Hume said a simultaneous referendum both
north and south of the border 'would require a Yes from each. If either says
No, it's not on. How much further can I go to reassure Unionists? I have not
even suggested what a final agreement should look like, nor has Gerry
Adams,' he said.
On that same point, Mr Adams said: 'I and Sinn Fein want to see an Irish
national democracy but what form that takes is for the Irish people to
decide.'
He said that were Sinn Fein's goal of a united Ireland to be rejected in a
referendum, even just by a northern majority 'we would continue to seek a
Republican model but through the normal political process'.
Mr Adams was not prepared at this stage to reveal what might be the minimum
terms the IRA would find acceptable to lay down their guns. But he told the
Financial Times that he would like to see the IRA 'in permanent retirement'
and that the Republican movement was prepared to make concessions to end the
violence.
He said: 'We are trying to take the armed element out of the conflict, all
aspects of it and not just the IRA. British forces are one element and the
loyalist paramilitaries are another.
'We are trying to put together a political process, such that those
presently involved in the military side of the struggle can become involved
in a political process, putting aside the military aspect.
'I would like to see the IRA in permanent retirement. The Unionists have no
monopoly in wanting peace.'
He continued: 'John Hume and I do not profess to have all the answers.
Others also have to grasp the nettle as well, and we may have to make it
easier for them to do so. If our proposals are not good enough, then let's
hear why and see if people at this end can accommodate them.
'Everything is possible if the British government has the political will to
move this process forward.'
The Northern Ireland Office (NIO) has responded with predictable caution to
Mr Adams remarks.
It said yesterday: 'Is there anyone who does not want to see all the
paramilitaries in permanent retirement? Ending violence is enough of a
valid, and long overdue aim in itself without it having to be paid for in
concessions or pre-conditions. There can be no concessions to violence.'
An NIO spokesman also referred to a speech by the Northern Ireland
secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, in Coleraine last December: 'In the event of
a genuine and established cessation of violence the whole range of responses
that we have had to make to that violence could and would inevitably be
looked at afresh.'
Clearly the biggest hurdle to the entire Hume-Adams initiative, however, is
whether terms can now be agreed for the IRA to hand in its weapons, without
either the British or Irish governments giving the impression they are in
any way negotiating with the IRA or Sinn Fein.
Such an impression could prompt a unionist backlash and the well rehearsed
cries of a political sell-out, together with a likely escalation of loyalist
violence.
Neither Mr Hume nor Mr Adams has any illusions that their initiative faces
intense hostility from unionists, and both are deeply concerned that the
Conservative-UUP alliance at Westminster will prevent their proposals from
being fully explored.
Mr Hume has raised the stakes by putting his political career on the line in
backing the initiative. If it fails, so will his credibility as leader of
the SDLP.
As the focus now shifts to the British and Irish governments' responses,
which are expected next week, they must be well aware of the significance of
such a failure and the message it will send to the IRA.
