FT  20 DEC 93 / Quangos lift spending by 10%: Unelected bodies take larger
share of public purse as numbers grow
Unelected quangos are growing in number, employing more staff and taking a
larger share of public expenditure, according to research by the Financial
Times.
Quangos, quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations, increased spending
by more than 10 per cent in the year to last April, much faster than
inflation.
They now account for more than a fifth of public expenditure, with NHS
trusts running hospitals, Housing Action Trusts financing the building of
homes for rent and an increasing number of schools and colleges becoming
independent of local authorities.
The government last year further reduced the number of quangos providing
central government services. Casualties included the Legionnaires Disease
Code of Practice Working Party and the Visiting Committee for the Royal
College of Art.
However quangos still offer central government advice on matters such as the
choice of wine for official hospitality functions (Government Hospitality
Fund Advisory Committee for the Purchase of Wine), the trade in bananas
(Banana Trade Advisory Committee) and acceptable place-names for new towns
(The Place Names Advisory Committee).
New quangos continue to come into life, led by the Citizen's Charter Panel
of Advisors and the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority.
The Housing Corporation, which distributes government grants to housing
associations in England, is the biggest spender in this year's FT top 40
quangos list, spending more than Pounds 2.3bn. The corporation has risen
from 10th place last year following the boost given to its budget to buy
unsold homes as part of the housing market package in the 1992 Autumn
Statement.
Health service quangos remain among the highest spenders, with more than
half of all quango spending being in the NHS. However, the fast-growing
legal aid bill has pushed the Legal Aid Board up to 11th place and brought
its Scottish equivalent into the top 40 for the first time.
Only one urban development corporation, that for London Docklands, remains
in the top 40 - there were five in last year's list. New entrants include
English Heritage, which looks after historical buildings and monuments, and
English Estates, which builds business premises in depressed areas. The
British Library also enters the top 40 for the first time.
Table and report, Page 7
