FT  25 NOV 93 / Faint signs of life among the ruins: Italy's old political
order has collapsed and a new one is struggling to be born
The process of change in Italy has acquired a new and more chaotic rhythm.
Until last Sunday's local elections, the ruling parties looked capable of
either delaying or blocking genuine reform of the political system. But the
spectacular collapse of support for the Christian Democrats and their allies
has removed this possibility.
The system of political and economic power, constructed and refined over
four decades by the Christian Democrats and their henchmen, has begun to
implode. In parliament, where their four-party coalition notionally enjoys a
working majority, they account for no more than 15 per cent of the national
vote. Yet these discredited parties are meant to be the pillar of
parliamentary support for the government of Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.
This raises worrying questions, not only for Italians, who initially reacted
with mindless shock to the new political geography, but also for Italy's
international partners, concerned about the country's governability, its
commitment to tackle public finances and press on with ambitious
privatisation plans.
The fears are genuine, reflected in the sharp falls on the stock market and
the decline in the value of the lira in the early part of the week. However,
they need not be exaggerated, provided Italians retain their fine sense of
self-preservation and choose not to shoot themselves in the collective foot
by backing away from reform.
'Throughout the period of change since the general elections (April 1992),
the political parties have always been brought face to face with reality by
the markets,' claimed one senior politician.
'In other words, when things get chaotic here, we are reminded of the
consequences by pressure on the lira and losses on the bourse. Equally,
Italy wants to be a responsible member of the international community and
there are limits as to how irresponsibly we can behave at home.'
The previous government of Mr Guiliano Amato cleverly exploited this
argument to the full in steering reforms and the budget through parliament
last year. Mr Ciampi, persuaded to leave the governorship of the Bank of
Italy to become prime minister in May, may lack the political background to
play this game of political balancing. Nevertheless his experience as a
central banker should give added weight to his insistence that Italy's
credibility now depends on quick approval of the 1994 budget.
He also managed to persuade Mr Achille Occhetto, the leader of the former
communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS), to come out on Tuesday with a
formal statement backing the budget. Mr Occhetto, fresh from the success of
his party in the municipal elections and a possible partner in a future
government, demonstrated he has every interest in appearing a responsible
figure. Behind the bellicose rhetoric of Mr Umberto Bossi, the leader of the
Northern League, a similar realism probably lies.
The budget envisages raising L32,000bn (Pounds 13bn) through extra taxes and
spending cuts to hold the public sector deficit to below 9 per cent of gross
domestic product. The bulk will come from sharp reductions in spending in
all ministries, as well as through a shake-up of the civil service.
Parliament has been quietly seeking to erode parts of the austerity package
and preserve the public administration from predatory cuts; thus there is a
sizeable element in both houses with an interest in altering the budget and
weakening both the fiscal side and the spending cuts.
However, the government is ready to resign if the budget fails to pass
before the end of the year - as it must by law. Were the government to leave
en masse, parliament would almost certainly be unable to approve legislation
altering electoral constituencies.
Further, the fall of the Ciampi government on the budget issue would leave
no alternative but to go to the polls immediately, without constituency
changes. This would make a mockery of the new first-past-the-post system
because electoral boundaries would not have been redrawn. Despite the
rumblings from some Christian Democrats and Socialists, it is therefore hard
to see the budget failing.
The parties' sense of realism will ride side by side with a ferocious battle
for political power, however. This has been all too evident as more and more
of the dying regime's dirty linen floats to the surface. In the past two
months the Italian public has been treated to stories of a rebellious
military preparing coups, and revelations about the misuse of secret service
funds to bankroll the private lives of politicians.
So much mud has been flying that some at least has stuck to every
institution, including the presidency. President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro was
obliged to go on television at short notice to deny reports that when he was
interior minister he knew about the misuse of secret service funds. This is
the one ministry the Christian Democrats have never relinquished since 1946,
and it has influenced some of the most sensitive aspects of national life.
It is widely believed to have sat on the truth about many poorly explained
events, including links between politicians and the mafia and the kidnap and
killing of former premier Aldo Moro.
As the old edifice crumbles, everyone is simultaneously quarrelling over the
inheritance and desperately laying down markers for a stake in the next
republic. The existence of so many latent scandals, to say nothing of the
ongoing corruption investigations, is a potent destabilising element. But
the collapse of the old parties reduces the relevance of such muck-raking
since it affects people and institutions on the way out.
The timescale in which the political parties have to regroup or recycle
themselves is very tight if elections are to be held in March, as expected.
The need to regroup explains why the Christian Democrats and their allies
will still do all they can to put back the date as late as possible.
Even during the summer, after an earlier round in June of poor municipal
election results, the Christian Democrats were still confident of remaining
the country's largest party. Having conceded hegemony in the north to Mr
Umberto Bossi's Northern League, the party had hoped to remain the dominant
force southwards from Rome, leaving central Italy, the old 'red belt', to
the PDS.
This scenario no longer applies. The league has established itself as the
dominant force in the north with one third of the vote; while the
neo-fascist MSI has emerged to take a similar share from Rome southwards.
The only party capable of a sizeable national presence is the former
communist PDS.
The rise of the MSI, which owes its inspiration to the corporatist state and
law and order policies of Mussolini, might seem perverse. But on closer
inspection it has captured those who have deserted the old ruling parties
and are reluctant to endorse the left. The new electoral laws for local
elections encourage a polarisation of politics - and the electorate has
simply opted for the few parties untainted by power or corruption.
The full impact of the MSI cannot be assessed until after the run-off in
mayoral elections, due on December 5. In Rome Mr Gianfranco Fini, the MSI
leader, is challenging Mr Francesco Rutelli, the Green candidate backed by
the PDS and a leftist alliance. In Naples, Ms Alessandra Mussolini,
grand-daughter of Il Duce, is in a run-off against the PDS and its allies.
If the PDS and its supporters fail to win both cities it would be a serious
blow and the political panorama would be even more confused. On present
form, it would mean that in the run-up to the next general election there
would be absolutely no clear alliance likely to form a stable government.
But at the moment, even one day is a long time in Italian politics.
