FT  18 NOV 93 / World Trade News: US pressure over financial services may
backfire - Other nations threaten to withdraw market-opening offers
US STRONG-ARM tactics to press other countries to open their markets to
trade in financial services are in danger of backfiring, as Uruguay Round
negotiators in Geneva threatened this week to react by entirely withdrawing
conditional market-opening offers.
'Other countries are simply going to follow the US lead and withdraw their
offers in financial services,' a senior negotiator in the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade said yesterday.
'It would be absurd for the US to throw everything aside because of problems
it has with a tiny number of developing countries whose share of financial
services business worldwide is negligible.'
US banks, brokerages, and insurance companies would be among the main
beneficiaries worldwide of more open financial services markets and so would
be main casualties if market-opening offers were withdrawn.
US officials have aroused controversy in the final stages of negotiation of
the Uruguay round talks on world trade liberalisation by demanding an
exemption in financial services from the obligation to offer most favoured
nation status to all-comers.
The US plans to restrict full MFN access to its financial services markets
to a small group of industrial countries that have similarly liberal banking
and securities regimes. Other countries will have MFN rights limited to the
rights that exist at present. Improved access would depend on progress in
liberalisation in their own market.
Observers have interpreted the move as a US effort to win improved
market-opening offers from countries like Japan, Korea, India, Singapore,
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines.
'The US wants its cake, and wants to eat it too,' said one Asian negotiator
said: 'It wants other countries to accept multilateral obligations to open
their financial services markets, but wants to reserve its power to exert
bilateral pressure. If it does not change its mind, we would have no choice
but to do the same.'
A senior Indian diplomat noted: 'Just as the US is getting vastly improved
offers in financial services, it is putting everything in jeopardy with
their two-tier MFN proposal.'
Many countries see the US threats as no threat at all: they see no prospect
of seeking a presence in the US banking, securities or insurance markets,
and are offering to open their financial services sectors as a necessary
price for better access to US and EU markets for products like textiles and
farm goods. As it has become increasingly clear that the US and EU are
unlikely to improve offers in these areas, so developing countries have
become more reluctant to keep financial services offers on the table.
A spokeswoman for the US Coalition of Services Industries, which has lobbied
hard for the past six years for a big financial services package in the
Uruguay round, said yesterday that she was 'surprised and disappointed' by
responses: 'We have been very flexible, and have changed course as the world
has said it is unable to live with the proposals the US has put forward. It
is late in the day to be doing this kind of thing, and I am not sure what
pulling offers off the table will accomplish.'
