FT  21 SEP 93 / Management (The Growing Business): Just don't ask us to pay
for it - President Clinton's health reform is one of a number of sore points
for small companies
Once upon a time, Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas was the only governor
ever to have received the 'Guardian of Small Business' award from the
National Federation of Independent Business, a 600,000-member organisation
that is the US's most vocal, and probably most powerful, small business
lobbying group.
After eight months at the White House, however, President Clinton has
crossed swords with the NFIB on a string of issues, most notably a bloody
combat over his budget bill.
Although he has maintained significantly warmer relations with a number of
more moderate groups, Clinton is embarking this week on a further battle
that seems likely to unite the small business lobbies against him. All of
them seem set to oppose a core element of his healthcare reform plan: a
requirement that all employers offer health insurance to their workers and
pay 80 per cent of its cost.
Small business has been a mantra in Clinton's political career, and it
remains a strong theme for his administration. Cabinet members, and Clinton
himself, are fond of observing that 85 per cent of jobs created in the past
12 years have been in businesses employing fewer than 50 people.
Clinton came to office proposing a package of fiscal incentives, including a
50 per cent tax exclusion for long-term investments in start-up businesses
and a targeted investment tax credit intended to spur investment in new
plant and machinery.
While some of these measures fell by the wayside during the long battle in
Congress, the final budget passed in August still included a limited
reduction in capital gains tax on start-up investments in small businesses,
as well as an increase from Dollars 10,000 (Pounds 6,500) to Dollars 17,500
in the limit on the amount of assets that can be declared as expenses in the
year of acquisition, rather than depreciated.
The White House has also taken steps to encourage bank regulators to loosen
their standards for banks lending to small businesses, and has made a
proposal for setting up community development banks to support local
businesses, following the much-publicised example of South Shore Bank in
Chicago.
But many of Clinton's main campaign pledges run headlong into small business
interests, even though in many instances the reaction may be more from the
gut than from a precise analysis of the pain they would inflict.
The Family and Medical Leave Act, which obliges employers to give workers
leave for the birth of a child or to care for a sick relative, was the first
bill Clinton signed into law after taking office.
Although it specifically exempted businesses employing fewer than 50 people,
the act provoked howls of rage from small businesses, partly because word
had not filtered out about the exemption, partly because business owners
feared that once the principle was established, the reach of the legislation
would gradually be extended to them, too.
The White House then ran into another barrage over its budget bill.
Opponents contended that the marginal tax rate for all partners and sole
proprietors, as well as so-called 'subchapter S corporations', which pass
their income directly through to a small number of shareholders, would rise
from 32 per cent to 46 per cent.
The debate was fuelled by David Hale, chief economist with Kemper Financial
in Chicago, who said that 89 per cent of all tax returns with significant
business income, including these different categories, now file under the
personal tax code. He further argued that more than 60 per cent of
subchapter S income goes to people who would be hit by the higher personal
tax rates imposed in the Clinton budget.
Erskine Bowles, head of the Small Business Administration - the government
department responsible for providing assistance and loans to small
businesses - countered that 96 per cent of the 7m taxpayers whose primary
source of income is a partnership, proprietorship or subchapter S
corporation would be unaffected by the increase in marginal tax rates.
The average income of the 4 per cent who would be affected, he added, was
Dollars 560,000 a year.
'It is a bogus issue. It's not a small business issue. What it is, is a rich
person's issue,' he snorted.
Clinton faces the same problem in his health care reform: opposition to the
employer mandate promises to be fierce, even though the great majority of
businesses already provide health insurance to their employees.
A survey of small and medium-sized businesses conducted in April by Arthur
Andersen and NSBU found that 99 per cent of companies with 100-499 employees
offer health insurance, as do 94 per cent of those with 20-99 employees.
Even among businesses with 19 or fewer employees, 54 per cent offer health
insurance.
The survey also found that the average increase in health insurance premiums
over the past year was 22 per cent, suggesting that Clinton ought logically
to be able to win over at least some business owners with the promise of
reduced medical costs.
But at a carefully staged event with small business people in a Washington
hardware store last week, Clinton was still not able to convince the
participants.
It is an argument that he must win if Congress is not to start giving small
businesses the same exemption from providing health insurance that it gave
on family leave - an exemption which could destroy his efforts to ensure
universal coverage.
