FT  08 JAN 93 / UK Company News: The doctor's painful loss of a sick patient
 -A look at the failure of another quoted company north of the border
IT IS always painful for a company doctor to lose a patient, but the
collapse of Lilley is a particularly bitter blow to Sir Lewis Roberston, who
has chaired the group since 1986.
The dismal significance of the failure of yet another of Scotland's
diminishing number of large quoted companies is not lost on the 70-year-old
Scot, who since retiring as the first chief executive of the Scottish
Development Agency in 1981 has been a leading figure in the commercial
establishment north and south of the border.
In spite of Lilley's alarming level of debt and heavy provisions for
property writedowns, Sir Lewis insists that a restructuring package
finalised before Christmas was feasible.
The plan provided for the subscription of new equity, the elimination of the
group's exposure to property developments and property joint ventures,
planned sales of the group's principal housebuilding and plant-hire
businesses and trading operations in the US, and a partial debt to equity
conversion by the banks.
The restructuring was supported by the three main institutional investors -
Scottish Amicable, M&amp;G and BZW - who spoke for nearly 30 per cent of the
equity, and the group's Spanish partners, Entrecanales and Cuibertas, who
own 21.5 per cent.
Four of the six banks in the group's Pounds 45m loan syndicate agreed - the
Bank of Scotland, Royal Bank of Scotland, NatWest and Banque Indosuez - but
the refusal of Clydesdale Bank and Hill Samuel to inject any new money made
receivership inevitable.
Hill Samuel said: 'We agreed the rescue package, but were not willing to
commit additional funds. We didn't want to increase our exposure, given the
sudden deterioration in their property books.'
No comment could be obtained from Clydesdale Bank, the Glasgow-based bank
taken over by the National Australia Bank in 1987.
Sir Lewis, who declined to give details of the bank negotiations, said: 'I
want to avoid hurling bricks amongst the banks, but what bothers me is the
need for unanimity.'
Under the so-called London Rules, most lending agreements contain covenants
requiring a unanimous agreement of the banks to make any substantial changes
in the loan terms.
Sale Tilney, the mini-conglomerate which went into receivership last week,
did so after just one small foreign bank declined to agree to a financial
restructuring, although the Bank of England is understood to have
intervened.
Sir Lewis pointed out that Mr Pen Kent, an associate director of the Bank of
England, recently urged banks to adopt new procedures when writing loan
covenants. Mr Kent said the requirement of a unanimous vote for a
reconstruction to go ahead should be replaced with a qualified majority.
Sir Lewis's disappointment at Lilley's receivership will not be lessened by
the knowledge that he saved the group from a serious financial crisis in
1986 resulting from its US and other overseas operations. Mr Robertson (as
he then was), a veteran of a number of corporate rescues, became chairman,
bringing in Mr Joe Barber as chief executive who drastically pruned Lilley's
overseas activities.
In 1988 Mr Barber was replaced as chief executive by Mr Bob Rankin, a former
chief executive of the construction group Balfour Beatty, in a management
buy-in which brought in Pounds 27.4m in new equity.
The idea behind the buy-in was to expand Lilley through joint ventures with
property developers including London and Edinburgh Trust, which is
subscribed to the share placing.
Sir Lewis said yesterday that, with hindsight, this deal had caused Lilley
to move towards property development and housebuilding at the wrong time in
the cycle. In 1989 Lilley launched an abortive bid for Tilbury, leaving the
Scottish company with a 29 per cent stake in the construction group, which
it later sold at a loss.
Last year Lilley unwound its involvement with London &amp; Edinburgh Trust and
Mr Rankin resigned in October. Mr James Hann joined the group as deputy
chairman and helped put together the rescue package which went to the banks.
Sir Lewis said the previous policies were pursued too long against a
changing economic background, but accepts that as chairman he shares the
responsibility: 'It was a board decision. It was necessary to give Mr Rankin
a run on the basis which he was appointed, which brought in Pounds 28m, a
substantial amount of money.'
Since most of Lilley's problems concern its remaining property portfolio and
balance sheet, there is a good chance of finding buyers for the group's core
contracting and construction activities, which have work in hand worth
Pounds 100m.
