FT  11 SEP 93 / Books: Case for the prosecution - Robert Taylor considers a
critical new biography of NUM president Arthur Scargill
THE UNAUTHORISED BIOGRAPHY by Paul Routledge HarperCollins, Pounds 16.99,
288 pages
IT IS hard to imagine a more devastating failure than the efforts of Arthur
Scargill, the mineworkers' union president, to preserve the British coal
industry. Indeed, his belligerence probably played a large part in
destroying the jobs he claimed to be championing. Since the miners' strike
nine years ago more than 140 pits have been shut and more than 100,000 men
made redundant as nuclear power, gas and cheap imported coal have
increasingly met Britain's energy needs.
As the veteran labour journalist Paul Routledge says in his unauthorised
biography of Scargill: 'The more baleful his threats from the presidential
rostrum the quicker the dash for gas became'.
After his landslide election victory in 1981, Scargill took over a union in
which the members were still the shock troops of the trade union movement.
Now it has shrunk so far that it is smaller than the actors' union, Equity.
Under his leadership the NUM has moved to the fringes of the Labour
movement. It no longer has any seats on the TUC general council, not even on
Labour's national executive. As Routledge says: 'By all the formal criteria
of success he has failed'.
Yet the irrepressible Yorkshireman can still stir the TUC's collective
emotions - although not its reason - with his demagogy. He may be 'a virtual
outcast from political society' but he continues to fascinate. Even as his
charisma fades,he still stands out among the grey men at the top of
Britain's unions.
As a former Scargill enthusiast, Routledge describes his pacy book as 'a
voyage of disillusion'. Indeed, it was hard to find any favourable comment
at all about the man throughout its 296 pages until the last strange
paragraph when Routledge writes of Scargill as 'a beacon of support' for
'workers in struggle, anywhere, over whatever issue' and that he should be
'honoured' for this.
Scargill is portrayed as a spoilt child who always liked to get his own way.
Routledge ridicules him as an egoist with a 'sense of destiny'. As a member
of the Young Communist League, the young Arthur attracted the attention of
the party as a self-confident class warrior but apparently his Marxism was
always vulgar with 'sentiments not out of place on the letter's page of a
children's newspaper'.
Routledge derides Scargill's role as the man who closed Saltley coal depot
by mass picketing in the 1972 coal strike. Heroic myth was really a 'fairy
tale'. And he has nothing but contempt for Scargill's leadership during the
great coal strike, suggesting he prolonged the agony of the miners by his
refusal to compromise.
The NUM president would not talk to Routledge during his researches and he
sought with some success to prevent the author from gaining access to his
closest associates. But Routledge makes good use of National Coal Board
archives of the great strike for an insight into Scargill's behaviour during
those tumultuous days. His own intimate knowledge of the coal industry and
the NUM is also invaluable in trying to put Scargill into a wider context.
The trouble is that the author is less than frank about his earlier
closeness to the NUM president. Scargill was a prime contact for Routledge
until May 1984 when the late night phone calls suddenly stopped coming.
The two men were allies who used each other professionally. Routledge
attended drinking sessions with the broad left NUM faction on the union
executive that met in London's County Hotel.
Scargill 'mesmerised a generation of miners', declares Routledge, but it
seems he bewitched the author for a long time too. Yet as the author admits,
Scargill did not come from nowhere. It was the NUM left that 'spawned' him.
Will Paynter, the legendary Welsh miners' leader, called him 'one of the
ablest and most articulate trade union leaders in the country'.
Indeed, Scargill's demands and style raised no criticism at all from the
formidable and articulate NUM left. They may have found him a bit gauche and
a socially stand-offish because he would not drink heavily with them but
they backed him all the way.
It was the revered Mick McGahey, Communist NUM vice-president, who warned
that the union would not be 'constitutionalised' out of a strike in 1984 by
honouring its rule book commitment to hold a ballot before industrial
action. The minutes of the negotiating sessions with the coal board during
the dispute reveal no obvious difference between Scargill and the other NUM
leaders on either tactics or strategy. Perhaps everybody was spellbound by
Scargill's delusions and certainties. But he never disguised his true
intentions.
The NUM president is a revolutionary not a union leader. He has never signed
a wage rise for his members, never compromised, never bargained. 'The
greatest achievement is the struggle itself', he declared after his
devastated members went back to work after nearly a year of pointless
conflict.
Yet in many a miner's home Scargill remains a revered figure because of what
Routledge calls his 'self-deluding sense of destiny'.
The Pounds 60,000-a-year NUM president may have borrowed money from the
union to beautify his home during the strike, as Routledge explains, at a
time when many of his members had to sell or pawn their furniture to buy
food for their children, but many in Yorkshire continue to see him as a man
who can do no wrong. This was always dangerous idolatry. Those who still
believe that Arthur walks on water should read Routledge's devastating case
for the prosecution.
