FT  21 AUG 93 / Books: US view of the Gulf
TWIN PILLARS TO DESERT STORM by Howard Teicher and Gayle Radley Teicher
William Morrow (New York) 418 pages, Dollars 23
HOWARD Teicher made the news in Britain a few months ago when he appeared on
television to say that as a White House staffer working in the Reagan
Administration he had seen classified documents referring to the alleged
involvement of Mark Thatcher in Middle Eastern arms deals. The full story of
what Mark Thatcher did or did not do has yet to be told, but meanwhile
Teicher has vented his spleen against the failings of US foreign policy in
the Middle East by publishing an informative and entertaining book of
personal memoirs.
The aim of Teicher's book is to illustrate what he terms America's flawed
vision in the region going all the way back to President Richard Nixon.
Indeed it was Nixon, together with Henry Kissinger, who first codified the
notion of access to Gulf oil as a strategic interest for Washington. It was
also under Nixon that US policy adopted the so-called 'twin pillars'
strategy of using Saudi Arabia and Iran (under the Shah) as the twin
gendarmes of US interests in the region.
Teicher writes initially from the boiler room of US policy, having spent
time in the Pentagon and State Department before joining the White House as
a staffer for Bud McFarlane, the hapless national security adviser to
President Reagan who was ultimately forced out of office over the
Iran-Contra scandal. But Teicher makes crystal clear that when the Shah went
and Ayatollah Khomeini arrived in 1979, the US suffered a trauma that has
conditioned its policy ever since.
The book is at its best in explaining the disorder, even chaos in the Reagan
White House, and how the tilt to Saddam Hussein grew out of the simplistic
idea that Iraq could supplant the Shah as the new second 'pillar' in the
region. Teicher is not gentle with the Reagan Administration, and his
portrait of the pro-Iraqi Caspar Weinberger, the Secretary of Defence, shows
a man with tendencies verging on the amoral.
The book contains several revelations, especially how the US and Iraq worked
together in covert operations between 1983 and 1985 to overthrow Libya's
Colonel Gadaffi. Also of interest is the story of how the US pro-Iraqi tilt
had its origins with Zbigniew Brzezinski, national security adviser in the
Carter Administration.
Teicher's time in the White House, from 1982 to 1987, and his posts as
director for Near East and South Asia in the National Security Council and
then senior director for politico-military affairs - allowed him a ringside
seat during the formation of many US policies that would later lead to
trouble. His book is a useful contribution to the history of US Middle East
policy in the 1980s, which is still in need of a revisionist analysis that
takes one through the Bush years.
