FT  06 AUG 93 / Civil engineers urge action as work hopes slip
THE FEDERATION of Civil Engineering Contractors yesterday called for a
further reduction in interest rates after a fresh downturn in members'
expectations for new work and manual employment over the next 12 months.
The federation's quarterly survey of workload trends found a further slight
decline in work and jobs since April, and a renewed weakening of order
books. It comes amid a week of generally gloomy forecasts of the outlook for
the construction industry.
Mr John Hackett, federation director-general, said: 'This disappointing
fresh downturn in our members' confidence in the future is clearly linked to
growing uncertainties over demand for their services in several key areas.'
He said contractors, and especially larger companies, were still frustrated
by the lack of a firm start date for work on the Jubilee Line extension to
London's Underground.
Speaking on the day that the government announced plans to speed up the road
building process, Mr Hackett said contractors were worried by the slow pace
at which the Department of Transport was awarding new motorway and trunk
road contracts.
He said there was a growing number of reports of reduced civil engineering
works by some water companies, pending decisions by the industry regulator
on their future prices and investment plans.
Mr Hackett said changes in control at English county councils following the
elections in May had been followed in some areas by hints of lower spending
on local roads.
He added that members were worried by government proposals to exempt local
authorities undergoing reorganisation from obligations to expose work to
competition from private contractors. There were particular fears in Wales,
where all councils will be reorganised at the same time.
'What's needed now, to boost confidence, is confirmation of the government's
spending plans for roads and other basic infrastructure, early announcements
of firm start dates for key projects and, not least, some further reduction
in interest rates to help private-sector demand,' said Mr Hackett.
