FT  06 APR 93 / Leading Article: Testing times
delivering the product depends on the willing co-operation of the teachers.
In seeking to raise the quality of education in UK schools, the government
has neglected this essential truth and failed to cultivate the profession's
support. The result is that progress on much-needed reforms could be stalled
by the overwhelming opposition of the teachers.
The present difficulties arise from the introduction of the national
curriculum and compulsory tests at seven, 11 and 14. The former has a useful
role to play in setting benchmark standards for schools, especially in basic
skills and core knowledge. It can also reduce unnecessary diversity in what
is taught across the country, an obstacle to educational achievement for
children who move home during schooling.
Compulsory testing was originally seen as a diagnostic tool, to help
teachers identify under-achievers. A second objective was then imposed:
tests would be used to judge school performance. The first objective
requires complicated tests to determine individual achievement in a range of
skills. The second needs national tests so that schools can be fairly
compared. The result has been complicated, national tests, requiring a
complicated national curriculum to sustain them.
Thus the national curriculum has become hopelessly overladen, reaching into
almost every minute of the school day. In some subjects, it falls into the
twin traps of being insufficiently challenging for academic children, while
neglecting the basic skills others need for the world of work. And it is far
too prescriptive, insisting, for example, that every 14-year-old child read
one of three named Shakespeare plays.
Teachers and their unions have been in the forefront of pointing out that
the curriculum and the testing have become unwieldy. However, successive
education secretaries have ignored their protests, because the unions have
in the past obstructed reform. They have thus ignored legitimate objections,
many shared by those who have in the past supported the government's
reforms. This has allowed a teachers' boycott of testing to gather support
that threatens the whole programme.
Mr John Patten, the latest education secretary, was relying on the courts to
enforce the law that makes testing compulsory. On Friday, the High Court
failed to come to his aid, ruling that the boycotts were legitimate
industrial action. Mr Patten has no alternative but to talk to the teachers
if he wishes to secure their goodwill to allow testing to continue.
Because the discontent has been allowed to fester, it may take more than
minor concessions to achieve this. At the very least, Mr Patten must come
forward with proposals to reduce the scope of the national curriculum and
simplify testing if his strategic aim of clearer, higher standards and
better performance among schools is not to be jeopardised.
