FT  03 DEC 93 / Letters to the Editor: Thorp - plutonium safeguards one
thing, security costs another
Sir, The extensive debate on Thorp in your pages has missed points of
central importance. The measures employed to safeguard the plutonium
separated will add further to the costs but cannot resolve the fundamental
security problems.
The global surplus of separated plutonium is a fact reaffirmed as a serious
concern by the then deputy director of the International Atomic Energy
Agency at this institute a year ago. The world cannot develop enough
capacity to burn up this surplus over the next few years. Consequently, any
plutonium from Thorp which is consumed in civil applications will be partly
at the expense of leaving other plutonium in more diverse and vulnerable
locations for longer. This includes both weapons grade material arising from
superpower arms reductions, and reactor grade plutonium (which is quite
adequate for terrorist weapons) in various countries. Even if every atom
separated at Thorp is burned as promised, it thus exacerbates a difficult
security problem.
The safest solution to the security problem is to place all separated
plutonium in a physically inaccessible form (vitrification) and/or secure
international repository (which could include Sellafield). But the relevant
governments - including Russia's - are reluctant to contemplate this due to
their perception of plutonium as a potentially valuable fuel. Thorp's
operation, and claims about the value of its products, will reinforce this
myth.
Thorp's operation may mean fissile material being held in a range of states
which may not use it for decades, a period in which their political
orientation may shift dramatically. It will be difficult to refuse custom
from currently 'acceptable' regimes, even if they may be politically
unreliable in the longer term. Governments holding plutonium stocks for
genuine civil purposes may also provoke fears among their neighbours. There
are signs that South Korea may seek plutonium should Japan's stockpile
increase.
Finally, the security regime surrounding the separation, storage and
transport of plutonium from Thorp is impressive. But how much will it cost,
and who is going to pay? Unless the requirements are fully costed and
accounted for, not only is the economic case distorted, but the regime
itself may eventually be weakened by financial constraints, as has occurred
previously with IAEA safeguards operations.
Michael Grubb,
Trevor Taylor,
The Royal Institute of International Affairs,
Chatham House,
10 St James's Square,
London SW1Y 4LE
