FT  03 JUL 93 / Kiev raises stakes in nuclear arms row: Instability grows in
former Soviet Union as Ukraine, Georgia, Estonia and the Urals clash with
Moscow
THE Ukrainian parliament yesterday took a further step along the road to
becoming a fully fledged nuclear power by declaring that Ukraine owned the
176 strategic nuclear missiles stationed on its territory.
The weapons are 130 six-warhead SS19s, 46 10-warhead SS24s together with
hundreds of nuclear-armed cruise missiles carried on bombers.
The declaration was one in a series of incidents in the former Soviet
republics yesterday which underscored the precariousness of their political,
economic and territorial existence.
The Georgian government accused Russia of sending 2,000 troops in full
combat gear to Georgia, following an earlier claim that commandos from the
forces of the breakaway region of Abkhazia had landed from the sea in the
Abkhazian capital of Sukhumi and attacked the Georgian forces which still
control the city.
Georgia's President Edouard Shevardnadze asked the UN Security Council to
intervene.
Guards on the border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan claim to have
repulsed a force of 150 guerrillas of the Tajik opposition attempting to
infiltrate the country from bases in Afghanistan, according to an interview
on the Interfax News Agency with Colonel Valery Kochenov, a senior Russian
staff officer. The Tajik frontier is largely guarded by Russians.
A constitutional crisis deepened in Belarus, as Mr Stanislav Shushkevich,
the chairman of parliament and head of state, refused to step down in spite
of losing overwhelmingly a vote of confidence on Thursday in the Belarus
parliament - a vote which, however, was inquorate.
Mr Shushkevich, a liberal, was accused by largely conservative deputies of
failing to move Belarussian policy closer to Russia. Mr Shushkevich has
responded by demanding a constitutional assembly to adopt a new state
constitution.
Meanwhile in Estonia, the foreign minister, Mr Trivimi Velliste, yesterday
accused Russia of fomenting a crisis over a controversial aliens law to
regain control in the Baltic region.
He said some members of the Russian government were eager to set up
'traditional spheres of influence'.
The Russian parliament has urged economic sanctions and a halt to troop
withdrawals if Estonia does not amend the law which requires the large
Russian minority to pass a language test if they want Estonian citizenship.
The Ukrainian move is the latest in a chain of decisions and declarations
which point to the loss of any political will to give up the weapons and to
ratify the Start I and II treaties which have yet to be put before
parliament.
Though the nuclear missiles are still ultimately controlled fom Moscow,
unconfirmed reports point to an attempt by Ukrainian authorities to develop
their own control system.
The decision will further sour relations between Ukraine and Russia, as
Moscow has always claimed ultimate ownership of the missiles and has
demanded their return or destruction under the terms of the Start treaties.
The Russian parliament cannot ratify Start II while Start I remains
unratified by Ukraine.
The issue of the Black Sea fleet based in ports in the Ukrainian-held but
ethnic Russian-dominated region of Crimea between the two republics has over
the past few days revived animosity between the two countries.
Though Presidents Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine and Boris Yeltsin of Russia
have agreed to the split and continue to support it, Russian military
officers have rejected the decision.
