FT  18 SEP 93 / Wheat harvest reaches record 14m tonnes
FARMERS in the UK produced more wheat per hectare this year than ever
before, in spite of a decline of 3 per cent in the overall harvest of
grains, according to estimates by Dalgety Agriculture.
The amount of wheat harvested rose by 700,000 tonnes to 14m tonnes, which
will give arable farmers roughly Pounds 1.4bn at current prices.
However, prices are likely to have to fall in order to shift the surplus
production of 4.4m tonnes on to already over-supplied world markets. They
could fall by about Pounds 5 a tonne from about Pounds 100 a tonne.
Dalgety, which surveyed 900 farms to produce its crop predictions, said the
wheat crop increased because of good weather in the growing season and
improvements in seed quality.
Mr Andrew Barnard, Dalgety's arable crop marketing manager, pointed out that
wheat tonnages rose in spite of a 13 per cent reduction in the area planted
because of reform of the European Community's Common Agricultural Policy
which encourages farmers to leave some land to lie fallow - the so-called
'set-aside' programme.
He said it pointed to the fact that the programme was not working as farmers
left their worst land fallow and improved yields on the rest.
The National Farmers' Union said: 'Set-aside causes mixed feelings among
farmers: it is a policy devised by politicians. But it is difficult to take
one harvest in isolation as an indication of trends.'
Overall production of grains fell slightly to 20.9m tonnes because of poor
yields of barley, particularly in Scotland.
Dalgety estimates that oilseed rape will prove profitable for the majority
of UK farmers, although plantings were depressed, because of adverse weather
during the sowing season. About 1m tonnes are expected - down from 1.2m
tonnes last year.
Wheat yields were a bumper 7.8 tonnes per hectare, but the quality of the
wheat crop was affected by heavy rain in some areas at the beginning of the
harvest season.
The lower protein content of part of the wheat crop could see millers
importing an extra 1.3m tonnes to blend with domestic grain, Dalgety
estimates.
Demand from animal feeds producers for this year's wheat is set to rise 10
per cent because of lower prices.
Barley quality was high, which will help farmers sell it at home and abroad,
although demand from maltsters and distillers, at an estimated 1.5m tonnes,
has not recovered from highs of 4 years ago.
Farmers are estimated to have produced 271,000 tonnes of linseed, the
distinctive blue plant, which has enjoyed a huge rise in plantings in the UK
in recent years.
