FT  10 DEC 93 / Technology: Green innovation takes centre stage - Moves to
create US export markets
During 12 years of Republican rule, it was a maxim in Washington that the US
government's job was to obliterate industry regulation so that the market
place could work its magic.
The Clinton administration disagrees. Carol Browner, the environment
protection chief, argues that strong standards at home will force industry
to flex its creative muscles and that in turn will make it more competitive
abroad.
The US was the first nation to regulate stringently electric power plant
emissions with standards for new boilers in the 1970s. American
manufacturers dominated the market for scrubbing technologies until Japan
and Germany adapted tough standards of their own, according to the US
Commerce Department.
There were other departures from 'old thinking' available when Ron Brown,
the commerce secretary, and Browner recently announced an environmental
technologies export strategy. The administration was leaving behind decades
of debate over industrial policy which has confined government efforts to
'an ideological box', said Brown.
The US government-industry partnership will go beyond the handing out of
billions of dollars a year in research and development grants; the
administration is also 'reinventing' a government structure which better
serves its private-sector 'customers'.
An Environmental Technologies Trade Advisory Committee will provide advice
on expanding environmental technology exports to the highest levels of the
administration, while the federal government also works with local
companies, associations and interested groups to form regional environmental
export councils around the country.
An interagency Trade Policy Co-ordinating Committee will identify markets,
create export marketing plans and set up 'one-stop shops' which will gather
and disseminate data about export markets. Four regional one-stop shops will
open next January in Miami, Los Angeles, Chicago and Baltimore.
The Environmental Protection Agency will promote and accelerate
private-sector commercialisation of environmental technologies. It says it
will restructure its regulation to reward rather than penalise users of
innovative technologies rather than promoting reliance on existing and
widely accepted products.
Mexico - where Dollars 6bn-Dollars 7bn (Pounds 4bn-Pounds 4.6bn) is to be
spent on environmental clean-up in the coming years - will be the first
target of the export strategy.
The current global market, worth Dollars 200bn-Dollars 300bn for
environmental goods and services, Brown said, would soar as high as Dollars
600bn by 2000. Although the US could capture 'a significant piece' of the
market, it faces intense competition from Japan and the EU, whose industries
are 'backed by a range of co-ordinated and focused government programmes'.
Bill Haney III, one of the founders of Molten Metal Technology of Waltham,
Massachusetts, sees 'extraordinary opportunity' in the initiative and notes
striking changes in US philosophy. 'Historically, the executive branch
thought environment and economic development were antithetical,' he said.
'Now, it is understood that the US needs a leading edge in regulation to
lead the industry. As we try to meet standards, we'll create new products.'
He was also struck by the 'self-confidence and greater sense of mission'
among presidential appointees, who are working together to maximise US
competitiveness - in this case the commerce, energy and environmental
agencies. There is no sign of the ego problems, turf wars and power trips
which plagued past administrations. Founded in 1989 by a group brought
together by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Molten Metal designs
and builds plants to recycle hazardous wastes into usable products. It has
150 employees and expects to double that number next year.
Haney said the company has numerous opportunities in the US, but Mexico,
which wants to leapfrog to the cutting edge on environmental clean-up, is
'the most exciting new market in the world'.
Joan Gardner, head of Applied Geographics of Boston, has a two-year-old
company with 10 employees. The company creates digital environmental maps
used by utilities, planners and local governments.
After visiting Mexico City with a state trade mission, she has entered a
joint venture with Grupo Gutsa and Northwest Water of the UK to maintain and
improve part of the city's sewer system.
She is impressed with the administration's support for small businesses. 'We
knew there was a market out there, but we didn't really appreciate the
breadth of it,' she said. 'This permits us to become part of the team.'
