FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (11): Conservation must replace
reactors - Christopher Brown-Humes on Sweden's dilemmas
Long cold winters, energy-intensive industries such as forestry, and a
general emphasis on the environment provide Sweden with plenty of incentives
to save energy.
However, the more immediate stimulus to the country's energy-saving drive
has come from a 1980 parliamentary decision to phase out nuclear power
completely by the year 2010. It is ambitious because Sweden's 12 reactors
supply nearly half of its electricity needs. If it is to be met,
conservation and enhanced efficiency will have a significant role to play,
as will alternative, environmentally-friendly sources of power.
The country's record on energy efficiency is relatively encouraging. Since
1970 total consumption has fallen from 375 terawatt hours (twh) to 368 twh
last year, thanks to lower usage by industry and households. Dependency on
imported oil has been sharply reduced.
However, electricity consumption has risen steadily over the period, as the
country has become more dependent on hydroelectric and nuclear power to
compensate for the reduced oil burn. Electricity use has risen by an average
of 3.6 per cent a year since 1970 to reach 138 twh last year.
In the last few years there has been a slowing in the rate at which
electricity demand has grown, thanks partly to the three-year long
recession, but estimates still suggest it will rise by around 1.5 per cent a
year between now and the year 2000.
This trend is worrying, given the ambition to phase out nuclear power. Hence
a target to cut electricity consumption by at least 10 twh by the year 2000
featured as one of the major components in the government's 1991 energy
bill. The bill also placed significant emphasis on promoting alternative
fuel sources such as biomass (for combined heat and power plants), wind and
solar power.
The bill included a SKr3.7bn allocation for the promotion of energy
efficiency through a programme which was initially designed to run for five
years but which has now been extended to mid-1998.
One of the biggest slices of the cake - SKr1bn - is intended to support
conservation, particularly through the procurement of more energy-efficient
technology. Much of the work in this area has been carried out by Nutek, a
government body within the Department of Industry and Commerce. Its task has
been to bring producers and consumers together to find ways of producing
equipment and materials which use less electricity and prevent heat loss.
This covers everything from fridges and freezers to windows and
high-frequency lights.
The programme claims considerable success in the sense that some
fridge/freezer models have been developed which are 40 per cent more
efficient, while windows have been produced which are 50 per cent more
effective in preventing heat loss. The problem has been that the recession
and a massive slump in building activity have delayed the rate at which the
new technology might otherwise have been installed.
The programmes have had a relatively modest impact so far, and results in
most cases have yet to be quantified.
But even assuming the conservation drive is successful, the question of how
the country is going to compensate for the loss of nuclear power, which last
year supplied 43 per cent of its electricity needs, remains largely
unanswered. This is the most important question in the whole debate: will
nuclear power be phased out as planned?
Many observers expect the 2010 deadline to slip. They believe that with
memories of Chernobyl fading, and the good safety record of Sweden's own
reactors, there is less pressure for a complete phase-out.
Mr Carl Bildt, the prime minister, has called the deadline 'artificial'. The
1991 government bill itself is vague on the subject saying only that 'the
juncture at which the phase-out ..can begin and the rate at which it can
proceed will hinge on the results of electricity conservation measures, the
supply of electricity from environmentally friendly power production and the
possibilities of maintaining internationally-competitive prices.'
One of the difficulties is that parliament has effectively limited Sweden's
ability to expand hydro-electric power generation, the country's most
important source of electricity, by saying it will not harness the four
remaining undammed rivers in the north.
Electricity from combined heat and power plants might be able to take up
part of the strain, although only 3.4 twh of electricity from this source
was generated in 1991. The government has set aside SKr1bn of its SKr3.7bn
allocation for energy efficiency support specifically to promote CHP
production based on bio-fuels, such as wood chips. This includes grants both
for new CHP facilities and the conversion of old ones.
The answer to the electricity crunch could also see greater co-operation
with Nordic neighbours in the more deregulated energy market now beginning
to emerge in the region. But it is too early to quantify the extent of such
collaboration.
Whatever happens, there are those who fear that the best Sweden's energy
efficiency programmes can hope to achieve is a delay in the need to build
new power plants. Current forecasts suggest there will, in any case, be no
need for new power capacity until around the year 2000.
Critics say that Sweden's energy conservation drive is being undermined by
low prices and a tax structure designed to keep export-dependent industry
internationally competitive. There should be no surprise about pricing,
given that supply has exceeded demand during the current recession. Taxes,
though, do seem to have been kept relatively low to favour industry. For
example, an energy tax on fuel and electricity consumption was scrapped for
industry as from the start of this year. Households are still required to
pay this tax, and the rate at which they pay tax on carbon dioxide emissions
is four times higher than that paid by industry.
Some worry that low energy costs are conserving Sweden's old industrial
culture based around forestry, mining and steel when the country should be
doing more to promote the development of high-technology businesses.
