FT  29 MAY 93 / Fresh doubts over US recovery: Clinton's budget bill victory
marred by sharp drop in growth rate
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's celebration yesterday of his vital budget bill
victory in Congress on Thursday night was tempered by new figures that cast
fresh doubts on the US economic recovery.
They showed much reduced economic growth as American consumers stopped
spending and a deeper balance-of-payments deficit in the first quarter.
Seeking to build public momentum for his economic policies, the president
told a large crowd in Philadelphia that the US 'must stop reducing our
investments and running up our debts'. He also insisted that the impact of
his controversial energy tax would be more than offset by lower interest
rates and that 'there will be no new taxes without budget cuts'.
Revised figures, released by the Commerce Department, showed gross domestic
product expanding at an annual rate of only 0.9 per cent, half the rate
estimated last month and sharply down on the 4.7 per cent recorded in the
fourth quarter of last year.
The latest signs of a US slowdown follow recent downward revisions to growth
forecasts for continental Europe and will increase concern in western
capitals about global growth. They will add to tension when economics and
trade ministers from industrial countries meet in Paris next week at the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to discuss rising
unemployment and protectionism ahead of the July Group of Seven economic
summit.
The figures may also increase opposition in the US Senate to elements of Mr
Clinton's deficit-cutting economic plan, which involves the largest tax
increase for a decade.
Share prices retreated on the bad economic news after record highs earlier
this week. The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 27.4 points down at
3,527.43.
On Thursday, Mr Clinton just avoided a potentially calamitous defeat when
the House of Representatives approved a bill that would raise taxes by
Dollars 250bn (Pounds 162bn) and cut spending by Dollars 87bn over five
years. Many Republicans and conservative Democrats, however, are pushing for
bigger spending cuts on the ground that higher tax rates on individuals and
companies will retard economic growth.
The downward revision of first-quarter GDP was sharper than expected on Wall
Street and mainly reflected the US's poor trading performance in the first
quarter. Balance-of-payments figures showed a merchandise trade deficit of
Dollars 29.1bn against Dollars 17.8bn in the first quarter of last year.
Imports rose 12 per cent in cash terms over the period.
Most economists have shaved growth forecasts for this quarter but still
predict a rebound in the second half to growth at an annual rate close to 3
per cent.
Mr Stephen Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley, theNew York investment
bank, said the economy was likely to grow at an annual rate of about 1.5 per
cent in the current quarter. 'My big concern is the surge in imports which
should not be happening when our currency and cost structure is
competitive.'
The weak growth figures follow reports of a sharp drop in consumer
confidence this month. They make a tightening of monetary policy by the
Federal Reserve improbable in the near future in spite of an upward blip in
consumer and producer prices.
The Fed intervened in foreign exchange markets again yesterday to try to
slow the yen's rise. But at the close in New York the dollar had slipped to
Y106.95 against an opening of Y107.55.
House nudges Clinton to the right, Page 3
Japan seeks help to stem yen rise, Page 4
Currencies, Page 13
US stocks, Page 21
