FT  16 SEP 93 / International Company News: Trinkaus chief plays down its
parentage - Two of a kind: Bankers with unique perspectives speak to David
Marsh
Mr Herbert Jacobi, the chairman of Dusseldorf-based Trinkaus &amp; Burckhardt,
runs a foreign-owned bank. Part of his job, however, is to ensure that the
parentage of this two centuries-old German private banking house is not too
evident. Trinkaus &amp; Burckhardt is 70 per cent owned by Midland Bank of the
UK, which last year became part of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank group.
Trinkaus has been in foreign hands since the 1970s, when Citibank of the US
acquired a majority share which it sold to Midland in 1981. Now, however,
playing down its non-German ownership is a key part of the bank's strategy.
'Many customers do not know we are foreign-owned.'
The bank's shares are listed on the German stock market, and, in accord with
German private bank tradition, it is directed by five personally liable
managing partners, of whom Mr Jacobi, 58, is the most senior.
The emphasis on its credentials is designed to highlight that most essential
German business trait: reliability. 'Foreign banks in Germany have a
reputation as 'fair weather' institutions. There is a belief that foreign
head offices have only to whistle to call in loans. This can be fatal for an
important part of our business.
'No foreign bank in Germany has ever been successful,' says Mr Jacobi, who
joined Trinkaus in 1981.
He speaks from experience. In addition to spells at Deutsche Bank and BHF
Bank in Frankfurt, Mr Jacobi worked for Chase Manhattan between 1964 and
1977, spending several years running Chase's perennially lacklustre German
operations.
Although Trinkaus puts its German character in the foreground, its banking
activities are strongly international. It builds its business around what Mr
Jacobi calls the 'three pillars' of corporate finance, private asset
management and financial market operations, including new issue business and
foreign exchange. Net profits have been steady at DM40m (Dollars 24.6m)
annually during the past two years.
The bank's main customers are individuals with assets of more than DM1m and
companies with cross-border transactions which want to improve financial
management. A firm adherent of Germany's 'universal banking' tradition, he
is pleased that Trinkaus can offer services across the whole spectrum of
banking. 'I don't know a better way of being close to our customers.'
These customers are being squeezed, like Germany as a whole, by the
consequences of reunification. 'German unity is a terrible crisis - but also
an opportunity. There was no 'game plan' (to carry out unification three
years ago), because no-one believed it was possible.' Making a success of
German unity will, he says, take 10 to 12 years.
Mr Jacobi outlines two areas where German industrialists and bankers are
being forced to change their agenda. The first concerns the need to improve
efficiency by cutting costs and shifting production abroad. German
manufacturing costs, he says, are up to 30 per cent higher than those of
foreign competitors. 'I believe that German industry will overcome its
difficulties, but at the cost of mounting unemployment.'
The second big change is in the financial field. Because of the 'colossal
costs' of reunification, German companies are now more dependent on stock
market finance, including, crucially, on funds from foreign investors.
English phrases like 'shareholder value' and 'investor relations' -
increasingly in vogue in Germany - have no German equivalent, he explains
sardonically, since until recently these concepts had no place in the German
banking vocabulary.
Mr Jacobi is convinced that convergence of ideas and practices is taking
place in EC countries. 'But this is the result of force of circumstances,
not because of any bureaucratic project laid down in Brussels.' He is
distinctly sceptical about EC plans for economic and monetary union. 'I
believe in Europe, but not in the Maastricht timetable.'
