FT  17 DEC 93 / Technology: Europe switches over to digital TV - Andrew Hill
explains why the political fizz has gone out of HDTV
A year ago, a fierce political and technological argument about the future
of the European strategy to develop advanced, cinema-quality television
raged between European ministers.
Strong words were exchanged - particularly between Britain, which was
blocking funding for high-definition television (HDTV), and its EC partners.
The issue was even discussed informally by prime ministers and presidents
during last December's Edinburgh summit.
Since then, the political fizz has gone out of the issue. This month, the
same telecoms ministers who promised to fight to the final TV set to defend
certain HDTV transmission standards, passed a resolution supporting new
initiatives to develop digital television - a more versatile technology than
the analogue systems originally backed by Europe. The words 'high
definition' were not even mentioned in the ministers' final communique.
The change of tack follows June's meeting of telecoms ministers, at which
Britain finally agreed to back a much-diluted plan for Ecu228m (Pounds 174m)
of European Union funding to promote wide-screen television services over
the next four years. The plan, unlike the original Ecu850m proposal of the
European Commission, is not linked to particular satellite transmission
standards. Indeed, the latest ministerial meeting laid the groundwork for
the rewriting of a 1991 directive so as to remove most references to
mandatory standards.
This does not mean that HDTV has been abandoned completely. But in the
medium term, the Commission and the ministers have recognised that digital
television of standard or enhanced quality offers greater opportunities to
the European consumer electronics industry.
The EU is pinning its hopes on the Digital Video Broadcasting Group, formed
in September under the aegis of the German telecoms ministry. This group
unites 120 interested parties, including television manufacturers,
broadcasters, satellite operators, governments and the Commission itself,
behind a digital strategy.
One of the group's aims is to come up with common European standards for
transmission and pay-TV decoders, but it seems unlikely that these will be
made mandatory unless it is obvious that consumers have taken to them. The
digital group is expected to talk to the European standard-setting bodies,
Etsi and Cenelec, shortlyy about a multiplex digital standard for Europe
(that is, a standard which allows several channels to be broadcast on each
digital signal). This could be formalised by the end of next year.
This time round, common European standards will not be used to fight US and
Japanese competition. As Jos Kestens of Cenelec said last week: 'Standards
are tools and normally tools aren't used as weapons.' The Commission has
already said that it would be desirable for systems serving the main
worldwide markets to share as many elements as possible, although a
worldwide standard is unlikely because of technical differences.
But the Commission and ministers do want to avoid a proliferation of
competing systems in Europe. That applies to systems for encoding - or, to
use the satellite TV jargon, 'encrypting' - subscription satellite channels,
as well as the transmission standards themselves.
The hope is that co-operation under the umbrella of the digital group will
deter broadcasters and manufacturers from developing incompatible
technological systems at great cost.
Ministers also hope that competing satellite broadcasters will think twice
before developing widely differing encryption systems to protect themselves
from increasingly sophisticated pay-TV pirates. Instead of living rooms
cluttered up with a variety of different decoders, one for each pay-TV
channel the consumer wants to receive, officials believe it should be
possible to develop a single European family of encryption standards,
perhaps based on 'smart' access cards.
Whatever happens, governments are unlikely to fall again into the trap of
dictating exactly what sort of pictures the European television viewer will
watch in the 21st century, and how these pictures reach the screens.
