FT  30 SEP 93 / Libya assures UN over trial
LIBYA informed the United Nations last night that it was willing to allow
the two alleged Lockerbie bombers to appear for trial before a Scottish
court.
But the announcement was received with considerable scepticism, after
numerous previous Libyan promises and evasions.
'The question of timing is still under discussion,' a UN spokesman said
after a meeting between Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary-general, and
Mr Omar al-Muntasser, the Libyan foreign minister.
They are to have further talks today, when Mr Muntasser will also address
the UN General Assembly.
Diplomats said Libya's response may have been prompted by a deadline set by
the Security Council. If it does not agree by tomorrow to submit the
suspects for trial, a resolution imposing a freeze on Libyan financial
assets abroad and an embargo on oil-related equipment supplies will be
considered.
Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, who is in New York for the UN
session, remained wary about Libyan intentions.
Reacting to a statement issued earlier in the day by the Libyan 'Bureau for
Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation', he said he was interested
only in getting the suspects to Scotland or the US to stand trial.
They are accused of masterminding the bombing of the Pan Am jet that
exploded over the Scottish town of Lockerbie in December 1988 with the loss
of 270 lives.
Under a Security Council resolution last year, Libya's air links were
severed and a ban on shipments of aircraft and parts was imposed, along with
an embargo on arms sales and a reduction of Libyan diplomatic staff around
the world.
While yesterday's developments indicated that Libya might be becoming less
intransigent in the face of tougher sanctions, its position remained
ambiguous. The Libyan official statement said the suspects would be
encouraged to go to Scotland but added that 'one step' remained: 'acceptance
by the suspects, their families and lawyers to appear before the Scottish
court'.
