FT  23 APR 93 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): Equities or
bonds? Inflation holds the key - If the investment climate really has
suffered a sea change, there are deep implications for portfolios / Strategy
for the nineties
SHOULD THE private investor be buying bonds or equities for the 1990s? If
you examine investment history, there appears to be no contest.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd's Equity-Gilt Study has produced investment
statistics for the period from 1918-93. The average nominal return on
equities over the whole period has been 11.8 per cent, compared with 6.4 per
cent from gilts. But the difference is even more stark in real (after
inflation) terms: 7.3 per cent per annum from shares, and just 1.2 per cent
from gilts.
But could the 1990s be different? There are some who argue that they will
be. The key element is inflation. Because the repayment value of a bond is
fixed in nominal terms, rising prices destroy the value of the bondholder's
capital.
Equities, however, tend to rise in line with inflation. The reason is that
inflation represents the increase in the prices of goods made by companies.
If margins stay the same, then, as prices rise, corporate profits will
increase in line.
In the inter-war period, inflation was not much of a problem. Gilts provided
real returns of over 5 per cent per annum. This was the era of the so-called
'yield gap', when shares were expected to offer a higher yield than gilts,
because they represented greater risk.
But after the second world war, the so-called 'cult of the equity'
developed, for a variety of reasons. Pension funds, offering benefits based
on final salaries, decided that equities were the best way of matching their
liabilities; inflation became an endemic, rather than occasional, problem;
institutional, rather than private, investors dominated the market and,
because of their larger portfolios, could brush aside the risk that
individual companies might go wrong.
In the past 20 years, gilts have often yielded twice as much as equities.
Institutional portfolios have come to be concentrated in shares, with the
proportion of gilts falling sharply.
But the 1990s, some argue, will be an era of low economic growth and low
inflation - and that should be good for bonds.
But why should inflation stay low? One argument is that the 1980s boom was
caused by excessive borrowing, and that the 1990s will see the hangover as
the world has to repay that debt. Economic growth will be slow as consumers
divert funds away from consumption and into debt repayment. Some even
believe that the 1990s are the 'downwave' of a 60-year economic cycle, and
will thus be as depressed as the 1930s.
Bonds certainly have their attractions. The recent falls in short-term UK
interest rates have led to what, in the jargon, is called a
'positively-sloping yield curve' - which, in practical terms, means that
bond yields are higher than the returns available from short-term building
society accounts.
Bond returns are also fixed, provided that you hold the issue till maturity.
That measure of certainty can be highly attractive to the private investor.
Furthermore, bonds offer a higher degree of security than equities - if a
company goes bust, then bondholders must be repaid before shareholders. And
gilts, of course, are issued by the government.
Indeed, in Europe and the US, it is quite common for private investors to
hold bonds as a substantial proportion of their portfolio. It could be time
for Britain to catch up.
But there are dangers awaiting those who decide to invest in bonds.
Inflation may be higher than is currently expected - especially in the light
of the devaluation of the pound and the rising budget deficit, both of which
normally lead to upward pressure on prices.
Most commentators would agree that the 'low inflation' argument is much less
convincing now that Britain is free of the constraints of the exchange rate
mechanism. And the budget deficit inevitably means a sharp increase in the
supply of gilts, which might depress gilt prices.
Furthermore, many gilts are trading at above face value. This means that
investors who hold them till maturity are trading higher immediate income
for long-term capital loss - not a very efficient strategy in terms of the
UK tax system. Profits on gilts are free of capital gains tax, but the
corollary is that losses cannot be offset against other gains elsewhere.
Income on gilts is fully taxable.
What about the prospects for equities? The equity bulls would point to the
BZW figures which show that low inflation is very good for the share market
 -the highest real returns on equities have occurred in years when inflation
was between 0 and 2 per cent.
As more and more of the world opens up to capitalism, some would argue that,
far from being stuck in depression, we are entering a 'golden age' in which
the resources of underdeveloped or communist countries will be unleashed.
Sir John Templeton, one of the grand old men of fund management, declared at
the end of 1991 that 'the next 10 years will be the most prosperous in world
history'. He expects the world standard of living to quadruple over the next
40 years.
Certainly, stock markets normally do well as economies move out of
recession. The question is whether world markets, and in particular the US
and the UK, have anticipated so much of the recovery that there is no profit
left for those who invest now.
After analysing all these factors, BZW concluded in January that, while
equities would continue to out-perform bonds in the 1990s, the gap would be
closer than before. Real returns, they forecast, would be around 6.5 per
cent per annum for equities and 3.5 per cent for bonds. The Budget change in
ACT, by reducing the tax credit on dividends, also tilted the equation away
from equities and towards bonds.
Many private investors currently have too much in the building society and
too little in either bonds or equities. So the answer may be to opt for a
diversified portfolio including both classes of asset. The greater the
investor's caution, the greater the proportion in bonds; the bigger the fear
of inflation, the more should be in equities.
The Experts' Panel considers bond funds - page 29
