FT  10 JUL 93 / Tory footsoldiers out of step with party: John Major faces
growing pressure over his leadership ahead of the crucial Christchurch
by-election at the end of this month. Pit closures, VAT on fuel and fears
over law and order have all added to his problems. Rachel Johnson visits two
very different constituencies to gauge Tory grassroot support
'IT'S a bloody mess,' said Rob. 'Hopeless,' agreed Harold. 'They should have
left Mrs T where she was,' said Bill, moodily staring into his empty pint
glass.
Predictable sentiments, perhaps, if from disgruntled Conservative voters.
But these were the voices of three Tory stalwarts in the blue-wallpapered
Llandridnod Wells Conservative Club.
Tory activists are getting restive. They see no reason why they should not
air their complaints to anyone who will listen. For one of their biggest
grouses is that the government does not.
The same message was brought home after three days spent in two very
contrasting Tory constituencies.
In remote, hilly Brecon and Radnor, the large agricultural Welsh seat, Mr
Jonathan Evans nosed ahead of the Liberal Democrats by 130 votes after two
recounts at the general election. In Chertsey and Walton, in plushest
suburban Surrey, Mr Geoffrey Pattie holds a majority of more than 22,000  -
making it one of the safest seats in the country.
The Conservative Association of Brecon and Radnor is losing supporters - 20,
including one branch chairman and two treasurers in the past eight weeks.
Chertsey Conservative Association has seen attendance falling at the cream
teas and barbecues so crucial for fundraising. And activists in both
associations are showing signs of losing heart.
Mr Michael Jefferies, a former policeman who is the agent for Mr Evans,
said: 'The troops are pissed off. It all started with David Mellor and look
at what's happened since. The presentation is appalling. They perceive John
Major as weak. The miners' issue was a killer.'
You will not, however, in either place hear a disloyal word spoken against
their MP.
Loyalty is particularly strong in Brecon and Radnor, a constituency famed
for nail-biting three-way fights in elections.
Mr Robin Gibson-Watt, the six-foot eight-inch Old Etonian gentleman farmer
who is chairman of the local Conservative Association said: 'I'd die for
Jonathan if he asked me to.'
Such loyalty, however, does not extend to the prime minister.
Mr Harold Nicholson, a local landlord who described himself as a 'Tory
footsoldier', said: 'He's weak, very weak. As bad as Ted Heath, one of the
worst.'
Europe was still one of the big issues and his gripe was Maastricht and the
drive to a federal Europe. 'They're closing creameries down here and Italy
hasn't even got milk quotas,' he said.
His neighbour, Mr Bill Griffiths, a beef wholesaler, is in despair because
his local abattoir has failed to open for the second year running. And the
European Community has just ruled that the waters of the spa town of
Llandridnod Wells are unsafe and cannot be served, even though they are
free, in the town's Pump Room.
VAT on fuel was another blow for a poor, sheep-farming community with a
large proportion of retired people.
Mr Jefferies said: 'We could have ridden out the uncertainty and inactivity
if we hadn't been walloped by these other things,'
Mr Bob Shearn, a former chairman of the Conservative Association, said:
'It's the worst time I can remember in 50 years. They (Central Office) just
don't listen to people.'
In Weybridge, in the heart of the Chertsey and Walton constituency, one does
not hear quite such mutinous plain speaking. But the fact that one hears it
at all in such a stronghold is just as telling.
Surrey is a rich commuter county  - 25 minutes from London, Heathrow and
Gatwick, bisected by the M25  - with emerald lawns, wide pavements and
business parks. But it contains its share of shuttered fronts and for-sale
signs.
In its way, Chertsey has had a worse recession than Brecon  - where
lamb-exporting farmers were delighted by the pound's exit from the European
exchange rate mechanism in what they call Golden Wednesday.
Mr Geoffrey King, president of the Chertsey constituency, picked his words
with care: 'The feelgood factor is very lacking. There is a fair spread of
grouse at the moment, which I think comes back to presentation.'
As in Brecon, there is perceived to be a John Major problem.
Mrs Rosemary Dane, Conservative councillor for Elmbridge said: 'The
government is indecisive. We used to know where we were. We need good strong
leadership.'
Many people pointed out that old-time Conservatives were suffering. Mrs
Audrey Kimmins, of the Conservative Political Centre, said: 'The ones who
have saved and given us their support are now just keeping their heads above
water. Then they look down the road and see someone who's got all he can
from the council and never done anything.'
The newest bugbear is, as in Brecon, VAT on fuel. Mrs Dane said: 'There are
little old ladies sitting on their own absolutely panic stricken.'
Low interest rates have also had an impact as the return on savings has
shrunk to almost nothing.
The Chertsey Tories are prepared to complain about policies and
presentation. But they still say it is Mr Major who will turn the party's
fortunes round. Mr Martin Brady, treasurer of the Conservative Association,
said: 'We must be firm. We are running the country, and an awful lot is
coming right. And Major's the best man for the job.'
In Chertsey there is a sense that, bar a defeat in Christchurch, the worst
may be over. The economy is on the turn and Mr Major will settle into the
job to 'plough his own furrow'. People vote for the party that makes them
feel wealthiest, and they see little danger of supporters deserting for
good. In the Llandridnod Conservative Club not even the fiercest Major
critic pointed to a preferred successor. They regard the prime minister as
the best of a bad bunch.
Mr Major may be the most unpopular prime minister on record, but his
footsoldiers still seem convinced that there is no alternative.
