FT  03 NOV 93 / People: Ex-surgeon to correct the balance at UBS healthcare
One of the more familiar names in the healthcare business has joined UBS as
a director, corporate finance. John Heap trained as a surgeon, specialising
ultimately in infertility treatments in obstetrics and gynaecology. But
since 1980 his instruments have been rather more metaphorical than
practical.
Heap has spent the past 13 years in a variety of senior European healthcare
positions, all of which have primed him for his new role, which will be to
assist UBS to steal a march on its competitors all fiercely engaged in
staying in the middle of the new business stream being generated by mergers,
floats and buy-outs in the now tightly squeezed pharmaceutical sector.
'One of the principal issues facing the pharmaceutical industry now is
research and development costs, which cannot persist at the level they have
reached,' says Heap. 'Globally, some Dollars 30bn is annually spent on R&amp;D,
which is an unsustainable figure when compared with generated sales of
perhaps Dollars 130bn. The ratio is wrong. Pharmaceutical companies will
either have to trim their R&amp;D costs, re-focus their research, or increase
sales enormously. The latter is very difficult, the first is very easy but
ineffective. What needs to happen is for companies to re-focus their efforts
and minimise their duplicated efforts,' argues Heap.
Heap's expertise has been gained through broad experience. On leaving the
national health service, he joined the Belgian company Janssen
Pharmaceuticals as a senior medical adviser. He went on to join the French
company Merieux, as medical director, helping establish it in the UK.
In 1983 he joined Lorex Pharmaceuticals as the board director covering
Italy, the Netherlands and the UK, and moved to Evans Healthcare in 1986.
UBS has busied itself in the healthcare market recently, recruiting a couple
of analysts in London as well as one each in New York, Tokyo and Zurich. It
recruited Heap in the belief that the pharmaceutical industry is about to
undergo the same sorts of upheaval over the next decade as befell the
computing industry in the past two.
