FT  31 JUL 93 / Books: Rich and randy romp
THE GRANDMOTHER'S TALE
by R K Narayan
Heinemann Pounds 9.99, 134 pages
FASCINATED
by Miles Gibson
Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 14.99, 245 pages
CAMPION'S GHOST
by Garry O'Connor
Hodder &amp; Stoughton Pounds 15.99, 246 pages
THANK GOODNESS for the Empire. Britain's predilection for the poles of a
more and more derivative frivolity and a less and less rational gloom is
undermining the art of the novel. Where would we be without the deeper
imported shades of the Caribbean, the subcontinent and other outer marches?
Take Miles Gibson's new book Fascinated, a gorgeously written romp through a
London underworld of bruisers, mugs and molls. Frank Fisher, a nobody of a
marketing man for the Fancy Wholesale Fruits Corporation, is yanked by a
fluke into the dangerous orbit of mega-rich gangster Conrad Staggers. To win
the heart of the beautiful Valentine, he must learn to kill. In the process
he 'comes to understand the need to give death a moving target'. Gibson's
writing is rich and randy, the plot as slick as it is predictable. But the
characters are celluloid, the scenes a cartoon pastiche mixing Raymond
Chandler with Arnold Schwarzenegger. A good read for sure, but Fascinated is
little more than a clever kid's screenplay.
As for gloom, Garry O'Connor paints a very unfunny portrait of John Donne in
his imaginary memoir of the metaphysical poet, Campion's Ghost. The facts
are that Donne was raised as a Catholic, gained fame as a voluptuary, and
ended his career as a pillar of the Church of England. O'Connor, perhaps
informed by his long association with the theatre, has the poet thumping
across the stage as a maudlin penitent, haunted by the Tudors' brutal
persecution of Catholicism, tormented by guilt. His is a regret which we are
told was shared by Queen Elizabeth, whom we meet in one unlikely scene
seeking absolution from a dashing Jesuit priest who is meant to serve as a
sort of alter ego to the sorry Donne.
There is a great deal of gallivanting about, miraculous rescues and the
like, but the swashes in Campion's Ghost do not quite buckle. Donne the poet
never really comes alive. We hear nothing, for example, of his foreign
travels. And why is every Protestant brutish and cynical, every Catholic
brave, sexy and wise?
The problem is that O'Connor has chosen a cumbersome vehicle to prove his
conviction - expressed in a peculiar note at the book's end - that England
lost its soul by suppressing the One True Faith. We are expected, one
supposes, to applaud the subtext of hostility to such modern horrors as
divorce, the ordination of women priests and so on.
After the thinness of Gibson and the sullen zeal of O'Connor, an old pro
like RK Narayan comes as a relief. At a sprightly 86, the doyen of Indian
letters remains true to form. The Grandmother's Tale, three short novellas,
has all the naive passion and gently mocking humour of his best work. The
stories are simple: a child bride stalks her absconded husband, a
bureaucrat's greed brings disaster, a poor housewife achieves literary fame
by way of her oblivious husband's skill in the kitchen.
To the dismay of his more critical countrymen, Narayan makes no pretense to
modernity. His pre-Independence India is a lost world, rooted in Hindu fable
and populated with Bertie Woosterish innocents. But the characters have
depth; their motivations ring true. Narayan may have little to say about
fundamentalist rage, but what he can do is conjure the quality of light.
