FT  09 FEB 93 / Tokyo orders more small business loans
JAPAN'S Ministry of Finance yesterday ordered the country's banks to expand
lending to small and medium businesses, which have been suffering from the
downturn in the economy.
The unprecedented move follows mounting criticism from businesses that
banks, which are trying to reduce their bad loans, are increasingly
reluctant to make loans. Complaints of excessively restrictive lending
policies prompted the ruling Liberal Democratic party to call for lower
lending rates in tandem with last week's cut in the official discount rate.
Mr Yoshiro Hayashi, finance minister, said the formal request was intended
to maximise the effects of last week's 0.75 percentage point rate cut.
Financial authorities are desperately trying to avert complaints that the
discount rate cut was aimed at shoring up profit margins of the struggling
banking sector.
Mr Yuji Tanahashi, vice-minister of international trade and industry,
yesterday insisted the main purpose of the rate cut was not to improve
earnings at financial institutions. He urged banks to reduce loan rates to
manufacturing companies in order to lead Japan out of the current slump.
Small companies, which are in general dependent on a narrower product range
than larger companies, have been hard hit by falling cash flows in the
current recession. A sharp rise in bankruptcies among smaller businesses,
which are more dependent on bank lending than large companies, added to
worries about a credit crunch.
Leading commercial banks are moving to cut short-term prime lending rates,
or the key rate charged on most creditworthy customers, in response to
falling money market rates following the discount rate reduction. Yesterday,
Sumitomo Bank, Mitsubishi Bank, and Fuji Bank announced a 0.5 percentage
point cut in their short-term prime rates to 4 per cent.
However, businesses claim that banks are increasingly reluctant to apply
lower rates to smaller companies, and are even trimming their lists of
eligible corporations for the more attractive prime rates.
