FT  11 DEC 93 / Smart money riding on a plastic card: John Gapper on a step
towards the global cashless society
It is Monday morning. Ms Jane Smith arrives at Heathrow at 8am after taking
a cab from her west London home. She has no notes in her handbag, or change
in her purse. It does not matter. She hands the driver a plastic card
instead. He inserts it in a slot by the meter and deducts the exact fare.
When she arrives in Frankfurt for her business meeting, she buys a German
newspaper at a bookstall, using the same card. She obtained DM30 earlier by
inserting the card in a telephone at her home. It dialled her bank, and
transferred the sum from his account onto a computer chip on the card.
Her 15-year-old son John is at home. It is the school holidays, and he is
bored. He hires a video game for an hour by dialling a local hire shop,
paying by inserting his card in the telephone. His mother earlier
transferred Pounds 10 to his card from hers using a device that looks like a
calculator.
It is the year 2010, and the global cashless society has arrived. The local
bank no longer has queues of customers because all small businesses use
electronic cash. Banks have just announced huge leaps in profits after
finally eliminating the cost of carrying money around.
This vision came a step closer this week when National Westminster Bank
revealed plans to test a smart card, called Mondex. It will give cards to up
to 30,000 people in Swindon, Wilts, adapting public telephones and cash
machines in the town to allow people to transfer electronic money.
It is a tempting prospect for banks and retailers, which bear the cost of
cash. The UK banks estimate that they spend Pounds 2bn a year on cash
distribution, and one study put the cost to retailers at Pounds 800m a year.
Swapping paper and metal for electronic impulses would save huge sums.
The question is: will people want the card? As Mr Tim Jones, the NatWest
executive who jointly invented Mondex admits, money tokens have been around
for hundreds of years because they are very convenient. 'Cash is a great
product,' says the man who is trying to eliminate it.
The attractions for banks and retailers go beyond saving money. In at least
two ways, cash cards might help expand revenues. One is that they do not
involve credit, and so can be given to everyone. The second is that they are
well-suited to paying for new multi-media products such as interactive
television.
The first point is a rather delicate one. Mr Bert Morris, NatWest's deputy
chief executive, bristles at the notion that Mondex will be a down-market
debit card. Nonetheless, many of the market opportunities that banks cite
involve groups like young people who are not trusted with other cards.
Retail outlets that depend overwhelmingly on cash payments for small
transactions, such as fast-food outlets and video stores, may welcome cash
cards. But it is questionable whether the young people who spend money there
will buy more products simply because they can use a card instead of cash.
The second point may be more significant. As telecoms and media companies
scramble to form alliances to sell films and media products down telephone
lines, smart cards look attractive as a means of payment. Money can be
transferred over a line at the same time as a product is ordered. This is
why British Telecom is working with NatWest and Midland Bank on the Mondex
project.
Mr Bruce Bond, BT's director of products and services management, says the
Mondex card is a good means of payment for multi-media products 'that we
believe are going to explode'.
Some observers believe the implications go further. Mr Robb Wilmot of the
Oasis consultancy group says consumers could use smart cards to search
databases for information on the cheapest air fare or the best hotel deal
before ordering and paying with a single transaction.
It is, then, hardly surprising that Mondex was unveiled with such fanfare
this week. But the short history of smart cards in other countries is
littered with disappointments. This has usually been because it has been
difficult to persuade consumers that they should switch to electronic cash
payments.
One example in Holland was a pilot scheme in the town of Woerden near
Utrecht between 1989 and 1991, in which only 3 per cent of purchases were
made by smart card compared with the 15 per cent target the banks had set.
People did not use cards for small transactions in busy shops.
NatWest has attempted to avoid this problem with what is a large gamble.
Transactions in other smart card schemes are authorised when the consumer
taps a PIN number into a machine. But NatWest has made Mondex exactly
equivalent to cash by eliminating this security device.
Thus if a person loses their card, whoever picks it up can spend their money
with no barriers. The only security safeguard is that cards can be
electronically 'locked' at telephones, using a PIN number. If Ms Smith has
set off for Europe with an unlocked card, the risk is hers.
The bank argues that this is the same as carrying cash. Yet consumers could
be wary about using cards with little bulk that hold large amounts in
various currencies. The experiment in Swindon will show whether the bank has
made the correct gamble, and whether the electronic system is safe from
fraudsters breaking the computer code on the microchip.
An even larger problem is pricing. Banks currently do not charge customers
in credit for the costs of cash handling. Yet the cost of smart technology
could be high. The wholesale cost of smart cards is about Pounds 5 each and
that of a telephone with a card reader for use at home is about Pounds 140.
Banks would probably try to charge customers at least for the associated
equipment such as telephones, although NatWest says it has not yet decided
how to finance its scheme. But consumers might question why they should pay
for an intricate cash substitute that could save banks huge sums when notes
and coins are both free and easily understood.
As Mr Willmot puts it, smart cards like Mondex offer banks a chance to
'transfer a lot of labour effort and management activity to the consumer'.
The people of Swindon will soon demonstrate whether they are any more
willing than the citizens of Woerden to accept such a burden.
