FT  17 FEB 93 / International Capital Markets: Goldman Sachs wins key role
in Repsol share sale
REPSOL, the Spanish state-controlled energy group, yesterday appointed the
US investment bank Goldman Sachs as global co-ordinator of a planned share
issue that is expected to raise at least Dollars 500m.
The decision to appoint a separate co-ordinator - Lazard continues to advise
on the overall management of the transaction - reflects the scale and
complexity of the deal, which is likely to have one of the biggest
international distributions of any share issue this year.
More than three-quarters of the shares are expected to be sold abroad in the
first large Spanish share issue targeted exclusively at institutional
investors.
Previous privatisation issues have been sold mainly to retail investors in
Spain, involving lengthy underwriting periods and a fixed price for the
shares.
The latest Repsol offer, by contrast, will be the first Spanish share sale
to be conducted on the international book-building model.
The placement, which is likely to reduce state-held equity in Repsol from a
54.5 per cent to around 47.5 per cent, will be divided into five tranches -
Spain, the US, the UK, continental Europe and the rest of the world.
Analysts believe it will be weighted strongly towards Wall Street.
The issue is due in the first half of the year, though the good market
conditions at present mean that the sale is likely to be launched early,
perhaps as soon as the end of next month.
In an attempt to spread the spoils of the placement among the domestic
banking sector, Repsol named Banco Bilbao Vizcaya as joint global
co-ordinator and appointed the rival big commercial bank, Banco Central
Hispano, lead manager of the Spanish tranche.
Banco Santander de Negocios, Spain's premier merchant bank, will jointly
lead the UK tranche with SG Warburg.
Goldman Sachs co-ordinated the placement of 26 per cent of Repsol's shares
in 1989.
It also led a subsequent major flotation by Endesa, the state-controlled
electrical utility.
The renewed business that Goldman Sachs has won from Repsol underlines the
pre-eminence that the US bank has established in major Spanish deals.
Repsol said that Paribas and Credit Suisse First Boston would be joint
leaders of the continental Europe tranche.
Morgan Stanley has been entrusted with the placement in the rest of the
world, it added.
