FT  16 OCT 93 / I believe in Winston Churchill: Simon Hollington ponders the
star deities of Cao Diasm, Asia's fastest growing religion
THE BUILDING jumps out at you from the lush Vietnamese vegetation. Ablaze
with dragons, rearing serpents and fantastic birds, the church - or is it a
temple, or a mosque? - is a Disneyland of world religions. The
all-encompassing eclecticism of Cao Diasm, perhaps Asia's fastest-growing
religion, assaults the senses. Adding to the variegated colours are Cao
Dia's many star deities, the likes of Winston Churchill and Victor Hugo, who
regularly hand down their wisdom through seances to priestly mediums.
Our bus had left Ho Chi Minh city with too little in the way of suspension
and too much in the way of faith - including the belief that there was room
for just one more farmer, his wife and umpteen chickens. After four hours
uncomfortable travel it was a relief when Tay Ninh, the capital of Cao
Diasm, came into view.
Graham Greene had made this journey in 1953. Intriguingly, he had once
actually considered converting to this eccentric faith. In the end, however,
Greene had written in an article in The Times: 'What on my first two visits
has seemed gay and bizarre (was) now like a game that gone on too long.'
A 'game' though, that many still want to play. After a decade of
suppression, today Cao Diasm claims 4m faithful and through its overseas
missions is attracting converts from Korea and Singapore.
The appeal of Cao Dia's eclecticism and mysticism through seances, which
regularly invoke the spirits of such luminaries as Hugo, Churchill, Joan of
Arc and Lenin, must have been attractive to Greene, given his own prophetic
instinct. He made good use of the experience, using the Cao Dia sect as a
foil in his own portentous novel, The Quiet American.
Founded in 1926, following a series of visions by Ngo Van Chieu, a retired
civil servant, Cao Diasm attempted to create an ideal faith through the
synthesis of secular and religious philosophies of East and West. Cao Dia -
which means 'high palace', signifying God - caught the imagination of the
Vietnamese and by the early 1950s had attracted one in eight of the
population of the south. By the middle of the decade, Cao Diasm had
established a virtually independent feudal state in Tay Ninh Province, which
is bordered on three sides by Cambodia and is only 80km from Saigon.
The Cao Dia's had their own 25,000-strong army, incorporated into the South
Vietnamese army during the Franco-Vietnamese War. They were characterised by
Greene in The Quiet American as the Third Force, which mirrored Washington's
wish that they would somehow resolve the Franco Vietnamese conflict.
In the struggle that was to follow, the Cao Dia reviled both the communist
guerrilla groups and the government of President Ngo Dinh Diem. Refusing to
support the Viet Cong during the US conflict, after the communist takeover
of the South, they were violently suppressed and their lands confiscated.
Cao Diasm has now re-emerged, indeed blossomed, under a more sympathetic
attitude by the communist ruling party. There is today much talk of
'universal peace' around Tay Ninh, where the faithful, in flowing white
robes, flutter around visitors like butterflies searching out pollen.
On the day of my arrival a busload of awed converts from Korea and Singapore
was kneeling on the marble floor of the pink and green ice-cream-parlour
interior of the temple. Wandering around the village-sized compound, with
its pink pagoda architecture, entrepreneurial Cao Dia children and would-be
guides swarm around, eager to practice their English. However, it takes six
of them to convince me that the elaborate fairyland tower infested with
decorative green snakes and adorned with pagodas and bells is in fact the
public toilet.
A middle-aged women with sparkling brown eyes and the complexion of a child
takes me to one side. The Cao Dias are the healthiest and wealthiest-looking
people to be found in a country full of hollowed cheeks and stick-thin legs.
Luong radiates an understated peace normally associated with absolute
personal conviction or controlled use of narcotics.
'Winston Churchill, a wise spirit,' says Luong, shaking her head with a
wide, white smile. I very much wanted to know what the great man's spirit
had communicated, but this Luong explains, to my disappointment, is privy to
the Cao Dia Pope and his inner circle of cardinals.
Cao Dia takes its hierarchical structure from the Roman Catholic Church and
combines Confucianism, Taoism, Hinduism, native Vietnamese spiritualism,
Christianity, and Islam. But it is the tenets of Mahayana Buddhism that form
the core philosophy, with the ultimate aim of breaking the cycle of constant
rebirth.
Ingeniously, the Cao Dia founder, although believing in one God, divided
history into three major periods of revelation. First came Moses and his
Hindu/Buddhist/Muslim equivalents and contemporaries. The human agents of
revelation during the second period were Buddha, Confucius, Jesus and
Mohammed, whose messages were, the Cao Dia thinkers say, applicable only to
their age and have subsequently been corrupted. The Cao Dia's see themselves
as embodying the third and final revelation, an alliance between man and
God.
This neat stacking of religious development is topped off by the
masterstroke of invoking the spirits of past Cao Dia leaders, as well as the
likes of Rene Descartes, William Shakespeare and Joan of Arc, who all serve
as messengers of salvation. However, for some reason it is Victor Hugo who
puts in the most regular spiritual appearance, and who has posthumously been
named the chief spirit of foreign missionaries.
'Ah yes, Shakespeare, he wrote many times a long document, a very long
document,' Luong explains. A new play, perhaps? Luong maintains her beatific
calm. The time to reveal the wisdom of the great spirits, she explains, has
not yet arrived.
The seances are held in what looks like a football stadium and involve a
medium holding a long calligraphy brush, which jerks and scribbles out its
message to the privileged few. Sometimes, by way of a change, a blank piece
of paper is placed in an envelope behind the Divine Eye altar. When removed,
there inside is a message from the superstars of yore.
Luong led me to the entrance of the Divine Temple, or Vatican, keen to show
off the plaster relief of Victor Hugo and the Chinese poet, Sun Yat-Sen, who
are jointly painting a scroll which reads: 'Dieu and Humanite Amour and
Justice.'
'A Walt Disney fantasia of the East' was Graham Greene's description of the
Cao Dia Vatican. Norman Lewis called it a marriage between a pagoda and a
southern baroque church. The concept is certainly worthy of California, but
perhaps Cao Diasm has more commercial appeal than most. The pop star Michael
Jackson came to my mind: he, I felt, would love the religion's Christmas
cake architecture and its message, oft repeated in my ear, of universal
peace and happiness.
It is noon and the faithful are arriving on bicycles to pray at one of four
ceremonies held during the day. The white beards and robes of elderly
sage-like men provide an atmosphere of an ancient theological university,
lending credence to the durability of Cao Dia philosophy.
But my attempts to penetrate the higher echelons of the Cao Dia priesthood
proved fruitless. Questions about the religion's funds, and of its apparent
wealth, produces more beatific but impenetrable smiles.
Cao Dia temples observe an odd protocol whereby the male and female
disciples enter on opposite sides. Women, who may belong to the clergy
except at the highest levels, travel only clockwise around the left hand
aisle, and men anti-clockwise around the right.
The 30-minute service consists of harmonic chanting, with ceremonial
offerings of tea and alcohol which are laid at the foot of the Cao Dia
altar, above which is the large and unnerving 'Divine Eye', set within a
huge globe. Below the eye is a pulpit entwined with a cobra. The stunning
colours of the clerical robes, blue, yellow, and white, with attendant funny
hats, are colour coded according to priestly rank.
As a finale to the mid-day service a priest in a peacock robe burns a
message at the altar, perhaps a memo to Churchill or Lenin, asking them to
drop by when the spirit moves them. At least they do not have to come by
bus.
