FT  26 AUG 93 / Arts: Transfixed by Berkoff - The Edinburgh Festival
Edgar Allan Poe and Steven Berkoff: a marriage made in Heaven or perhaps for
some spectators Purgatory. Both favour the wilder side; both plough their
own imaginations; both choose the Gothic and place style before content. So
Berkoff performing Poe's Tell Tale Heart is an awesome experience.
The silences, and the slow drawing out of certain of Berkoff's favourite
words, like 'stealthily', are only matched by his rat-a-tat explosions of
action. As the mad man who murders the miser to avoid the stare of his fishy
blue eye, Berkoff is as well matched as a sweater to Edinburgh. And as the
drama proceeds from the slow laborious preparations for the killing to the
rising, insistent, reproachful beat of the dead man's heart as it pounds
from its hidden grave, so Berkoff winds up the audience to the pathetic
climax. Sometimes the words are strangulated beyond meaning; but the body
never fails to speak loudly and Berkoff even makes a virtue of mime. No one
climbs an imaginary staircase better; no one opens the door with more dread.
This is how Dickens must have transfixed an audience at his public readings
and if it owes more to Victorian excess, to the Henry Irving School of
acting than to sophisticated realism, that is spot on for Poe. Berkoff
brings death to life.
The other two monologues in his show at the Assembly Rooms are superficial
stuff, some rhyming nonsense about a failing actor, and an East End tough
singing the praises of his killer dog. But Berkoff uses his physical
presence to more effect than any rival and he makes a convincing case for
his self-proclaimed if slightly odd genius.
Twenty-three year old Crispin Whittell has hardly edged into the public
limelight as a dramatist but this year's Killing Him (The Pleasance) adding
greatly to the reputation he established last year with his play Success
must suggest a great future.
Black (or White) Wednesday is already an important historical date and the
tensions, both private, political and philosophical, that it generated are
superbly captured in Whittell's play. The dialogue cracks along, with City
slang, designed to make the awful seem palatable, running happily with
spouts of poetical lyricism. The style is so sharp that we take defeat and
murder happily in our stride. The four characters screw each other and
themselves to perfection but the moral survives beneath the wit in the
audience's total identification with the only decent character, an
unemployed birdwatcher. Wonderful acting; an unexpected treat.
