FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (4): Ownership switches - Privatisation
signals radical shift in the economy
PRIVATISATION has been the linchpin of the Argentine government's economic
programme. It has allowed the government to put its budget to rights,
brought sorely-needed investment to badly run-down utilities and provided a
strong psychological signal of drastic change in Argentina's economic
regime.
The numbers are impressive. According to figures cited by Mr Juan Carlos
Sanchez Arnau, privatisation secretary in the economy ministry, the
companies so far privatised by the government were receiving average annual
transfers from the government of Dollars 2.1bn between 1980 and 1989. Now,
not only have these transfers ceased, but the privatised companies pay tax,
which ran into hundreds of millions of dollars last year.
The privatisations so far have raised Dollars 5.4bn in cash and Dollars
12.5bn face value of government debt has been cancelled through debt equity
swaps. A further Dollars 1.5bn of liabilities were transferred from the
government to the private sector. On top of that, there is a gathering
movement towards privatisations by some provincial governments.
The government, he says, has also been pleasantly surprised by the
investment in privatised industry. 'We are monitoring the companies and all
started to make investments very quickly. This is one of the most important
aspects of the results.'
The two privatised telephone companies invested Dollars 400m in 1991,
Dollars 1.2bn in 1992 and - judging from the rate of investment in the first
quarter - are expected to make Dollars 1.5bn in investments this year.
Companies owning privatised roads invested Dollars 188m in 1991 and Dollars
120m last year. The new owners of the railways will be expected to invest
Dollars 200m-250m a year; the gas companies at least Dollars 200m a year.
Even the much criticised sale of Aerolineas has brought Dollars 188m in new
investment, says Mr Sanchez Arnau.
For some companies, the transfer to the private sector was just in time.
Indeed, the transfer of the Costanera power station in Buenos Aires in March
1992 to Chilean investors led by Endesa was on the day the last functioning
generator stopped. Now all seven of the station's generators are working.
While Endesa might not agree, some privatised companies are popularly
reckoned to be making a mint. But Mr Juan Masjoan, president of Telecom
Argentina - a company jointly operated by France Telecom and Stet of Italy
which made profits of Dollars 150.3m after tax in its last financial year
compared with Dollars 55.2m a year earlier - argues the task the new owners
have undertaken is far from easy.
'Everything has to be changed by 180 degrees,' he says. 'From an
organisational point of view, we took over a government office. It was
highly unproductive - productivity was running at one-third of international
levels.'
There was little or no decentralisation or delegation of authority, minimal
training of staff and where computers were being used they were being used
badly.
Technologically, the picture was as just as bad: only 10 per cent of the
company's infrastructure could be described as 'modern', defined as anything
less than 10 years old. Yet upgrading the technology may be the easy part.
One third of the network was new technology by the end of September 1992. Mr
Masjoan estimates that by the same time this year, more than 50 per cent of
the network will be modern.
'The most difficult thing to change in the company are the people. You need
to develop a customer-oriented service and decentralise without losing
control.'
Telecom's 16,700 employees (down from 21,205 at the time of privatisation)
now work in 19 operating units. One department is weeding out corruption in
a country where a bribe until recently was necessary to secure a phone line
or to get one repaired.
Another foreign operator, British Gas, took over the gas distribution system
in Buenos Aires and brought over some 35 managers to help get it into shape.
It has already reduced the number of employees from 2,000 to 1,300. Senior
managers say that in some respects they have been pleasantly surprised. Some
aspects of the network were in better shape than they had expected.
The experience of the users of privatised industries has been varied.
Travellers have complained of a deterioration of service on the state
airline, for example. Mr Sanchez Arnau says this is now improving. New
customers of Telecom must now wait an average nine months (six in Buenos
Aires) for a new line, compared with three years before. Repairs are being
carried out more quickly and, as mechanical exchanges are phased out, the
system's capacity is being expanded.
However, telephone calls are still expensive, particularly long distance and
international calls. Long distance makes up 7-8 per cent of Telecom's
traffic but accounts for 70 per cent of revenues.
These high rates are encouraging unofficial competition for international
calls such as cheap call-back services from the US that are eating into the
temporary monopolies granted the new owners when they took over the
companies.
The interests of consumers are supposed to be looked after by independent
regulatory agencies. Since utilities were previously state owned, there is
no experience of such regulatory bodies and there is a widespread view that
telephone regulation is not working as it should.
The effectiveness of the more recently created water, electricity and gas
regulatory bodies is yet to be tested.
Mr Cavallo rescued the privatisation programme from disrepute when he took
over the economy ministry in early 1991, halting and refashioning it to
increase its transparency. This has quietened some of the opposition to the
programme, although on occasions some losing bidders have privately
intimated dissatisfaction with the bidding process. But the bidding is only
part of the story.
The importance of effective regulation has become paramount: a perception
that newly-privatised utilities are using their monoply positions to exploit
the public could damage the government and its economic programme severely.
Another issue has been the lack of sizeable Argentine partners for the
foreign operators in privatisations. A predictable handful of Argentine
companies appear in just about every privatisation - Perez Companc, Techint
and Comercial del Rio de la Plata - because only they have had the size to
get sufficient finance.
'There are potential problems emerging in these huge concentrations of
wealth and economic power in the hands of a few companies,' says a banker
from the British merchant bank, Midland Montagu. That, and the development
of effective anti-trust legislation, seem likely to be issues for a future
government, however.
