FT  04 DEC 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: Clarke's mixed bag - Diary of a
Private Investor / The Budget and You
:Kenneth Clarke's first Budget is, on closer inspection, much tougher than
it originally seemed. For private investors, there was much to cheer:
although it is disappointing that stamp duty on share transactions was not
abolished.
Investors with large losses on share transactions will also not be pleased
that they can no longer take advantage of the indexation allowances to
increase their loss for tax purposes - although indexation can still be used
to reduce the size of gains.
I welcome the proposed Enterprise Investment Scheme (EIS) which offers tax
relief of 20 per cent on investments of up to Pounds 100,000 per year in
qualifying companies. Shares have to be held for at least five years, after
which gains made on selling the shares will be tax-free. Any losses made on
such investments can be set against either income tax or capital gains tax.
I hope the chancellor will ensure that EIS legislation is drawn so tightly
that crafty accountants and lawyers do not exploit the scheme in order to
fund investors' private hobbies at the ordinary tax payers' expense. While
the chancellor has said property companies will not be eligible and that
qualifying companies will have to be unquoted trading companies carrying on
a 'qualifying activity' for at least three years, I hope that losses from
golf clubs and yacht charters will not qualify.
It is good news that, unlike business expansion schemes, an investor who
becomes a paid director of an EIS company will still qualify for tax relief
on his investment. Hopefully, this will help to ensure that EIS companies
have a better track record than the average BES. Directors with large
personal shareholdings are more likely to ensure a company is profitable and
if a business gets into difficulties it will be easier for a private
investor to step in and help sort it out.
I also welcome the proposal for Venture Capital Trusts (VCT's) which will
provide a spread of investments in unquoted trading companies. Dividends and
capital gains will be entirely free of tax. This proposal is still subject
to further consultation to 'flesh out the details'.
VCT managers should be banned from seeking high fees from the companies in
which they risk their investors' money. While I accept the managers will
need to run more thorough checks on the companies in which they invest than
would be the case for quoted companies, large 'upfront' fees could skew
VCT's towards investments where managers might benefit more than investors.
Another welcome item was the extension of capital gains tax reliefs so an
individual can defer tax on any gains if they are reinvested in a qualifying
unquoted trading company.
The proposed National Savings Pensioners Guaranteed Income Bond for savers
aged 65 and over could also have implications for other investors. This new
bond is likely to suck pensioners' funds out of building societies. When a
similar thing happened with the first option bond last year, the societies
reacted angrily and interest rates on that bond were promptly cut.
Kenneth Clarke could take the view that building societies are overstaffed
and need to make economies. So the bond could prove stiff competition for
them. This could make it worthwhile for people to place funds with those
societies which might pay investors a bonus to encourage them to vote in
favour of a merger.
