FT  29 MAY 93 / Seriously Rich: Where pearls grow on trees - Christopher
McCooey visits a sheltered bay where gems are farmed
AN AZURE SKY and a cerulean sea in a bay surrounded by green hills. We are
in the Ise Shima national park on the Pacific coast of central Japan.
A bamboo raft rocks gently as a boat draws alongside. Mrs Asano steps nimbly
on to the floating platform and ties up as her husband shuts down the
outboard motor. The Asanos have come to check their oyster baskets to see if
nature has worked her alchemy to produce for them some lustrous pearls.
Mrs Asano, wearing a white cotton bonnet to shade her eyes from the sun and
its reflection off the water, pulls up the first basket of oysters. Deftly,
she inserts a wide-bladed knife into the joint of the bivalve and twists it
open. The point of the blade searches in the fleshy organs of the creature's
body and pops out a perfect pearl into an aluminium dish.
She picks it up, making a duck's beak with her thumb and index finger, and
turns it this way and that, examining it critically. It glistens with the
body juice of the oyster that produced it, but when the juice is wiped off
it begins to glow sensuously with a rainbow-like aura. There is the merest
blush of pink and an evenness of lustre. It is a moment of primal pleasure.
'I have opened thousands and thousands of oysters in the past 20 years,'
says Mrs Asano, her round face split by a dazzling smile enriched by a full
set of gold-capped teeth, 'but it is always exciting, especially when you
find a pearl of great beauty like this one. We can sell this for Y50,000'
(about Pounds 280).
Not all pearls fetch such a good price. The very best pearls are sold
individually, but the majority of the Asanos' pearls are sold by weight
through a co-operative venture which holds auctions periodically. The big
companies, like Mikimoto, send buyers to the auctions and the Asanos' annual
production of about 8 kilogrammes is then graded and marketed by them.
For centuries, natural pearls were used as charms, talismans and adornment
for noble men and beautiful women. Taken in powdered form, they were used as
potions for love and cures for lunacy - one and the same condition, some
might say. But during the last century, several people began trying to
produce cultured pearls, including a German named Hessling who experimented,
unsuccessfully, with freshwater pearl cultivation.
It was the eldest son of a noodle shop owner from Toba, on the Pacific coast
of central Japan, who succeeded in convincing the skeptics that seeding
oysters to produce pearls was a viable business. He wasn't the only pioneer,
but Rokichi Mikimoto's great talent was not only in raising cultured pearls
but marketing them as well.
Mikimoto irritated his first oyster in 1888. He prized it open and inserted
a foreign body into the living mollusc's reproductive organ, and then
returned it to the sea. A foreign body in the gonads even sounds irritating.
As might be expected, the oyster did its best to ease its discomfort by
secreting nacre (mother of pearl) and isolating, by enclosing, the irritant.
Eventually, after countless failures, Mikimoto succeeded in producing a
pearl, although it was not spherical. That was in 1893; it took him another
12 years before an oyster gave him his first artificially cultured - but
perfectly round - pearl.
This pioneering work was done in Ago Bay, in Mie prefecture. Today, the
sheltered bays of Mie account for 70 per cent of Japan's production of
cultured pearls, of which about half are exported. About 10,000 people are
involved in commercial pearl cultivation in Japan.
Pearls are among the few organic gems; jet and amber come from plants. The
Asanos begin the process of making this most feminine of gems by growing
oysters on trees. When female oysters are spawning they release thousands of
larvae into the water, to come to rest where they may. The Asanos lower
trees into the water in suitable locations and the little molluscs attach
themselves to the branches.
'After two or three months,' Mr Asano grins, 'we raise up the trees and
transfer the oysters to barrels which are then left in the sea for another
two or three years.'
When the shells are about 6cm across, they are ready for use as mother
shells. Pearls can form in other shellfish, in abalone and mussels, for
example, but the pearl oyster (pinctada fucuta) is the most suitable host
for cultured pearls.
'Half the oysters that are seeded die,' says Mr Asano. 'Of the remaining 50
per cent, 10 per cent reveal an uncoated nucleus; 20 per cent have pearls,
but because of their shape are unsaleable Of the remaining 20 per cent,
about 5 per cent have pearls which are excellent and it is with these that
we make our profit.'
With luck, by November (the optimum time for harvesting) the Asanos will
have a rich harvest of soft and velvety gems from the warm sea.
How to get to Ise Shima national park: from Tokyo station take the Hikari
(non-stop) Shinkansen to Nagoya (two hours) and change to the Rintetsu
railway for Toba (90 minutes). In Toba there is the Mikimoto Pearl Island
(admission: Y600) which shows all aspects of pearl cultivation and has
displays by ama - diving women, who used to gather wild oysters from the
seabed, but now dive for edible shellfish and seaweed. Inquire at the Japan
National Tourist Organisation (JNTO) office for a visit to a family-run
farm. Buying pearls: At Mikimoto in Toba (and other specialist stores in
Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto, etc) pearls are of the highest quality and there is a
luxury goods sales tax of 15 per cent on jewellery items costing more than
Y30,000. No discounts are offered.
Many other companies beside the big ones and the department stores sell
cultured pearls, and it is possible to get discounts (often amounting to the
equivalent of the sales tax) in the smaller jewellery shops. For the best
buys, locate a shop that is a wholesaler as well as a retailer of pearls.
Prices here can be 50 per cent cheaper than in department stores.
Size, colour, lustre, roundness and whether the pearl is marked or not
determine the value of pearls. Generally speaking, pink pearls are rarer and
more expensive.
If in doubt about the origin of a pearl, rub it across the edge of your
teeth. Real nacre on natural and cultured pearls is gritty; imitation nacre
is smooth.
