FT  30 NOV 93 / The IRA Connection: Sinn Fein rails at Britain over
'duplicity'
SINN FEIN, the IRA's political wing, yesterday accused the British
government of duplicity, while at the same time declaring that it remained
committed to helping secure peace in Northern Ireland.
Mr Martin McGuinness, Sinn Fein chief of staff, said last night: 'Patrick
Mayhew read a text which he claims to be a communication sent by me to the
British government in late February. I totally refute his claim. The text he
read is a counterfeit. No such communication was ever sent.
'It is a lie, yet another lie which has emanated from Patrick Mayhew and
John Major in recent times.'
His comparison of the version of a March 19 document indicated 'they are now
counterfeiting their own documents to meet their current needs'.
He said the version of a communication sent by Sinn Fein to Sir Patrick on
May 10, and the circumstances surrounding it, were 'equally at variance with
the truth and will be proved to be so'.
He added: 'His claim that a communication of November 2 to the British
Government was from Sinn Fein is equally bogus.'
Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, accused the British government of being
behind the leaking by unionist politicians of details of secret talks
between intermediaries and Sinn Fein. He said that the aim was to divert
'public attention from IRA conditions for peace and to sow confusion and
division among republicans.'
Four hours before Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, spoke
to the Commons, Mr Adams held a press conference in Belfast to release three
documents - two from UK government representatives and one from Sinn Fein.
He said they made clear that 'the British were quite blatantly abusing the
lines of communication for their own narrow short-term interests'.
But he produced no documents to support his central allegation that an IRA
offer in March of a two-week ceasefire in return for talks had been rejected
by the UK government for 'internal political reasons', missing an
opportunity for peace days before the IRA's Bishopsgate bomb attack.
Neither the press conference nor the documents drew attention to the fact
that the IRA had continued its bombing campaign in the province and on the
mainland.
The press conference was preceded by an IRA attack on a police barracks in
Belfast. The attack was small and caused no injuries, consistent with the
IRA's apparent decision not to mount a spectacular attack prior to the
Dublin summit. But it was a reminder of its capacity to act in the absence
of a political breakthrough.
