FT  05 FEB 93 / Technology: Researchers find genetic link with asthma
Researchers at Oxford have found a single gene which may make people
susceptible to allergy-based diseases including asthma and hay fever - but
only if they inherit it from their mother.
The discovery by Bill Cookson and colleagues at the John Radcliffe and
Churchill Hospitals is published in the Lancet today. It is certain to cause
controversy, because four other research groups have failed to confirm the
Oxford team's finding that most cases of asthma are associated with a
genetic mutation on chromosome 11.
The Oxford scientists say their 'candidate gene' predisposes carriers to
atopy, the allergy to inhaled particles which underlies asthma and hay
fever. Its identification follows a seven-year genetic study of 400 people
from 70 families, funded by the Wellcome Trust and National Asthma Campaign.
In technical terms, what the gene does is code for the beta chain of the
receptor for IgE. This controls the human response to IgE, the antibody that
causes allergy.
The gene on chromosome 11 accounts for about 60 per cent of asthma and hay
fever in the families studied by the Oxford group. But it seems to be
inactive when it is inherited from the father, unlike the vast majority of
genes which work in the same way whichever parent they come from. The
reasons for its exclusively maternal activity are not known.
The scientists now want to relate molecular variations in the IgE receptor
gene to cases of asthma and hay fever. That would prove that it is indeed an
important allergy gene - and would be the first step towards improving the
treatment for these disorders, which are poorly controlled by existing drugs
(steroids, antihistamines and broncho-dilators). In the UK there are an
estimated 6m seasonal sufferers from hay fever, and asthma affects 2m-3m
people causing 2,000 deaths a year.
'Once the gene has been found, the task of developing a new treatment is
likely to take at least 10 to 15 years,' said Donald Lane, chairman of the
National Asthma Campaign. The idea would be to switch off the gene or to
block the receptor for which it codes.
Last December, four separate research groups (from Japan, the US,
Netherlands and UK) published papers in the journal Clinical and
Experimental Allergy, saying they could find no linkage between atopy and
chromosome 11, on the basis of other genetic studies of families with
asthma. They are unlikely to be convinced by the latest evidence from
Oxford.
Cookson, however, says his group has re-checked all its data and remains
convinced that the linkage is real. He cannot explain the discrepancy with
the other studies, beyond observing that 'it is surprisingly difficult to
show genetic links of this sort'.
