FT  01 MAR 93 / The Lex Column: Dividend dilemma
The moment of truth arrives for Barclays Bank this week when it must decide
on its dividend for 1992. The stock market assumes the payout will be
maintained despite large property lending losses. But should Barclays
blithely pay a dividend out of reserves as if nothing adverse had occurred?
The question, if the bank and its shareholders are being honest, is far from
easy.
A bad reason for doing so would be to save the skin of Mr Andrew Buxton, the
bank's executive chairman who was managing director for a period from 1988
when much of the bad property lending was approved. A cut dividend would
almost certainly set the City baying for blood. It might no longer be
possible for Mr Buxton to satisfy his critics simply by splitting the
functions of chairman and chief executive.
Yet a cut dividend could also imply the bank was gloomy about its own
prospects despite the succession of interest rate cuts since last September.
The signal would be seriously misleading if the real reason was to atone for
past mistakes. Barclays would have some justification for maintaining its
dividend if it felt confident of continued growth in operating income -
provided the cost to its reserves did not impair its ability to finance
higher lending in the recovery. Having squandered the proceeds of its 1988
rights issue, it can scarcely ask shareholders for more.
All other things being equal, an unchanged final dividend costing around
Pounds 195m would knock only about 20 basis points off Barclays' tier one
capital ratio. That would leave it at around 5.7 per cent, substantially
above National Westminster's 5.2 and comfortable enough for this year. But
that assumes no more nasty surprises in this week's results. Barclays must
also decide if it will be able to retain enough future earnings to rebuild
reserves going forward. That is the test for the dividend. Even if it
passes, shareholders should still ask why a system of collective
responsibility for lending decisions turned out to be a system that
effectively absolves management of any responsibility.
