FT  19 JUL 93 / Personal View: Reluctant banker run to ground
Mr Jacques Attali, the object of recent excessive world media attention, has
resigned from his prestigious post of president of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. As I was involved from the outset in January
1990 in the discussions on the establishment of the bank and the selection
of its first president, I would now, with hindsight, like to say a few
words.
Mr Attali has never been a banker in the true sense of the word. He has
never worked in a bank. He was a typical French intellectual (that is, a
socialist intellectual, visibly on the left of the political spectrum), a
writer publishing a book every year and an adviser to President Francois
Mitterrand of France. He was not a conven-tional person and he certainly
never wanted to play a conventional role.
Mr Attali never intended to become a banker. He wanted to be a politician
who could influence the world around him and developments in Europe in
particular.
The wholesale fall of communism in 1989 and the ambitions of the French to
play a new role in Europe gave him the right opportunity. The entire world
was - at least in theory - prepared to do something for the post-communist
countries.
To this end the EBRD was founded - without much enthusiasm from bankers,
economists and financiers - as a purely political undertaking, pushed
through by the European Community, which has a majority shareholding in the
bank.
From the beginning there were arguments over the EBRD's role. Should it
offer the 'usual' loans, perhaps a little more cheaply for individual
projects? Or should it co-operate with countries and governments and
undertake regional planning studies (which I favoured) as a prelude to
restructuring whole branches or sectors?
There was also dissent about its location: should it be in the centre of the
world's financial markets in London; or should it be based in eastern
Europe, where its work would be directed?
And there were questions, among other matters, about its president: should
he be a politician like Mr Attali or a conventional banker? As usual,
compromise won the day and a 'half measure' - an institution with inbuilt
tensions - was born.
At the inaugural meeting of the EBRD in London in April 1991, I disrupted
the prevailing friendly atmosphere when I openly criticised the concept of
the institution; and a photograph of me with Mr Attali was published on the
front pages of newspapers around the world. Asked what I thought of the
bank, I answered that it was 'just another bank'.
This upset Mr Attali because he saw (and wanted to see) the EBRD as
something totally unconventional, something that would - according to the
French left - influence the transformation of east Europe: but from
communism to what? And this is the crux of the whole problem.
We in the east aim to return to the normal democratic system of
parliamentary pluralism and unrestricted market economics. The French left
was aiming for a mixed system with wide-ranging state intervention, with
pseudo-humanistic views (masking the pride of intellectuals and their
insatiable ambitions to recreate the world according to their own ideals) in
an attempt to create a 'just' world.
From all of this, it is clear to me that Mr Attali's extravagant behaviour
(the famous chef brought to London from Paris, private flights in the style
of a head of state, the now well-known marble at the EBRD headquarters in
the City of London) are only snippets of a much greater and more widespread
problem: that of the attitude of the west towards the east after the velvet
revolutions in 1989.
The EBRD, as the only dedicated institution set up at the time with the
specific role of 'helping' the east, has become the victim of an unclear and
hazy 'west-east' set-up. Out of this emerged all the craven preconceptions,
partial or direct lobbying interests, false expectations, and lack of
courage and of a clear vision of the problems involved which, every day, we
experience around us.
Mr Attali was the most obvious, best known, most discernible protagonist of
this historic epoch. He carried out his role with more than a small amount
of charm and graciousness, neglecting trivia (he was above trivia).
With his departure, an era will end. In a certain way I liked him, and to
this day wear the tie in his inimitable taste which he gave me. But only the
choice of his successor will show whether we have really made any progress.
The author is prime minister of the Czech Republic
