FT  21 JUL 93 / VW suffers further setback in legal battle with GM
VOLKSWAGEN lost more ground in its legal battle with General Motors of the
US when a Hamburg court yesterday permitted publication of further detailed
allegations of industrial espionage by senior executives at the German motor
group.
Der Spiegel, the German news magazine, welcomed the partial lifting of a
temporary injunction, imposed on it last month. It had claimed that Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, now production and procurement director at VW,
had 'not adhered strictly to the truth' over events surrounding his
departure as a GM director earlier this year.
VW admitted yesterday that the court had 'extensively' accepted the
magazine's claimed right to report suspicions. But it quoted a statement
last week from Mr Harald Ficus, the presiding judge, who told the open
hearing that the court would not make any decisions on the truth or untruth
of the suspicions.
VW shares, which fell last Friday after the oral hearing, dropped DM6.8 to
DM351 yesterday, although the ruling had not been made by the time the
market closed. Traders said the fall was due to US selling by people
speculating on the court's ruling.
Although GM was not directly involved in the civil action, which was heard
last Thursday and ruled on yesterday, the allegations published in the
magazine are at the heart of a criminal investigation being undertaken by
state prosecutors in the light of the US group's accusations.
The court removed the gag preventing reporting of 11 mostly highly
contentious issues. These include the claim central to GM's charges,
reported by Der Spiegel, relating to the alleged removal by Mr Lopez and
several former GM colleagues who followed him to VW of boxes of confidential
GM price lists, secret construction plans and car model studies.
VW responded to the court's findings by pointing out that the magazine
remained gagged on several issues.
The magazine was freed from reporting restrictions on claims, which 'give
the impression or allow the impression to be drawn that Mr Lopez and
colleagues who changed to VW with him took with them any secret GM or Opel
(GM's German subsidiary Adam Opel) documents and delivered them to VW'.
One key to the court's decision lay in evidence presented last week by Mr
John Howell, director of business planning at GM Europe, who 'specifically
remembered' giving Mr Lopez 100-150 documents the day before Mr Lopez
announced his departure.
The documents included details of new models, including a top secret mini,
the O-Car. Mr Lopez told last week's hearing: 'I obtained at my request only
documents concerning the rejected project (for a revolutionary low-cost
production plant) on which I had worked on for a year and a half. As I
remember it was a matter of four charts. These four charts are still in my
office at GM.' GM says searches of offices vacated by Mr Lopez and
colleagues have failed to find any of the secret documents which the US
group claims they had before they left for Germany.
VW faces more scrutiny, Page 2
