FT  07 APR 93 / Pakistan's prime minister faces toughest political test:
Cabinet rifts and a strained relationship with the president are weakening
Mr Sharif
WHEN Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif came to office two and a half years ago, he
was seen as a strong leader who would survive the intrigues of Pakistani
politics and complete his five-year term of office, unlike two predecessors
who were sacked at mid-term.
Believed to be a protege of Pakistan's powerful president, Mr Ghulam Ishaq
Khan, and politically influential army generals, Mr Sharif brought a new
agenda of economic reforms. However, new rifts within the cabinet and signs
of a strained relationship with the president have raised concerns over the
prime minister's ability to carry on.
Yesterday, dissent deepened with the resignation of the minister of state
for economic affairs, Mr Sardar Asseff Ahmed Ali. Mr Ali, the fourth cabinet
minister to quit within a week, accused Mr Sharif of incompetence in
handling foreign policy and the economy.
He said there had been a 'wide front failure' in foreign policy which had
isolated the country from the world, and charged the government with failure
to clamp down on alleged terrorists who had come to Pakistan from other
Islamic countries. Mr Ali accused Mr Sharif of failing to revive the economy
 -a charge which hit at the heart of the prime minister's political agenda,
and at a sensitive time with the budget deficit expected to exceed the
government's target by a wide margin.
Some senior officials saw the recent departures as creating the most
difficult crisis of Mr Sharif's political career.
The previous ministerial resignations, as well as that of a federal
government adviser, were in protest against nomination of Mr Sharif by
supporters as president of the ruling Pakistan Muslim league, in an effort
to strengthen his position.
In addition, the provincial finance minister of the North Western Frontier
Province who was seen as the prime minister's protege was sacked last
weekend by the chief minister, a supporter of the president.
The latest rift began in January, when the president set aside Mr Sharif's
advice and appointed General Abdul Waheed as chief of army staff, one of the
most powerful positions in a country ruled by the military for more than
half of its independent existence since 1947.
The president has the power to appoint the army chief through powers under
the eighth constitutional amendment introduced by the late military
dictator, General Zia ul Haq, which also enables the president to dissolve
the national assembly and call fresh elections in the national interest. Mr
Khan used that power to dismiss Ms Benazir Bhutto's government in 1990 on
charges of corruption.
'The general's appointment brought simmering differences out in the open,'
said one senior official.
In response, Mr Sharif announced his intention to change the amendment,
giving more powers to his office.
'If you really want to establish the authority of the parliament and respect
to the mandate given to the prime minister, the eighth amendment to the
constitution will have to undergo a change,' he said.
President Khan responded by saying it was his duty to defend the
constitution of which the amendment was a part. Cabinet ministers close to
Mr Sharif said privately that the prime minister had become frustrated as he
found the constitution undermining his authority.
The governors and chief ministers of at least three of the four provinces as
well as some senior bureaucrats loyal to the president, were subverting Mr
Sharif's authority by maintaining direct contact with the presidency, they
added.
'The prime minister wants to take charge and press ahead with his plans, but
is just not able to do so in the present set-up,' said one official close to
Mr Sharif.
After last week's build-up of dissent, Mr Sharif was told by cabinet
ministers that he must end confrontation with the president. In response, he
held a 90-minute meeting with Mr Khan, and shortly afterwards announced that
his government would back the president for a second term in office, in
presidential elections due in November. Privately, some officials admitted,
the prime minister had assured the president that he would not press ahead
with his plans to repeal the 8th amendment.
Although officials close to Mr Sharif say that the differences with the
president have been resolved, dissidents within his party are trying to
gather support for a vote of no confidence. So far, prime ministerial aides
are confident that the dissent will not broaden to the extent that Mr Sharif
would lose his majority in parliament.
However, an aide to one of the dissidents said, 'It doesn't take long for
dissent to spread, especially when elected members fear that if they don't
get rid of the prime minister now, they may all have to pack up and go home
after the assemblies are dissolved.'
However, most diplomats believe Mr Sharif will continue in office because of
support from his home province, the Punjab - where he was chief minister -
and because there are few alternatives.
