FT  20 MAY 93 / Substitute workforce 'trained'
A SUBSTITUTE labour force has been trained to take over at Southampton
Container Terminals, Britain's second-largest cargo-handling company, in the
event of a strike over the second cost-cutting plan in a month, according to
the TGWU general union.
The company has told the union that it intends to make a third of its
500-strong workforce redundant and introduce contract casual labour.
The union said up to 80 substitute workers had been trained by Drake
International, the employment training agency, and were being paid Pounds
175 a week on three-month contracts to stand by in the Southampton area.
Mr Denis Harryman, TGWU district secretary in Southampton, said Mr Bruce
Dawes, Southampton Terminal Containers' managing director, had told him the
substitute workforce was an 'insurance' for the company, the main
shareholders of which are Associated British Ports and Peninsular &amp;
Oriental.
The company yesterday refused to comment on the allegations but said in a
statement that overcapacity and the need for cost savings required 'more
flexible working and increased productivity but at significantly lower
cost'.
Two days ago Mr Dawes wrote to Mr Harryman to announce that the company
needed 97 redundancies - 76 from among its terminal operators - because it
seemed likely at best to break even this year and make a loss next year.
Voluntary redundancies would be sought in the first instance.
Mr Dawes said it was 'necessary to take action in order to restore
profitability'. Last year Southampton Container Terminals made a Pounds 5m
after-tax profit on a Pounds 29m turnover.
The company has told the TGWU it means to contract out gatehouse jobs,
container lashing and bus driving to 'suitable suppliers' and possibly other
tasks later, which could involve up to a further 112 redundancies.
Last week all but 32 of the workforce accepted, after legal advice, a
sweeping reform of terms and conditions of employment. This includes a wage
freeze until December 31 1994, more flexible manning arrangements to cover
24 hours a day, a cut in holidays and the end of set meal breaks.
The workers were informed in writing by Mr Dawes on April 14 that they would
be dismissed if they did not agree to terminate their present employment
agreement by April 30 and accept the new terms and conditions.
