FT  12 MAY 93 / Management: Running the charity superleague - Alan Pike
describes how the sector is trying to improve its management skills
For managers in the more frenzied reaches of the private sector, the idea of
running a charity must feel like an invitation to retreat into monastic
life.
Reality, however, is different. Charities may be driven by philanthropic
motives, but they face most of the same financial and competitive pressures
as commercial organisations.
Thousands of small, local charities will always depend on volunteers for
their management. But government ambitions for the voluntary sector to
become a large-scale provider of state-financed welfare services are
encouraging moves towards an elite, super-league of big charities. Attention
is increasingly focusing, therefore, on how these large, business-like
organisations should meet their management needs.
A survey* by Ian Bruce, chief executive of the Royal National Institute for
the Blind and director of the Centre for Voluntary Sector and Not-for-Profit
Management (Volprof) at London's City University Business School, shows that
charities rely heavily on outside recruitment to find many senior managers.
According to the study, 53 per cent of top managers in the biggest 200
charities came from outside the voluntary sector - 33 per cent from
commercial organisations and 20 per cent from public-sector ones. The bigger
the charity, the more likely it was to recruit its chief executive and
senior directors from outside the sector.
'The survey asked only about individuals' last jobs,' says Bruce. 'Had we
traced their careers further back, we should almost certainly have
discovered an even higher proportion with backgrounds outside the voluntary
sector.'
The management needs of big charities are complex and it is therefore no
surprise that they sometimes buy in specialist skills. 'At the RNIB we are
running schools and hotels, managing a Pounds 50m budget, employing 2,000
people, training and managing volunteers and providing services of acute
importance to our clients,' says Bruce.
'It is quite a managerial challenge, something that those people in the
commercial sector who regard us as amateurs fail to appreciate.'
Even so, he believes too many senior posts in big charities are filled by
outside recruitment. 'Some outside talent is obviously good and brings in
new ideas. But if charities are recruiting a majority of their senior staff
from outside it suggests they are not doing enough to train and promote
their own middle managers. That is not good for staff morale or the
long-term development of the sector.'
Some charities take organised steps to develop managers internally - RNIB
runs its own management training scheme with South Bank University  - but
his research suggests that the sector gives insufficient attention to
management.
Volprof is undertaking a feasibility study to see whether this could be
remedied by sector-wide training and development programmes. And the
National Council for Voluntary Organisations this month set up a study group
chaired by Bruce to consider whether a formal Industry Training Organisation
for the voluntary sector should be established. The group will produce its
recommendations early next year.
Another incentive for the voluntary sector to develop the talents of its own
managers is that recruits from the commercial world are not always
successful. 'Some commercial managers cannot cope. They tend to be the more
inflexible ones,' says Bruce.
Bruce and his colleagues at Volprof have begun researching similarities and
differences between managing in the two sectors. Diana Leat, Volprof
visiting senior research fellow, believes many of the assumed differences
between commercial and voluntary organisations are based on oversimplified
views of both.
Rather than searching for differences between charities and commercial
companies, she believes the starting point must be within individual
organisations, regardless of the sector they are in. It is clearly
unhelpful, she says in a Volprof report, to put ICI and a market stall in
the same category just because they are both commercial organisations;
similarly, Oxfam has little in common with a village playgroup. But, she
adds: 'It may be more illuminating to look at the similarities between, say,
Apple and Oxfam than those between Apple and Pepsi.'
In any case, believes Leat, we may be witnessing a convergence in management
priorities between commercial and voluntary organisations to become more
business-like - many resulting from public funding changes, with charities
having to compete for contracts.
But, she suggests, there are equal pressures in the other direction, with
some characteristics more familiar to the voluntary sector becoming
increasingly essential to the success of modern commercial organisations.
*Managing Across Sectors, Pounds 9.50, City University Business School.
