FT  09 MAR 93 / Scots administration plans to be launched
MEASURES TO improve the way Scotland is governed without conceding the
creation of a Scottish assembly or parliament - are to be unveiled this
afternoon by Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary.
They include proposals to increase the scope of the Scottish grand
committee, which includes all 72 Scottish MPs,
to devolve more administrative powers from London to the Scottish Office.
The grand committee is likely to handle at least some sessions of Scottish
questions to the Scottish Office ministers and to debate non-contentious
Scottish legislation. The Scottish Office could take responsibility for
training from the Department of Employment.
Accompanying the package should be an announcement that some civil servants
dealing with the regulation of North Sea oil development in the Department
of Trade and Industry will move to Aberdeen.
The package, contained in a consultation paper, is certain to be attacked by
Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National party. Even people
associated with the government concede that it may not win it many friends.
One observer said yesterday: 'If it isn't a nine-day wonder, it could
irritate people and throw petrol on dying embers.' Yet the widespread view
in Scotland is that the government will probably get away with it.
The package is the fulfilment of a statement by Mr John Major last February
that while ruling out any change to the union of Scotland and England, he
would 'take stock' after the election.
It was a sensible precaution because at that stage it seemed likely that
even if the Tories won the election they would lose many of their nine seats
in Scotland.
In the event the Tories took two seats in the election and raised their 24
per cent share of the Scottish vote by nearly two points.
The government is going ahead with the move partly because Mr Lang has made
conciliation and consultation the hallmarks of his administration since the
election, and partly because he believes he can outflank the opposition.
After the election a cross-party organisation called Scotland United was
formed to keep up the fight for constitutional change, but its
demonstrations soon fizzled out.
However, 25,000 people marched in Edinburgh during December's European
summit in support of 'democracy for Scotland'.
But efforts in the past few weeks by the leaders of the three anti-Tory
opposition parties to co-ordinate their opposition on the constitutional
question have so far failed, in spite of attempts by Mr Campbell Christie,
general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, to bring them
together.
Some Labour MPs have always been lukewarm about devolution, while the
Liberal Democrats believe their close association with Labour in the
Scottish constitutional convention before the election cost them votes.
Neither wants to become aligned with the SNP.
Mr Lang knows, however, that nothing he does will satisfy the
pro-devolutionists, or assuage the nationalists. But he believes his
proposals be enough to keep the constitutional issue off the boil.
