FT  12 JAN 93 / Czech and Slovak protests at VAT's impact
THE introduction of value added tax by the Czech and Slovak republics at the
start of the year has caused confusion and unexpectedly high price
increases. A public outcry may force the Czech and Slovak governments to
reintroduce price controls.
The Czech government will review the results of VAT introduction this week
and the Slovak authorities say they may reimpose price controls on food.
In the Czech Republic, prices have risen by an average of 20 per cent
overnight, though in some cases individual items in local shops have
increased by considerably more. A pensioner living on the outskirts of
Prague said her local shop imposed a three-fold increase in the cheapest
type of bread.
The press has criticised both shopkeepers and the government, and trade
unions have threatened to strike unless the government takes action to
reverse the recent price rises.
Many shops were closed in Prague last week as managers adjusted prices in
line with the new VAT rates, which range from 6 per cent, for services and
basic foods, to 23 per cent for other goods. But lack of information about
the tax and how to implement it, and the temptation for shopkeepers to raise
margins, caused much larger increases than expected.
Many shop managers appear simply to have added the new VAT rate to the old
prices, which included the now abolished purchase tax, thereby doubling the
tax. VAT is expected to raise prices on a wide range of goods, including
food, electrical appliances, construction materials, and services. The price
of other products should fall, especially those such as coffee, cosmetics,
some clothing and jewellery, which were formerly taxed at 40 per cent as
luxury goods.
The prime minister, Mr Vaclav Klaus, said last week he would not reintroduce
price controls, and government officials called on people not to buy
products which had been excessively marked up. One newspaper said this was
like asking people not to eat, and called for urgent government action.
Lidove Noviny, a Prague daily, blamed the government for failing to break up
key monopolies which it said were responsible for the price rises.
Officials now admit the possibility of reintroducing some price controls if
prices do not come back down.
Shopkeepers argue many shops will go bankrupt if they are forced to reduce
prices. They say rising wholesale prices, rent and running costs in city
centres are outstripping earnings. VAT was introduced simultaneously in
Slovakia, but businessmen say there are discrepancies on how the rates are
applied in the two countries of the former Czechoslovak state. They also
complain procedures have become more cumbersome now there is a border
between the two countries.
Confusion about new customs regulations are causing delays at borders.
'There's no customs union and you have to go through the same procedures as
if you were importing from Germany,' says one manager of a large foreign
company. For example, he says, VAT must be paid in Slovakia on goods
produced there, to be claimed back at the Slovak border, then paid again on
the Czech side, and cleared through Prague.
