FT  05 JUN 93 / Tory women give Patten chilly reception
MR JOHN PATTEN, the education secretary, faced sharp criticism at the Tory
women's conference yesterday for pressing ahead with the school tests this
summer, but insisted that he remained committed to testing and assessment.
Earlier both the tests and the minister had been defended vigorously by Mr
John Major, who told the conference: 'To opt for the quiet life in education
would be to accept the second-rate.'
The prime minister was applauded when, in a reference to the way Mr Patten
had been booed and heckled earlier in the week, he called for 'good manners'
from headteachers as well as children.
On the last day of its conference, the National Association of Head Teachers
stopped short of passing a motion of no confidence in Mr Patten, but the
government came under renewed attack from Mr David Hart, the National
Association of Head Teachers' general secretary, for 'wasting' Pounds 29.5m
in trying to implement this year's tests.
Mr Patten was unrepentant yesterday, as he argued that it would be
disastrous to suspend the reforms. 'That is why I am committed to
high-quality testing: this year, next year, every year,' he said.
His speech, which acknowledged the difficulties on the 'bumpy road' back
from 1960s education policies but emphasised a determination to streamline
the tests and curriculum, met a cool reception and gained only 20 seconds of
applause.
The conference clearly agreed with him that there should not be industrial
action by teachers, but some delegates were outspoken in saying that
proceeding with the tests in the face of the boycott would be
unsatisfactory.
Mrs Angela Comfort, from Essex, warned that governors and headteachers were
being put in an impossible position over this summer's tests. 'Teachers are
united against the tests, parents are not behind them, independent schools
won't use them,' she said.
Mrs Stella Bye, a teacher in a London comprehensive school, won a warm
reception as she told Mr Patten: 'You have driven me to support union
action, and it breaks my heart.'
Several speakers at the Tory women's conference complained about the
bureaucracy associated with the tests and with the national curriculum, a
theme developed also by Mr Hart, in a fiercely critical speech at his
union's conference in Newcastle upon Tyne.
'It is nothing short of a disgrace to see millions of pounds wasted on
national curriculum bureaucracy and paperwork at the expense of desperately
needed staff, books and equipment in our schools,' he said.
It was made worse, he added, because the Department for Education had also
spent 'some Pounds 2m or more' on 'publicity stunts'.
There was some encouragement for Mr Patten, however, in the standing ovation
given by the head teachers to Sir Ron Dearing, chairman-designate of the
Schools Curriculum and Assessment Authority, who has been charged with
reviewing the national curriculum.
Loud applause greeted his comment that 'teachers know best', and his
commitment to do an 'honest job'.
