FT  30 JUN 93 / Foreign Exchanges: Yen loses to D-Mark and Dollars
THE YEN reversed direction yesterday, losing ground to both the dollar and
the D-Mark following another corruption scandal in Tokyo and a poor set of
Japanese industrial production figures, writes Sandeep Deol.
The yen closed in London at Y63.26 to the D-Mark after Y62.36 on Monday.
Against the dollar the Japanese currency finished at Y107.10 after Y106.05.
The yen had begun weaker in early European trading, following sales of the
currency in the Far East. Later, the decline continued.
Reports that top officials at several Japanese construction firms had been
arrested on bribery charges had prompted Far Eastern sales, with the market
fearful that this could challenge the Liberal Democratic Party's retention
of power at the general election on July 18.
Mr Nigel Richardson, international economist at Yamaichi in London, pointed
to a weakening in the Japanese economy as having played a role in the yen's
weaker tone. Industrial production data released yesterday showed a sharp
output fall in May.
Mr Richardson forecasts that once the elections are over the Bank of Japan
will ease interest rates to boost the economy. This sentiment seemed
yesterday to be shared by others in financial markets, sparking general
selling of the yen.
The D-Mark moved up to DM1.692 against the dollar in London yesterday from
DM1.70 on Monday. Against the French franc, it improved to FFr3.37 from
FFr3.367.
The D-Mark's firmer tone was supported by news that the German government
had agreed to cut federal spending. The budget agreement raised hopes that
the Bundesbank may cut official interest rates at tomorrow's council
meeting.
Dr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, believes the
central bank will cut the discount rate by  1/2 percentage point from 7.25
per cent. However, he said a rate cut would have been expected whether or
not the new budget had been agreed. The weakened state of German industry
demanded lower interest rates and a weaker currency, he said.
Speculation of an easing was boosted by evidence that the Bundesbank had
been selling dollars and buying its currency in a move interpreted as
boosting the D-Mark ahead of any possible monetary easing.
The dollar saw a slipped slightly from its better levels after the release
of US leading indicators of economic activity for May. These showed a
surprise 0.3 per cent fall against forecasts for a 0.3 per cent rise. The US
consumer confidence index fell to 58.9 per cent in June from a revised 61.9
per cent in May. The market had expected a figure of around 61 per cent.
Sterling had a quiet day on the sidelines in the absence of economic data.
It closed in London at Dollars 1.5040 and DM2.545 from Dollars 1.4930 and
DM2.5375 on Monday.
