FT  07 MAY 93 / SFO failed to halt Nadir's flight despite tip-off
THE Serious Fraud Office was tipped off early last Sunday that Mr Asil
Nadir, the former chairman of Polly Peck International, was about to flee
the country, but did not take special measures to prevent his flight.
The tip was passed to the Metropolitan Police, who issued a routine warning
to major ports and airports but decided not to launch a surveillance
operation on Mr Nadir.
A warrant was issued in London yesterday morning for Mr Nadir's arrest, two
days after his flight to northern Cyprus.
The SFO yesterday acted to counter criticism by issuing a statement saying
that the tip had been the latest of numerous similar claims, all of which
had previously proved false.
The authorities in northern Cyprus distanced themselves from Mr Nadir, who
hitherto has been seen as a hero on the island. Mr Rauf Denktash, president
of the self-proclaimed republic, told the Financial Times that Mr Nadir's
flight would provide confirmation for those who saw the island as a 'haven
for criminals'.
He added: 'Legally we can do nothing. The only way out is for moral pressure
to be put on Asil Nadir to choose between going back to face the music or
staying here and making us suffer for it.'
This is the first time President Denktash has openly criticised the fugitive
Cypriot businessman and is seen as a measure of the growing concern of the
possible diplomatic fallout for the government in Nicosia.
Turkey, which has bankrolled the territory since Turkish forces occupied the
northern part of the island in 1974, was also urging action yesterday. Mr
Tugay Ulucevik, Turkey's special envoy on the Cyprus talks, raised the
matter in a meeting with Mr Denktash. Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, a Foreign
Office minister, summoned the Turkish ambassador in London, Mr Candemir
Onhon, to a meeting, but later cancelled the appointment to answer questions
in the Commons.
The meeting, at which Mr Garel-Jones will urge Turkey to put pressure on
northern Cyprus to ensure Mr Nadir's return to the UK, is now due to take
place this morning.
The northern Cyprus council of ministers was meeting yesterday in special
session, at Mr Denktash's request. Meanwhile, Mr Nadir told journalists
outside his house that he would explain his plans today.
Mr Nadir later sent a fax from Cyprus to the Foreign Office in London
offering to come back in return for a guarantee that all bail restrictions
would be lifted. The Home Office said no such guarantee could be offered.
Turkish officials are concerned that Turkey's relations with the UK could be
damaged by the affair.
The UK has no extradition agreement with northern Cyprus, but should Mr
Nadir go to Turkey, a legal dispute over his extradition could arise.
The flight of Mr Nadir coincided with the winding down of a highly secret
investigation by the Metropolitan Police into allegations that a plan
existed to use bribes of up to Pounds 3.5m in an attempt to influence the
outcome of Mr Nadir's trial.
As their investigations proceeded, those involved in the inquiry reached the
conclusion that, while some attempt to interfere with the legal process
might have been planned, it was not of the degree of seriousness at first
suspected.
Detectives found no evidence of Mr Nadir's involvement in the alleged plot.
The investigation is now understood to have, in effect, been completed and
no charges are expected.
Lost: a friend, a fortune and political clout, Page 8
UK in no rush to step up the pressure, Page 8
