FT  19 OCT 93 / Russian alliances form ahead of polls: The imminence of
elections prompts a scramble to line up party support
RUSSIA'S politicians are scrambling for alliances ahead of December's
parliamentary elections whose outcome will be determined by access to the
media, support from business, and the heavy hand of the government.
Reformers in the Russian government, members of which are allowed to run for
parliament while preserving ministerial posts, have already produced two
competing alliances through which they hope to produce a reform-minded
parliament.
The bulk of the cabinet has swung its weight behind Russia's Choice, led by
Mr Yegor Gaidar, the first deputy prime minister responsible for the
economy. He is promising more radical reform.
But two young deputy prime ministers associated with the reforms of the past
two years - Mr Sergei Shakhrai, responsible for regional issues, and Mr
Alexander Shokhin, who looks after foreign economic relations - have broken
away to form a Russian Party of Unity and Agreement. They are advocating
more gradual market reform and greater autonomy for Russia's restless
regions.
There is little to distinguish this party's aims from a third alliance being
organised by Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, the prominent economist who wants to
become Russia's next president. The main difference is the latter's
independence from the government.
Another independent group, which is closer to the radical economic platform
of Russia's Choice, has been established by Mr Konstantin Borovoi, a
prominent entrepreneur and founder of the Economic Freedom Party. But he has
refused to join Russia's Choice, describing it as 'a criminal restoration of
the idea of a ruling party like the communist party once was'.
Most Russian businessmen, who are the main source of independent finance for
this campaign, are still busy shopping around for their best buy, with some
inclined to support several groups, just to be on the safe side.
As an aide to Mr Shakhrai puts it: 'There is a sort of competition now
between businesses to give money to parties. Many are helping all the
democratic parties, hoping they will get someone of their calling elected.'
Still unclear are the plans of the leaders of the so-called 'centre', who
have been tainted by their past alliance with former Vice-President
Alexander Rutskoi. They are well-known figures such as Mr Yuri Skokov,
former chief of the Russian Security Council, and Mr Arkady Volsky, head of
an important industrialists union. Mr Volsky is today expected to announce
an alliance with radicals such as Mr Anatoly Sobchak, mayor of St
Petersburg, and Mr Gavriil Popov, Moscow's ex-mayor.
One such alliance of odd bed-fellows was formed only yesterday, uniting Mr
Victor Aksiuchits, who heads a Russian christian democratic movement, and Mr
Valery Zorkin, who was forced to resign as head of Russia's the
constitutional court.
A key test of the elections' legitimacy will be access to forces associated
with the old parliament so that they are not driven underground and the new
state duma's legitimacy is recognised by all.
The acknowledged leader of what is left of the Communist movement is Mr
Gennady Ziuganov, a moderate who was not involved in parliament's armed
uprising.
His Russian Communist party is expected to team up with the Russian Workers
party, headed by Mr Roy Medvedev, a once-dissident Communist historian, and
the Agrarian party, which has the support of Russia's powerful state farm
lobby.
The main leader of the hardline nationalist movement is Mr Sergei Baburin,
who unlike many colleagues who remained in the White House until the bitter
end, has not been arrested and has every intention of running for
parliament.
The main handicap of the Communists and hardline nationalists - as
illustrated by the banning of a Baburin news conference by a compliant
International Press Club - will be limited access to the media.
The government has already closed the television programme 600 Seconds and
hardline newspapers for instigating violence and anti-Semitism. It is also
taking control of other media.
Mr Mikhail Poltoranin, President Yeltsin's aide for the media, announced
plans at the weekend to switch 2,400 local newspapers financed by the
councils to 'democratic' forces - a euphemism which can only mean local
administrations controlled by Mr Yeltsin.
