FT  10 SEP 93 / Letters to the Editor: Union members remain committed to
collective bargaining
Sir, David Goodhart, in his article 'On the lookout for the vision thing'
(September 6), reports that collective bargaining between employers and
trade unions is declining. I detect (from my own research with trade union
members) an ideological bias in the analysis he offers of this important
development.
Goodhart interpets this trend as 'the tailoring of union activities to
individuals', citing a 1992 survey by the National Union of Public Employees
in which respondents put 'advice on disciplinary issues and grievances'
ahead of collective wage bargaining in a list of their reasons for joining a
trade union.
From this he argues a need for trade unions to concentrate on providing
services to individual members, if they are to survive. This, he says, is in
accordance with the members' wishes.
I agree that this kind of service is increasingly valued by trade unionists.
Goodhart, however, overlooks the real reason for the response by Nupe's
members. My own work with other unions suggests that it is the dramatic
increase in workplace intimidation by employers and managers in the past
decade that has brought the issues of discipline and grievance settlement to
the forefront of unionists' minds.
I have seen no evidence that employees are losing interest in collective
bargaining over wages, especially in these difficult economic times, only
that they now want stronger representation in disciplinary and other
workplace issues added to the unions' traditional role in defending wages -
which are, after all, the reason why they go to work.
Goodhart seems to interpret the Nupe survey as confirming a supposed trend
towards an increasingly individualist society. But surely it is the
collective strength of the trade union movement that leads employees to take
their disciplin-ary and other grievances to their unions in the first place.
We should beware of undisputed fact being used to support dubious,
politically inspired myth.
Alexandra Ouroussoff,
23 Ladbroke Road,
London,
W11 3PD
