FT  06 OCT 93 / The Conservative Party Conference: Rifkind says defence cuts
near limit
MR Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, won sustained applause when he
warned that expenditure cuts imposed on the three services were close to the
acceptable limit.
He said: 'We must at all costs avoid creating a hollow force - that is an
armed force that looks formidable but is, in fact, a paper tiger.'
Mr Rifkind declined to comment on his current negotiations with Mr Michael
Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury.
But he acknowledged the repeated expressions of anxiety made in a debate on
defence, which concerned the damaging effect likely to result from further
disruption on top of that already caused by the amalgamation of regiments
and other economies.
Mr Rifkind said it was clear that the conference was seeking assurances that
the government would not go too far 'in any economies that may be made'.
He stressed: 'It is the government's obligation to listen carefully to those
concerns', and suggested that any further cuts should be matched by a
scaling down of commitments.
In a BBC interview Mr Archie Hamilton, a former defence minister, said he
would be surprised if the Ministry of Defence emerged from current
negotiations with the Treasury with its budget intact.
Mr Rifkind joined Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, in warmly praising the
peacekeeping efforts of the British forces in Bosnia.
Mr Hurd forecast that the difficulties of intervening in Bosnia rather than
the clear objectives of the Gulf war were likely to typify future
international conflict.
He sharply contrasted the irresponsibility of opposition calls for action
and the government's need to weigh the effects of its decisions on the lives
of British forces as well as Bosnians.
'No government at any time proposed the only form of intervention which
could guarantee a solution, namely the despatch and indefinite stationing of
an international army to impose that solution.'
Giving the armed revolt in Russia as an example of continuing international
uncertainty, Mr Hurd gave strong support for President Yeltsin's actions in
defence of his democratic reforms.
