FT  22 MAR 93 / Germans dislike neo-Nazis: Opinion poll suggests fears of
racism wave are unfounded
GERMANS do not like having neo-Nazis as their neighbours. They like them
even less than drug-addicts, drunks and left-wing revolutionaries.
As for anti-Semitism, it is a feeling still harboured by only a small
minority of the German population, and it is not on the increase. It is no
more significant than it is in neighbouring France.
Those clear conclusions emerge from an opinion poll of the German
population, which suggests that fears of a new wave of racism and right-wing
radicalism in the country are largely unfounded.
On the other hand, it does suggest that Germans are still pretty choosy
about precisely who is coming to live next door to them, but more on grounds
of behaviour than of race.
The opinion survey carried out by the respected Allensbach Institute, the
country's leading polling organisation, decided to test attitudes to
foreigners and political extremism by asking: 'Who would you not like to
have as your neighbour?'
The result showed that 'right-wing extremists' were the nastiest neighbours
of all: 77 per cent of the population want to have nothing to do with them.
That compares with 67 per cent who do not want drug addicts next door, 66
per cent who single out 'heavy drinkers', and 61 per cent who are equally
hostile to 'left-wing extremists'.
The one minority group in the German population which is clearly the object
of prejudice is the gipsies: 64 per cent do not want them as neighbours,
either.
Of all the national, religious or racial groups mentioned, the Jews are
disliked by the smallest proportion: just 7 per cent.
'People with large families' are more unpopular - on 8 per cent - and the
vague definition 'people of a different race' is ruled out by the same
proportion.
A similar poll carried out in France in 1990 showed very similar degrees of
prejudice: 7 per cent did not want Jews next door, 13 per cent did not want
'immigrants' (12 per cent in Germany), and 18 per cent did not want Moslems
(17 per cent in Germany).
The Allensbach institutes concludes: 'The overwhelming majority of Germans
are shocked by and full of contempt for those who believe that German
unification can be used to spark a major nationalist blaze. . . Germans
distance themselves from political extremism, and this distance has not
decreased in the past two years, but rather, it has grown.'
Another poll published on Friday did show, however, that the small minority
supporting the far right is still creeping up in size.
The Republicans, the leading representative of far-right views, gained 6 per
cent support in the latest Polit-barometer published by the ZDF television
channel, compared with 5 per cent in February. At a general election, that
would be enough to gain seats in the Bundestag.
As for the big political parties, the opposition Social Democrats have
slipped back two points to 36 per cent, since their poor showing in local
elections in the state of Hesse. They are now neck-and-neck with Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats, which means they could well be condemned
to co-operate in a 'grand coalition' if there were an election tomorrow.
