FT  15 JUN 93 / Survey of Retail Chain Management (8): US takes the
cut-price lead - Neil Buckley discusses new formats in the money-conscious
1990s
WHILE the UK may be the envy of Europe for the efficiency and quality of its
food retailing, the US still leads the way when it comes to new retailing
ideas. Several innovative US formats are now crossing across the Atlantic.
All are discount formats, reflecting the move towards lower-margin retailing
in the 1990s, and could have a big impact on Europe's existing retailers.
The first is the warehouse club, the fastest-growing format in US retailing
in the past 10 years, with between 50 and 100 outlets opening each year.
Total sales had reached more than Dollars 34bn last year.
Warehouse clubs are huge sheds - at between 100,000 and 150,000 square feet
they are four or five times the size of a typical grocery superstore - which
sell a limited range of 3,500 to 4,000 lines at bargain prices in no-frills
surroundings. Profit margins are pared to the bone, but the clubs make money
by shifting huge volumes of goods. And they charge an annual membership fee
of Dollars 25 to Dollars 30.
Warehouse clubs could eventually spread across Europe with the UK the first
to experience the format, because it is often used by US retailers as a
testing ground prior to a full assault on continental Europe.
The club culture is the opposite of that of many UK retailers, which have
concentrated their efforts in recent years on increasing operating margins.
'When these two cultures clash, it will be very, very interesting to see
which one wins,' says one retail expert.
Despite delays in obtaining planning consents, Costco, the third-largest US
operator, plans to open warehouse outlets at Trafford Park, Manchester, and
Thurrock, Essex.
Nurdin &amp; Peacock, the UK cash and carry chain, has taken space at Wednesbury
in the West Midlands and on the Valley Park development in Croydon, south
London.
And, most recently Littlewoods, the privately-owned retailing and football
pools organisation, has formed a joint venture with Price Club Canada, a
subsidiary of the second-largest warehouse club operator in the US, saying
it aims to open at least one warehouse club in the UK this year.
But many retail experts are sceptical about UK and continental Europe
warehouse clubs' ability to keep costs low enough and volumes high enough to
secure adequate rates of return on investments.
Factory outlet malls are another US format heading for Europe. These have
grown almost as rapidly in the US as warehouse clubs, to 270 in less than 10
years, with another 160 in the pipeline.
Again, the UK could be the testing ground. There are more than 1,100 small
factory clearance outlets in the UK, selling goods cheaply, either because
they are cutting out the middle man or they are selling factory over-makes,
end-of-line or returned stock. A relatively new concept is grouping such
outlets together in a large mall.
The idea was pioneered in the UK in the late 1980s by the Hornsea Retail and
Leisure Park in Humberside. This is where manufacturers including
Aquascutum, Laura Ashley and Wrangler are able to sell goods at about 30 per
cent below high street prices.
Hornsea attracted more than 800,000 visitors last year, and other developers
are keen to harness the format's potential. At least three groups, including
Value Retail, a consortium of US and UK developers; Prime Group of America,
Richardson Developments and Tarmac consortium; and UK developer Factory
Outlet Shopping Centres, plan to open factory outlet malls in the UK and
continental Europe.
Again, some commentators are sceptical about factory outlet malls' prospects
in Europe. Despite the growing price awareness among shoppers, the appeal of
buying out-of-season fashions from out-of-town malls is largely untested.
But high-volume discount retailing has been only one of two important trends
in US retailing in the late 1980s. The other is the growth of speciality
retailers known as category killers - highly-efficient operators which sell
a wide range of goods within a narrowly-defined consumer market at discount
prices, usually from low-cost edge-of-town superstores.
Their aim is to kill off the competition in their product category.
Category killers have already arrived in the UK. Toys 'R Us is the
best-known example, and has revolutionised the UK toy industry, building a
20 per cent market share and leading to the demise of many small, specialist
chains. The US chain has recently announced plans to move into Belgium and
Switzerland.
There is also Ikea - not another US store, but a Swedish furniture and home
furnishings chain operated on the category-killer principle.
It has been highly successful in a number of European countries and has slow
but steady expansion plans.
Another example is PC World, the computer superstore concept brought to the
UK by Jan Murray, chairman of Vision Technology Group. Mr Murray recently
sold the company to Dixons, the UK's largest electronics retailer which aims
to open up to 30 PC Worlds within three years.
What the next retailing import from the US might be is less clear. Some
commentators believe it could be large, discount variety stores similar to
those run by Wal-Mart, the world's largest retailer. But high land costs
could prevent these operating effectively in the UK.
Industry analysts believe that in the long run the nature of shopping could
change radically, with customers buying more and more products from the
comfort of their own homes.
Mail order and home shopping currently accounts for between 3 and 6 per cent
of all retail sales.
But many believe its share will gradually decline, because mail order's
traditional advantages - availability of credit, convenience, home delivery
and low prices - have been eroded by the developments in high street
retailing. And despite home shopping advantages , it seems shoppers still
prefer to buy their goods in the shops.
'The long-term trend is definitely down,' says Mr Richard Hyman, director of
Verdict, the UK retail market research group.
Others believe new technology such as interactive video systems, and
computer systems to process orders automatically, will eventually enable
customers to choose goods from TV screen catalogues - orders and payments
are carried out by tapping into a key pad.
Indeed, home shopping made easy could divert sales from the high street,
sparking off potentially the biggest revolution yet in the retail industry.
