FT  29 MAR 93 / Survey of Latin American Finance (5): A scale of
desirability for capital flows
CAPITAL is flowing back into Latin America, but not all capital flows are
created equal.
'Some types of flows seem more desirable than others,' says Stephany
Griffiths-Jones, of Sussex University's Institute of Development Studies.
Bottom of this scale of desirability, from the recipient economy point of
view, is speculative short-term capital. Of this, perhaps the most risky
inflows are those resulting from foreign currency borrowing by domestic
companies to lodge money in money markets at home. At the top of the scale,
it is generally agreed, is foreign direct investment aimed at enlarging
productive capacity.
For comfort's sake, too high a proportion of the inflows into Latin America
over the past few years is 'hot money' - money attempting to capture profit
from interest differentials or foreign exchange market inefficiencies, and
which is likely to be withdrawn as soon as the perceived risk associated
with the investment increases.
JP Morgan, the New York bank, estimated late last year that Treasury bills,
local currency deposits and other short-term funding account for between
one-third and one-half of Mexico's capital inflows.
Arbitrage borrowings by Latin American companies in dollars may also be
storing up problems for the future: the British investment bank Morgan
Grenfell estimates that 60 per cent of Argentine corporate debt is in US
dollars; much of that is clearly invested in the Argentine money markets.
The reason why the dependence on short-term capital is such a critical issue
for Mexico and Argentina hangs on their exchange rate policies. Both are
using exchange rate policy as a tool in the battle against inflation,
leading to an appreciation in the real value of their currencies against the
dollar.
Argentina fixed its currency to the dollar in April 1991. Mexico, which
until October was pursuing a daily slide of the peso amounting to a 2.3 per
cent nominal devaluation a year, is now allowing the currency to float
within a target band that would permit a maximum depreciation of twice that.
The problem is that so much of the short-term inflows depend on an elusive
commodity: confidence. If the view grows that a big devaluation is in the
offing, then short-term capital will not hang around to wait and see. The
impact on international financial market confidence could be such that no
politically sustainable level of interest rates will be enough to tempt it
back.
This possibility can be cushioned by the now significant reserves, and in
the early part of this year short-term capital inflows appeared to be
holding up relatively well - albeit, in Mexico, at the cost of higher
interest rates. Nonetheless the risk remains of over-dependence on this type
of capital.
Indeed, a slowing down of inflows may occur because of events completely
external to the region. Some short-term inflows have certainly been
encouraged by recent unusually low US interest rates and the low returns on
investments generally in the US and other industrialised countries.
IN Mexico's case, much depends on the passage of the North American Free
Trade Agreement through the legislatures of Mexico, Canada and the US. The
biggest question here is the attitude of the US Congress to the accord - and
signs, one way or the other, about the attitudes of US legislators - are
already having a significant impact on capital flows. Sensitive to these
concerns are domestic residents bringing home flight capital, salted away in
the 1970s and 1980s. This group, until a couple of years ago, accounted for,
according to some estimates, half of the region's private capital inflows.
The InterAmerican Development Bank has estimated that more recently almost a
quarter of the funds flowing into Mexico have been controlled by Mexican
investors.
The trigger for the return of much of this money was the simple lifting of
capital controls across the region, which gave residents comfort that they
could take their money out of the country. Some flight capital is also
obviously linked with drugs trafficking, although this is more important in
some countries than in others. Drugs money responds to the concerns of all
investors - for example, low returns in established markets - as well as to
special concerns such as the clampdown on money-laundering in the US and
other banking centres following the BCCI scandal.
All told, however, the influence of returning flight capital on overall
flows has probably fallen in the past two years as more foreigners have
begun to invest. Latin Americans are not, of course, simply parking money on
deposit in banks or short-term government paper. They have also repatriated
capital as portfolio investors in the region's stock markets and as
important buyers of Eurobonds from Latin American issuers.
