FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (8): An amicable divorce -
Anthony Robinson traces the tortuous road to Slovak independence
SLOVAKIA may be a state without a history, but the grounds for its divorce
from the Czech republic have deep historical roots.
The disintegration of Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia mark, in their very
different ways, the liquidation of the last multi-ethnic compromises to
survive the collapse of the Hapsburg and Ottoman empires 75 years ago.
In former Yugoslavia the principle of ethnic purity, absurd and tragic given
centuries of intermarriage, is being pursued to its bloody end through the
mass transfer of people accompanied by systematic rape and pillage. The
emergence of separate Czech and Slovak states, by contrast, came about
through a negotiated divorce and legal division of state property.
The underlying historical and cultural differences between the Czech and
Slovak peoples are almost as great, or as small, as those between Serbs and
Croats. The contrast is due principally to the total absence in the Czech
and Slovak case of any tradition of violent conflict between two ethnically
and linguistically linked peoples.
The re-emergence of Serbia has revived memories of the medieval Serb
kingdom, subjugated by the Ottomans 500 years ago, while the rebirth of the
Czech republic has restored, in essence, the Kingdom of Bohemia. The latter
was assimilated into the Hapsburg Empire after the fateful battle of the
White Mountain near Prague in 1618 at the outset of the Thirty Years War.
Slovakia and Croatia, by contrast, were both junior partners in their former
federations and share a long history of domination by Hungary. While Croatia
enjoyed periods of semi-independence, however, Slovakia was never a
sovereign state, except as a Nazi puppet during world war two.
Slovakia, including its former large Jewish and gypsy minorities and smaller
Ruthenian, Saxon, Ukrainian and other populations, remained under Hungarian
domination for almost a millennium. Much of the sometimes almost hysterical
tone of Slovak-Hungarian relations is inexplicable without reference to this
past relationship.
The Slovak leaders who took their country into the first Czechoslovak
republic after the first world war did so because they felt too weak to
survive on their own. Even in 1919 they wanted Czechoslovakia to be a
federal state in which Slovakia would have enjoyed considerable autonomy.
Only reluctantly did they accept the unitary state insisted on by Jan
Masaryk and the Czech fathers of the republic, rather than risk a return to
Hungarian rule.
It was a wise choice. In contrast with the 19th century, when millions of
Slovaks had emigrated to America, or sought work as masons and builders
elsewhere in Europe, the inter-war years of this century enabled Slovaks to
strengthen their economy and build up cultural and educational standards
with assistance from Prague.
The Slovak search for recognition and cultural awareness took systematic
form in 1863 with the creation of Matica Slovenska, the Slovak cultural
foundation. But Slovaks found their nightmares come true in 1939 as
Hungarian power moved back into eastern and southern Slovakia following
Hitler's rape of Czechoslovakia.
Even Kosice, the second biggest city in Slovakia, passed back under the
control of Hungary's crypto-fascist regime while nominal autonomy over the
rump of Slovakia was given to a clerico-fascist regime led by Father Jozef
Tiso. The spectacle of Hungary's Admiral Miklos Horthy riding on a white
horse in triumph through the streets of Kosice cheered on by its ethnic
Hungarians is still remembered by older residents and recounted to their
children.
More than 60,000 Slovak Jews were deported to concentration camps along with
unknown thousands of gypsies during the Tiso regime. Those who lived in the
Hungarian occupied regions met the same fate in 1944, after Hitler seized
power from Admiral Horthy and imposed direct rule on his former ally. As
Soviet forces advanced from the east a sometimes bloody settling of scores
took place. Thousands of ethnic Hungarians were deported from eastern and
southern Slovakia, mirroring the expulsion of 3m ethnic Germans from the
Czech Sudetenland.
During the war the Nazis built up Slovakia as a powerful centre of arms
production. Central Slovakia in particular was out of range for allied
bombers but conveniently close to the Russian front. As the Cold War
developed and Stalin tightened his hold on Czechoslovakia after the Prague
Coup of February 1948 the tightly centralised communist regime continued to
invest heavily in big arms factories.
In the 1960s the the East Slovakian Steel Works (VSZ) was built outside
Kosice by Czech engineers with Czech equipment. The completed plant used
iron ore transported over 1,000kms from Krivoi Rog in Ukraine. Its steel was
needed for the arms industry and the other heavy engineering plants set up
in what was still a largely rural country before the war.
The close integration of the Slovak economy with the Soviet military machine
and the Comecon market was reinforced by construction of the Slovnaft oil
refinery at Bratislava, the main terminal of the Druzhba oil export
pipeline. Moscow's refusal to risk losing its strategic control lay behind
the crushing of the Prague spring in 1968 and the humiliating removal from
power of Alexander Dubcek, the Slovak communist who endeared himself to
Czechs and Slovaks alike by his espousal of 'socialism with a human face'.
Vladimir Meciar, the current prime minister, was among those purged from the
communist party in 1969 as the Slovak apparatchik Gustav Husak was appointed
by Moscow to 'normalise' Czechoslovakia and create a phoney federal state
which gave greater autonomy, but only on paper, to Slovakia.
After 20 years of 'normalisation' the loose anti-communist coalition calling
itself 'People against Violence' celebrated the victory of the velvet
revolution in Bratislava as its Czech counterpart, the Civic Forum,
spearheaded by the writer Vaclav Havel, celebrated the downfall of communism
in the streets of Prague.
The superficial unity of both coalitions soon broke apart, however,
accompanied by a bitter dispute over the economic impact in Slovakia of
decisions made by high-minded politicians in Prague and over the name to be
given the newly democratic Czechoslovak state.
For months debate raged over a hyphen. Was it enough, as most Czechs argued,
to call the new state the Czecho-Slovak Federal Republic or was it to be
called the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic. Behind the war of words
nationalist and separatist emotions were whipped up by new politicians in
both countries who sought new ways to identify themselves and their
movements or parties.
The defining moment came with the elections of June 1992. Czechs voted for
rapid market reforms and integration into Europe under the leadership of
Vaclav Klaus while Vladimir Meciar's ill-defined nationalist-populist
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and the avowedly separatist Slovak
National Party won the elections in Slovakia.
Since that date the two nations have moved rapidly apart. After six months
of detailed, top level negotiations between the Czech and Slovak leaders and
their closest advisers, the two nations formally divorced on January 1,
1993. Slovakia gained its sovereignty and independence under Mr Meciar,
whose espousal of Slovak nationalism only really took off in 1991 after he
was removed as premier of the first elected post-communist government.
Six weeks into independence the political divorce was followed by the
division of the former common currency into separate Czech and Slovak
crowns. Six months later the once invisible border was clearly demarcated,
institutionalised and patrolled by armed border guards. Suddenly, and
unintentionally, Slovakia found itself on the wrong side of what has become
in effect an East-West border, thanks to a deal worked out by Bonn with its
immediate neighbours, the Czech republic and Poland to help implement
Germany's tougher new asylum laws.
It has been a rough start for the new Republic, made worse by a collapse in
bilateral trade with the Czech republic, rising unemployment and recession
in western markets. But, aware that there is no turning back, Slovaks have
to press ahead with building their new state into a viable member of a
future enlarged European Community.
