FT  23 JUN 93 / Survey of Manchester and the Olympics (1): Going into the
last lap
'It's the last lap of the race for the 2000 Olympic Games, and, as the bell
sounds, it's Sydney surging to the front with Beijing pressing on the
leader's shoulder.
Manchester has now moved clearly into third place, with Berlin a metre or
two behind and Istanbul gathering for a final effort. Brasilia is the length
of the straight behind.  Inside the track, Tashkent and Milan, the two who
dropped out of this oh-so-high-pressure race, watch their dreams fade as the
leaders accelerate towards the back straight.
And it's Sydney for Australia, holding on.  They had to make their effort
early, and show what they are made of months ago, because they are at their
best in their summer, which is in the northern hemisphere's winter.  Have
they succeeded in burning off the opposition? Perhaps.  Beijing is showing
definite signs of stress.  Their supporters are reacting with another of
their famous spontaneous displays of disciplined solidarity but looking into
the VIP box I can see this has not impressed several members of the IOC.
There's a bit of bumping and boring going on, as they approach the last 200
metres.  Berlin clearly could not hear Istanbul closing because of the noise
from the German spectators.  That may well have shot their chances.
The leaders are on the final bend ..and Bob Scott of Manchester and Great
Britain - a tall, bespectacled theatrical impresario in his other life - has
kicked.  AND-HE'S-GOING-FOR-GOLD.  That will please Apollo Leisure, his
employer and personal sponsor.  They've given him four years off work for
this and he's paying them back handsomely - win, lose or draw.
And 'Ive just been told by my headphones that Manchester's bid has been
passed summa-cumlaude by the IOC technical delegation - and that means the
IOC believes Manchester can noy only do it, but guarantee the world a good
Games in the year 2000.  When that happened last time to Atlanta, it cleared
them to stop arguing about whether they could do it, and steal up on the
technically-suspect Athens to take the prize.
Scott clearly knew this was coming - and what strength it has given
Manchester]  Beijing is faltering.  They're in the final straight. Sydney
has just realised how serious a threat Manchester is, and just looked round
anxiously.  The Australians know they're in the wrong time zone for the
American TV networks.  The underdog is neck-and-neck with the favourites.
They're almost abreast, rushing for the line and Olympic glory.  Can
Manchester and Bob Scott do it?
In the VIP box John Major is on his feet.  The Princess Royal, Britain's IOC
member, is cheering]  They're nearly there]  It's Manchester] It's Sydney]
Beijing are dipping for the line.  It's going to be a photo-finish]  How on
earth are the 91 members of the International Olympic Committee going to
sort this out?
And now we hear they are going to give their verdict on who has won the 2000
Olympics at a meeting in Monte Carlo on September 23.  The suspense is going
to be absolutely killing.  So now over to Ian Hamilton Fazey, Northern
Correspondent of the Financial Times, who will explain the background to
Manchester's part in this remarkable race.'
