FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of South Africa - Open for investment (5): Business
is sitting on its hands and waiting - The recession is ending, inflation is
in single figures, but many hurdles remain
BARRING dramatic political setbacks, the worst is past for the South African
economy.
In the closing months of 1993, the country is beginning to emerge from its
longest ever recession, with economists predicting marginal GDP growth of
around 0.5 per cent this year, accelerating gently to around 1.5 per cent to
2 per cent in 1994. Thus far, the recovery is mainly attributable to the
rebound in agriculture from last year's drastic drought, with mining and
manufacturing remaining in the doldrums. But from next year all sectors of
the economy should start to benefit.
The policy environment is markedly friendlier than in the 1980s. Corporate
taxes have been cut, inflation is in single digits (9.7 per cent forecast
for 1993) for the first time in 20 years, a new tariff structure is about to
be launched and both real wages and real interest rates have started to
fall.
The balance of payments remains a problem area as capital outflows continue
and Pretoria is committed to repay over Dollars 1bn annually for the next
eight years. Bankers and stockbrokers say the country is underborrowed -
which it is, with a foreign debt of Dollars 17.3bn or 15 per cent of GDP -
leaving scope to refinance previous commitments. But such rollovers merely
provide a breathing space rather than a solution. This suggests that - in
the absence of strong export growth - there will be little room for
abandoning the financial rand and liberalising exchange controls, at least
until 1995.
The strength, and duration, of the upturn will depend on three main factors;
the new administration's ability to restore confidence to a badly-mauled
business sector; developments in the global economy, especially the
commodity price cycle, and the economic policy framework that evolves in the
'new' South Africa.
There are grounds for cautious optimism on all three counts. A reduction in
the violence and general acceptance of the election results, would do
wonders for business morale, simultaneously opening the door to a strong
upturn in public works spending on housing, electrification and roads. On
the policy front, finance minister Derek Keys has managed through the
National Economic Forum to put together a middle-of-the-road consensus to
secure agreements on resolving the debt standstill, an Dollars 850m IMF
loan, future relations with the World Bank and the crucial GATT Uruguay
Round submission that will liberalise and streamline South Africa's tariff
structure.
Disconcerting though the latest EC and Japanese numbers may be, South
African economists are modestly confident that the commodity cycle has done
its worst and that demand and prices for many of the country's key exports -
especially gold - will recover in 1994-95. Even so, the upturn is going to
be relatively limp through next year, as investors and businessmen sit on
their hands until the elections are out of the way and they have some idea
of who will be holding the reins of economic power.
Many hope and expect that Mr Keys will retain the finance portfolio, while
Dr Chris Stals, whose term as governor of the South African Reserve Bank
expires next year, and whose tough monetarism has done so much to reduce
inflation, fiscal follies notwithstanding, will be reappointed.
Continuation of the Keys-Stals double-act would certainly calm business and
banking nerves, abroad as well as at home, providing much-needed continuity
and stability. But whether the ANC is ready to allow whites to retain
control over key economic management decisions is unclear.
Mr Mandela and his close aides may be happy with such a transitional
arrangement - for two or three years - but already there are demands lower
down the ANC hierarchy for some relaxation of monetary and fiscal policy.
Fiscal policy is going to be crucial. While some in the ANC exude
moderation, insisting that large tax increases are not necessary, this begs
the Dollars 64 000 question - how is the country to fund the proposed social
upliftment and job-creation programmes? Professor Dennis Davis, an ANC tax
adviser, has suggested increased estate duties along with differential rates
of VAT so that some basic necessities can be zero-rated while higher rates
are applied to luxuries. Some rationalisation too of tax-breaks seems
probable thereby raising the effective rate of corporate tax - from around
20 per cent at present - while leaving the basic rate unchanged at 40 per
cent. One senior ANC economist, Mr Tito Mboweni, has ruffled feathers with
his suggestion of a once-off 'reconstruction levy,' though this has since
been played down.
ANC economists believe there is scope to fund upliftment programmes by
restructuring government spending.
This is questionable; the 'peace dividend' from defence cutbacks has been
largely siphoned into increased spending on the police, and in a country
where crime levels seem destined to remain uncomfortably high, there is
little room for savings. Nor is there going to be any 'apartheid dividend'
since the elimination of wasteful, duplicative spending on social services
for blacks and whites, will be offset by a larger public service and the
need to establish regional governments and structures. Mr Keys himself
believes there is likely to be a net increase rather than saving, and sees
his job as minimising that 'hump.'
One of the conditions of the IMF loan is a reduction in the budget deficit
to 6 per cent of GDP in 1994-95, down from the 6.8 per cent forecast for the
current year. Mr Keys says that 2 per cent of this represents public sector
investment spending, while 2.5 per cent is needed to build up the civil
servants pension fund in terms of already-announced political guarantees. He
hopes to achieve savings by eliminating the remaining 1.5 per cent of
'discretionary' deficit, but it is hard to square his plans with the social
upliftment goal.
It has been estimated that racial parity in social service spending would
cost almost a quarter of GDP, with education alone requiring 15.4 per cent,
more than double the 7.3 per cent provided in 1993-94. Indeed, a 'parity
budget' would mean shifting 10 per cent of GDP into the social services
budget from a budget total of 28 per cent (excluding debt-service
expenditure). Since such a target is out of reach, the likely implication is
that the ANC's sweetness and light on the tax front will fall foul of
political realism on one hand, and the need to deliver some form of
liberation dividend on the other. Cost-recovery in the public sector, in the
form of user charges for education and health, targeted initially on the
better-off, could well be necessary.
The fragile economic strategy consensus will come under strain too on the
labour front. While there is broad agreement on the need to put job creation
ahead of wage increases, optimism that the lifting of sanctions and
increased investment will make a significant dent in unemployment looks
misplaced.
Unemployment, estimated at a frightening 46 per cent by the SARB, is the
most important single challenge that will face the next government. The
optimists argue that the SARB's doomsday scenario exaggerates the problem,
citing the 1991 census which found that 19 per cent of the workforce were
actively seeking jobs, with one quarter of the black workforce falling into
this category compared with only 4 per cent of the whites.
Critics accuse employment pessimists of ignoring the vibrant, fast-growing
informal sector that is crucial to any strategy for easing the crisis. In
1989, the Central Statistical Service (CSS) estimated that there were some
304,000 fulltime black informal sector operators in South Africa to which
can be added 1.9m part-time informal sector entrepreneurs and 350,000
employees, making more than 2.5m or almost a third of the
economically-active black population. Unfortunately though, much of this
informal sector activity is described as 'survival' rather than 'voluntary'
entrepreneurship, implying that many self-employed would sooner have a
formal sector job.
The formal sector employment conundrum raises a question that few South
Africans feel confident to answer: where can the new South Africa develop
competitive advantage? Primary sector activities with value-added through
beneficiation of minerals is perhaps the most obvious answer, but hardly
reassuring given the probability of continued sluggish growth in primary
product demand and the possibility of ongoing excess capacity. In any event,
such operations are highly capital intensive, creating few jobs.
The finance minister is optimistic though, pointing out that Samcor, which
assembles vehicles, takes 34 hours to produce a motor car compared with 44
hours in Western Europe. In the pulp industry, productivity is higher at one
South African plant than in Germany, 'We have nothing to worry about in
terms of productivity,' says Mr Keys confidently, arguing that low black
worker productivity under the apartheid system reflected demotivation.
'There was nothing in it for them.' Black people could not move to better
areas, nicer homes or send their children to better schools. They were not
motivated to improve productivity.
South African businessmen acknowledge that they cannot expect to match the
Asians in terms of costs, work ethic or productivity. Their competitive edge
is in resource-intensive activities, low-cost energy, a superb
infrastructure, and in services such as banking and information technology.
In manufacturing though, competitive advantage will depend on investing in
skills, technology and training and since this kind of investment does not
yield quick returns, success in manufacturing is more likely to be found in
niche operations than in any single industry.
Even if the foreign investor is satisfied that the country has put political
violence and instability behind it and has the capacity to develop
competitive advantage in specific areas, the nagging question remains: why
should South Africa be different from the rest of the continent?
Mr Keys brushes all doubts aside. 'South Africa is totally different -
always has been,' he says, putting his finger on what few would dispute is
the country's single most important advantage - its powerful,
battle-hardened, diversified private sector. 'We have' he says, 'a lot of
indigenous capital here making a return and which has every intention of
going on doing that.'
