FT  23 JUN 93 / Sale cleared after attack on Kuwait: Arms-for-Iraq Inquiry
THE GOVERNMENT cleared an export licence for ammunition to Jordan made by
the munitions company Royal Ordnance six weeks after the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, it emerged yesterday.
The Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry has been told that from November 1984 Jordan
was suspected of being used to channel equipment to Iraq.
Further official documents made available to Lord Justice Scott show defence
exports to Jordan continuing until at least September 14 1990.
On that day the Department of Trade and Industry cleared the export licence
for artillery shells from Royal Ordnance, the armaments subsidiary of
British Aerospace, after the contract had been vetted by the Ministry of
Defence.
Lt-Col Richard Glazebrook, a former MoD official, told the inquiry that the
licence involved a contract for ammunition previously sent to Jordan which
had proved faulty.
It was approved in spite of what Lt-Col Glazebrook called 'cumulative
evidence' from defence intelligence that Jordan was being used by Iraq to
help build up its arsenal. During yesterday's hearing the inquiry's counsel,
Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, referred to further government documents which
show that in July 1988 senior MoD officials were told by the chief of staff
of the Jordanian armed forces, Field Marshall Bin Shaker, that Jordan had
been officially pressed by Iraq to act as a 'front' for defence contracts.
This did not alter government policy, which was that Jordan fell outside
guidelines restricting defence sales to Iraq and Iran and that the UK should
minimise disruption to its trade links with Amman.
Lt-Col Glazebrook confirmed yesterday that in 1988 and 1989 the government
approved contracts with Jordan for artillery fuses and explosive booster
pellets involving Ordinance Technology, a military engineering company. The
main contractor was named as Space Research Corporation, the company at the
centre of the Iraqi supergun project.
Executives of the company were given suspended sentences last year for
conspiring to ship illegally artillery fuses for long-range shells to Iraq.
They are appealing on the grounds that they were prevented from seeing
evidence of government collusion in arms sales to Iraq.
