FT  22 SEP 93 / World Bank 'should step up risk'
THE Institute of International Finance, which represents many of the world's
large commercial banks, yesterday called on the World Bank and regional
development banks to assume bigger risks in support of their lending to
private sector investment in the developing world.
Mr Charles Dallara, the IIF's managing director, said the international
financing institutions such as the World Bank should revise some of their
lending rules to encourage private capital flows.
In a letter to Mr Philippe Maystadt, the Belgian finance minister and
recently-elected chairman of the International Monetary Fund's policy-making
interim committee, Mr Dallara suggested that the World Bank and regional
developments banks should think again about their insistence that
governments in countries borrowing from them should guarantee all of their
loans.
Mr Dallara also suggested that the institutions should provide coverage of a
broader definition of political risk in countries such as Russia to attract
private capital to large projects. Mr Dallara, who was a senior official at
the US Treasury and US executive director to the IMF in the 1980s, said such
changes were needed to support developing nations that were putting greater
emphasis in their policies on privatisation and private sector investment.
He called for the creation of a 'deputies working group' of senior officials
from IMF and World Bank member countries to work out plans for early changes
to the policies of the development banks and the Fund so that they would be
better able to mobilise private capital flows.
To some extent, the IIF is pushing on an open door. The International
Finance Corporation, a World Bank affiliate which promotes the private
sector in developing nations, is expanding its activities with particular
emphasis on encouraging private infrastructure investment in emergent market
economies.
But it is unlikely that his plea for the international financing
institutions to take on greater risk in support of private sector investment
will gain rapid support in the IMF or World Bank. Both bodies feel they are
running substantial risks already, especially in the former Soviet
republics.
