FT  18 DEC 93 / Smile masks a scream of rage: Vladimir Zhirinovsky is part
clown, part victim, say John Lloyd and Leyla Boulton, but his contradictions
cause concern
A Russian couple debated which candidates they liked before last Sunday's
elections. The wife favoured Vladimir Zhirinovsky, leader of the neo-fascist
Liberal Democratic Party. The husband objected: Zhirinovsky is a Jew, he
said. The wife believed him, and they voted communist. This really happened.
Post-communist Russia is perhaps the only place where voters who wish to
vote for fascists choose instead to vote communist because the fascist
leader is Jewish. It is the basis for a farce, but that is not what it is.
Mr Zhirinovsky's Jewishness (through his father, Wolf Zhirinovsky) is not
incontrovertible, but it is probable. Yesterday Mr Mikhail Chlenov, head of
Russia's Jewish Federation, says that he met Mr Zhirinovsky in November 1988
during the founding conference of an organisation called Shalom.
'He got up and said he was a lawyer, and after his speech he was elected to
the board. Shalom lasted three months and then he disappeared. There was no
hint of a future Fuhrer. It was self-evident that anyone who came to such a
meeting was Jewish or considered himself to be. There is no doubt that, with
a name like Wolf, his father was Jewish.'
Being, or not being, Jewish matters in Russia. Jews are not the most
oppressed of the former Soviet peoples - it is the Azeris, Armenians and
Georgians who are being thrown out of Moscow and St Petersburg now - but
they cannot expect to play a leading role in the governance of the state. It
matters for Mr Zhirinovsky, because he has used - inconsistently -
anti-semitic (or 'anti-Zionist', which can amount to the same thing)
rhetoric in his campaigns and would presumably suffer more defections from
his cause once people knew for sure he was Jewish.
Yet all this merely adds another veil to the dance Mr Zhirinovsky is
performing in front of the Russian people, and of the world. It adds another
layer of obfuscation on a figure whose contradictions are beyond easy
explanation. As the world asks - should we take this man seriously? Does he
herald a nation in arms against reform? - he continues to weave this way and
that, now protesting moderation, now threatening to use nuclear weapons on
Germany and Japan, now claiming he is is a maligned liberal, now welcoming
starvation in Central Asia if it assists Russia's economy. If Stalin was a
dogma wrapped in an enigma, Zhirinovsky is a scream of rage masked with a
grin, veiled with a lie and topped with a joke.
A judgment on him might start with his assessment of himself in his
autobiographical pamphlet The Last Dash for the South. The analysis is as
dark and pathetic, as ridden with complexes and hatreds as that of any
important public man of our times. His book is the testament of the victim:
of a boy who hardly knew his father; who grew up with five siblings (by
another father) in one room in a communal flat; whose mother took a young
husband while he was still a child; who 'never liked common games - I always
preferred to play by myself'; who says at one point that 'my whole life was
a degradation' and again that 'I had no friends' and that 'I loved my mother
. . . I loved her very much . . . I watched her cry again and again'.
The mawkishness, the obsessive insistence on his specialness and uniqueness,
his insistence on suffering are touching, because they show not a brute, but
a man whose sensitivity and intelligence never could attract the attention
of the mother he adored. There are also passages of compelling writing, as
on his first awakenings of sexuality, watching naked little girls go to the
lavatory in the night in the orphanage in which he spent some time. Later,
his wife and son are introduced as an afterthought - the centrepiece must be
the unfairness of the world to Vladimir Zhirinovsky, and the explicit and
constant equation of the ills of the former Soviet Union with the ills which
beset him.
On the first page, his birth is described down to the minute and the
weather, and intercut with the degraded condition of the Russians in
Kazakhstan (he was born in the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata) - a state they
considered they had brought into the civilised world. Later, he rails
against his life in the communal flat as a product of the preference given
to Kazakhs over Russians in the allocation of individual housing. After
another howl that his life has been 'nothing but suffering', he shifts to
Mikhail Gorbachev and says 'he had a sweet life. That's why he . . . could
do nothing right. He was weak.'
How could this bundle of resentments and hatreds and losses have risen so
fast to become the latest threat to the west's peace of mind? Throughout his
life's account, there are hints that he may have been associated with the
KGB: his education in a prestigious oriental language institute, his army
service as (apparently) an instructor, a trip to Turkey - all of these would
have at least attracted the attention of the all-enveloping security
service, if they were not sponsored by it. Mr Chlenov, also a graduate of
the oriental institute, says graduates were routinely asked by the KGB to
work for them after qualification. He avoided it by moving into academia.
Further, Mr Zhirinovsky's dip into Jewish movements in the late 1980s (an
area saturated with KGB attention) and most of all his founding of the
Liberal Democratic Party in 1990 (registered in 1991), shows either a man of
extraordinary freedom of movement or one with at least a thread leading back
to KGB headquarters in the Lubyanka.
From the start, the LDP was a strange formation. It eagerly espoused
individual rights and the need to 'de-ideologise Soviet society', (then
passing through the last,terminal crisis of communism) - and at the same
time insisting that the Soviet Union remain an integral state. An early
interview with Mr Zhirinovsky in the conservative newspaper Glasnost during
his bid for the Russian presidency in 1991 (where he zoomed from nowhere to
third place after Mr Boris Yeltsin and Mr Nikolai Ryzhkov), quotes him as
saying: 'Everywhere I went I spoke about anti-Russian attitudes. Now we've
seen the last straw - the killing of Russians in Russia because they're
Russians (referring to some apparently ethnic-based murders). I don't say
Russians are any better than anyone else but they are certainly no worse and
they don't deserve their present fate (as the victims of their former
colonial empire).'
It is the voice of the victim-nation, forced out of former colonies, feeling
the boot on the end of another foot. Every imperial country - Britain,
France, Portugal - has had a similar imperial movement, and Mr Zhirinovsky
began to articulate it as soon as he came into public view. It is not far
fetched to say that this is a voice of the KGB, and that the LDP - whose
launch made the first page of Pravda, a sign of approval - is yet another
'police party' of the kind familiar during the Tsarist period.
But are not the worries of Russians today less about the integrity of the
former Soviet Union than the price of bread? Is not the LDP's economic
programme - more arms sales, no more aid to the former Soviet republics, a
boost for the public sector, a crackdown on crime - ridiculous in its
simplicity? Yes: but Mr Zhirinovsky's skill has been to recognise that
people do not want one more foolproof plan from a self-satisfied economist:
they want action, even if it is only the action of a demagogue.
What Alan Bullock in his Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives says of the
German fascist leader is true of Mr Zhirinovsky. 'He never made the mistake
of supposing that the best way to exploit (the depression) was by making
economic policy and promises the centrepiece of the party's opposition. He
grasped, as no other German politician did, that the effect of such economic
factors on peoples' lives was one of psychological shock and that it was to
the emotions this created - fear, resentment, despair, the longing for
reassurance and the renewal of hope - that a political leader should address
himself.' Economics, indeed rationality, have nothing to do with it.
Comparisons with Hitler overestimate Mr Zhirinovsky, however. He will not
cut the same swathe through civilisation - not because he has no ambition to
do so, but because he has neither the will nor the space.
He is a fragile man, for all his scorn for those who have had the 'sweet
life'. He attracts no one of any quality (as Hitler soon did) and cannot
bear anyone who seeks equality with him. His background, or his KGB links,
or both, are in the end debilitating in this society. His need for the
victim status, much more obsessive than Hitler's as revealed in Mein Kampf
or Table Talk, will be difficult to transform into an effective use of the
power he appears to want.
The special circumstances of Russia, and the incompetence of the reformists,
especially in running an election campaign, have given a talented populist
room for growth. But he is a freak - a hot character in an increasingly cool
environment, where TV sets flicker behind threadbare curtains from Brest to
Vladivostok. Mr Zhirinovsky is at once the master and the victim of
television. The master, because he is able to be simple, direct and convey
his own obsessions and hatred of 'them', to chime with a nation made to feel
like outcasts. The victim, because the medium demands fresh fodder
constantly, and (as many Russians now say) he is a one-time phenomenon, not
a permanent fixture.
His insouciant ability to deny pledges made in print or in public and to
assert the opposite is seen as clever but will also bewilder or dishearten.
The great European tyrants of the century - Stalin, Hitler, Mussolini,
Franco - all did much of what they promised and often raised their peoples'
living standards, at least for a while. Mr Zhirinovsky, instead, threatens
nuclear holocaust.
Finally, the European dictators' rise to power was against a threatening
background in which it seemed wholly sensible to be tyrannical. Mr
Zhirinovsky grasps for the seat of the Russian president when almost every
important country in the world is trying to become democratic, or
market-oriented, or both. He himself, in his extraordinary dodging this way
and that, pays both the tribute of rhetorical support.
He is more than a clown, though he is funny: but less than a tyrant in the
making, though insofar as there is a programme it is fascistic. He is like
one of Shakespeare's most bitter and diseased jesters with a skinhead
retinue. And he reflects, sometimes with shocking accuracy, the cries of a
society in which many have suffered similar tribulations to his own, and now
feel even more dispossessed than he can give witness to.
