FT  09 JAN 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: M &amp; G launches Treasury fund
A NEW option for the income-seeking investor has been created by the launch
of M &amp; G's Treasury fund. The unit trust will aim to provide a better return
than that provided by the instant access accounts of big building societies.
It will do so by investing around half the fund in Treasury bills issued by
the UK government, with the remainder in money market instruments, such as
bank bills or commercial paper.
The minimum investment in the fund will be Pounds 5,000, but investors will
be given a chequebook allowing them to transfer money into their bank or
building society account. Cheques must be for a minimum of Pounds 250 and
you will be allowed to write enough cheques to take your balance down to
Pounds 2,500.
Income will be distributed monthly and M &amp; G estimates that, as of November
30, the fund would have paid 6.06 per cent gross per annum, compared with an
average 5.15 per cent on investments of Pounds 5,000 in instant access
accounts from the top five building societies.
Although the income will be paid net of basic rate tax, non-taxpayers will
be able to reclaim the tax charge from the Inland Revenue.
Such funds are commonplace in the US, where investors have become
increasingly concerned about the safety of savings and loan institutions
(the American equivalent of building societies).
In the UK, money market funds have grown significantly only in the past few
years. The most obvious direct competitor to M &amp; G's new fund is Fidelity
Investments' cash account, which also grants a chequebook to those with
balances of over Pounds 5,000.
The Fidelity fund yields rather more (6.8 per cent this week) than M &amp; G's
and is more flexible - investors can use cheques to pay for large
transactions such as holidays, rather than simply make transfers into a bank
or building society.
However, the M &amp; G fund, because of its holding in Treasury bills, is lower
risk (although the risk in the Fidelity fund is very small).
There is no initial charge on either fund and annual fees are 0.6 per cent
on M &amp; G and 0.5 per cent on Fidelity. The income figures quoted above are
net of these charges.
It is good to see competition in this market; eventually such funds will
offer facilities such as standing orders and cashpoint withdrawals.
