FT  26 NOV 93 / Berlusconi's 'courage' makes others see black: Italian media
magnate's backing for neo-fascist candidate in Rome mayoral election
Mr Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's media magnate, claims he has done no more than
follow a maxim of Tolstoy - a courageous man does what he feels is
necessary.
But what Mr Berlusconi considers 'necessary' has created a near mutiny among
his employees and provoked a storm of controversy in Italy's political and
intellectual establishment.
Mr Berlusconi, who controls three quarters of Italian commercial television
and a string of publishing interests, has decided to enter the political
fray in Italy.
Throughout this year he has been hinting he might form a political party and
appeared to be flirting with the populist Northern League of Mr Umberto
Bossi. But this week he chose the occasion of the opening of a shopping
centre in Bologna to urge the formation of a new centrist party.
Apparently off script, he went further. If he were in Rome he would back Mr
Gianfranco Fini, the leader of the neo-fascist MSI, in the run-off on
December 5 for the mayoralty against Mr Francesco Rutelli, the candidate of
the left.
This was immediately interpreted not only as an endorsement of the MSI but
as placing this party, always seen on the far right, in the centre of
Italian politics.
This produced headlines such as 'Berlusconi in black' (a reference to
Mussolini's infamous black shirts) and cartoons such as the one with a
bubble coming from Mr Berlusconi's mouth saying 'Fini-vest' (a play on
Fininvest, Mr Berlusconi's principal media group).
Accompanying such sarcasm was a flood of criticism and protest. The next
issue of Panorama, the main Berlusconi weekly, will not appear because of a
strike; a stoppage was observed on Wednesday at Mondadori, his main
publishing group, and television journalists loudly proclaimed their
independence. Some groups have threatened a boycott of his Milan football
team.
The objections to Mr Berlusconi's stance centre on two separate issues. The
first is whether someone who wields so much power, especially through
television, should take sides so openly and harbour political ambitions.
These objections are on weak grounds since media owners in Italy, discreetly
or clumsily, do support causes - indeed that is partly why they are
proprietors.
Mr Berlusconi himself has always been a political animal, and built his
empire on the back of a close friendship with Mr Bettino Craxi, the former
Socialist leader. Mr Berlusconi himself has not been implicated in the
corruption scandals but Milan magistrates are investigating whether his
media interests allowed discounted advertising slots on television to the
political parties during elections. Another investigation is examining
allegations of kick-backs to obtain television licences.
The second issue is whether the MSI is a dangerous rightist phenomenon,
foreshadowing a return to the Mussolini era. The spectre of a party,
inspired by Mussolini, gaining substantial electoral space in Italy has
frightened the left and all those with long memories. They feel Mr
Berlusconi is highly irresponsible in lending his considerable weight to
making the MSI respectable.
However, most of the criticism is based on historical memory rather than the
MSI today, led by Mr Fini, who was born in 1952 (seven years after Il Duce
was executed). The criticism also contains an element of hypocrisy since he
would have earned little odium if he had associated himself with the
leftists' candidate in Rome, Mr Rutelli.
Mr Berlusconi is unrepentant. He wrote in yesterday's newspapers: 'I'm
completely foreign to fascist culture and traditions; but I refuse to accept
the use - or worse the blackmail - of anti-fascism as a demagogic device to
steer the country away from a liberal democratic government which we and
Europe need.'
He added that if and when it was necessary he would establish a 'clear
distinction between politics and editorial control'.
By taking such a high profile, Mr Berlusconi may well encourage more of the
media to focus on the financial problems of his empire. La Repubblica
newspaper and L'Espresso magazine, controlled by Mr Carlo De Benedetti, have
been running for some months a campaign demonstrating that the debts of
Fininvest are well above the L3,333bn (Pounds 1.3bn) published in the 1992
accounts.
They also claim that close scrutiny of the accounts reveals a L174bn loss
instead of the declared L21bn profit. This has not been denied by Fininvest.
