FT  28 MAY 93 / Boycott over whales alarms Norway
NORWAY'S business and industrial leaders yesterday voiced concern to the
government about the economic impact of its decision earlier this month to
resume commercial whaling.
Moves by several companies in Germany, a key market for Norway, to stop
buying Norwegian products and a call by the environmental group Greenpeace
for a European consumer boycott because of the whaling decision have alarmed
the business community, which fears long-term damage to the country's
exports.
Most political groupings at the European parliament yesterday declared
support for a resolution demanding Norway discontinue commercial whaling if
it becomes a member of the European Community.
Norway started membership negotiations in April.
The minke whale is included in the EC's list of endangered species, under
the so-called habitat directive which will be implemented from July 1994.
This month Norway's foreign minister, Mr Johan Joergan Holst, called on the
EC to remove the minke whale from the endangered species list.
In Brussels, Mr Eivind Berg, who is leading membership negotiations on
Norway's behalf, said he did not believe the European parliament's
resolution would interfere with the negotiation process. He suggested the
European parliament's resolution creates a potential difficult situation
once negotiations are concluded, however.
Senior officials in Oslo acknowledge privately that the threat from boycotts
by individual foreign companies and consumers was real.
Representatives of the Confederation of Business and Industry, the Norwegian
Trade Council, the association of fish producers, the ship owners'
association and the Norwegian Tourist Board held a two-hour meeting with
senior Foreign Ministry officials to outline their worries. 'I am much more
worried than I was a few days ago,' said Mr Kjell-Martin Frederiksen, head
of the Trade Council. 'The boycott is now taking place. Norwegian companies
are already being hurt.'
German companies which have said they will stop buying Norwegian goods
include three supermarket groups and Hawesta, a fish processing group. The
supermarket chains are Tengelman, Hertie and Nordsaade, a Unilever company.
Norway exported a total of NKr15.9bn (Dollars 2.30bn) non-oil products to
Germany in 1992.
