FT  19 OCT 93 / Survey of Bermuda (2): Island's fortunes looking up -
Richard Lapper finds investment plans are back on the agenda
BARELY a year after Bermuda began to emerge from its worst recession since
the 1930s, the island's economic prospects are looking a good deal brighter.
An upturn in the fortunes of the tourism industry, unexpectedly rapid growth
of the island's offshore insurance and investment business and the
re-election in early October of the United Bermuda Party (UBP) have
bolstered business confidence and stimulated plans for fresh investment.
Mild growth of at least 1 per cent is expected for 1993/94, following a
slump in gross domestic product of more than 6 per cent between 1989 and
1992, when domestic demand fell back to 1987 levels and capital formation
retreated to a point not seen since the end of the 1970s. Growth was hit by
a decline in tourism, mainly due to recession in the north and east of the
US, which supplies more than 60 per cent of Bermuda's visitors.
The island's problems were compounded by a sharp contraction of money supply
by the local monetary authority, following a rapid expansion in credit
between 1986 and 1988.
On the employment front, more than 2,500 jobs were lost between 1989 and
1992. Foreign workers - from the Azores and the Caribbean - have borne much
of the impact. More than 5,000 work permits have been cancelled since 1989
and the number of foreign workers reduced to less than 5,000.
Even so - by Bermudian standards - unemployment has been high, reaching an
estimated 5 per cent by the end of 1991.
But just as the decline was largely a result of Bermuda's dependence on the
US economy, so the sudden nature of the recent upturn is largely a result of
external factors. Growth has been helped by the steady increase in tourist
numbers in recent months.
But confidence - and future prospects - have been boosted primarily by a
rapid increase in the number of offshore investment and insurance companies,
and an unprecedented growth in the reinsurance sector.
Spurred by developments in the international reinsurance markets, where
rates have risen sharply following a succession of large losses, nine large
reinsurers have established subsidiaries or new ventures on the island
within the past 12 months.
The new investment should help spur recovery in the construction sector,
which has suffered in the downturn. Four construction projects worth up to
Dollars 60m are all primed to go ahead in the next few weeks, according to
finance minister David Saul.
This reflects moves by local developers to build new office accommodation
for the increasing numbers of reinsurance companies choosing to locate on
the island.
Business interest could also help local hoteliers claw their way back to
profit, by providing extra demand for conference and other facilities. The
linkages between tourism and finance have been underlined by the Bermudiana
business hotel redevelopment of the Bermudiana hotel complex which, if it
goes ahead, will be the biggest in the island's history.
In the meantime, Mr Saul, who has presided over the island's finances during
the recession, now has a different category of economic problem to manage.
Mr Saul says that his biggest fear is that the economy could overheat. 'We
have to watch the boom in construction,' he says, hinting at a possible
surge in imports if developments are not controlled.
