FT  19 MAY 93 / Norway's whaling go-ahead defies ban
NORWAY said yesterday it would allow the killing of 296 minke whales this
year, in defiance of an eight-year ban. It is prepared for possible sabotage
attempts on its whaling fleet.
Mr Johan Joergen Holst, the foreign minister, told parliament that the quota
would include 136 whales to be taken for scientific research.
Whalers were disappointed with the quota and some larger vessels might find
it uneconomical to hunt.
'In fixing this year's quotas we have followed the recommendation of the IWC
(International Whaling Commission) scientific committee,' Mr Holst said.
Norway had chosen to fix the quota at the lowest level the IWC would have
allowed had it followed its own rules. 'We wish to demonstrate that Norway
is going forward carefully on this issue.'
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said Oslo had fixed a budget of NKr11m (Pounds
1m) to cover an information campaign and pro-whaling lobbying activities
primarily in Washington, London and Bonn. The US Congress is reviewing a
proposal calling for limited sanctions against countries which resume
commercial whaling in defiance of a 1985 IWC moratorium, reaffirmed on
Friday.
In Brussels last night Mr Holst demanded that the EC remove the minke whale
from its list of animals considered in danger of extinction. He reiterated
that Norway's decision to resume commercial whaling was based on evidence of
the IWC's scientific committee that the minke whale was no longer an
endangered species.
Robert Thomson adds from Tokyo: The Japanese government has said it will
abide by the IWC's decision last week to deny it permission to catch 50
whales in addition to its annual take of about 300 minke whales for
'research purposes'.
Japanese whalers also took 154 whales last year from within the country's
territorial waters. With Japanese government approval it can increase that
catch without breaching the IWC's ban.
While the government was unhappy with the IWC's decision to extend the
moratorium on commercial whaling, it fears an open violation of the
commission's rules could lead to criticism from the US government.
