FT  01 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Eastern Electricity lifts dividend by 20%
Eastern Electricity led off the regional electricity companies' interim
results season yesterday with a pace-setting 20 per cent increase in its
dividend.
The rise, from 5.5p to 6.6p, was accompanied by a minimum Pounds 5 rebate
for all domestic customers, bringing to more than Pounds 10 the rebates that
customers have received this year. Mr John Devaney, chief executive, said:
'We have obligations to the customers and to the shareholders, and we're
trying to fulfil both of them.'
Eastern, the largest of the recs, reported pre-tax profits for the six
months to September 30 of Pounds 77.4m, up 14.5 per cent from last year's
Pounds 67.6m which was restated to reflect a change in accounting policy.
Eastern now matches periodic costs to revenues, spreading them more evenly
through the year.
Turnover was Pounds 799m, down from Pounds 841.9m, reflecting the absence of
economic recovery in Eastern's region, which stretches from north-east
London to East Anglia, and price reductions. Unit sales of electricity were
flat in all segments of the market.
The profits growth came largely from reduced costs. The company shed 1,250
people in the year to September 30, and expects to lose a further 200 by the
end of the current financial year. The cost of all these redundancies,
Pounds 8.6m, was charged to the first half.
There was also an improvement in Eastern's retailing activities where a loss
of Pounds 1.3m was turned into an operating profit of Pounds 3.1m, including
a Pounds 600,000 share of the loss by E&amp;S, Eastern's joint retailing
venture. Contracting reduced its loss from Pounds 2.3m to Pounds 2.1m.
Mr James Smith, chairman, said the result clearly demonstrated the company's
determination to reduce costs and increase efficiency in the core
electricity business. 'We confidently expect our results for the full year
to continue to demonstrate our success in these areas.'
COMMENT
The eye-catching dividend helped drive up the shares and set a good tone for
the results season. The underlying performance was harder to judge, however,
because of the rebalancing caused by the change in accounting policy, though
SG Warburg calculate it implies a full-year dividend of 22p, and a yield of
4.7 per cent, about average for the sector. The results showed that the new
management team headed by Mr Devaney continues to make progress against
costs, and that should enable Eastern to hold its place as the supplier of
some of the cheapest domestic electricity in the country. However, non-core
activities are still not out of the red, and those will still need close
attention.
