FT  29 JUL 93 / Muscle behind a counter offensive: Tony Jackson examines the
logic behind a link-up of three of the world's biggest drug companies
Yesterday's triple alliance between Glaxo, Warner-Lambert and Wellcome is
striking evidence of an industry under pressure. Around the world,
governments have declared war on the cost of prescription drugs. Companies
have responded by ransacking their cupboards for medicines that can be sold
direct to the consumer without prescription. The link-up in over-the-counter
(OTC) drugs between three of the world's big drug groups, while the most
ambitious to date, is unlikely to be the last.
The most obvious effect of the industry's shift in strategy is to transfer
power from the scientist to the marketing man. In terms of prescription
drugs, Warner-Lambert is much the weakest of the three companies. But it is
a giant in US consumer markets. Its advertising budget is the 11th largest
in the US, supporting products such as Listerine mouth wash and Benylin
cough syrup. It also has a 600-strong US sales force, and OTC sales around
the world of Dollars 1.2bn. Wellcome has OTC sales of Dollars 400m and sells
mostly through brokers. Glaxo has no OTC products and no sales force. It is
therefore Warner-Lambert which dominates the joint venture.
This is despite the fact that, by common consent of the parties, the chief
attraction of the deal lies in forthcoming OTC products from Glaxo and
Wellcome. Glaxo's Zantac, an ulcer treatment, is the biggest-selling
prescription drug in the world. Zovirax, Wellcome's anti-viral treatment, is
the eighth biggest. The aim is to sell Zantac as an indigestion pill, and
Zovirax as a cream for cold sores or - in the US - as a pill for genital
herpes.
Mr John Robb, Wellcome's chief executive, explained the logic yesterday.
'The difference between the economics of prescription drugs and OTC
medicines is that in prescription drugs, your big costs come before you
reach the market. With an OTC product it's the other way round. The
marketing cost in year one can be as big as your revenues, and it can take
seven or eight years to get your pay-out.'
Therefore, said Mr Robb, the trick is to build up consumer awareness of the
drug in its last years on prescription. That way, it has a flying start when
it is converted to OTC. Wellcome claims to have done this with its cough
medicines Actifed and Sudafed, and to be doing it now with Zovirax. Indeed,
all but one of the top 15 OTC medicines launched in the US since 1975 have
been former prescription drugs.
But it needs the marketing muscle of a Warner-Lambert to hustle them along.
'With their operation behind us,' Mr Robb said, 'we're likely to get a much
faster lift-off and better penetration with Zovirax than we would do through
a handful of brokers. And Warner-Lambert can buy advertising much more
cheaply, and get more shelf space.'
Since Mr Robb is himself a consumer marketing man by training, it is hard to
believe he does not chafe at being junior partner in the venture. But he
treats the fact stoically. 'I couldn't see any other way into it. We are
just not in the first flight of consumer marketing companies, and it would
take a huge investment to get there. There is no one you could think of
making a hostile bid for, and no pharmaceutical company wants to sell its
OTC business. And as OTC approvals for Zovirax started coming through, we
risked missing the market opportunity.'
When it comes to Glaxo, the motivation is more complex. Its negotiations
with Warner-Lambert began independently from Wellcome's. Its strategy was
also very different: indeed, strategic differences within Glaxo may have
contributed to the abrupt and somewhat mysterious departure in March of Dr
Ernest Mario, Glaxo's chief executive.
It was rumoured at the time that Dr Mario wanted to pursue outright merger
with Warner-Lambert. However, Glaxo's chairman, Sir Paul Girolami, remains a
stubborn advocate of the virtues of prescription medicines. Yesterday's deal
means that Glaxo will wash its hands of the OTC future of Zantac and its
other drugs, leaving their development to Warner-Lambert and Wellcome.
Dr Franz Humer, Glaxo's chief operating director, yesterday stuck to the
Glaxo line. It would be wrong to blame Dr Mario's departure on differences
over the deal, he said. The reasons for his departure were many and varied.
'We are convinced that the prescription drug market will continue to be a
very healthy and growing one,' he said. 'We want to concentrate all our
resources, and the Pounds 700m we spend on research and development, on
innovative ethical (ie: prescription) pharmaceuticals. This deal clearly
recognises that the know-how for running an OTC business belongs to
Warner-Lambert.'
Warner-Lambert itself is in no doubt of the value of its catch. Mr Mel
Goodes, the chairman, was clearly in a jubilant mood as he announced the
deals yesterday. While he refused to estimate the income that would flow to
his company from the agreements, he said 'in aggregate, they have the
potential of adding hundreds of millions of dollars to our annual sales
line'.
The company claims that a treatment for genital herpes which is available
for immediate purchase from a pharmacist would 'eliminate thousands of
doctor's visits' and give sufferers access to the product at an early stage
when it is most effective. This would make the switch of the product to OTC
status attractive, 'as governments look to curb their health care bills',
said Mr John Walsh, head of the company's consumer products division.
While the new joint venture will still rank only third in the world of OTC
products, behind Johnson &amp; Johnson and American Home Products, it ties in
with the strategy of extending the range of products sold through
Warner-Lambert's existing network, as enunciated by Mr Goodes soon after he
became chairman two years ago.
On the other hand, Zantac and Zovirax are unlikely to be on sale in the US
before 1996 at the earliest. According to Warner-Lambert yesterday, a
submission will be made to the US Food and Drug Administration in August to
sell OTC versions of both products, with approval expected in 1994 or 1995.
It might also be asked how profitable they will be. Despite Zantac's huge
success as the world's biggest prescription drug, when it comes to the OTC
market it will be entering a crowded field. SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet, an
older ulcer drug with an almost identical action, has already been cleared
for OTC sale in the UK and has been submitted for clearance in the US. A
third drug with a similar action, Pepcid, has been submitted for OTC
approval in the US by Merck, the biggest prescription drug company in the
world.
According to Mr Robb of Wellcome, US margins on OTC medicines are good by
consumer product standards, though not by comparison with prescription
drugs. 'They shouldn't drop below 15 per cent before tax,' he said
yesterday. 'It would also be unusual if they went above 20 per cent. That's
very respectable. And who knows where prescription drug margins are going to
go? I suspect they'll be more under attack than the OTC side.'
However, past OTC margins need not be a guide to the future. It is worth
recalling that as recently as the late 1980s, drug companies thought the
answer to government pressure on prices was to merge their prescription
businesses, as SmithKline did with Beecham and Bristol-Myers did with
Squibb. Now, the trend is to get together with consumer groups. Thus, the
pharmaceuticals group Syntex has already formed a marketing alliance with
the consumer products giant Procter &amp; Gamble, and Merck has an OTC agreement
with Johnson &amp; Johnson.
The danger may therefore be that too many companies are heading the same way
at once. Collectively, the drug industry has enormous resources and huge
piles of spare cash. Now that their traditional prescription business is
under threat, the industry giants have the capacity to unleash consumer
marketing wars on an unnerving scale. In staying clear of the hurly-burly,
Glaxo is being typically contrarian. Just conceivably, though, it may have a
point.
Additional reporting by Richard Waters and Paul Abrahams
