FT  22 OCT 93 / CBI warns of overload in accounting requirements
NEW ACCOUNTING standards are coming too thick and fast for companies to cope
with, the Confederation of British Industry warned yesterday.
The pace and volume of standards from the Accounting Standards Board and its
urgent issues task force are 'stretching resources to the limit' for
business, it said.
Mr Howard Davies, the CBI director-general, will express the organisation's
concerns in a document to be circulated this week to the bodies that set
standards for financial reporting, as well as to the Treasury and the
Department of Trade and Industry.
He urges the ASB, the Auditing Practices Board and the Cadbury committee on
corporate governance to give greater consideration to the costs of their
proposals. He said they should also avoid forcing disclosures that put UK
companies at a disadvantage to their international competitors.
The CBI's statement  - which was endorsed as official policy at a council
meeting on Wednesday  - represents an escalation of criticism of the reform
of standards by attacking the ASB directly. The Hundred Group of leading
finance directors has previously focused on the Cadbury committee and the
Auditing Practices Board.
Mr Davies said that the CBI endorsed the objectives of the new standards
setters, but warned: 'At present there is a severe risk of overload and of
ill-considered proposals being set in stone.' In a second letter to the DTI,
he gave industry support for the first time for the campaign to limit
auditors' liability.
Accountants are concerned that they may be sued for the full extent of any
losses when a company collapses, even though faults with their audits may
have been only a minor factor.
The CBI said standards setters needed to improve the phasing of new
proposals; extend consultation on more complex drafts; increase the time
taken to experiment with standards before they become mandatory; and provide
more co-ordination between the different standards bodies.
Mr Keith Hamill, finance director-designate at Forte and chairman of the
CBI's financial reporting panel, said companies had not criticised the ASB
until now for fear of being seen as self-interested at a time when
high-profile corporate collapses had shown the need for reform.
Observer, Page 19
