FT  24 MAR 93 / Business and the Environment: America reaches the bottom of
the barrel - Worldwide water / Efforts at conservation
MANY Californians had already made up their minds, but after one more big
snowstorm over the Sierra Nevada at the end of February, Governor Pete
Wilson made it official: the state's six-year drought is finally over.
The latest blizzard left snow equivalent to an estimated 44m acre feet of
water; only the Columbia and upper Missouri basins are still dry. But the
end of the drought seems unlikely to halt a significant change in water
policy, particularly in the west, where for 90 years government engineering
works have wrestled the region's rivers out of their beds to bring water to
city pipes or - accounting for 80-90 per cent of water use in the west -
farm irrigation.
Even without the drought, the west was coming to the bottom of the barrel in
its search for new rivers to dam and divert; there will be no more Hoover
dams. 'The big projects may return about the same time as dinosaurs come
back to earth. We can't afford them, and there is no place to put them,'
says David Getches, a specialist in water law at the University of Colorado
School of Law.
Now, more attention is being paid to in-stream uses - fisheries, recreation
and the preservation of ecosystems. 'The challenge is that most of the water
is already allocated under a system that did not recognise the value of
these in-stream uses,' says Craig Bell, executive director of the Western
States Water Council, which groups representatives from the governments of
each state.
Indian nations, too, are claiming their water rights under the terms of
their treaties with the US. Wyoming's supreme court recently awarded nearly
half the water from the Bighorn river to the Shoshone and Arapaho.
Recently, there have been notable examples of re-allocation. Dams in the
Pacific north-west must now control their outflows in the interests of the
local salmon species which their construction put in peril, while the Glen
Canyon dam, on the Colorado River, has been forced to stop the water
releases that were eroding the beaches of the Grand Canyon.
The Central Valley Project, California's largest water delivery system, last
month announced it would allow nearly a fifth of its throughput, some
600,000 acre feet, to flow straight into the Sacramento-San Joaquin delta to
help restore the habitat of such species as the endangered delta smelt -
even though this leaves farmers in the San Joaquin valley, the project's
biggest beneficiaries, with barely a quarter of the water they requested.
This reassessment is not confined to the west. The Kissimmee river in
Florida, which the Army Corps of Engineers spent millions of dollars
canalising in the 1960s, will now be restored to its natural state at the
cost of further millions in order to save the wetlands around Lake
Okeechobee, at the northern end of the Everglades.
Rivers are not the only source of water, but states such as Arizona are
pumping groundwater at unsustainable rates, and excessive pumping has caused
widespread land subsidence in states as far apart as California and Florida.
Efforts to conserve water, meanwhile, have gained momentum, especially in
the west, and are expected to continue despite the formal end to this
drought.
The average water bill in Los Angeles has doubled in the past six years, and
the Metropolitan Water District, southern California's biggest supplier,
plans a further 22 per cent price rise this year. Many cities have adopted
new, water-saving construction requirements such as smaller toilet cisterns
or low-flow showers, and some local governments allow the use of 'grey'
water, which has been used once for something relatively clean, such as
bathwater, to be used for other purposes - flushing toilets or watering
lawns.
At the same time, the beginnings of a market in water are starting to
emerge. California and Idaho now have water banks run by the state. Some
deals, for instance between Los Angeles and the Imperial Valley system, have
built on the principles of conservation, with farmers agreeing to adopt more
economical irrigation methods or to grow less water-intensive crops in order
to free water to be sold to the city.
Getches foresees such exchanges reaching across state lines, with California
buying water from the states of the upper Colorado basin, which under-use
their allocations under the 1922 Colorado River Compact.
But quantity is only one side of the water equation; quality, too, is at
issue, with the Clean Water Act likely to come up for reauthorisation by
Congress this year. Since the first act, in 1972, many of the problems of
sewage and industrial water pollution have been largely addressed. But
non-point source pollution, especially run-off of pesticides and fertilisers
from agricultural land, has not been dealt with.
Some estimates put the cost of complying fully with the Clean Water Act,
which sets the goal of making rivers fishable and swimmable, at Dollars
110bn (Pounds 77bn) - although the Environmental Protection Agency has
estimated that 58,000 jobs are created for every Dollars 1bn invested in
sewage treatment.
