FT  02 APR 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: US debate on aid for Russia
WHILE THE Clinton Administration was wrestling with plans to sell its
Russian aid programme to American voters, a House of Representatives
agriculture subcommittee has been holding a series of hearings on how to
structure an aid package to its former adversary.
'The issue is not how big a package, but how to put together a package that
goes where we want it to go,' said Ms Jane Shey, staff director of the house
subcommittee on foreign agriculture and hunger.
Concerns abound that aid would be diverted to the Russian Mafia, that US
investments will lead to an ultimate decrease of exports, and that they will
'go down a rat hole' in a system devoid of market forces.
Dr Philip Raup, a professor at the University of Minnesota, warned that
April, May and June will mark the period of greatest food shortages,
especially in grains.
'Even though grain purchased now will not arrive until May or June, at the
earliest, the knowledge that it is under way will enable Russian authorities
to draw down stocks to levels that might otherwise be dangerous,' he said.
Furthermore, the prospective arrival of grain imports could unblock internal
supplies being withheld by producers in the former Soviet Union in
anticipation of higher prices or more favorable barter trades.
Whatever doubts exist, the US must continue exporting to give the Russians
'a means to manage food supplies in the face of social discontent,' said Mr
Steven McCoy, president of the North American Export Grain Association.
Imports would not become a disincentive to output, he said, because of the
tremendous demand in the Russian market.
Dr Don Van Atta, a research associate at Duke University, said whatever aid
is sent, must not be 'dumped off' in Moscow.
'To be effective, American aid has to avoid much of the central political
turmoil, instead concentrating on individuals and voluntary organisations
which can rebuild something from the mess,' he said.
Dr Stephen Wegren, a political scientist, said the fact that commodity
exchanges were being set up in Russia provided 'the one shining light of
optimism because there are true market forces at work'.
