FT  02 APR 93 / UK Company News: Wolseley buys Swedish group in Pounds 45m
deal
WOLSELEY, the building materials distributor, is further expanding into
Europe with the acquisition of Enertech Industries, the Swedish oil and gas
burner and boiler manufacturer.
Wolseley is paying SKr512.3m (Pounds 44.5m) for Enertech, a division of
Trelleborg, the Swedish conglomerate. The acquisition is being financed by
share placings at 565p to raise Pounds 62.2m.
In February last year Wolseley bought Brossette, France's largest plumbing
distributor, and remains keen to expand its European distribution network.
Yesterday's purchase marks the first overseas expansion of its smaller,
manufacturing arm which makes a range of specialist engineering and
agricultural products.
Mr Richard Ireland, finance director, said Enertech was complementary to
Wolseley's existing products. 'Our UK burner group (Nu-Way) was not really
operating in Europe but we now have a significant presence,' he said.
Enertech's burners are market leaders in Sweden and its domestic burners
have a large share of the UK market. Its domestic and commercial boilers
also have strong market shares in northern Europe.
Enertech also owns HRPC, which supplies domestic heating parts in the UK
through 36 branches. Mr Ireland said HRPC would be kept separate from the
Controls Centre chain, which mainly serves the commercial market.
Enertech employs more than 1,000 people and has factories in Sweden, Germany
and Belgium. In the year to December 31 it reported operating profits of
SKr80.4m on sales of SKr1.33bn.
Mr Ireland said the acquisition would only dilute earnings if Enertech
failed to match last year's profits. Results should be helped by cost
cutting put in place last year.
Under the placings, arranged by SG Warburg, Wolseley will issue 11m new
shares, equal to 4.6 per cent of its issued capital. The extra money raised
will be used to match Pounds 12.1m of Enertech borrowings which would
otherwise increase Wolseley's net borrowings and gearing level. Exchange
rate movements on overseas debt lifted Wolseley's net borrowings by more
than Pounds 60m to Pounds 122.6m at the year end, increasing gearing to 32
per cent.
The remainder of the cash raised, about Pounds 6m, would be used to pay for
a smaller acquisition which is under discussion.
