FT  16 OCT 93 / Arts: 'Katya' in Scotland
A WEEK after we were told that the 'permissive society' has failed, it is
instructive to be reminded what life could be like before it. Janacek's
Katya Kabanova is set on the banks of the Volga in 19th-century Russia,
where moral rectitude is obsessively observed and any who transgress its
rules are ostracised, even hounded to death.
No opera composer has made more headway in public esteem since the war.
Every opera company in Britain wants to have some Janacek in its repertoire,
especially Katya Kabanova, of which Scottish Opera's new production is only
the most recent of quite a number. Clearly late 20th-century audiences
respond to the theme of a woman who suffers at the hands of the morally
righteous. Verdi's La traviata was a predecessor, Janacek's Katya is the
next down the line, more obviously modern and psychologically intense.
It is that sense of a mind under pressure, of nerve endings sensitive to the
touch, which gives Janacek's music its individual voice. The Glyndebourne
production of a few years ago caught that aspect particularly well by
combining a near expressionist visual style with keen, tense music-making.
At the Theatre Royal in Glasgow, the conductor Richard Armstrong prefers to
play the music in more conventionally dramatic terms.
In that, he was equally at one with his production, which is beautiful and
atmospheric, but the most traditional I have seen. The designer, Richard
Aylwin, sees the opera as taking place in a windswept, misty marshland,
where people thread their way through pools of water and clumps of
bullrushes. There is enough evidence to suggest that Janacek intended the
season to be spring. This production made it winter, but no matter. The
designs are distinctive and of high quality.
As they suggest, the story is to be taken simply, at face value. There can
be few British sopranos who are better suited to the role of the life-loving
Katya than Helen Field. Her voice is of the right scale and the personality
well suited, but much of what she could offer remains untapped in Mark
Brickman's production. At the key moments she is constantly asked to gaze
longingly at the sky or throw her arms out wide - not the wrong movements,
but so standard, so conventional, where Janacek's unique Katya is asking for
something new and fresh.
Between the two men in her life it was difficult to tell the difference.
Anthony Roden as her feeble husband and Richard Brunner as the man who
brings love briefly into her life were equally burly, nondescript figures,
though Brunner should be commended for managing the high tenor part of Boris
with so few difficulties. The younger couple of lovers was played with
delightful naturalness by Elizabeth McCormack and Iain Paton.
The moral majority is embodied by Kabanicha, the fearsome mother-in-law, who
says of poor adulterous Katya that 'women like that should be buried alive'.
Many sopranos turn her into a monster. Elizabeth Vaughan, still possessing a
voice of authority, underplayed her - just. The suggestion that she gives
her old suitor Dikoy a good whipping was only mildly over the top. The smile
of satisfaction as she pulled her son off his dead wife's body made one's
stomach sink.
Every word of her short address to the watching crowd at the scene of the
suicide was absolutely clear, but then so was most of Norman Tucker's
English translation. Whatever its shortcomings, this production tells the
story of Katya Kabanova very clearly. Any judgment on the issues it raises
is left to the audience.
