FT  23 JUN 93 / An uphill task for earthlings: The Rio Earth Summit offered
inspiration, but it ignored some vital issues
One year after the Rio Earth Summit, the world's most ambitious attempt to
address global environmental issues, ministers from more than 50 countries
have the opportunity to assess its legacy.
In New York today, they will hold the first meeting of the United Nations
Commission for Sustainable Development, which is intended to help turn the
summit's principles into reality.
The summit's long-term impact is hard to judge, because recession has pushed
the environment down the political agenda in many countries. The past year
has, however, justified the warning of Mr Maurice Strong, Rio's organiser,
that 'we simply cannot save the world in a one-shot quick-fix conference'.
Progress towards many of the specific targets set by the summit has been
slow, although Rio has won credit for changing attitudes in both developing
and industrialised countries. And pressing questions remain about whether
Rio's aims - from international treaties to raising environmental awareness
 -were the right ones.
Rio produced two main treaties - a framework convention on climate change to
help curb the threat of global warming, and a biological diversity
convention to help preserve the number and distribution of the world's
species.
Twenty-six countries have ratified the climate change convention out of the
166 that signed it. These countries, including three of the biggest present
or future emitters of gases - the US, China and Japan - are committed to
producing plans within a year for curbing 'greenhouse gases'. The total
number may seem small, but the convention will become international law when
50 have ratified; up to another 44 countries, including the UK, expect to
ratify later this year.
That tally is better than some critics of Rio feared in its immediate
aftermath. The target may have helped focus minds - several countries are
well advanced in plans for curbing the gases, particularly carbon dioxide.
Governments have found energy taxes particularly attractive - for instance,
the UK brought in new fuel taxes in the March Budget. Environmentalists
argue that such taxes are better at raising money than at persuading people
to use less energy.
But there have been recent signs that momentum on the climate change
convention is flagging. The Clinton administration is modifying its proposal
for a nationwide energy tax in the face of congressional opposition. The
European Community is also embroiled in a long-running dispute between
member countries on the feasibility of an energy tax weighted towards fuels
with the highest carbon content.
The biodiversity convention has encountered similar problems. One of Rio's
dramas was the refusal of the US under President George Bush to sign it. The
administration's objections stemmed apparently from the potential threat to
the US biotechnology and pharmaceuticals industries, but it was alone among
the leading industrialised nations in opposing it.
Three weeks ago the Clinton administration, which has made much of its
'green' intentions, finally added its name. But of the 168 countries which
have signed, only 20 have ratified, including only four that are
particularly rich in species - China, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru. The treaty
still needs another nine ratifications before it can come into force.
One of the difficulties in implementing the conventions has been funding.
The World Bank's Global Environment Facility, set up in 1990 to help
developing countries finance environmentally beneficial projects, is
currently supporting more than 100 projects.
However, the facility has faltered on two counts: first, international
wrangling over the criteria used to pick projects; second, its budget is
small compared with its aims - the Dollars 1.3bn pledged by World Bank donor
countries for its three-year pilot phase has nearly gone. In Beijing last
month, some 60 participants in the facility estimated that it would need
from Dollars 2.8bn to Dollars 4bn over the next three to five years.
Apart from the two flagship conventions, a host of broader, but less
specific, measures was agreed at Rio: a statement of aims for forests, a
declaration of environmental principles, and the Agenda 21 action plan - an
800-page plan for achieving global 'sustainable development'. The task of
turning these high-minded but ill-defined proposals into environmental
improvement falls to the new Commission for Sustainable Development.
While today's inaugural meeting of the commission seeks to do no more than
set up reporting procedures and administration, some observers are sceptical
that it can live up to its wide remit. One close observer of the
preparations says: 'They are already arguing over tiny phrases within
sub-clauses - it's just like Rio all over again.' But other officials and
advisers report a 'refreshing' and unexpected absence, so far, of the
north-south divides that characterised much of the Rio debate.
Some feel that the apparent narrowing of the gap between north and south in
the past year reflects a change in underlying attitudes since Rio.
Mr Richard Sandbrook, director of the International Institute for
Environment and Development, an independent think-tank, says: 'Rio's effect
on governments is remarkable. It has changed attitudes in developing
countries more than in the OECD. A lot of them, such as Zimbabwe and
Pakistan, are drawing up sustainable development plans in a way they would
not have done before.'
By setting a precedent for international consensus, the Rio conventions may
have helped push through last November's international treaty, agreed in
Copenhagen, on curbing damage to the ozone layer.
Mr Chris Hampson, a board director of ICI, the UK chemicals group, and a
former member of the UK's recently disbanded Advisory Council on Business
and the Environment, which was set up by the Department of the Environment,
argues that Rio also brought about a change in businesses' approach to the
environment. 'It was the first international conference in which business
was brought in officially. It recognised that in the end business will have
to deliver the goods,' he says.
Despite such endorsements, the question of whether Rio had the right
priorities remains. Climate change still heads many governments' lists of
environmental concerns, and environmental groups report considerable public
support for the issue. But biodiversity questions have been partly eclipsed,
at least in the public mind, by recent battles over commercial whaling.
US and UK government officials also say privately that Rio's emphasis on
sustainable development and the third world is remote from the public's
environmental priorities, which tend to focus on conservation of the
countryside. Several academic economists have taken a tilt at the notion of
sustainable development promoted by Rio. They argue that the concept is
confused, given that any economic activity uses up some irreplaceable
resources.
Most important, perhaps, is that in the past year it has become clear that
Rio ducked several environmental issues which will dominate the next decade.
It had almost nothing to say on the growing conflict between proponents of
free trade and environmental regulation. Such battles have come to the fore
recently, for example, in the US's dispute with the General Agreement on
Trade and Tariffs about whether it can ban imports of Mexican tuna fish.
Rio was likewise reticent on the subject of population growth and birth
control, for fear that controversy would scupper the whole conference. Last
week, Mr Al Gore, the US vice-president, chose to devote much of his Rio
anniversary speech to these topics.
The limitations of Rio's agenda do not mean that its impact should be
dismissed. At the very least, by gathering together ministers from more than
100 countries, it established the principle that some environmental issues
are global and urgent, requiring international co-operation at the highest
governmental level.
But the record so far of the Rio signatories in devising practical answers
to problems of climate change and biodiversity is mixed. Rio called for
long-term solutions to long-term questions, but both its supporters and
critics want to know how long they should wait. On its first anniversary,
Rio offers inspiration for tackling the planet's environmental problems, but
has not yet produced solutions.
