FT  29 APR 93 / Germany defiant on Ekostahl subsidies
THE Treuhand agency responsible for privatising eastern German industry,
said yesterday it would continue to press the European Community to agree
subsidies for Ekostahl, the steel plant near the Polish border.
The European Commission said yesterday it could not support the Ekostahl
plan, which it said involved up to DM1.94bn (Pounds 780m) of state
subsidies, because it would add to severe over-capacity in the EC. Brussels
has told the Treuhand to find another way to save 2,000 jobs at the east
German plant.
But Mr Wolf Schode, the Treuhand's spokesman, said yesterday: 'We are
convinced, that if not now, then certainly in the future, we will obtain
subsidies so as to make Ekostahl competitive in the steel market.' Brussels
is already putting in place other parts of its plan to protect the EC
industry from the effects of over-capacity, recession and cheap non-EC
imports, but state subsidies could still be a stumbling block.
Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, and Mr Martin Bangemann,
responsible for industry, have called for a special meeting of EC industry
ministers in July to assess the Ekostahl state aid case, and parallel
proposals to subsidise the Spanish and Italian industries.
The credibility of the overall plan will be put in question if ministers do
not back a strict line on state subsidies unanimously. 'Only then will other
enterprises commit themselves to reduce capacity,' said Mr Van Miert
yesterday.
Brussels has already indicated its severe doubts about the Spanish
proposals, and will consider over the weekend new Italian plans for state
aid to Ilva, the country's loss-making steel producer.
Industry ministers will discuss the progress of the EC plan next Tuesday,
including an Ecu240m (Pounds 190m) budget for social aid, proposed by the
Commission yesterday. The cash, which will only be disbursed if matched by
member states, will help cover the cost of 50,000 to 60,000 steel industry
redundancies expected by 1995.
The Treuhand, which owns Ekostahl, requires two subsidy tranches aimed at
transforming the steel plant into a mini-mill, which would then be sold to
the private sector. The first tranche, totalling DM310m, would be earmarked
for modernising the cold rolling mill. The second phase envisages building a
mini-mill costing DM750m, for the production of hot-rolled flat products.
Western Germany's steel federation has opposed any subsidies on the grounds
that it would reopen the debate about subsidies in Spain and Italy. However,
both the Treuhand and the Ekostahl management believe that the steel
federation fears competition from a mini-mill which would produce high
quality steel.
'This is not a question of Ekostahl adding to the already high levels of
over-capacity,' a Treuhand official said. 'Ekostahl would not be producing
much more than its current 900,000 tons a year. As a mini-mill, it would no
longer be dependent on raw material imports from western Germany.
'It could stand on its own and be competitive. That is the issue,' the
spokesman added.
