FT  31 AUG 93 / Survey of Malaysia (11): Blackouts are embarrassing - The
race to build more power stations
ON SEPTEMBER 29 last year the lights went out through most of peninsular
Malaysia. The blackout, blamed on a freak lightning strike and described
officially as an Act of God, left many parts of the country without power
for several days.
In subsequent months there were a growing number of power breakdowns.
Earlier this year what industrialists and others had been talking about for
months became official - Malaysia was in the midst of a power crisis.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister, demanded prompt action. Mrs Rafidah
Aziz, minister of trade and industry, described the blackouts as
intolerable. Mrs Aziz deals with foreign investors in Malaysia: the fear was
that electricity shortages would have a damaging impact on the investment
climate.
Tenaga Nasional, the country's electricity utility which was partially
privatised early last year, has been taking steps to remedy the situation.
Maintenance work on existing facilities has been speeded up. Under a special
'fast track' energy programme, new power plants are being built.
The incidence of power shedding and blackouts has been reduced. Mr S Samy
Vellu, the energy minister, says that by the end of the year more than 500MW
of extra power will be available each day to meet maximum daily demands of
about 4,600MW.
But Malaysia's economic growth could run out of steam if power output is not
constantly expanded. Mr Samy Vellu estimates that Malaysia needs to invest
MDollars 10bn (Dollars 4bn) over the next 10 years to cope with increasing
electricity requirements. Over the next 25 years about MDollars 100bn will
have to be invested in the power sector.
Malaysia cannot meet these massive investment needs from its own resources:
it is therefore inviting independent power producers (IPPs) to participate
in building, owning and operating power plants.
Malaysia is the first country in the region to get such projects off the
ground. Already two IPPs have been granted power producing licences  - one
to build own and operate a 1,300MW plant at Lumut, in the northwest of
peninsular Malaysia, and the other for two plants with a combined capacity
of 1,230MW near Singapore in the south.
A variety of other IPP projects are also being considered. Foreign companies
are being encouraged to participate and are able to hold 25 per cent of
equity in the projects.
But there have been some hiccups. Foreign companies have complained that
there is a shortage of local expertise in the power sector and reliable
partners are difficult to find. There have also been accusations of
political favouritism in the government's granting of IPP licences.
Under new regulations the IPPs will purchase gas to feed their power plants
from Petronas, the state oil company, and sell power to Tenaga. These buying
and selling contracts, binding over an extended period, have proved very
difficult to negotiate. Financiers are also being cautious about extending
the large amounts of credit needed to build these IPP power plants.
However there are few who doubt that these plants will be built and
Malaysia's power output will be substantially expanded. 'It's got to
happen,' says an energy analyst. 'Without the power all the plans for
economic growth over the coming years will come to nothing.'
