FT  17 MAR 93 / Money Markets: Repo unchanged
THERE WERE strong expect-ations yesterday that the Bundesbank would cut
official rates at its council meeting this week, even though the central
bank left the rate at which it offers weekly funds to commercial banks
unchanged, writes James Blitz.
The Bundesbank announced that it would be setting a fixed rate repurchase
tender at 8.25 per cent, unaltered from the rate set two Fridays ago. The
move caused some disappointment in money markets, and the June Euromark
contract slipped 2 basis points to finish at 93.22.
However, some dealers suggested that the unchanged repo rate was largely
neutral and that there had recently been signs of a willingness among
Bundesbank council members to ease policy. The predominance of the bulls in
the market was seen by the fact that three-month D-Marks hovered at around
7.75 per cent, some 50 basis points below the current repo rate level.
Whatever the outlook for official policy, conditions in the German money
market remained tight as dealers continued to adjust to the recent changes
in the Bundesbank's minimum reserve requirements.
Call money was quoted as high as the Lombard rate level of 9 per cent. It
came down to about 8.67 per cent in the afternoon following comments from Mr
Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, a Bundesbank council member, who said that the German
central bank would aim to calm markets via the allocation of its securities
repurchase funds today.
In the sterling cash market, three-month money ended unchanged at 5 15/16
per cent after the UK chancellor made no alteration to UK base rates in his
budget statement.
Yesterday morning, there was speculation that Mr Lamont would ease UK
interest rates. Shortly before Mr Lamont spoke, three-month money was bid
down to around 5 7/8 per cent by speculators prepared to take a bet on a
cut. The March short sterling contract, which expires today, was also
trading at 94.10 shortly before the budget statement.
After the speech, the March contract fell steeply to 93.95, down 12 basis
points on the day. The sharp rise in the level of three-month sterling may
also have been due to the expectation that there will be large shortages in
the discount market later this week.
