FT  20 APR 93 / Forced from a cosy cocoon: America's Baby Bell telecoms
groups face radical changes
In the sunny suburbs of Orlando, Florida, you can gain an insight into one
of the most far reaching changes of industrial structure taking place in the
US - the slow death of the monopolies enjoyed by America's local telephone
companies. Orlando has been chosen by Time Warner, which runs the second
largest cable television system in America, as the commercial launch-pad for
one of the most ambitious interactive home entertainment and communications
networks yet attempted in the US.
An initial 4,000 subscribers will be able from next year to call up on their
cable television systems a wide range of movies on demand, as well as
inter-active video games and video home shopping. And stepping well beyond
cable TV's normal business, Time Warner wants eventually to offer its
Orlando customers personal communications services (PCS) - a kind of mobile,
wireless telephone system - and direct access to the lines of long-distance
telecommunications companies.
Both services could divert some business from the local telephone company.
Time Warner, which has already tested consumer appetite for its services in
the New York city borough of Queens, aims eventually to roll them out across
the US.
This is just one example of how technological change - in particular the
ability to translate video, audio and data information into digital form and
then transmit it along fibre optic lines - is blurring the distinction
between the US telecommunications, media and computer sectors. The three are
converging into a single industry, offering customers the ability to summon
up a wide range of communications services on a single video screen.
Radical change, therefore, confronts the seven 'Baby Bell' regional
companies which dominate the local industry, as well as the other
independent companies which are part of the patchwork of local
telecommunications monopolies.
On the one hand, the fraying of the local monopolies creates a significant
threat to the Baby Bells' financial performance just at a time when the
companies face big capital outlays on new technology. On the other, the new
world opens up huge new business opportunities if these slow-moving
companies can become nimble enough to grasp them - and are allowed to do so
by the state and federal regulators which monitor their every move.
'It is like the early stages of the collapse of the Soviet Union,' says Mr
Victor Schnee, of New Jersey consultancy Probe Research, the author of two
books which forecast much of the current turmoil. 'There are more volatile
and destabilising elements all the time. The perception of risk is growing
in each company.' But he adds that, just as in the former USSR, the
industry's leadership is riven by dissent over which direction to take.
The past few months have produced a series of different initiatives by local
telephone companies looking for ways to improve their positions in the
competitive new world. They include radical proposals by Ameritech, a Baby
Bell, and Independent Rochester Telephone to abandon their monopolies and
open their businesses to competition. In return, they seek greater freedom
from regulation. Other proposals include a scheme by Pacific Telesis to spin
off its wireless communications operations as a separate company.
Southwestern Bell has launched the first takeover bid for a large US cable
TV business by a leading telephone company.
The new competitive forces look likely to hasten the end of the American
telecommunications industry's unusual structure, which was imposed in 1984
by the so-called Modified Final Judgment (MFJ). This settled an anti-trust
court case against American Telephone and Telegraph, then the dominant
long-distance and local US telephone company, known as Ma' Bell.
AT&amp;T's local telephone operations were spun off into seven separate 'Baby
Bell' regional companies. The rump AT&amp;T was left with the long-distance
telephone market - where it faced competition from upstart rivals such as
MCI Communications and Sprint - and manufacturing telecommunications
equipment.
The judge overseeing the case, Mr Harold Greene, also barred the Baby Bells
from entering three markets - long distance, equipment manufacturing and
information services. He feared the companies, which account for some 80 per
cent of the local services' Dollars 90bn in annual revenues, might use their
monopoly telephone revenues to compete unfairly in these areas.
After a long campaign, the Baby Bells managed to get the information
services ban removed 18 months ago and they are pressing to be allowed into
the two other businesses, on the grounds that they now face significant
local competition. The companies still account for the bulk of local
communications traffic, but competition is growing in four important,
interlinked ways:
State and federal regulators have allowed new local telecommunications
companies, known as 'competitive access providers' (CAPs), to establish
themselves in many metropolitan areas, where they operate highly efficient
fibre optic networks. They cream off some of the local monopoly's most
profitable business customers by offering cheaper rates to transmit their
bulk traffic around the area and directly into networks run by long-distance
carriers.
The CAPs are still very small, accounting for only about 1.5 per cent of
total local telecommunications revenues. But some of the biggest have been
bought by cable TV companies, which gives them added financial clout, and
the business could grow rapidly thanks to a landmark ruling last September
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the government agency which
oversees the industry. The agency voted to allow the CAPs to link their
networks into those of the local telephone companies, so the newcomers can
offer private line services between states to business customers with
offices located out of the reach of the CAPs' often-restricted networks.
Long-distance carriers, led by AT&amp;T, resent the high charges they have to
pay the local telephone companies to carry calls over the last mile or two
of wire to customers. These 'access charges' bear little relation to the
cost of providing the service, yet account for about 30 per cent of local
operators' revenues and are the largest single expense for the long-distance
groups.
AT&amp;T and its rivals are urging that the local market be opened to greater
competition in the hope that this will cut access charges and spur traffic
growth. They are also themselves nibbling away at the local telephone
companies' revenues, since telecommunications regulators in over 30 states
now allow long-distance carriers to compete in the lucrative market for
intra-state medium-distance calls. New technology is about to make it much
easier for consumers to dial up an alternative service provider.
There has been a rapid growth in the US of the cellular telephone industry,
which offers an alternative means of communication to the local phone
company's network. The Baby Bells are among the leading players in this
business, since the federal government granted the local telephone
monopolies one of the two licences it issued to operate a cellular service
in each region.
However, the second licences are held by independent providers and the
largest of these, McCaw Cellular, frightened the Baby Bells late last year
by agreeing to sell 33 per cent of its equity to their arch-enemy, AT&amp;T.
If the deal goes through it will give AT&amp;T its first foothold back in the
local market, as well as another potential means of bypassing the Baby
Bells' access charges.
Wireless competition to the Bells will intensify over the next few years
when the FCC gives the go-ahead for PCS, a new kind of mobile communications
network which uses small, inexpensive, lightweight phones.
Cable TV companies, including Time Warner in Orlando, have made clear that
they intend to play a significant role in PCS, since they can cut the costs
of installing a system by piggy-backing it on their cable network.
The Bell companies face an even bigger tussle with the cable companies over
which industry will dominate the provision of new multi-media services to
the American home, ranging from movies-on-demand to video telephones and
home shopping.
Both industries could exploit the market, since each already has
communications wires running into US homes and these can be upgraded through
the use of fibre optic cable and modern technology for compressing digital
images and switching, or routing, information.
But the two industries also have distinct strengths and weaknesses. Cable
companies are experts in providing entertainment, which is likely to account
for the most intensive home use of the new systems.
They also have a capital investment advantage: the relatively high capacity
of their existing co-axial cable means they should not initially have to
place as much fibre optic cable in the local network as the telephone
companies, whose systems consist largely of low-capacity twisted copper
wires.
The phone companies, for their part, have much greater financial muscle
(their Dollars 90bn of annual revenues compares with cable's Dollars 20bn)
and have two important skills which the cable sector lacks - precise routing
of two-way information flows and sophisticated billing techniques.
The local phone companies - whether or not they are Baby Bells - still face
a huge barrier to full participation in multi-media. They are barred by law
from owning a cable operator in the area where they provide
telecommunications services. However, the past two years have seen
regulatory changes allowing them to at least get a foothold in the video
industry.
The first was the 1991 relaxation of the ban on the Baby Bells entering the
information service industry. This paved the way for Southwestern Bell,
which serves Texas and surrounding states, to make an agreed Dollars 650m
bid last February for two cable systems in suburban Washington, DC. The deal
still has to be approved by Judge Greene, but assuming it goes ahead it will
be the first acquisition of a big cable system by a telephone company - and
will set an important example for others to follow.
The second regulatory break-through came last year when the FCC permitted
telephone companies to offer 'video dial tone' - in other words, to transmit
television programmes over their own lines for third parties.
One of the first to take advantage of this is Bell Atlantic, the Baby Bell
serving the middle of the eastern US seaboard, which is making particularly
energetic thrusts into multi-media services. It has agreed, for example, to
build a state-of-the-art fibre optic cable television transmission system
(which will also carry its own telephone services) in three New Jersey
communities for the incumbent cable operator.
This is but one example of increasing co-operation between cable and
telephone companies in multi-media ventures, suggesting that the current
tussle may end up in a complex series of partnerships between the two sides,
rather than a clear-cut victory for one industry or the other.
With all these competitive forces intensifying, the Baby Bells need to
become more entrepreneurial, but they are hamstrung not only by their
cautious traditions but also by regulations.
In an unusually bold attempt to overcome both these problems, Ameritech, the
Chicago-based Baby Bell, recently announced a total reorganisation of
operations to make it much more 'customer focused,' as well as a radical
proposal for reform of the industry.
It has proposed opening its local system to competition, allowing other
companies to provide services by connecting directly into its distribution
network.
In return, however, it wants to be allowed to enter the long-distance and
cable markets, and be freed from so-called rate of return regulation, which
puts a ceiling on its profits, rather than its prices.
Many analysts think the local communications industry is broadly heading in
the direction outlined by Ameritech, but getting there is likely to be
extremely messy and highly political. The government agencies with a say in
the matter include the FCC, which is awaiting a new Democratic appointee as
chairman; the Justice Department; Judge Greene; local state regulators;
Congress, which in recent years has repeatedly considered legislation to
liberate the Baby Bells; and Vice-President Al Gore, who favours letting the
telephone companies fully into cable.
The Clinton administration, which professes great enthusiasm for the
creation of '21st century information super-highways,' could try and bang
some of these heads together to produce a coherent national
telecommunications strategy. But for the moment the main catalysts of change
in the industry are market pressures, such as those under way in Orlando.
