FT  13 JUL 93 / Markets unfazed by crop losses
CROP losses from the high rainfall and flooding in the US Midwest have so
far been around Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn), according to estimates from Iowa
State University, with nearly half the losses in flooded Iowa farm country.
Some counties in Iowa have had three times the normal amount of rainfall
this month, deluging the richest corn-growing area in the US.
Nearly 4m acres of prime midwestern farmland have either been too wet to
plant spring crops or flooded by the swollen rivers.
While that may mean disaster for many individual farmers, the impact on
world cereal prices is expected to be very small. 'This is not a significant
event,' said Mr Dennis Starleaf, head of the economics department at Iowa
State University. 'It is way too early to tell if we won't actually get a
boost in yields because of the excess moisture.'
There is an old market axiom that 'rain makes grain'. Although farm country
on either side of the Mississippi river is under water, and floods are
occurring in other parts of Iowa and Missouri, crops in the eastern US corn
belt, in the states of Ohio, Indiana, and eastern Illinois, are in excellent
condition.
Also, farmers still have over 2bn bushels of maize in store from last year's
crop. The feedgrain supply is more than adequate, with few prospects for
long-term food price inflation, Mr Starleaf said.
At the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, traders sent soyabean prices
sharply lower as flood-related panic buying ebbed. Prices for harvest-time
delivery are up over 20 per cent since mid-June, to more than Dollars 7 a
bushel.
However, yesterday's setback was predictable after such a big rise. Crop
analysts now fear that if high prices are sustained through the summer, it
will encourage Brazilian farmers to plant record acreage with soyabeans.
A loss of 4m acres to the floods is small when compared to the 56m that were
planted with maize and soyabeans in the US last year, when record yields
resulted in a bumper 240.8m metric tonne maize crop and a respectable 60m
tonne soyabean harvest.
Soyabean prices will increase sharply and US exports will fall because of
the midwestern flooding, according to a US Department of Agriculture
economist, Dr Scott Sanford.
Weekly crop projections published yesterday show the price of soyabeans will
increase an average of 50c a bushel.
Damage to soyabean crops comes on the heels of several years of bumper
crops. 'We've been in a spate of record crops because production has been
moving out of lower yielding areas such as the south-east and delta and into
the corn belt,' said Dr Sanford.
The price increase, he said, would make US exports less competitive on the
world market. The higher prices might also hit livestock prices. The USDA
reduced projected yields from 2.04bn bushels to 1.97bn.
Projected maize yields were also reduced, by 650m bushels to 7.85bn bushels,
by the flooding. Price rises are expected to be low, however, because of
large stocks of corn - up an average 15c a bushel to Dollars 2.20.
