FT  07 AUG 93 / International Company News: Astra may strengthen links with
Merck
SHARES in Astra, Sweden's leading pharmaceuticals group, rose 4 per cent in
early trading yesterday on news that its licensing agreement with Merck, the
world's largest prescription drug company, is set to become a full-scale
joint venture.
Merck's US sales of three Astra products passed Dollars 500m in the year to
July, setting in motion the creation of the new venture under an agreement
dating from 1982.
Astra must decide by early 1995 whether to take a 50 per cent stake in the
business. If it does - as seems likely - it will have to pay Merck an amount
equal to its US licence sales in the year from September 1 1993, which given
the fast growth of the business, could be as much as Dollars 700m.
Until then, Merck would continue to own Astra/Merck, which is based in
Wayne, Pennsylvania, although it would be run as a separate entity.
Astra's shares rose 4.4 per cent to SKr165 early yesterday, although they
ended the day unchanged at SKr158.
Astra products marketed by Merck are the anti-peptic ulcer agent Losec
(under its US name Prilosec), and two heart drugs, Plendil and Tonocard.
Merck has also filed a new drug application for Roxiam, a new
Astra-developed therapy for schizophrenia.
By taking a half stake in the venture, Astra would get 50 per cent of the
profits from the US sales of these drugs, rather than a royalty on sales as
at present.
At the same time, the collaboration with Merck could deepen, with additional
drugs being brought into the venture, as Merck would gain the right to most
pharmaceutical discoveries from Astra's research in the future. However, the
agreement would remain restricted to the US market.
Mr Roy Vagelos, Merck chairman and chief executive, said: 'It's a very
important step for Merck because it establishes an independent company and
therefore guarantees the flow of research products from the Astra
laboratories.'
Losec, in particular has proved a great success for Astra. Total sales of
the drug (including those through licensees) soared 70 per cent in the first
three months of 1993 to reach SKr2.64bn (Dollars 328.8m).
