FT  02 FEB 93 / Currencies will be picked off one by one, Irish warn
THE Irish government yesterday denounced the management of the European
exchange rate mechanism and warned that, without closer co-operation, member
states' currencies risked being 'picked off one by one' on the foreign
exchange markets.
However, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, last night threw
his weight behind the European Monetary System, arguing that it had a good
long-term record in promoting monetary stability and economic convergence
across Europe.
Mr Dick Spring, Irish minister for external affairs, told his European
Community counterparts meeting in Brussels that a more effective collective
response was needed to deter speculators following the weekend devaluation
of the punt.
Without naming the French franc, which has received substantial support from
the Bundesbank, he suggested some countries were receiving more support than
others.
The 10 per cent devaluation of the punt last Saturday led to speculation
that the franc would soon come under attack. But Mr Michel Sapin, the French
finance minister, yesterday insisted that France and Germany would continue
to support the currency. 'If the franc is attacked we will fight back with
the same determination and the same methods.'
The franc has been shrouded by speculation since last week's reduction in UK
base rates. Mr Sapin criticised the British for renewing the tension in the
ERM with an 'every man for himself' policy.
However, Mr Schlesinger also hinted, in a speech in London, that more
realignments might be needed before Europe reached the final goal of fixed
exchange rates as part of economic and monetary union.
Speaking to the Overseas Bankers' Club at the Guildhall, the Bundesbank
president warned that, with Britain having no firm plans to rejoin the
exchange rate mechanism, there would be 'less compulsion' for the UK to take
the necessary steps ahead of union to harmonise its economy with the rest of
Europe.
He went out of his way to sound conciliatory about Britain, suggesting that
for Europe to go ahead with economic and monetary union without the UK would
be inappropriate. In a determinedly positive reference about the EMS, Mr
Schlesinger said the recent spell of currency turbulence in Europe did not
mean the system had failed.
Mr Berie Ahern, Irish finance minister, said at the weekend that smaller
countries were at a disadvantage, while France was able to get a 'separate
deal' in support of the franc.
