FT  18 AUG 93 / Rexrodt moves to defuse VW spying row with GM
MR GUNTER Rexrodt, the German economics minister, yesterday stepped into the
bitter dispute between the motor giants Volkswagen and Adam Opel, General
Motors' German subsidiary, apparently aiming to defuse the conflict.
His intervention is a clear indication of concern at the highest levels of
the German government over the damage done to the country's international
reputation by the row over the alleged theft of industrial secrets.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, as well as Mr Rexrodt himself, has already publicly
urged the two sides to settle their differences.
Mr Rexrodt invited Mr David Herman, chairman of Adam Opel, for talks at the
economics ministry in Bonn last night and he has agreed on a similar meeting
with Mr Ferdinand Piech, the VW chairman, to be held on Friday. Both
companies have agreed to the discussions.
A ministry spokeswoman said Mr Rexrodt was not seeking to mediate directly
in the dispute, in which GM has accused VW of industrial espionage and the
theft of confidential docu-ments. 'He is merely seeking to inform himself
about the situation, and about the arguments on both sides,' she said.
The move was immediately welcomed by VW as a step towards peace talks
between the two companies. They have been at loggerheads since Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, former global purchasing director for GM,
defected to VW in March. GM accused Mr Lopez and several associates of
systematically plundering industrial secrets before their departure.
There was less enthusiasm from senior officials at Opel, who insist that
before the two companies can sit down together Mr Piech must withdraw what
Opel sees as anti-American accusations against GM, and his suggestion that
the US company was somehow responsible for planting its secret documents on
VW employees.
In a furious outburst last month, Mr Piech suggested GM was trying to damage
VW in a commercially motivated war. This week he underscored his commitment
to his production director, repeating that he would 'put my hand in the
fire' for Mr Lopez.
Opel officials added yesterday that the company would not enter peace talks
while the German legal authorities were in the middle of an investigation
into allegations of theft, industrial espionage and fraud.
At VW, Mr Otto Wachs, a company spokesman, said the Rexrodt initiative was
'very much to be welcomed, because it supports us in our efforts to talk to
each other. For two weeks we have been trying to initiate talks with Opel,
but so far without success,' he said.
Yesterday, Mr Georg Nauth, spokesman for the public prosecutor's office in
Darmstadt, which is responsible for the investigation, expressed some doubt
about VW's move to appoint independent assessors KPMG Deutsche Treuhand. He
insisted his office was already in possession of more information than would
be available to an independent investigator.
'An independent investigator cannot undertake searches, cannot confiscate
documents, and cannot make inquiries at Opel,' he said.
GM diesel engines to be built in Germany, Page 12
