FT  11 MAY 93 / UK Company News: CLS contracts help Sidlaw maintain mid-term
outcome
SIDLAW GROUP, the oil services, packaging and textiles combine, reported
flat pre-tax profits of Pounds 4.6m in the six months to March 31, in spite
of a jump in turnover from Pounds 45m to Pounds 71.5m.
Sales benefited from a new Pounds 22.7m marine services contract to charter
and manage standby and supply vessels for BP and Conoco.
The deal did not contribute any profits, but it is an important part of the
group's strategy of developing Contract Logistics Services contracts, which
involve managing the supply chain to North Sea operators.
The group said it would try to achieve further cost savings for its
customers and could rent out surplus deck space on the vessels.
Disregarding the new contract, oil services saw sales marginally ahead at
Pounds 15.6m (Pounds 15.4m). Operating profits improved to Pounds 3.06m
(Pounds 2.73m), on the back of a higher contribution from the CLS contracts.
Activity was affected by lower levels of drilling and hook-up support work,
and by several weeks of bad weather. The division also absorbed start-up
costs for Supplylink, a joint venture set up to offer CLS to the oil
industry internationally.
On the packaging side the operating profits were flat at Pounds 2m on sales
of Pounds 20.9m (Pounds 18m).
Falcon Packaging was integrated into the division, but recession continued
to squeeze margins.
Operating profits from the Dundee-based textiles division declined from
Pounds 451,000 to Pounds 298,000 on sales which rose marginally from Pounds
11.6m to Pounds 12.3m. While jute continued to fall, yarns used in the
carpet industry consolidated progress made last year.
Mr Digby Morrow, chief executive, said: 'The group's businesses have come
through the recession intact and well positioned for growth as economic
recovery gather momentum. One again, oil services has increased its profits
and there are encouraging signs that business is picking up in packaging.'
Earnings per share fell to 9.2p (9.5p) but the interim dividend is stepped
up to 4.25p (3.75p).
