FT  20 NOV 93 / Capital Spending (23): Necessary luxuries - Puritans may try
to purge useless objects - but they never succeed for long, we all need them
ANY archaeologist will confirm that there is nothing unnecessary about
luxury goods. Far from it. In the silent graves of innumerable past
societies, the relics most eloquent about individual status and power are
precisely those whose beauty has got the better of their functionality. The
golden filigree fibula; the chased silver drinking cup; the outrageously
plumed helmet; the inlaid horse bits, and the delicate brazen chariot.
Accoutrements like these were never intended for hard, everyday use. They
were wheeled out for ceremonies to dazzle and intimidate. They were not so
much the instruments of rule as the signals of authority.
There is a timeless quality to the accumulation of luxuries which has
resisted campaigns to be censorious about excess and cleave to the simple
life. Anti-sumptuary strictures have never held for long. In Cromwell's
time, Puritans purged luxuries as diverse as poodles, tapestries and
petticoats. To the committed Puritan, there is hardly anything that cannot
be deemed impure. Envy, and the sheer pleasure of unpunished vandalism,
probably account for most of those moments in history when someone briefly
cajoles his fellows into making bonfires of their vanities. But the poodles
and petticoats return. It is inhuman to do without them; we are lost in an
unnatural limbo of egalitarianism.
The nexus of luxury and power does not, of course, release luxury from moral
evaluation. Stern antique Romans regarded luxury and avarice as twins; and
sometimes they went further in their disapproval by pairing luxury with
insanity. Nero's wife, who had her favourite horse shod with golden shoes,
was thereby as mad as Nero himself. The love of luxury was traced to a
contempt for nature: not, I think, a necessary connection, although it is
certainly true that the collectors of ivory knick-knacks do not care whether
the elephant population declines or dies. The truth is that each individual
will regard some luxury or other as offensive. In my case, it is
personalised car number plates; in my father's, a bottle of champagne. But
this does not mean that we want to legislate against those who cherish these
things. So long as we are left with our own indulgences (Egyptian cotton
sheets; a little cigar at Christmas), we will tolerate the foolishness of
others.
There is, however, a terrible irony about the consumption of luxuries in the
late twentieth century. By definition a luxurious lifestyle ought to be easy
and hedonistic. Yet the reality is that modern luxury goods are aimed at
those who lead anything but a relaxed and otiose life. So many of the
luxuries themselves are concerned with strict timekeeping and frenetic
travel. No wonder that the best place to survey the exposure of luxury goods
is an international airport (at Heathrow par excellence).
Partly the airport luxuries are designed to glamorise what is essentially a
tedious and still unnerving form of transport. The departures lounge is a
sort of prison for the condemned, but it does not seem that way if there is
a bar dispensing oysters and caviar. Partly the airport luxuries are
pandering to Oriental gift cultures, in which a bottle of brandy costing
Pounds 500 duty free can be billed as a bargain. But primarily the cocoon of
luxuries protects the social status of the travellers.
Picture the businessman dispatched abroad. What the trip really entails is a
flog across continents to a lonely room in an anonymous hotel for a series
of stuffy encounters with alien people. But no captain of industry can admit
to that. So you see him in the airport shopping malls, both determined and
obliged not to return home empty-handed. He glances at his Rolex Oyster,
finds he has time to buy his wife a bottle of Chanel; signs for it with his
Mont Blanc pen, and slots it into his Bond Street hand baggage. The names of
the goods manage to be both discreet and significant: and they are what
counts, for they say that the business trip was not hellish at all, but what
everyone else would love to be doing.
Hence that curious new phrase, essential luxuries. It ought to be a paradox,
if luxuries are understood to be such items as are desirable but not
indispensable. But it is more than the remorseless logic of conspicuous
consumption. It is precisely what our Bronze Age ancestors understood.
Luxuries massage our egos and buttress our place in the world. We could
hardly do without them.
