FT  16 OCT 93 / Sport: Taylor: a hard man to replace - Soccer
GRAHAM TAYLOR, England's soccer manager, is not without tactical acumen. Nor
does he lack courage. On Wednesday night, soon after his team had lost 2-0
to Holland in their World Cup qualifying match, he strode into a crowded
press conference, sat behind the microphone and went straight on to the
attack. 'I have never been a person to make excuses,' he began. (Actually,
that is not quite true but let it pass). 'But . . .'
He then began a detailed complaint about the serious incidents that turned
the game against England: Ronald Koeman should have been sent off for
fouling David Platt in a scoring position; Jan Wouters should have been
punished for encroaching at the subsequent free kick. Taylor pointed out
that when, a minute later, the Dutch were given a free kick in a similar
position, Tony Adams was punished for a similar offence and Koeman, 'who
should not have been on the field,' scored from the re-taken kick.
Taylor listed England's string of near misses when shots twice hit the post
and two others were cleared off the line. Unprompted, he showed his
fair-mindedness by saying he thought Frank Rijkaard was not offside, as the
referee ruled, when he put the ball in England's net in the first half. He
stressed that the game was 'not about team selection' and 'not about
formations' - the two areas where he had been criticised beforehand - but
about 'incidents.'
It was a strong, coherent, eloquent performance - indeed, one of the reasons
Taylor was picked for the job in the first place was his ability to talk to
the press - but, like that of his team, it was largely in vain. Most of his
critics were not even there. Many were still in the press box struggling to
meet the deadlines imposed by the game's 8.15 pm kick-off. A few had already
made their way to the bar.
In truth, Taylor's post-match press conferences normally are brief, polite
affairs, especially when there is no Paul Gascoigne to discuss. Perhaps it
is the English dread of creating a scene, especially in front of foreigners.
On Wednesday night, he was asked only one question: would he 'soldier on? -
a polite way of asking if he would resign. With rising emotion, Taylor said
he would not quit although, typically, it took him five minutes to make the
point. Then, he stood up. As his back disappeared through the door, it was
almost possible to see the daggers quivering between his shoulder blades.
Taylor's England contract runs to the end of this season and his team can
still qualify for the World Cup although, as he admitted on Wednesday, it
would take a 'major miracle.' If that does not happen, the Football
Association will be tempted to look around for a replacement.
The scars of the traumatic relations between successive England managers and
the press will shape the decision, as they helped to shape the selection of
Taylor and the likeable Bobby Robson before him. Robson was at the match as
an analyst for Dutch television; white-haired, seemingly healthy and happy,
his familiar figure brought a pang of nostalgia for the long years of his
timid managership. Terror of being humiliated by the press has distorted the
way the FA treats the job of England manager.
The simple answer to the FA's dilemma is to pick a manager who will win
every game - but no one believes that any of the leading candidates is
capable of such witchcraft.
Furthermore, the sight of Rijkaard, Koeman, Dennis Bergkamp, Bryan Roy and
Marc Overmars tearing into England on Wednesday was a reminder that Taylor
did not have a world-class player in his squad.
It is possible to succeed at international level without a Bergkamp or a
Rijkaard; Norway has shown that. But Egil Olsen, the Norwegian manager, has
said he does not think his team's rigorously workmanlike approach would be
tolerated by English fans and press. The England team must succeed by
expressing the national genius. If it falters, its failures are read as
symptoms of national decay. It must assert the English virtues of heart,
stomach and sinew in the face of foreign cunning and sophistication.
Taylor has made mistakes. He has failed to grasp that international players
need to be nurtured. He was too willing to discard members of the 1990 World
Cup semi-final team: Des Walker, Chris Waddle and, until this week, Paul
Parker. Taylor also helped drive Gary Lineker into premature exile. He
failed to cultivate replacements. His selections were inconsistent.
Yes, Wednesday's game was one of 'incident.' Yes, England had the chances to
steal it. But if Taylor's team had taken more than one point from Norway
earlier, it would not have been in that position.
Taylor has not been a good England manager. But, on Wednesday, as he made
his excuses to the journalists and left, it was difficult not to respect his
courage. He has taken the relentless personal criticism, although not always
with dignity, and kept coming back for more. For that reason, he will be
difficult to replace.
