FT  02 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Food retailers fall
Renewed concerns over the severity of the price war among Britain's
supermarkets once again undermined confidence in the food retail sector,
although there were also hints of a change in sentiment in some quarters.
But share prices reacted first and foremost to further worries over growing
pressure on margins, after Hoare Govett lopped Pounds 10m off its profit
forecast for Asda. Other brokers were believed to have followed suit among
talk of tough competitive pressures in several regions of the UK.
Asda shares slipped 2 3/4 to 55p in turnover of 19m. J Sainsbury slumped 13
1/2 to 416p, upset also by the imminent arrival of US warehouse clubs to the
UK. Tesco fell 4 1/2 to 193p and Argyll 6 1/2 to 288p.
However, there were also hints from certain brokers that recent falls in an
already battered sector have been overdone.
At least one broker yesterday was shifting to a more positive stance and
another is believed to be preparing to turn positive next week.
Intriguingly, there is talk that the unnamed broker may use a large warrant
issue as a means of encouraging clients back into the sector.
Shares in composite insurers traded strongly, after a clutch of brokers
turned more positive on the sector and whispers of impending corporate
activity did the rounds.
SG Warburg advised investors to move from 'underweight to neutral' in
anticipation of good third-quarter results.
Robert Fleming issued a bullish circular saying: 'Improving
fundamentals-real GDP growth and positive real bond yields also make the UK
composites look attractive, especially in comparison to some European
insurers.'
Credit Lyonnais was also reported to have issued a recommendation, with
added spice coming from talk of an imminent bid in the sector. Commercial
Union advanced 17 to 630p, while Guardian Royal Exchange put on 5 to 218p,
and Royal Insurance gained 15 to 320p. General Accident rose 18 to 719p.
Shares in Aberdeen Trust edged a penny forward to 60 1/2 p, after Panmure
Gordon crossed 2 1/2 m shares at 59 3/4 p.
Standard Chartered jumped 24 to 968p after news late in the session that it
had received Pounds 25.9m in settlement of its claim against National
Housing Bank of India.
This week's Opec output agreement continued to underpin the oil sector. BP,
a strong feature for most of the week, gained another 5 to 329 1/2 p, while
Shell Transport firmed 6 to 676p.
Enterprise Oil, which also benefited from broker's recommendations earlier
in the week gained 12 to 470p. Strong two-way business in Lasmo brought
turnover of 16m as the shares edged a half-penny forward to 145 1/2 p.
With consumer stocks largely friendless yesterday, utility stocks found some
support, although waters were undone by a dividend cut from NatWest
Securities. The broker slashed its dividend growth forecast for five stocks
 -Anglian, North West, South West, Severn Trent and Yorkshire - from 9 per
cent to 7.5 per cent. Thames suffered a similar fate last month. NatWest
said lower inflation and cautious comments from the companies had
contributed to the cuts.
Anglian slipped a penny to 526p, North West the same to 511p, South West 5
to 560p and Severn Trent 2 to 531p. Yorkshire was steady at 538p, as was
Thames at 536p.
Chemicals group Courtaulds fell 20 to 496p as Smith New Court reduced its
forecast for 1994 profits to Pounds 182m, from Pounds 195m. The forecast,
which has now fallen in line with that of other analysts, was attributed to
worsening competitive conditions. Mr Charles Lambert at Smith suggested that
Courtaulds's 'steady growth image was tarnished'.
Shares in motors group Avon Rubber fell 5p ahead of speculation that
analysts' reports were unfavourable.
The fallout from this week's hectic activity in the drinks sector impacted
on several stocks. Whitbread, seen as the chief casualty in the battle for
Chef and Brewer, lost 7 to 520p. Drinks analysts said that the failure to
land the pub and restaurant chain, together with scepticism over whether it
will now buy Forte's Harvester group, have put hopes of a share
restructuring on the back burner. Industry watchers had been optimistic that
the group would have changed its archaic share system if it were to make a
big acquisition. Meanwhile, Forte continued to suffer from Thursday's poor
results, closing 6 down at 221p.
Scottish and Newcastle, the eventual buyer of Chef and Brewer, gained 5 to
467p. NatWest Securities moved from a sell to a hold on the stock and now
believe it has the ability to take market share from its big rivals,
although teething problems remain.
Turnover in Hanson topped 24m and the shares bounced 3 3/4 to 253 1/2 p.
Hoare Govett was reported to be positive.
