FT  03 MAR 93 / British Gas uses Eurobonds to raise Pounds 400m at less than
8%
BRITISH Gas raised Pounds 400m in the international bond market yesterday,
joining the growing number of UK companies seeking to secure long-term
borrowings at the lowest interest rates since the 1970s.
The strength of demand for longer-dated sterling bonds enabled British Gas
to fulfil a large part of its 1993 borrowing programme of Pounds 500m in one
move. The utility launched two Eurobond issues, each of Pounds 200m, one
with a maturity of seven years and the other with 10 years. The average
fixed interest rate paid by British Gas is less than 8 per cent.
Mr Arthur Burgess, British Gas's group treasurer, said: 'If someone had told
us two or three years ago that we would be able to accomplish this, we would
not have believed it.'
Other recent corporate borrowers have been Argyll, the supermarket group,
which raised Pounds 150m through a seven-year Eurobond issue, and Peugeot
Talbot Motor Company, the UK subsidiary of the French car group, which
tapped the market for Pounds 100m through a Eurobond issue with a maturity
of just under five years.
Mr Burgess acknowledged that long-term interest rates may fall further
still, but added that there might be some wait before base rates were cut
again. 'It seemed sensible to us to borrow now,' he said.
The proceeds from yesterday's issues will be used for general corporate
funding. British Gas has heavy investments in capital projects, and plans to
spend up to Pounds 2bn this year on capital expenditure.
A scarcity of longer-dated corporate bonds has reduced the premium that
companies have to pay over the yield on UK government bonds, resulting in
cheaper borrowing costs to the issuer.
Last week, Royal Insurance raised Pounds 100m worth of subordinated
Eurobonds due 2003. Mr Roy Randall, head of group corporate relations at
Royal Insurance, said the beneficial interest rates meant a big saving in
the group's borrowing costs.
Also last week, Woolwich Building Society raised a similar amount of
subordinated sterling Eurobonds, but with a much longer maturity of 24 3/4
years. At the end of January, the Royal Bank of Scotland launched Pounds
150m of 20-year Eurobonds.
Capital markets, Page 29
