FT  07 SEP 93 / Business and the Law: Jury is out over a mass of minutiae -
Calls to reform the over-complicated and over-stretched industrial tribunal
system
What did 140,000 UK policemen do recently when they spotted a potential
pensions loophole in an opinion from the Advocate General of the European
Court of Justice?
The answer is they turned to the UK industrial tribunals - each and every
one of them filed a separate sex discrimination claim. Firemen, air traffic
controllers and some bank workers piled in, too, with the result that the
already over-stretched tribunals acquired the equivalent of more than two
years' work almost overnight.
The policemen are watching the Coloroll group of cases on which judgment in
the ECJ is expected soon. The cases follow an earlier judgment on sex
equality in occupational pensions and the court is being asked to decide
whether employers may pay higher lump sum pensions to women because they
live longer than men. The advocate general has suggested that men with
complaints in train when the judgment is delivered could qualify for extra
benefits - hence, on Police Federation advice, the flurry of complaints to
tribunals.
These recent mass claims, springing from machinations in Luxembourg, provide
an extreme example of how far industrial tribunals have departed from their
original function.
When the first tribunals were set up 30 years ago in the UK, they had a
simple job: to hear employers' complaints about the training levy then in
operation.
Since then, a stream of changes to the law has widened the jurisdiction of
tribunals, making them virtually local labour courts dealing with most
employment matters. This domestic jurisdiction has been overlaid recently by
rulings from Brussels and Luxembourg.
As the scope of industrial tribunals has widened, criticism of them has
mounted. Allegations by users - employers as well as employees - of delays
in cases being heard and excessive legalism are prompting demands for an
overhaul of the system.
Mr David Cockburn, a partner with Pattinson &amp; Brewer, a law firm which often
acts for trade unions, has experience of how complex proceedings may now be.
He represented a group of sacked Tilbury dockers in the longest-ever
tribunal case. After 205 days of hearings between 1989 and 1992, 447 pages
of written decision, and a further 13 days in the Employment Appeal
Tribunal, the case is awaiting a Court of Appeal decision. Costs so far
total about Pounds 3m.
The dockers' case presents a very different picture from the 'simple
palm-tree justice' tribunals were expected to dispense, says Mr Cockburn.
'Tribunals were even staffed in the beginning by old colonial judges. The
intention was they would be speedy, informal and cheap, determining
reasonableness in accordance with common sense criteria, rather than the
interpretation of legislation or precedent.'
But, according to critics, those early aims, set out in 1968, are not being
met. Mr Peter Martin, head of legal affairs at the Engineering Employers'
Federation says that most employers consider tribunals to be a 'good thing
but they're disappointed in the way they're operating now'.
The Confederation of British Industry echoes this view.
With the relative decline of trade union power and the break-up of national
bargaining between employers and unions, the entire industrial relations
setting has changed so much that there should be a rethink, says Mr
Cockburn.
'Tribunals grew up at a time when the law largely kept out of industrial
relations and grievances were dealt with around the bargaining table. Now
many employees look to the law as the way of solving employment-related
problems,' he says.
The most common complaint against tribunals is that there are excessive
delays in cases being heard. In England and Wales, half of cases have to
wait over six months before being dealt with; Scotland appears to be more
efficient, with only 20 per cent of cases having to wait that long.
Critics claim backlogs reached ridiculous proportions after tribunals ran
out of money in mid-1990. The use of part-time chairmen for hearings was
suspended to make savings, resulting in a temporary 40 per cent fall in the
number of hearings.
Since then, tribunals in England and Wales have had a new president, Judge
Timothy Lawrence, who says the problem of delays is being tackled by
increased funding and the recruitment of more chairmen. But he points to
difficulties caused by an 'enormous and unprecedented increase in work' for
the tribunals in recent years.
In 1990-91, there were about 43,000 applications registered with tribunals
in the UK; the next year this leapt to almost 67,500; for 1992-93 the figure
stands at just under 72,000. It remains to be seen what the policemens'
claims will do for this year's total.
Judge Lawrence blames the recession for much of the increase in tribunal
cases. Two-thirds of applications recently have concerned allegations of
unfair dismissal.
He also believes people have become more aware of their rights and that an
increasing number of white-collar workers on higher salaries have been
bringing complaints - and their legal representatives - to tribunals.
Delays are not a problem only for applicants, according to the CBI and EEF.
Mr Michael O'Connor, head of employment law at the CBI, says managers
dislike having cases hanging over them.
Apart from long delays, the next most frequent criticism of tribunals is
that they have become legalistic to an absurd degree - the Tilbury dockers'
case is an extreme example. The original concept was that applicants should
be able to conduct their own cases.
Judge Lawrence accepts that 'inevitably and sadly' legalism has increased
and attributes this mainly to 'outside influences' such as the higher
courts, parliament and the EC.
The Equal Opportunities Commission describes current equal pay laws, which
are among the most difficult for tribunals to interpret, as 'grotesquely
complex'. Mr Alan Lakin, senior legal adviser, has described the laws as
'paradise for lawyers but hell for women'.
It is small wonder, says Mr Cockburn, that when applicants are faced with
such complexities they feel the need for legal representation. While most
applicants still survive without lawyers, 'there is no doubt the difficult
cases are getting more difficult', adds Mr Cockburn.
Long delays and increasing legalism can also be attributed to the almost
haphazard growth in tribunals' jurisdiction. The latest piece of labour
legislation, the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Act, increases the
tribunals' workload still further. It extends employment protection measures
and makes tribunals responsible for sorting out some grievances against
trade unions.
Says Mr Martin: 'Tribunals have grown up piecemeal. I don't think anybody
has stood back and looked at the whole system until recently, when things
have started to get bogged down. The whole thing has grown up in a very
English, pragmatic way.'
The Engineering Employers' Federation is now calling for the government to
review the entire workings of tribunals. There would be no shortage of
suggestions to such a review from lawyers, pressure groups and academics. Mr
Martin, for example, would like to see binding settlements more easily
reached, without the need to go to a tribunal in the first place. He would
also advocate a move to replace the 'forest of case law' with updated codes
of practice on issues such as dismissal on the grounds of ill-health.
A move away from the adversarial and towards a more inquisitorial approach,
with a greater use of written statements, is also frequently mentioned by
would-be reformers as a way of getting more quickly to the heart of
disputes.
The latest suggestion for reform has come from Roy Lewis and Jon Clark,
respectively professors of law and industrial relations at the University of
Southampton. In a pamphlet published by the Institute of Employment Rights,
which is being launched this week at the TUC congress in Brighton, they
argue that arbitration could provide a voluntary alternative to the tribunal
route*.
In the first detailed exposition of how such a scheme might work, they say
that 'alternative dispute resolution' has become a fashionable topic in
areas as diverse as matrimonial and commercial disputes. In employment
matters, they argue, the opposite seems to be happening.
The two, who are themselves on the panel of arbitrators for the Advisory,
Conciliation and Arbitration Service, see arbitration as potentially a
fairer, cheaper and more accessible method of parties settling their
differences. The increased use of arbitration would also help to alleviate
the current overloading in the tribunals, they argue.
The most radical suggestion of all would be to abolish tribunals completely,
on the grounds that they have outlived their usefulness, have become
terminally bogged-down in legalism and overlap confusingly with other
courts.
Numerous though critics of tribunals are, the suggestion of complete
abolition is usually met with horror. The consensus is that virtually every
flaw in the tribunals is magnified in other jurisdictions.
As one Acas official put it, adapting Winston Churchill's verdict on
democracy: 'It's the worst system apart from all the others.' The way
forward is clearly reform.
*Employment Rights, Industrial Tribunals and Arbitration: the case for
alternative dispute resolution by Roy Lewis and Jon Clark. Institute of
Employment Rights, 112 Greyhound Lane, London SW16 5RN. Pounds 20 (Pounds 5
to affiliates)
