FT  18 OCT 93 / Cautious support tempered by fear of over-capacity
MANY Names have expressed cautious support in the past few days as they make
up their minds on the proposals for corporate capital.
They see the introduction of limited liability capital as important for the
future of the market; but have voiced concerns that it might crowd out Names
who underwrite the market with unlimited liability.
Mr John Hindmarsh, a Name and chartered accountant who advises others, said:
'I am definitely for corporate capital, with the very big proviso that we
must not under any circumstances get too much capacity. Over-capacity will
lead to soft markets. It's got to be governed.'
He added: 'I'm staggered by the number of people who have complete
confidence in Middleton (Lloyd's chief executive) and Rowland (Lloyd's
chairman) and want to put more into the market. I think Lloyd's will get a
big majority (in the vote).'
Mr Nicholas Goodhart, a Name, said: 'I have given my proxy to the chairman
of Lloyd's. I am very supportive of Rowland and Middleton. My only hope is
that we don't derail the thing. But I think it's going to be quite a close
vote.'
Another Name said: 'I suppose approval of corporate capital is inevitable to
bail out the market. The only way forward for Lloyd's is to introduce it.
But it needs to have enough safeguards to protect Names' interests or
individuals will disappear.'
He expressed concerns that Names would find it difficult in future to gain
access to sufficient underwriting capacity given the number of syndicates
now withdrawing from the market and the growing amount of corporate capital
being planned. He also expressed scepticism at the returns being promised by
corporate-capital vehicles.
'It is flavour of the month but I think it is bound to burn its fingers at
some stage,' he said. 'I'll stay underwriting long enough to pay my losses
and then leave.'
Mr David Leighton, a Name, said: 'I am absolutely in favour of corporate
capital. I think it's essential provided there are safeguards on the
allocation of capacity and on voting rights. There are a lot of issues that
still need careful consideration.'
But he added that he would continue to underwrite as a Name and not
subscribe to any of the proposed new vehicles. 'I will continue on a bespoke
basis. There are still tax advantages in being a Name.'
Mr John Pincham, another Name, said: 'Having gone so far down the road I
think we've got to vote in favour. But I am not sure corporate capital is
necessary.'
