FT  11 MAY 93 / Whaling ban wins strong US backing
THE US government toughened its environmental policy yesterday, demanding
that the International Whaling Commission maintain a ban on whaling
regardless of scientific findings.
Pro-whaling nations such as Japan and Norway said the US decision increased
the likelihood that the body would collapse. An IWC scientific committee
report appeared to clear the way for limited catches in the north Atlantic
and in the Antarctic.
Most of the 32 countries represented at the IWC's annual conference, which
opened in Kyoto yesterday, are in favour of an extension of the decade-long
moratorium, although few have been as blunt as the US. Its stance suggests
that the usually accepted principle of 'sustainable development' does not
apply to whales.
US officials said the decision followed a policy review by the Clinton
administration, which concluded that a resumption of commercial whaling
would not be supported even if the 'requisite assessment and management
procedures' are agreed by the IWC.
The US went further than the UK and most other western countries, and may
prompt debate on a similar toughening of controls over fauna and flora
covered by other international agreements.
Mr John Gummer, the UK minister of agriculture, fisheries and food, said
yesterday that lifting the ban could not be contemplated until whale numbers
were verified.
A report prepared by the IWC's scientific committee made clear that there
appeared to be sufficient stocks for small quotas of minke whales in the
Antarctic and in the north Atlantic.
However, the UK still has concerns about the humaneness of whaling methods
and the enforcement of any future agreement on catches. UK officials said a
lifting of the ban was unlikely, but they also expect that a proposed vote
on a 'whale sanctuary' in the Antarctic will not succeed.
The Norwegian representatives said their government would reconsider its IWC
membership. Japan has also threatened to withdraw but is unlikely to risk a
clash with the new US administration.
Whale watchers, Page 4
