FT  23 DEC 93 / EU fails to break Bosnia deadlock
LEADERS of the warring parties in former Yugoslavia yesterday agreed to a
Christmas truce, but European Union-led efforts to achieve a wider
breakthrough remained deadlocked over Bosnian Moslem claims for more land to
create a viable, independent state.
The Belgian presidency of the EU blamed Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian
Serb leader, for intransigence at the end of the peace talks in Brussels
widely seen as the last chance for a political settlement before the end of
winter.
Mr Willy Claes, Belgian foreign minister, said Mr Karadzic had delivered a
'flat no' to a request to reopen Tuzla airport in order to allow
humanitarian aid to resume.
Mr Claes also suggested that Bosnian Serbs were still pressing for a
division of Sarajevo, despite the fact that the future status of the
multi-ethnic Bosnian capital was 'of paramount importance' to a lasting
peace settlement.
Negotiations were continuing last night in Brussels under the guidance of
Lord Owen and Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg, the two international mediators. Also
present was Mr Slobodan Milosevic, Serb president; Mr Franjo Tudjiman,
Croatian leader, and Mr Mate Boban, his Bosnian proxy.
Lord Owen and Mr Stoltenberg were trying to expand on 'points of agreement'
reached yesterday between the warring parties, notably the principle that
the Bosnian Moslems were entitled to one third of the territory in the
former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, German foreign minister, said the issue turned on 'the
quality, rather than the quantity of land' claimed by the Moslems. He and
other officials singled out several areas of difficulty.
Bosnian demands for land corridors linking Sarajevo to the enclaves to the
east, including Bihac, Zepa and Srebrenica. The Moslem claims also cover
Gornic to the west which Moslems say fell victim to Serb atrocities.
The status of Sarajevo. Europeans would like to avoid dividing the Bosnian
capital on ethnic lines, preferring instead administration under a United
Nations mandate lasting around two years. The Serbs are resisting.
Bosnian demands for access to the Adriatic sea, either to the north or to
the south at Neum. Croatians are prepared to discuss sharing sovereignty or
joint administration, but broad differences exist over land corridors to
Neum.
Mr Claes said a measure of progress had been made during the talks
yesterday, and the shelling was now likely to stop during Christmas. But he
made no attempt to disguise his disappointment that all parties had failed
to compromise. 'It is an old story. The glass is half empty or half full,
you choose.'
The Belgians repeated warnings that the EU was ready to tighten sanctions
against Serbia if it was clearly responsible for a breakdown in the peace
talks. But diplomats said the Europeans did not mention earlier threats to
withdraw their peace-keeping troops.
