FT  05 JUN 93 / Fear and loathing in las elecciones: Peter Bruce tastes the
last offerings by the leaders in the Spanish poll campaign
THE two main political leaders in Spain, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the socialist
prime minister, and his conservative challenger, Mr Jose Mara Aznar,
president of the People's Party, may have a lot to answer for.
During a month-long campaign, leading to the general election tomorrow, the
closest and nastiest since the country became a democracy 16 years ago, they
have dragged fear and loathing back to the heart of Spanish politics.
At political rallies around the country this week, it has been possible to
catch just a scent of the passions that tore at the second republic in the
1930s, before the Civil War, as the country was divided into left and right.
The socialists have been selling fear; the conservatives doing the loathing.
Not that anything terrible is going to happen after the polls close. Power
will be peacefully retained or peacefully - if a little chaotically -
transferred. But nearly 80 per cent of the electorate is expected to vote, a
measure of the passions ignited.
The rallies are huge. In Valencia, Mr Aznar tells 30,000 roaring supporters
bussed in from the countryside that the socialists are corrupt, that the
country is on the brink of collapse, and that the time has come to 'get them
out of the way'.
An evening later, in Barcelona, Mr Gonzalez asks more than 40,000
supporters, next to the city's Olympic stadium, 'what do they mean 'get rid
of us'? This is a democracy. We don't 'get rid' of people.'
Desperate to stop the PP winning enough votes to enable it to form Spain's
first conservative government in more than a decade, the Socialists
blatantly play on the fears - particularly those of old people - of a return
of fascism and dictatorship. In Barcelona, Mr Gonzalez makes a surprise
reference to el viejo (the old man), meaning Franco and thus uttering a term
he has not used for ages.
Celebrities at the Barcelona rally drench the crowd with the past. A rock
singer says his father was persecuted by Franco. A huge roar goes up as the
Colombian writer and Nobel prize-winner Gabriel Garca Marquez is introduced
and embraces Mr Gonzalez. A humorist remembers leaving a POW camp after the
Civil War and being told not to fear the dictatorship. 'Two days later, I
was back in Franco's jails,' he cries. 'Don't trust them] There is no 'new'
right, it is the same old right it always was.'
Felipe's eyes moisten. He is a sentimental old anti-Francoist who also did
his time in exile. As he speaks, he struggles to control what is in his
heart and then stops bothering. In Spain, 40,000 people begging for the good
guy to give the bad guys what for is called 'bathing in the masses'. No
politician would resist it.
The scare-mongering ranges from warning old people that PP tax policies
threaten their pensions, parents that the conservatives will run down public
education, and the infirm that Mr Aznar will make it expensive to be ill. 'I
am not saying that democracy is in danger on June 6,' roars Mr Gonzalez,
'but tolerance is being threatened by intolerance. We cannot build a future
by forgetting the past.'
This enraptured crowd would probably vote socialist even if he were speaking
Norwegian so it may not matter what he says. Little of the speech would get
onto television. But the more Mr Aznar has looked like winning, the more
strident Mr Gonzalez has become.
The right started it, though. For nearly two years, expectantly watching the
approach of economic recession, the PP and its supporters in the media and
business have carefully sold a toxic portrait of economic disaster and
unbridled socialist corruption to Spain. Language has hardened. One hears
respectable businessmen speak of the socialists as 'thieves' or 'idiots'.
They are neither, but more than a decade in power and rising unemployment
have lubricate conservative propaganda. Spaniards are disposed to be
suspicious of politicians anyway and it was not cold economic fact that
forced Mr Gonzalez to call the election early - it was his sense that
somehow the country's body politic was being poisoned.
If the PP wins the most seats, as the polls predict, tomorrow, Mr Aznar will
have to deal with the same problem, even though he may have the comfort of
governing in coalition or some partnership with smaller regional parties.
The nastiness generated by this campaign will not subside quickly and he
will be given no quarter by an opposition led by Mr Gonzalez.
Felipe Gonzalez will still be around, win or lose. He loves politics - but
there was an air in Barcelona of something ending. He is the last socialist,
the last sixties radical, still running a European Community country.
Watching him choke up 40,000 people with his rhetoric is still
knee-weakening, but listening to him claw back the past was like being at
the last Beatles concert.
THE SPANISH POLL
VOTERS/CONSTITUENCIES:
30.7m Spaniards can vote in elections for the 350-seat Congress (lower
house) and for 208 of the 252 seats in the Senate. The remaining senators
are designated by the autonomous regions.
More than 800 candidates are standing for Congress and 777 for the Senate,
with a record 92 parties putting forward lists in Spain's 52 constituencies.
There are four Senate seats available in almost all the 52 constituences,
regardless of the size or population of the area.
By contrast, areas with greater concentrations of voters elect
correspondingly more deputies for Congress. The largest constituency is
Madrid, where 34 Congress seats are on offer. The smallest two are Spain's
North African enclaves, Melilla and Ceuta, which elect one deputy each.
VOTING SYSTEM:
Under Spain's proportional representation system, parties put up a list of
candidates in each constituency - as many candidates as there are seats.
The number of seats won corresponds approximately to the percentage of votes
obtained. If a party wins 50 per cent of the vote it will get 50 per cent of
the seats, with candidates from the top half of its list automatically
elected.
Voting is not compulsory. In the 1989 general elections there was a 69.7 per
cent turnout.
