FT  11 NOV 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): A potentially
explosive brew - Carlsberg has entered the lucrative Thai beer market
Thailand can be a difficult place to launch a mass-market product. In a
recent A-Z guide to doing business in Thailand, the A stands for
assassination. Yet Carlsberg, the Danish brewer, has succeeded this year in
pushing its way into the potentially lucrative Thai beer market in the only
way possible: with the help of a powerful local partner.
There was never any doubt about the opportunities. With the economy
expanding at an average of 10 per cent a year, beer consumption has tripled
to more than 330m litres a year in the last five years. Per capita
consumption is still low and Carlsberg executives believe the market will
continue to increase by 25 to 30 per cent annually.
The challenge for newcomers has been to loosen the stranglehold of
Thailand's duopoly of existing brewers. Until Carlsberg Brewery (Thailand)
began production at its new Dollars 80m (Pounds 57m) plant north of Bangkok
in May, the market was dominated by Boon Rawd Brewery - whose Singha brands
accounted for nine-tenths of the beer sold in the country - and Thai
Amarit's Kloster and Amarit brands.
As Thais have become more prosperous, they have increasingly taken to
drinking beer, regarded as a western, up-market product, instead of the
cheaper, rum-type beverages known as 'whisky'. But Boon Rawd and Thai Amarit
have hitherto controlled the beer distribution networks and imported beers
are heavily taxed.
Carlsberg has broken into the market by teaming up with Charoen
Sirivadhanabkhadi, an influential ethnic Chinese businessman. He produces
and distributes Mekong, the most popular Thai whisky and therefore has a
ready-made distribution network across Thailand, as well as an interest in
branching out as beer consumption rises.
Charoen, his wife Wanna, Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark and Carlsberg's
managers celebrated the new partnership at a lavish ceremony at the brewery
last month.
'You've got virtually 100 per cent distribution (of Carlsberg) because of
their whisky,' said Michael Iuul, Carlsberg International's managing
director. 'If you're starting from scratch you have to work much harder to
get penetration.'
Charoen has demanded a high price for his part in the business. He and his
local partners own 90 per cent of the joint venture and they say they may
use a second brewery to be completed by the partnership next year to produce
their own brand as well as - or even instead of - using it to make more
Carlsberg.
Carlsberg executives regret failing to secure a larger share, but console
themselves with the knowledge that Carlsberg receives royalties for the use
of its name and technology. The Thai operation also fills a gap in
Carlsberg's network of Asian operations.
Early indications are that Carlsberg is selling well in Thailand and has
seized about a fifth of the market. The new brewery, which can produce 1m
hectolitres a year, is working at full capacity and Carlsberg says it has
only three days of stocks.
Heavy advertising has helped - Carlsberg in Thailand believes it will spend
between 30 and 40 per cent of the Dollars 10m being spent by Thai brewers
this year on television and other main media - and the brewer has matched
Singha's 6 per cent alcohol content to suit Thai tastes.
But Charoen's distribution network is vital. Launches of other beers have
failed in the past because the product was not widely available.
Boon Rawd is putting up a strong fight. Its advertising emphasises
nationalism and positions the product as a local beer in contrast to
Carlsberg's international image.
Carlsberg has been obliged to take the unusual step of producing own brands
of bottled soda water and still water; these are essential mixers for Mekong
whisky and Charoen feared that Boon Rawd, hitherto the main soda water
manufacturer, would threaten to withhold supplies from retailers who
accepted Carlsberg beer on their shelves. The rivalry between selling agents
on the backstreets of Bangkok and other towns was described by one Carlsberg
manager as 'fairly violent'.
Carlsberg's European executives are painfully aware of their dependence on
Charoen, but know they could have entered the Thai market only with the help
of somebody like him.
Asked if Charoen could market Carlsberg in the face of stiff resistance from
Boon Rawd, one manager described Charoen as 'resourceful' and pointed out
that cornering the whisky market in Thailand - as Charoen had done - was not
an achievement for the fainthearted.
