FT  05 OCT 93 / Survey of Distribution Services (1): Cinderella industry
finds its feet - The European distribution industry is poised for a big leap
forward.  The advent of the EC single market has removed costly border
controls and opened up the opportunity of distributing goods to a market of
320m people
THE distribution and logistics sector is a classic Cinderella industry. In
the past 30 years it has been transformed from a rather unglamorous servant
into the indispensable partner of a whole range of businesses.
Despite the Europe-wide recession, the industry and its influence is
continuing to grow and the advent of the single European market has opened
up many new opportunities.
A couple of decades ago, it was very different. Logistics was not a concept
associated with industry at all, but was defined in dictionaries as a branch
of military science dealing with 'the moving of and providing for troops'.
Distribution, says Mr Ronnie Frost, executive chairman of Hays, the business
services group, had a rather more downmarket reputation.
'Thirty years ago, distribution meant 'I have wheels; I'll carry something
for you'. Warehousing meant 'I've got a waterproof roof; I'll store
something for you',' he says. 'Now it means running a sophisticated,
computer-controlled business.'
The reason for the change was the realisation by manufacturers and service
companies that holding large amounts of stock was costly and tied up
valuable working capital.
They began to see distribution as a capital-, fuel- and labour-intensive
business that lay outside their core activity.
Increasing numbers of companies began contracting out their distribution to
outside specialists and found they could reduce operating costs and improve
margins as a result.
As technology has advanced, many distribution and logistics contractors have
now developed skills beyond the expertise of many industrial companies.
Logistics specialists offer complete supply chain management which is highly
reliable and cost-effective as well as providing 'just-in-time' inventory
systems, so reducing stocks and improving companies' return on capital.
The results can be seen clearly in figures from the Institute of Logistics
and Distribution Management, which found distribution costs as a percentage
of UK companies' turnover fell from 17 per cent at the start of the 1980s to
4.7 per cent in 1991-92.
Now the European distribution industry stands on the brink of another big
leap forward.
The advent of the single European market has removed costly and
time-consuming border controls and opened up the opportunity of distributing
goods to a market of 320m people.
The impact of the single market has been mixed. It has undoubtedly cut costs
for distributors, and reduced journey times by up to 24 hours for
trans-European trips. But the expected development of truly pan-European
distribution companies has been held back by the comparative slowness of
manufacturers to create Europe-wide operations.
Some companies, such as Unilever and Ciba Geigy, have started to close
national factories and concentrate their production sites to achieve greater
efficiency.
Many businesses have also sought to reduce the level of inventory in the
supply chain by centralising distribution. They have moved away from
national sites to warehouses servicing regions of Europe. Philips, the Dutch
electronics group, for example, has rationalised a whole network of national
warehouses into three regional centres.
But the development of pan-European operations has been hampered in many
cases, says Dr James Cooper, director of the Cranfield Centre for Logistics
and Transportation, by two factors.
One is the tendency for marketing departments to be organised along national
lines, with the distribution director reporting to the marketing department.
This, in turn, has been reinforced by the slowness of manufacturers to
standardise product ranges across Europe, instead retaining different
products, with different labels and packaging, for different markets.
There are, of course, exceptions. Unilever has formed Lever Europe and put a
marketing director in charge of each product category throughout Europe
rather than give national marketers control over the whole range in each
country.
Unless more companies follow suit, Europe-wide distribution networks will
remain difficult to achieve.
'Progress towards removing national barriers has been much slower and more
laborious than anyone expected when all this started three or four years
ago,' Dr Cooper says.
That means that some distribution companies who established Europe-wide
capabilities have been left with costly over-capacity.
'You end up with a chicken and egg situation,' says Dr Cooper. 'Do you set
up the network before the customer is ready, but risk getting into trouble
if they don't follow you?'
The deregulation of the distribution services industry with the creation of
the single European market has, however, been very successful.
The bilateral permit system, whereby pairs of governments used to regulate
all haulage between their countries, was progressively broken down from the
mid-1980s onwards. Full deregulation was achieved on time at the end of last
year, making the whole industry more dynamic.
Moreover, this has been followed by national deregulation of distribution
services by several countries including France, the Netherlands, and Spain.
Even Germany is loosening the tight controls on its distribution sector.
The impact of both these changes has been lessened to some extent by
recession, which is still deepening in many parts of Europe.
Although distribution companies have suffered from the slowdown in movement
of goods, however, few have gone out of business.
The recession may even have some positive effects. Mr Ian Canadine,
director-general of the Institute of Logistics, says the need to cut costs
has led even more companies to contract out their distribution.
It has also led to a more open, co-operative approach. Instead of insisting
on dedicated fleets carrying their own liveries, customers have become more
prepared to share vehicles and facilities, he says.
Mr Canadine believes partnershipping of a different kind may be another
important trend in the 1990s. He expects retailers, distribution companies,
and suppliers to work more closely together on cutting down stockholding at
every point in the supply chain, to their mutual benefit. That will involve
exchanging electronic point-of-sale information, and linking systems
together.
'It's not about beating the other guy into submission,' Mr Canadine says.
'You have to have real partnerships based on trust, where all sides get a
fair share of the deal.'
Technology will continue to be a driving force in the industry, with the
most important advances, as Mr Canadine suggests, expected to be in
information technology. Linking systems together through electronic data
interchange will be a priority, as will developing the use of satellite
communications to allow the whereabouts of goods to be tracked right the way
down the supply chain.
A final factor shaping the development of distribution services will be the
environment. The Braer tanker disaster off the Shetland Islands in January
highlighted the impact a transport vehicle can have on the environment.
A survey earlier this year found two thirds of distribution companies
expected operating costs to increase as a result of addressing environmental
issues, although they admitted that nearly all the improvements already
implemented had reduced costs. One example is speed limiters to maximise
fuel efficiency, compulsory since August last year for new vehicles and now
being extended to all vehicles built after January 1988.
The increasing congestion of Europe's transport infrastructure, especially
its roads, may lead to some structural changes in the industry.
Increasing road traffic, coupled with the EC proposal that member states
should be allowed to charge for the use of motorways to pay for their
upkeep, and the opening of the Channel tunnel, could see a renaissance of
the rail network as a freight carrier.
The EC plans to establish a network of intermodal transport 'corridors'
between main centres, with rail providing the main links, and road
operations being used to handle collection and delivery at either end.
Meanwhile, Railfreight in the UK is investing Pounds 500m in new facilities
connected with the Channel tunnel and hopes to more than triple the annual
volume of cross-Channel rail freight to 6.5m tonnes by the mid-1990s.
It says the tunnel will cut 24 hours or more off comparable trans-European
journeys by road. Manchester to Milan, for example, should take 32 hours by
rail, compared with 60 by lorry. Such developments may speed up progress
towards a truly pan-European distribution sector.
