FT  21 JUN 93 / Tories unsettled by funds secrecy
FEARS ABOUT the sleazy image created by secrecy surrounding Conservative
party donors erupted in Tory ranks yesterday as Labour again exploited the
embarrasment caused by Mr Michael Mates' links with Mr Asil Nadir.
The Northern Ireland security minister's relationship with the fugitive
businessman who gave Pounds 440,000 to the Tory party has broken into a
wider debate. Should the party that supposedly supports open government be
more open about its own funding  - never mind its Pounds 19m deficit? Should
Tory MPs signed up to lobbying or public relations companies be explicit
about the companies they are working for?
The predicament will be seized on eagerly by the Labour party in the Commons
debate it has initiated tomorrow. Although Labour takes much of its money
from trade unions which have a large say in policy decisions, the party
leadership can argue that unions have by law to declare how much they pay
into political funds.
Labour backs state funding for parties and wants the Conservatives at least
to back a code of practice on donations. It also has a wider agenda to
portray Mr John Major's government as tired, corrupt and beleaguered by
internal contradictions in the hope of eventually precipitating his
downfall.
In response to the cur-rent row over Mr Nadir Sir Norman Fowler,
Conservative party chairman and loyal supporter of Mr Major, has not gone
much beyond promising that 'stolen' donations would be returned.
He told the Commons home affairs committee last week that the party had a
policy of refusing donations from foreign governments, donations with
strings attached, or from unknown sources.
There have, however, been some reforms over the past year. Sir Norman has
set out the proportions of Central Office funds coming from companies and
from individual donations in 1992-93. A balance sheet, setting out
Conservative party assets and liabilities, is to be published for the first
time.
But for the Tory hierarchy the principle that donors are entitled to privacy
is unchanged. The problem is how that can be reconciled with the search for
greater disclosure in order that charges of influence-buying can in future
be readily dismissed.
The Labour Research Department estimates that undisclosed donations to the
Tory party, including those from individuals, reached Pounds 15m in the year
up to the last general election  - almost certainly far exceeding
undisclosed donations to the Labour party.
Mr Richard Shepherd, Conservative MP for Aldridge Brownhills and supporter
of freedom of information, said the act of giving to the Tory party had to
be public.
He told BBC radio: 'Like Caesar's wife it should be beyond suspicion. As
long as things are done clandestinely and anonymously there is always a
suspicion that they are done for motives that are not appropriate.'
Mr David Mellor, former cabinet minister, said that out of 'the backwash' of
the controversy over Mr Mates 'there may well be some careful thinking about
the way that the Conservative party presents its accounts'.
Mr Peter Viggers, Conservative MP for Gosport, urged a debate on the Commons
committee report on the rules on the declaration of members' interests.
Working for a lobbying or public relations company was in a different league
to a normal company directorship because it was unclear who was buying an
MP's time, he said.
