FT  03 DEC 93 / First among equals
Mr Kenneth Clarke is bemused by the effect of his Budget. He must have
anticipated groans about the increases in tax, or the pressure on spending.
Instead there is euphoria, and not only in the markets. This could be a
worry. The chancellor has been in politics long enough to be aware of the
superstition that if you are greeted by cheers on the day of delivery, there
is trouble in store. If the economy doesn't get you, your admirers will.
When you have been puffed up to the dizzying heights, there is only one way
to go.
We can consider some of the possible pitfalls in a moment. First it must be
emphasised that the Budget has achieved its purpose. It has started the
process of restoring the government's authority. This remains as true three
mornings after delivery as it did on first hearing Mr Clarke's words on
Tuesday. The chancellor had one aim: to begin to lift Mr John Major's
administration out of the hole into which it had fallen. The party, and with
luck the electorate, had to be shown that Downing Street was back in control
of economic policy, following 14 months of destabilisation.
Mr Clarke reckoned that his best bet was to produce proposals that would
eventually eliminate the Pounds 50bn deficit. All else followed. The public
was prepared to expect more austere measures than in fact emerged. That is a
routine pre-Budget ploy. The actual cuts and imposts were chosen for their
likely acceptability on Conservative backbenches. Nice thoughts about
creating a symmetrical or coherent system of taxation were suppressed as
irrelevant.
The speech was carefully crafted. Aware that the House of Commons will not
listen to anyone for longer than about 90 minutes, the chancellor pruned his
words ruthlessly. The traditional, lengthy world-view of the state of
economies here there and everywhere was omitted - although Treasury
officials would have included one had they been asked. The new unified tax
and spending Budget, which enabled the chancellor to announce many decisions
in one go, provided him with a unique platform. He would not be Kenneth
Clarke if he was not aware that this hugely strengthened the power of the
chancellor, and thus his influence with the rest of the government.
This enabled him to make quick or possibly controversial decisions, without
being over-ly concerned about the prime minister's reaction. His
predecessor, Mr Norman Lamont, was not so fortunate. To take one example, Mr
Major was always unsure about changing invalidity benefit. The upshot of the
chancellor's efforts to spread the burden was that numerous small items were
necessarily crammed into an address that turned out to be of greater
significance in stating government policy than the Queen's Speech at the
opening of parliament. Mr Clarke may or may not make it to No 10 Downing
Street, but this week he is tasting some of the delights of being first
among equals.
That said, the government is not out of its hole yet. Take taxation. The
shadow chancellor, Mr Gordon Brown, has made a good start to what will be an
energetic, and sensible, Labour campaign to remind the electorate that it
was hoodwinked by the Tories in April 1992. The Conservatives promised lower
taxes, no extention of value added tax, and no increase in national
insurance contributions. All three undertakings have been cast aside. This
may have an effect on future election results, although I doubt it. Much
depends on the attention-span of the average voter. Is it as long as that of
an elephant - or do most of us have the political memory of a gnat?
Public spending cuts may be a more serious pitfall. The reductions depend on
squeezing public sector pay. The hardest hit sector is probably local
government. Think ahead, as Mr Clarke surely does, to next April. Picture
the scene. A new bargaining round has begun, but so far the government's
freeze is sticking. In come the higher taxes, and VAT on domestic fuel,
ordained by Mr Lamont in March and Mr Clarke this week. The inevitable
upwards blip in inflation created by the Budget makes itself felt. People
who have nodded over the favourable comments made since Tuesday suddenly
notice where Mr Clarke's fiscal prudence is coming from: their pockets.
Plenty of work for the trade unions, and Mr Brown, there.
The supposed government attack on the welfare state is another potential
vote-loser for the Conservatives, at least in Labour eyes. But is it? The
rhetoric of Mr Michael Portillo and Mr Peter Lilley has a calculated
purpose. These hatchet-men of the right are working to a long timetable.
They are believers in the minimal state, but they are wise enough to proceed
slowly, softening up opinion in advance, threatening more than they do.
Their aim, which they pursue with skill, is ever to push forward the
frontiers of the thinkable.
Mr Clarke is not a philosopher. His Budget contained nothing on the social
security side that is not defensible in its own terms. If it hit
Portillo-Lilley targets, they were soft ones. More effective rules for
invalidity benefits are common sense. Asking unemployed people to draw on
their own savings, if they have any, after six months on contributory
benefits is tough, but Beveridge would have understood. Making the system
more like workfare is welcome. Equalising the state pension age at 65, after
two decades' notice, is overdue. Throwing in a new benefit to help mothers
who take low-paid jobs to finance childcare was Mr Clarke's signal to the
moralists of the right.
When the chancellor had gone through his Budget at Tuesday morning's cabinet
meeting, several ministers spoke on the welfare state. The upshot was a
concordat between right and left. 'This government will never take part in
any attempt to dismantle the welfare state,' Mr Clarke said in his speech
later that afternoon. Any deal has a price. 'We must make sure that it is a
system that future generations will be able to afford,' he also said. Labour
cannot successfully quarrel with that. It will have to wait until its
Commission for Social Justice has reported next summer before it can joust
with the minimalists' arguments. The Labour leader, Mr John Smith, should
not dilly-dally for too long. If the Conservatives have the will to build on
what has been a good week for them, they will stop looking like losers
comfortably in advance of a 1996 election.
