FT  03 FEB 93 / London Stock Exchange: US threat to drug stocks
STOCKS IN the international drug industry companies, particularly Glaxo and
Wellcome, suffered selling pressure in London ahead of a press conference to
be held today in Washington. The conference will highlight a report which
claims that pledges by drug companies to contain drug costs have gone
unfulfilled.
It will be hosted by Senator David Pryor, an established critic of the drugs
industry and a Democrat who is believed to have the ear of the president. It
is expected to add further weight to President Clinton's promise to review
the industry. Also, Salomon Brothers removed several US drug companies from
its buy list.
Glaxo dropped 23 to 655p on very heavy turnover of 9.8m shares. Wellcome
weakened by the same amount to 853p and SmithKline Beecham lost 15 at 482p
in the 'A's and 18 at 420p in the Units.
Gas placing
The placing by a leading UK securities house of a block of 5.9m British Gas
shares at 286p brought significant pressure on the shares, which closed a
net 7 1/2 off at 284p. The Seaq ticker revealed that the share block had
been purchased at 285p before being sold on.
Turnover in Gas reached 14m shares, the highest single day's business in the
stock since mid-December when Ofgas chairman Mr James McKinnon called for
the group to be broken up.
It was thought that the block of Gas shares had been sold into the market
and the proceeds switched into other utilities, notably the regional
electricity stocks (recs).
The 'recs' were badly mauled after last week's report from the Trade and
Industry Committee on energy policy which called for the electricity
distribution review to be brought forward and for a reduction in the 'recs'
returns on capital.
Among the best performers in the 'recs' were Seeboard, 6 higher at 452p, and
Eastern, 2 firmer at 413p.
Granada hint
An institutional visit by Granada moved the shares smartly forward, adding
to speculation that the television and leisure group is again considering an
acquisition. Granada has made little secret of its desire to buy a
cash-generative company and rumours have hinted at Compass, the catering
group, as a potential target.
Compass shares have been strong performers in recent weeks, yesterday
climbing 6 before falling back to 594p, up a penny on the day. Granada rose
11 to 359p.
Mr Gerry Robinson, Granada's chief executive, formerly ran Compass, and he
confirmed his continuing interest in the catering industry by admitting
Granada was look-ing at Gardner Merchant, the catering subsidiary of Forte
which was eventually sold to management in a Pounds 400m deal.
The market also focused on the share price following an announcement that
Reed International is to offer its 3.66 per cent stake in BSkyB to big
shareholders Granada, Chargeurs and Financial Times owner Pearson. The news
means that the Reed stake and, consequently, the whole of BSkyB would
receive the stock market valuation which it at present lacks. Reed shed 3 to
666p and Pearson 14 to 370p.
Stakis deal
Institutional support for the Stakis recovery story was again in evidence
yesterday, with a large placing of family shares being quickly taken up by
large investors.
The 21m shares on offer were the ones due to the Stakis family as a result
of last week's three-for-one rights issue. They were placed by Smith New
Court in the nil-paid form at 9 3/4 p. The fully-paid closed steady at 44p
and the nil-paid a halfpenny off at 10 1/2 p. As a result of the sale, the
family holding will fall from around 24 per cent to 19 per cent.
News of a strike at its US coal subsidiary Peabody led to early nervousness
over Hanson shares yesterday. The stock was weak in the US and 3p lower in
the UK at one stage.
However, Goldman Sachs argued that the strike affected less than 7 per cent
of Hanson's earnings and the US investment bank advised clients to switch
into the stock from international conglomerate BTR.
Mr Gavin Launder at Goldman Sachs said: 'Hanson offers better exposure to
the US recovery market than BTR, and a better yield at a substantially lower
rating.' Hanson shares closed only a halfpenny easier at 257p on heavy
turnover of 11m, while BTR, also hit by vague talk of a rights issue,
retreated 5 to 553p in trade of 4.8m.
The upsurge in market activity since the turn of the year triggered further
keen support for the merchant banks with significant market share. Against
the overall trend, SG Warburg added 15 at 615p and Kleinwort Benson 3 at
356p.
Confirmation that the recent burst of US buying of BP had boosted the US
holding in the oil company to 23.1 per cent led to periodic bouts of short
covering in London. This, plus more defensive buying of the shares by UK
institutions anxious not to be underweight in the stock, drove BP shares up
3 to 257p with turnover reaching 12m. Shell suffered from switching into BP,
and closed off 4 at 569p on 4.1m traded.
The recent big increase in turnover of Premier Consolidated continued, with
more than 15m shares changing hands and the stock edging ahead 1/4 to 29 1/4
p.
Weakness in Vodafone shares, triggered by worries about competition from
Mercury PCN, scheduled to start up in the middle of the year, and a scare
story hinting at links between cellular phones and brain cancer, was brought
to an end as Vodafone stock advanced 11 to 390p.
ICI rose 4 to 1150p on currency considerations and news of a joint venture
for its titanium dioxide unit.
Some big dollar earners, however, saw profit-taking following sharp rises.
Reuters receded 19 to 1404p and BAT Industries 5 to 973p.
Pharmaceuticals and scientific equipment group Fisons rose sharply in early
trading as Credit Lyonnais Laing recommended the stock as a short to
medium-term buy. There was also a return of bid speculation. However, the
gain was trimmed later. From being 10 points up, the shares closed a net 5
ahead at 224p.
Shares in Alexon continued to be buoyed by rumours of a predator. Most
prominent among potential suitors has been Next, but company sources denied
this, as did Country Casuals. Alexon said no approaches had been received.
Its shares jumped 18 per cent to 88p. Next dipped 3 to 140 1/2 p and Country
Casuals held steady at 177p.
Marks and Spencer shares were bought as the stores sector dipped below a
significant technical resistance level. The stock added 7 1/2 at 325 1/2 p.
Dixons rose 3 to 226p on the replacement of the head of its US subsidiary,
Silo. Two blocks of 10m Laura Ashley shares went through the market at 78
1/2 p and 79p. The stock closed off 2 at 80p.
Another poor performance by Invergordon shares increased speculation that
White &amp; Mackay may consider a renewed bid for the whisky distiller. US-owned
White still holds a 41.3 per cent stake in Invergordon and has never
discounted returning to the fray. Invergordon shares have now underperformed
the market by 20 per cent this year and at yesterday's close - 12 weaker at
252p - were 25 below White &amp; Mackay's final offer price.
Profit-takers were out in force in Rolls-Royce and turnover jumped to 11m as
the shares eased 3 to 130p. Talk of further profit downgrades in TI Group
left the shares 6 lighter at 297p.
BBA moved up 3 to 173p, with UBS Phillips &amp; Drew said to have shown a keen
interest. IMI hardened 2 to 264p after ending talks to acquire a subsidiary
of Gebrueder Sulzer, of Switzerland.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992/93
NEW HIGHS (273).
BRITISH FUNDS (2) Exch. 13 1/4 pc '96, Fd. 3 1/2 pc '99-04, OTHER FIXED
INTEREST (7) AMERICANS (22) CANADIANS (1) Hudson's Bay, BANKS (5) Asahi, Bk.
Scotland 9 3/4 pc Pf., Lloyds, Mitsubishi, NatWest, BREWERS (1) Vaux, BLDG
MATLS (5) Anglian, BPB, Lilleshall 9pc Pf., Marshalls 6 1/2 pc Pf.,
Wolseley, BUSINESS SERVS (6) Brit. Data Mngmt., Inchcape, Rentokil, Rolfe &amp;
Nolan, Salvesen (C), Time Products, CHEMS (1) Yule Catto, CONGLOMERATES (2)
Brierley, Hanson, CONTG &amp; CONSTRCN (4) Barratt Devlpt., Bellway, Boot (H),
Crest Nicholson 5 1/2 pc Pf., ELECTRICALS (7) BICC, BICC Cap. 10 3/4 pc Cv.
'20, Critchley, Jones Stroud, Kenwood, Mitsubishi, Sony, ELECTRONICS (12)
Blick, Control Techs., Cray, Domino, Elect'comps., Ferranti, GEC,
Hewlett-Packard, MMT, Macro 4, Multitone, Tadpole Tech., ENG AERO (2) FR,
Hunting, ENG GEN (7) Carclo, Powerscreen, Siebe, Spirax-Sarco, Sterling,
Vosper Thornycroft, Weir, FOOD MANUF (2) Acatos &amp; Hutcheson, Unilever, FOOD
RETAILING (2) Iceland Frozen, Sainsbury (J), HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (2) Assoc.
Nursing Sevs., Seton, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (2) Compass, Vardon, INSCE COMPOSITE (4)
American Gen., American Intl., Travelers, USF &amp; G, INSCE LIFE (5) Legal &amp;
Gen., Liberty Life Africa, Prudential, Torchmark, Transatlantic, INV TRUSTS
(95) MEDIA (14) Abbott Mead Vickers, Adscene, Elsevier, Euromoney,
Harrington Kilbride, Independent, Metal Bulletin, News Intl., Ports. &amp;
Sunderland, Reed, Scottish TV, Sterling, Telegraph, Ulster TV, MERCHANT
BANKS (3) Kleinwort Benson, Warburg (SG), Do 6pc Pf., MTL &amp; MTL FORMING (2)
Billam (J), Linread, MISC (7) Aspen Comms., Glenchewton, Laser-Scan, Lincat,
Norbain, Photo-Me, Silentnight, MOTORS (6) Avon Rubber, BBA, Do 6 3/4 pc
Pf., Cowie (T), Lex, T &amp; N, OIL &amp; GAS (4) Bow Valley, Chevron, Pittencrief,
Shell 7pc Pf., OTHER FINCL (15) First Natl. Fin., Govett, Henderson Admn.,
Jupiter Tyndall, King &amp; Shaxson, London Forfaiting, Lon. Scottish, M &amp; G,
Natl. Home Lns., Oceana, Perpetual, Secure Tst., Smith Newcourt, Do Pf.,
Tyndall Australia, OTHER INDLS (3) Cookson, Morgan Crucible 7 1/2 pc Pf.,
Williams 8p Pf., PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (2) Bunzl, NMC, PROP (4) Frogmore
Ests., Lon. Merchant, Do Defd., Savills, STORES (3) Betterware, Brown (N),
GUS, TEXTS (4) Hicking Pentecost, Leeds, Parkland, Readicut, TRANSPORT (6)
CSX, P &amp; O Defd., Do 6 3/4 pc Pf., Powell Duffryn, Sea Cntrs., Tibbett &amp;
Britten, WATER (1) Cheam, PLANTATIONS (1) Kuala Lumpur, MINES (2)
Antofagasta, Minorco.
NEW LOWS (11).
CANADIANS (2) Brascan, Nth. Amer. Tire, BREWERS (1) Invergordon, ELECTRONICS
(2) Cranbrook, EIT, INSCE BROKERS (1) Oriel, MISC (1) Roxspur, OTHER FINCL
(1) Cambridge, PROP (1) Olives, TEXTS (2) Cupid, Gabicci.
Other market statistics, Page 31
