FT  27 FEB 93 / Ructions in the ancien regime: Disorder on the streets has
spread to French politics, injecting uncertainty into the election campaign
It is ironic that France, which fields more troops than any other country to
help the United Nations try to prevent a new world disorder breaking out,
should often be so unruly at home.
This week has seen fishermen smashing up markets in their native Brittany
and in Paris in protest at cheap imports. It was the first time that the men
of the sea decided to use the same licence for violent demonstration that
French society has long given its men of the land. The farmers, too,
disrupted trains in their continuing campaign against farm reform negotiated
in the European Community and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Some dockers, airline and electronics workers also stopped work in pay and
lay-off protests.
Disorder of a different kind broke out in French politics. Mr Michel Rocard,
former prime minister, used his position as the Socialists' intended
successor to President Francois Mitterrand in two years to call for 'a
political big bang' to create a new universe on the French left. Conceding
the implosion of the ruling Socialist party in the run-up to next month's
parliamentary elections, Mr Rocard called on Socialists to abandon their
party and to join with pragmatic Greens, moderate Centrists and reformist
Communists in a new movement.
The shock waves of this initiative are still radiating through French
politics. A note of uncertainty has now been injected into an election
campaign which had seemed sure to result in an overwhelming victory for the
centre-right. Clearly, Mr Rocard sees his 'big bang' as the only thing that
can propel him into the Elysee in 1995, but there is just an outside chance
that it could give France the sort of broad-based, durable social democratic
party that most other European countries have.
These ructions stem, in part, from the fact that France has modernised its
economy - or the industrial part of it - faster than its society or its
politics. But they also reflect an unhappiness about the way that industrial
modernisation has taken place.
In statistical terms, its industrial success is clear. France recorded a
FFr30bn (Pounds 3.8bn) trade surplus last year, a performance made all the
more impressive by the country's strong exchange rate. This surplus is now
fading away under the impact of competitive devaluations, plus falling
demand, in many neighbouring countries. But France will keep its position as
the world's fourth largest exporter. Its unit wage costs have risen 12 per
cent less than rival Germany's over the past four years.
All this has been achieved within the liberal economic rules that the EC and
world economic competition have imposed on France. Brussels's competition
directorate has gradually reined in French state aid to industry, which has
been equally constrained by the Maastricht treaty's budgetary disciplines.
Industrial imports have a higher penetration (31 per cent) in France than in
trade-deficit Britain (29.2 per cent), according to the Commissariat du
Plan, the French planning agency. They include ever-larger quantities of
Japanese cars, to the continuing fulmination of Mr Jacques Calvet, head of
Peugeot.
But just because the French have played the game well does not mean that
most of them like the rules any better. One of the few popular things the
Socialist government has done in its waning weeks of power has been to make
it harder for employers to throw more people on the heap of nearly 3m
jobless. The Patronat employers federation has become the butt of criticism
from the right as well as the left.
An even better scapegoat has been foreign companies like Hoover, Philips,
Grundig and Kimberly-Clark, which have been pulling out of France. Behind
the charge of 'social dumping' - widely levelled at foreign companies, but
only with any plausibility at Hoover - is the feeling that France must
resist an alien, uncaring model of society being thrust on it.
Nowhere, of course, is such resistance greater than in agriculture. France
remains flatly opposed to last year's EC-US deal on cutting back subsidised
farm exports. Paris says it wants the whole Gatt negotiations restarted, an
idea to which President Clinton's combative behaviour on Airbus and other
trade issues gives a faint plausibility.
UK Prime Minister John Major tried to play peacemaker at the White House
this week. But there is a tendency here these days also to see Britain as
part of a general effort to do down France and its achievements. Even the
cosmopolitan Mr Raymond Barre, the centrist politician, has warned publicly
of an Anglo-Saxon conspiracy to sell the franc short. A senior government
official dismisses as nonsense such a charge which arises, he believes, out
of the linguistic fact that 'the markets tend to speak to us in English'.
France's current xenophobic bout seems to be socio-economic rather than
racist. The national human rights commission this week reported a further
decline in racist violence last year, a welcome contrast to - and perhaps a
lesson drawn from - what has been happening in Germany.
Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, who last year clamoured against Maastricht and was
inviting his supporters to slap in the face every journalist they met, has
had a quiet campaign. His National Front has been squeezed by the strong
showing of the RPR and UDF opposition parties, who themselves have called
for a 'clear and courageous immigration policy'. They want to give
foreigners less time to argue against expulsion orders, and less scope for
those wishing to gain entry into France to make marriages of convenience and
for polygamists to collect multiple family allowances.
But the phenomenon that spawned the National Front on the right and the
Greens on the left still exists. This is the mixture of contempt and apathy
in which many French hold mainstream politicians, who in some opinion polls
rate only just above prostitutes.
Corruption may not be on the Italian level. But one insider trading scandal,
concerning Pechiney's 1988 purchase of Triangle, a US packaging company,
still rumbles on to haunt the Socialists. In modernising the Paris
marketplace, Socialists opened it and themselves to the temptations inherent
in big financial transactions. Senior Socialists, as well as opposition
politicians, have been indicted for putting corporate kickbacks into the
party coffers. The presence in the government of Mr Bernard Tapie, seen as
an asset-juggler rather than a conventional businessmen, has not helped.
In the country that gave the world the categories of 'left' and 'right' in
politics, many people, according to opinion polls, feel this dividing line
to be of decreasing relevance.
This week Mr Rocard claimed the demarcation was still relevant - but 'in the
wrong place'. His strategy is to move socialists with a small 's' away from
outmoded concepts like class warfare towards the political centre, while at
the same time wooing back the founders of Generation Ecologique, the more
pragmatic environmentalists who had earlier bolted from the Socialist party.
Mr Brice Lalonde, GE's leader, said he might do business with Mr Rocard,
though not necessarily the Socialist party - accepting 'the bang, but not
the gang', as he put it.
Even if Mr Rocard's initiative never takes the concrete form of a new party
or a new federation of parties, it is part of the necessary fluidity of
French politics. All presidential aspirants need to reach outside their own
party to assemble temporary coalitions that can carry them to the Elysee,
the seat of real power.
Mr Mitterrand has set in train a constitutional review to modernise the
Fifth Republic. But his first step was timid. An experts' committee this
month recommended tinkering with the balance between institutions. Until
France gives less power to its secretive, quasi-monarchical presidency and
more to its feeble, but open, National Assembly, its citizenry will do the
old-fashioned thing of taking their grievances on to the streets.
