FT  02 JUN 93 / SPD accepts Deutsche Telekom reform
GERMANY'S coalition government and opposition Social Democrats (SPD) have
paved the way for the privatisation of Deutsche Telekom, the state
telecommunications monopoly, by agreeing to reform post and
telecommunications services.
The agreement, which closes two years of difficult negotiations, will create
separate joint stock companies for Deutsche Telekom, the postal services and
the German postal bank. The three enterprises will operate under a holding
company controlled by the state.
The move will allow Deutsche Telekom to move towards its target of selling
49 per cent of its capital to the private sector, starting in January 1996.
Details of how much control the holding company will have over its
subsidiaries still have to be worked out between the coalition and the SPD,
whose support in parliament is needed to change the constitution and allow
telecommunications to leave state ownership.
But the agreement represents a victory for Mr Wolfgang Botsch, the posts and
telecommunications minister, who has been pushing the SPD to accept the
privatisation of Deutsche Telekom.
Deutsche Telekom itself has repeatedly warned that it would not be
competitive in a liberalised telecommunications market in the EC unless it
could get access to the capital markets and restructure itself.
'We are greatly relieved that a solution was found which allows for the
privatisation of the German telecoms,' a spokesman from Deutsche Telekom
said yesterday.
The agreement foresees that the holding company will be an Anstalt des
offentlichen Rechts, or public law corporation, a special legal status
enjoyed by some regional banks and television channels. Such a corporation
would initially offer non-tradable certificates to private buyers but voting
rights would remain with the state.
This arrangement is a compromise to win over the SPD, which is insisting on
some state control in order to ensure that all parts of the country are
serviced.
The SPD has also been concerned about the special job security and pension
rights of employees. 'The agreement was done in such a way that the
professional future of the post and telecom staff will not be jeopardised,'
the negotiating parties said on Friday.
The negotiators are due to submit the agreement to the executive committees
of their parliamentary caucuses on June 14.
