FT  17 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pakistani farmers prepare
defence against increased tax burden - A look at fears that existing
indirect taxes may not be taken sufficiently into account
NOISY TRACTORS tow large trollies full of rice on a dusty road near 'Mandi
Faizabad' - a farm market in central Punjab - as a group of peasants wait at
a nearby traders shop, to be paid for their crops. It is harvest time in
Pakistan, which for many is the time to be paid for up to six months of hard
labour and grinding patience.
But a few hundred miles away in Islamabad, the newly elected government of
Benazir Bhutto is reviewing recent proposals to tax farmers, a legacy of
former prime minister Mr Moeen Qureshi. The government's decision on the
issue would not only affect the wealthy landlords, but could also have
repercussions on the poorest.
The Qureshi plan focuses exclusively on ending the tax immunity of the more
prosperous farmers, defined as those owning between 50 and 75 acres of land,
depending on its quality. The move is one of the key demands of foreign aid
donors.
Some senior officials are convinced, however, that the proposals could
eventually raise inflation rates in rural areas, which would force many
peasants to either accept larger financial burdens or move to cities,
intensifying Pakistan's growing problem of unplanned urbanisation.
There is a growing recognition among the wealthier landowners that the time
has come to start paying such taxes, although many are convinced that if the
indirect taxes they are already paying were fully appreciated the case
against them would be weakened substantially.
'There's a perception that the farmer is non-tax paying. We want to see if
this perception is true,' says Mr Shah Mehmood Qureshi, the
Cambridge-educated former finance minister of the Punjab and a member of the
national assembly.
Mr Qureshi has been appointed to head a task force to examine the taxation
proposals and report back to the government next month with fresh
recommendations. The committee is trying, among other things, to evaluate
the indirect taxes paid by farmers as a means of assessing the agriculture
sector's overall contribution to national revenues.
'Of course, they have a point that we must pay our taxes, but the taxes that
we are already paying must be taken into account when they make this point,'
argues Mr Afaq Tiwana, another landowner and member of the task force. He
claims that, while direct taxes paid by farmers may not visibly appear
large, the indirect and implicit taxes make them up to more than a due
contribution to revenues.
The indirect and implicit taxes include local duties and the government's
monopoly over pricing of grain at a level far below the international level.
Mr Iqbal Mustafa, a famous Pakistani progressive farmer, argues that up to
60 per cent of the country's indirect taxes are paid by farmers, which is
far in excess of the agriculture sector's contribution of 25 per cent to the
GDP. He quotes a recent study demonstrating that Pakistani farmers get a
price up to 49 per cent below that of imported grain.
Despite the arguments from the farmers' lobby, Ms Bhutto's government is
unlikely to scrap all of the new taxation proposals because doing so would
invite fresh criticism from donor agencies. On the other hand, its also
difficult to impose them in full because of concern over reaction from the
newly-elected members of the assembly - at least 70 per cent of whom
represent rural areas.
'We (the task force) are neither going to reject it (the proposal) outright,
nor accept it in total,' says Mr Qureshi.
Other senior government officials say that the taxation proposals may be
softened by lowering the tax bands for farmers.
Some experts see the debate as an opportunity for donor agencies to
re-assess their views on the issue.
'The World bank, the IMF and others have really not critically looked at the
literature base and the vast amount of information which is available which
clearly points to the fact that Pakistani farmers are already very heavily
taxed,' says Dr Parvaiz Amir, an eminent agricultural economist.
