FT  17 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Half a big stick
HOW SMALL is a minimum nuclear deterrent? After months pondering the
appropriate level of armament for its new Trident submarines, the British
government has come up with an enigmatic formula. Its decision to keep the
total explosive power in line with that deployed on its ageing Polaris
submarines is meant to deliver a political message, without revealing
anything about either system in terms of actual warhead numbers or
megatonnage of destructive force.
As a gesture, the self-limitation policy is logical and timely. To have
pressed ahead with anything like the full potential of Trident, ordered
during the cold war, would have left the UK out on a limb with China as the
only recognised nuclear powers actively strengthening their arsenals while
the US and Russia embark on deep cuts in their nuclear stockpiles.
Good faith by the nuclear powers in curbing their armouries will be crucial
for hopes of securing renewal of the Non-Proliferation Treaty - perhaps the
most important of all arms control pacts - in 1995. A complete ban on
nuclear testing, which the UK has come around to supporting, could also have
considerable symbolic effect.
Sound arguments can still be made for keeping nuclear weapons. They are
integral to the Nato security structure, part of the Nato bargain being that
the US does not bear the nuclear burden alone. Britain and France may also
have good reasons for keeping forces as a hedge against future upsets - a
return of east-west confrontation or a direct threat from a new nuclear
state.
But clarity is needed. Do nuclear weapons have a purpose other than as a
counter to a would-be nuclear aggressor? Their wider role as preventers of
war - one which they can be held to have performed in Europe for over 40
years - is untested and questionable outside the context of the bipolar
east-west stand-off. They do not seem to deter Galtieris or Saddams. It is
doubtful whether nuclear arms can effectively deter the use of chemical or
biological weapons. Would an aggressor really believe he was risking nuclear
reprisal? Nor does the existence of nuclear arms stop countries such as
North Korea from seeking their own nuclear weapons, or - in the case of
Ukraine with the leftover Soviet weaponry on its territory - from holding on
to them.
The nuclear priority must now be just that - to stop proliferation. There
needs to be a shift in the balance between long-held defence doctrines and
the foreign policy objective of widening and strengthening the
non-proliferation regime. Existing nuclear forces should be reduced as far
as prudently possible, made as safe as possible and kept at lower states of
readiness: and transparency should be increased. It is difficult to insist
that other countries open themselves to inspection while refusing to be more
open about one's own weapons.
