FT  20 NOV 93 / As They Say in Europe: Strange days for Social Chapter
I bet that puts you off - could be changing. From enfant terrible to bete
noire, it may now be on its way to eminence grise. These thoughts were
inspired, if that is the word, by this week's annual conference of the
Confederation of British Industry and the reflections of the London
correspondent of Liberation, Julien Lefranc. 'Not European, the British? The
cliche has to be adjusted,' he wrote.
Now, the CBI has not usually been regarded as one of great engines of change
that drives British society and Lefranc took care not to let anybody think
it was. He just took, as a symbol of British reality, the marked preference
for a single currency in the European Union which was expressed by business
leaders in a CBI survey. Howard Davies, the CBI's director-general, spoke of
wanting to avoid a situation 'where there was a single currency over there
and Ukrainian coupons here.' That, said Lefranc, was a demonstration of
pragmatism: the CBI recognised that it could export more if it operated in a
single currency area.
This was contrasted, not with the views of the government, but with those of
the City of London. For the City 'Black Wednesday,' when sterling had been
ejected from the ERM, 'had been regarded as a personal victory by many
London financiers and investors.' The event had saved a vast foreign
exchange market which brought them large profits. But in fact, the paper
concluded, these were marginal matters. The City was not really against
industry on matters European; it was firmly in the European camp, for the
Community provides a 'plus for Britain.'
So, rather disappointingly, the paper concluded, there was no real debate in
Britain about Europe. Any differences today are mere nuances. And Jacques
Delors should rejoice. So much for an article that started out with such
promise. But you can see why the situation in Britain might be regarded as
somewhat more placid than we had suspected.
So maybe the British are more European than they think. If one removes the
theatrical, even hysterical, element which plays such a large part in
domestic political debate, the basis of that debate is hardly different from
anything in France or Germany: the role of the nation in a wider union, the
problems of achieving a single currency and whether it can be done at all.
But there is still the Social Chapter, a classic example of the divide
between Britain and the rest, and of how things can get out of hand. The
British take this component of the Maastricht treaty at more than its face
value. But Article 1 consists of banalities about improved living and
working conditions, with a nod at their diverse meanings in different member
countries. Article 2 says the Council of Ministers can agree on what might
be done to further those aims. In Europe this is all symbols and
horse-trading, as well as a reflection of certain aspects of industrial
management that have proved quite successful.
But the British government, and in this it has the full support of
employers, refuses to have anything to do with any of this. The Social
Chapter is meaningful and it means higher costs. So no British minister of
civil servant will play any role in its development and implementation. But
the Labour Party supports it. One day maybe a Labour government may sign up
to the social chapter; by that time it will have taken on a character that
may be contrary to Britain's interests. Undoubtedly, whatever happens,
Britain will follow the iron rule that has guided all post-war policy
towards Europe: whatever the organisation, whatever the system, the British
must join at the wrong time.
However, there is just one curious difference in the present situation. When
it comes to discussing and voting on the implementation of the Social
Chapter, British members of the European Parliament will not be excluded.
They can therefore vote on matters from which British ministers are
excluded. This fact is only now starting to sink in Europe and has caused
alarm in Paris. It should not for, as it happens, Labour has, and presumably
will continue to have, a majority among MEPs and will vote with other
'socialists.' So the Social Chapter will benefit from the input of the
official opposition in Britain but not from that of the British government.
Now that is what makes the British different, not real Europeans. No other
government hands its opponents free gifts like that. When others press for a
ban on British Euro-MPs participating in votes on the Social Chapter, will
the British government show its Euro-credentials by taking the lead in that
campaign?
No, I was wrong, the British are not eminences grises, but wise fools,
idiots savants.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
