FT  13 APR 93 / Border bustle conceals neighbourly suspicion: A look at the
tensions affecting Vietnam and China
NOTHING in the bustling commercial scene at the main border post between
China and Vietnam contradicts the idea of a warm relationship suggested by
the name Friendship Gate.
Under a drizzling sky, cheerful traders carry boxes of Chinese apples,
sewing machines and rice bowls from Chinese to Vietnamese lorries parked
back-to-back in a sea of mud. A raucous, red-faced Chinese woman smuggling
playing cards into Vietnam supervises her workers as they pile empty
lightbulb cartons into a truck to hide the real merchandise.
For the region's desperately poor inhabitants, the trade is a welcome
spinoff of the 1991 'normalisation' of relations between Beijing and Hanoi -
12 years earlier the Chinese army invaded and laid waste this part of
northern Vietnam to avenge the invasion of Cambodia and the overthrow of the
Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge.
But the busy scenes at the border belie the reality of the Sino-Vietnamese
relationship. In spite of frequent exchanges of high-level dignitaries and
the signing of several bilateral agreements, the two countries continue to
regard each other with suspicion and, sometimes, outright hostility.
Since last year China has not only dragged its feet in implementing trade
agreements and attempted to extend its control across the frontier, but has
made forays into the southern reaches of the South China Sea close to the
Vietnamese coast. This has threatened development of Vietnam's vital oil
industry and triggered alarm in other south-east Asian countries, such as
Malaysia, about the future of the disputed Spratly islands.
Beijing granted last year an offshore oil exploration concession to
Crestone, a US company, in an area Vietnam says is on its continental shelf.
Vietnam says China has also seized more than 20 cargo vessels plying the
route between Hong Kong and northern Vietnam. The ships have been released
but the Chinese, accusing the Vietnamese shippers of smuggling goods to
China, have confiscated some cargo without compensation.
'China sees this as a good opportunity to fill the power vacuum left by the
reduction of US forces in the region and the strategic retreat from the
region made by Russia,' says Mr Nguyen Ngoc Dien of the Hanoi Foreign
Ministry's Institute of International Relations. Vietnam treats Chinese
denials with scepticism.
'In their declarations they are anti-hegemonist but in practice they are
hegemonist in putting pressure on the smaller countries around them,' says
Maj-Gen Tran Cong Man, a government spokesman.
Even the booming border trade between the two countries is a source of
friction. Vietnam says China is reluctant to promote official commerce - it
has refused to re-open the railway near Friendship Gate - and is instead
encouraging smuggling of Chinese consumer goods, a trade which undermines
Vietnamese factories.
'With smuggling,' says Mrs Pham Chi Lan, of the Vietnamese Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, 'we are spending a lot of hard currency needed for
the import of capital goods on buying products that can be produced in
Vietnam.'
The Vietnamese, who have fought against Chinese domination for the last
2,000 years, are feeling particularly nervous about China's military and
economic might at the moment. The peace agreement in neighbouring Cambodia
appears to be falling apart, leaving the way clear for Khmer Rouge
guerrillas, Beijing's former proteges, to kill Vietnamese settlers and cause
trouble on the border.
The trouble for Hanoi is that there is not much it can do without provoking
China or undermining its fragile economic recovery. Ethnic Chinese
businessmen still dominate the Vietnamese economy, and a large share of
foreign investment is of Chinese ethnic origin, coming from Taiwan, Hong
Kong and Singapore.
Vietnam's army has been halved in size to some 600,000 men, and the navy is
too small to protect Vietnamese interests in the South China Sea. The Soviet
Union, Vietnam's long-time ally, has disintegrated.
Hence Vietnam's desperate attempts to make friends with the US - which
maintains an economic and diplomatic embargo on Hanoi dating back to the
Vietnam war - and to strengthen ties with the European Community.
As one diplomat in Hanoi put it: 'Vietnam is in the unfortunate position of
having lost one superpower and being unlikely to get an alliance with the
one remaining.'
