FT  26 NOV 93 / Dublin orders police chief to join leak inquiry
The government of the Irish Republic has underlined how seriously it takes
last week's leaking of draft proposals for a political settlement on
Northern Ireland by bringing Mr Patrick Culligan, the Irish police
commissioner, into its efforts to track down the culprits.
Downing Street has acknowledged that the leak has damaged attempts by prime
minister John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, his Irish counterpart, to secure
a comprehensive constitutional settlement, casting a pall over next month's
planned Anglo-Irish summit in Dublin.
Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist leader, this week urged Mr John
Major to stop looking for such a settlement, claiming the Dublin proposals
offered 'structure that would bring about the unification of the Irish
territory'.
Dublin's move came as the IRA said it was committed to securing 'a just and
lasting' peace, while accusing London and Dublin of 'playing politics' with
the Irish issue.
Using an article in its Republican News mouthpiece, the IRA sought to
undermine recent suggestions it might be tiring of the armed struggle. The
two governments should 'harbour no doubts about the determination with which
we, our activists and supporters will apply ourselves to realising our
objectives,' it warned.
In London, Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the mainly Catholic SDLP,
sought to inject momentum into the quest for a settlement by calling on the
main protaganists to reject their entrenched positions and compromise.
'Peace is going to have to make all of us make concessions and bite our
lips,' he said.
Yesterday Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, offered fresh
assurances to unionists about Dublin's intentions in efforts to reach a
settlement.
'There should be no fears or suspicions among unionists. We are trying to
end a very complex problem and bring about a situation where there is peace
on this island and the people can live and work together as friendly
neighbours. I just wish that people could see that and have talks on the
basis of tolerance and respect.'
He hit out at the perpetrators of last week's leak, branding them 'the real
betrayers of both communities in Northern Ireland.'
