FT  30 NOV 93 / The IRA Connection: Extracts from the talks - the British
government's version
JANUARY 11 1993: Sir Patrick Mayhew says that pressure within the IRA for an
end to violence is mounting
FEBRUARY 22: Oral message from Provisional Movement leaders:
The conflict is over but we need your advice on how to bring it to a close.
We wish to have an unannounced ceasefire in order to hold dialogue leading
to peace. We cannot announce such a move as it will lead to confusion for
the volunteers because the press will misinterpret it as a surrender. We
cannot meet secretary of state's public renunciation of violence, but it
would be given privately as long as we were sure that we were not being
tricked.
FEBRUARY 26: Warrington bomb explodes gasworks.
A British government message:
We understand and appreciate the seriousness of what has been said. We wish
to take it seriously and at face value. That will of course be influenced by
events on the ground over the coming days and weeks . . . It is not possible
to give a substantive reply immediately.
MARCH 5: Message from Provisional leaders:
We would like two representatives, Martin McGuinness and Gerry Kelly, to
have an exploratory meeting with you as soon as possible.
MARCH 7: IRA bomb injures 4 policemen in Bangor
MARCH 11: British message:
In the light of the continued violence of recent days since the first
response we are not yet able to send a substantive response.
MARCH 19: British message:
1. The importance of what has been said, the wish to take it seriously, and
the influence of events on the ground, have been acknowledged.
2. It is essential that there should be no deception on either side.
3. The position of the British government on dealing with those who espouse
violence is clearly understood . . . We confirm that if violence had
genuinely been brought to an end, whether or not that fact had been
announced, then dialogue could take place.
4. Once a halt to activity became public, the government would have to
acknowledge and defend its entry into dialogue.
It would do so by pointing out that its agreement to exploratory dialogue .
. . had been given because . . . it had received a private assurance that
organised violence had been brought to an end.
5. The British government has made clear that:
No political objective which is advocated by constitutional means alone
could properly be excluded from discussion.
The commitment to return as much responsibility as possible to local
politicians should be seen within a wider framework.
New political arrangements would be designed to ensure that no legitimate
group was excluded from eligibility to share in the exercise of this
responsibility.
In the event of a genuine and established ending of violence, the whole
range of responses to it would inevitably be looked at afresh.
6. The British government . . . wants to see included in this process all
main parties which have sufficiently shown they genuinely do not espouse
violence.
7. The British government cannot enter a talks process . . . with the
purpose of achieving a predetermined outcome.
It has accepted that the eventual outcome of such a process could be a
united Ireland, but only on the basis of the consent of the people of
Northern Ireland.
But unless the people of Northern Ireland come to express such a view, the
British government will continue to uphold the union.
8. Evidence on the ground that any group had ceased violent activity would
induce resulting reduction of security force activity.
9. It is important to establish whether this provides a basis for the way
forward. We are ready to answer specific questions or to give further
explanation.
MARCH 20: Warrington bomb explodes in shopping centre.
MARCH 22: Oral message from Provisional leaders:
The last thing we needed at this sensitive time was what has happened. It is
the fate of history that we find ourselves in this position, all we can
think of at this time is an old Irish proverb: 'God's hand works in
mysterious ways.' Our hope is that this hand will lead to peace and
friendship.
APRIL 10: SDLP leader John Hume meets Sinn Fein's Gerry Adams.
APRIL 24: Bishopsgate bomb explodes in City of London.
MAY 10: Message from Provisonal leaders:
We welcome face-to-face exchanges with your representative . . . We wish now
to proceed without delay to the delegation meetings . . . We would like to
nominate someone to liaise with Martin McGuinness on this.
We also have a number of questions:
(a) Who will represent you?
(b) When will the British government be politically represented in this
process and by whom?
(c) We need clarification of the phrase 'progressive entry into dialogue'.
(d) When will this start?
(e) Where is the proposed venue?
It would be more practical and quicker if these details could be agreed
directly with Mr McGuinness.
UK government note: The 'face-to-face exchanges with your representative'
referred to in the first sentence was the unauthorised meeting between Mr
McGuinness and a British official.
MAY 20: 1,000lb bomb explodes in Belfast, injuring 20.
JUNE 1: Message from Provisional leaders:
The Provisional leadership is dismayed that it has not yet received a formal
reply to its offer.
JULY 22: Message from Provisional leadership:
4. British sovereignty over the six counties, as with all of Ireland before
partition, is the inherent cause of political instability and conflict. This
must be addressed.
5. We seek to assist the establishment of, and to support, a process which .
. . culminates in . . . the end of your jurisdiction.
6. We believe that the wish of the majority of the Irish people is for Irish
unity.
7. Your disavowal of any prior objective is contradicted by your commitment
to uphold the unionist veto. The consequence of upholding the veto is, in
effect, to set as your objective maintenance of partition and the six-county
statelet . . .
The potentially historic opportunity which this represents for the cause of
peace in Ireland should not be lost. We have outlined our position. You have
outlined yours.
It is now time to move on. You should arrange for us to do so as speedily as
possible.
JULY 17: British message:
There was no ulterior motive in any delay . . . Although it was absolutely
clear from the attacks which took place in March that events on the ground
could halt progress, these attacks following the May elections went ahead .
. .
Does the ending of conflict remain your objective, and is there a way
forward?
JULY 23: Major wins vote of confidence.
AUGUST 14: Message from Provisional leadership:
You asserted the belief that a two-week suspension to accommodate talks
would result in republicans being persuaded that there is no further need
for armed struggle. Because of our commitment to a lasting settlement . . .
we sought and received a commitment to facilitate that step. You failed to
grasp that opportunity.
As for events on the ground. The greatest number of fatalities for some time
now in the conflict have resulted from the actions of loyalist groups acting
both on their own agenda and as surrogates for British intelligence . . .
SEPTEMBER 3: British message:
The importance of clear mutual understanding has already been recognised.
Minds do not seem to be meeting at the moment. This needs to be over-come.
The note you sent on August 14 did not . . . confirm that you envisage a
peace process which is aimed at an inclusive political process and that a
lasting end to violence does not depend on your analysis being endorsed as
the only way forward . . . On a further point in it, the government side has
not asserted a belief that a two-week suspension would have the result
described . . . Can you confirm that you want a peace process which is aimed
at an inclusive political process and that a lasting end to violence does
not depend on your analysis being endorsed as the only way forward?
OCTOBER 23: IRA bomb in Protestant Shankhill Road kills 10 inlcuding one
bomber.
OCTOBER 27: Gerry Adams helps carry the bomber's coffin.
OCTOBER 29: John Major and Albert Reynolds set out six guiding principles
for a settlement at Brussels summit.
OCTOBER 30: Seven murdered by loyalist Ulster Freedom Fighters in Greysteel.
NOVEMBER 2: Message from Provisional leaders:
This problem cannot be solved by the Reynolds-Spring situation, although
they're part of it. You appear to have rejected the Hume-Adams situation
though they too are part of it . . . Now we can't even have dialogue to work
out how a total end to all violence can come about.
We believe that the country could be at the point of no return. In plain
language please tell us though as a matter of urgency when you will open
dialogue in the event of a total end to hostilities.
We believe that if all the documents involved are put on the table -
including your nine-paragrapher and our May 10 - that we have the basis of
an understanding.
NOVEMBER 5: British message:
1. Your message of November 2 is taken as being of the greatest importance
and significance.
2. We hold to what was said jointly and in public by the prime minister and
the Taoiseach in Brussels on October 29. A copy of the statement is annexed.
3. Any dialogue could only follow a permanent end to violent activity.
4. If, as you have offered, you were to give us an unequivocal assurance
that violence has indeed been brought to a permanent end, and that
accordingly Sinn Fein is now committed to political progress by peaceful and
democratic means alone, we will make clear publicly our commitment to enter
exploratory dialogue with you.
Our public statement will make clear that, provided your private assurance
is promptly confirmed publicly after our public statement and that events on
the ground are fully consistent with this, a first meeting for exploratory
dialogue will take place within a week of parliament's return in January.
5. Exploratory dialogue will have the following purposes:
(i) To explore the basis upon which Sinn Fein would come to be admitted to
an inclusive political talks process . . . but without anticipating the
negotiations within that process.
(ii) To exchange views on how Sinn Fein would be able over a period to play
the same part as the current constitutional parties in the public life of
Northern Ireland.
(iii) To examine the practical consequences of the ending of violence.
6. The attached Annex summarises the sequence of events and provides answers
to the procedural questions concerning exploratory dialogue which have been
raised.
7. If, in advance of our public statement, any public statement is made on
your behalf which appears to us inconsistent with this basis for proceeding
it would not be possible for us then to proceed.
8. If we receive the necessary assurance, which you have offered, that
violence has been brought to an end, we shall assume that you are assenting
to the basis for proceeding explained in this note and its attachment.
The procedural annexe included the following points:
2. The sequence of events would be as follows:
(i) There is an unequivocal private assurance that violence has been brought
to a permanent end, and accordingly that Sinn Fein has affirmed that it is
henceforth committed to political progress by peaceful and democratic means
alone.
(ii) Soon after receiving the necessary satisfactory assurance, and on the
assumption that events on ground are consistent with this assurance, we will
make a public statement indicating our agreement in principle to enter
exploratory dialogue in January provided the private assurance is promptly
confirmed publicly and continues to be demonstrated on the ground.
(iii) If a genuine end to violence is brought about within the next few
days, a first meeting for exploratory dialogue would take place within a
week of parliament's return in January.
3. At the first meeting of exploratory dialogue each party could field up to
three delegates to be seated at the table. The possible need for the
additional presence of advisers on each side is something which could be
addressed at the logistical meeting.
4. It is for each party to decide who should represent it at this and at
subsequent meetings . . . It is assumed that each party will wish its
representatives to have the seniority appropriate to its authorised
representatives.
The British side will be represented by senior officials acting under
political authority and direction . . .
