FT  06 FEB 93 / Books: Love off the couch
R D LAING AND ME: LESSONS IN LOVE
by Roberta Russell
Airlift Book Company
Pounds 16.95/Pounds 12.95, 306 pages
WHEN Roberta Russell, a New York-bred psychology major and marketing
consultant in her late 30s, first met the revolutionary psychiatrist RD
Laing in 1980, he was 53, with his fame dwindling and his marriage nearing
the rocks. As she was heavily overweight and desperately seeking a man to
share her life, whilst he was drinking too much and earning too little, she
proposed a game plan of co-counselling in which she would work at doubling
his income while he was supposed to help her lose weight.
He agreed to give her some time and tape-record dialogues that might make up
a book. As these sporadically progressed, she found his 'attention,
commitment and good intentions were my allies in the battle against my
persistent resistance to taking my own common-sense advice'. She eventually
spent two months on protein malts and a mile of swimming a day, and lost her
hated 35 lbs - but did little to alleviate Laing's problems.
Toward the end of the book - and of their third year of acquaintance - he
stayed with her for a week in Manhattan and, for the first time, Russell
goes all coy: 'Of course, I cannot really describe the luxury of this
experience, but it changed me forever.' Since we have been led to expect
this ultimate lesson in love from the outset, and since she has been
spilling everyone else's domestic and socio-sexual beans, along with vastly
debatable interpretations, this discreet veil is a bit thick.
But despite Russell's gooey sentiments and ponderous psycho-babble, her
actual conversations with Laing turn the better half of this volume (which
he urged her to complete on her own just before his death in 1989) into an
absorbing document for anyone interested in the maverick polymath's later
development.
Laing originated the liberation of mental patients from unthinking
subjection to drugs, ECT and lobotomies in favour of more caring individual
considerations and long-term healing. Russell's record suggests how much
remains worth learning from him by non-specialists, too. His Divided Self
(1960) remains an indispensable manual for dealing with schizophrenia, even
though he never pretended to be able to resolve his own conflicts - let
alone to redeem what he experienced as 'the injustices of love.'
